WT01-B25-1IA086-000614-B047-332http://206.61.184.43:80/schaffer/Library/studies/nc/nc1l.htm 206.61.184.43 19970122022827 text/html 91560HTTP/1.0 200 OKDate: Wednesday, 22-Jan-97 02:28:20 GMTServer: WebSitePro/1.1f (S/N wpo-0deb)Allow-ranges: bytesContent-type: text/htmlLast-modified: Saturday, 28-Dec-96 06:57:07 GMTContent-length: 91342 Marihuana and (Non-Violent) Crime Contents | Feedback | Search DRCNet Library | Schaffer Library | Major Studies Marihuana, A Signal of Misunderstanding The Report of the National Commission on Marihuana and DrugAbuse Marihuana and (Non-Violent) Crime Much that has been said with respect to aggressive behaviorand violent crime also applies to the more general propositionthat marihuana causes or leads to (non-violent) crime anddelinquency. The popular and professional literature abounds withclaims and counter-claims. Public and professional opinionsurveys demonstrate a widespread belief in the existence of amarihuana-crime relationship but also reveal considerableuncertainty about the existence of such a relationship. The empirical evidence is somewhat more consistent. Laboratorystudies provide no evidence that marihuana produces effects whichcan be interpreted as criminogenic. Although some studies ofoffender populations purport to demonstrate a causal relationshipbetween marihuana and crime, they reveal, at the most, asignificant statistical association. Closer examination of thesedata or more sophisticated analysis, however, generally shows thepurported relationship to be spurious. The original relationshipis usually found to derive not from the chemical effects of thedrug but from the operation of social and cultural variablesunrelated to either the drug or its use. In the following pages the available evidence bearing on therelationship between marihuana. and crime will be reviewed in aneffort to determine whether marihuana itself or the use of thedrug plays a significant precipitating or contributory role inthe commission of criminal or delinquent acts. PUBLIC AND PROFESSIONAL OPINION The formulation and expression of strong opinions about therelationship of marihuana to criminal and delinquent behaviorhave persisted despite the inherent complexities of the issue,the relative absence of conclusive empirical evidence and thegeneral lack of knowledge and understanding about the effects ofthe drug. For the most part, however, neither public norprofessional opinion about marihuana and its impact on publicsafety has been explored in any systematic fashion. As aconsequence, public policy with respect to the drug has beenshaped by the most vociferous advocates of one position oranother at any given time. Probably the first official body to explore prevailing opinionabout the relationship between marihuana use and crime was theIndian Hemp Drugs Commission of 1893-1894. The Commission spentover a year in making field trips to 30 cities, in receivingevidence from almost 1,200 expert witnesses (335 of whom weremedical practitioners) and in reviewing judicial proceedings andthe case files from India's mental hospitals. The Commission'sReport, reprinted in 1969, contains the following informationgathered with respect to the relationship of marihuana use tocrime. First, the Commission found that the majority of hemp drugconsumers were moderate rather than excessive users, and that thedrug users were rarely regarded as offensive or potentiallydangerous by their neighbors (a few objected to the smell of thesmoke or the example set by the users for the neighborhoodchildren). With respect to the drug's possible long-term or chroniccriminogenic effects (producing "bad characters"), theCommission reported that two thirds of the witnesses did notbelieve that marihuana would produce, over time, a largeproportion of "bad characters" among the moderateusers. A majority felt that even excessive use was unrelated tothe production of "bad characters." When the possiblerelationship was framed more precisely in terms of cause-effectrather than statistical association, a ratio of 8 to 1 of thewitnesses held that moderate consumption of these drugs had noconnection with crime and a ratio of 4 to 1 denied a causalconnection between excessive consumption and being a "badcharacter." With respect to the more acute effects of hemp drugs, theCommission set out to determine whether criminals use the drug tofortify their courage prior to the commission of their crimes,whether the drugs were used by criminals "to stupefy theirvictims," and whether the drugs incited the user to commitunpremeditated crimes. The Commission's conclusion regarding thefirst question was that "criminals like any other consumersof these drugs go to them for that assistance when they feel theyrequire it" (p. 256). To the second question, the Commission responded that althoughsome persons had alleged the commission of "thefts ofornaments from children stupefied by sweet meats" containingmarihuana, the fact of other readily available, more effectiveand more disabling drugs, considerably more conducive tosurreptitious administration, cast doubt on the use of hemp drugsby criminals for this purpose. To the third question, the Commission said that the majorityof witnesses saw no connection between either the moderate orexcessive use of hemp drugs and the commission of unpremeditatedcrimes, including crimes of violence. The Commission thereforeconcluded that "for all practical purposes it may be laiddown that there is little or no connection between the use ofhemp drugs and crime," (p. 264). The Mayor's Committee on Marihuana (1944) also interviewed lawenforcement officers (federal, state and local police) about thepurported link between marihuana and crime. The Committeereported that: In most instances [the police officers] unhesitatinglystated that there is no proof that major crimes are associatedwith the practice of smoking marihuana. They did state that manymarihuana smokers are guilty of petty crimes, but that thecriminal career usually existed prior to the time the individualsmoked his first marihuana cigarette (Schoenfeld, 1944:14-15). Reference has already been made to the results of a small,unpublished survey of the opinions of police officers about therelationship of marihuana to aggression (Schofield, 1968), All ofthe respondents reported observing a variety of conduct exhibitedby users under the influence of marihuana and emphasized that anindividual's reaction to the drug depends on his particularpersonality and, in some instances, the strength of the dose.Some, respondents observed a recent shift in the type ofindividual or personality prone to using marihuana. In response to a question regarding the use of marihuana priorto engaging in property crimes, 10 out of the 16 officersinterviewed believed that this often occurred. Seven citedspecific examples of offenders who reported using marihuanabefore committing their offenses to bolster their courage andsharpen their senses; the views of three rested on hearsayevidence; and the remaining six officers responded that they didnot believe this was a common practice and that they had neverpersonally observed such examples. In the Commission-sponsored National Survey of arepresentative sample of more than 3,000 American youth andadults (Abelson, et al., 1972), respondents were asked toindicate their agreement or disagreement with the statement that"many crimes are committed by persons who show that 56% ofthe adults and 41% of the youth agree with the statement. Theextent of agreement, however, varies significantly according toage, education, geographic location and the marihuana-usingexperience of the respondent. Those who are early adolescents(12-13 years), over 25 years of age, have not completed highschool, live in the South or North Central regions of the countryand have no experience with marihuana are, significantly morelikely to agree with the statement than are those who are between14 and 25 years of age, are at least high school graduates, livein the Northeast or West and have had experience with marihuana.Table 5 below, shows the percentage of respondents agreeing tothe statement according to age, education, geographic locationand experience with marihuana. The survey also showed the existence of considerableuncertainty with respect to the proposition that many crimes arecommitted by persons under the influence of marihuana; 25%, ofthe youth and 17% of the adults were either unsure of itsrelative truth or failed to respond to the question (p. 69).Adults were considerably more certain, however, about therelationship between alcohol and crime (youth were not asked thequestion) ; 7% were either unsure or did not respond and 69%agreed with the statement that many crimes are committed bypersons who were under the influence of liquor (pp. 28, 31). Table 5.-PERCENTAGE OF RESPONDENTS WHO AGREE THAT"MANY CRIMES ARE COMMITTED BY PERSONS WHO ARE UNDER THEINFLUENCE OF MARIHUANA" Percent agreeing Youth Adults Total respondents agreeing 40.7 56.0 Age (years): 12-13 54.5 14-15 35.2 16-17 31.8 18-25 35.1 26-34 48.5 35-49 59.0 50 and over 68.8 Education: Less than high school graduate 70.9 Eighth grade or less 49.5 Ninth-twelfth grades 31.8 High school graduate 56.8 College or more 39.2 Geographic location: Northeast 34.1 46.9 North-Central 42.1 54.9 South 48.5 66.8 West 34.0 52.3 Marihuana experience (ever used): Yes 8.9 24.1 No 46.1 62.0 The surveys of prosecuting attorneys, judges, probationofficers and court clinicians also revealed considerable doubtabout the existence of a causal connection between marihuana andcrime. Although the survey of prosecuting attorneys conducted bythe Commission staff asked only about aggressive behavior andviolent crime, the data showed that 52% of the respondents eitherdenied or were uncertain that marihuana causes such behavior. The Commission-sponsored survey of nationally representativesamples of judges, probation officers and court clinicians,however, posed several questions bearing on the more generalproposition that marihuana is related to crime and delinquency(InTech, 1971). Respondents were first asked whether or not theyhad witnessed an increase in the incidence of drug ordrug-related offenses in their caseloads during the past fiveyears. The large majority of all three groups (86%) respondedaffirmatively and reported that marihuana was the type of drugmost often seen in this connection (83%). However, about twothirds of the respondents reported that marihuana offenders(those arrested for using or selling marihuana) constituted lessthan 20% of their caseloads; 56% of the respondents reported thatthose arrested for non-drug offenses but incidentally found topossess marihuana comprised less than 10% of their caseloads; and73% of the respondents reported that less than 10% of theircaseloads attributed their offenses to marihuana (pp. 31, 34). To determine better the nature and direction of a possiblerelationship between marihuana use and crime, respondents wereasked to indicate which -of four statements most reflected theirown professional experience. On the whole, the respondents weremore likely to postulate a statistical association (36.6%) ratherthan a direct cause-effect relationship (26.9%) ; 18% of therespondents thought that involvement in a criminal or delinquentsubculture caused or led to the use of marihuana (in contrast tothe. more prevalent belief that marihuana use, leads to crime)and 9.1% believed there was absolutely no relationship betweenmarihuana use and other criminal or delinquent behavior. Theextent to which uncertainty prevails even among these practicingprofessionals is reflected in the 9.3% no response category (p.39). Table 6 shows the responses of the judges, probation officersand clinicians to each of the four propositions (InTech, 1971:Appendix 1, Section II, Question 3). The data show that judgesare significantly more, likely to believe that marihuana causesor leads to criminal and delinquent behavior and significantlyless likely to believe in either a statistical relationship or inno relationship whatsoever than either the probation officers orthe clinicians. The researchers also attempted to determine these,professionals' opinions about crimes actually committed bymarihuana users. More specifically, did the respondents thinkthat most non-drug crimes committed by persons who were knownusers of marihuana occurred when the individuals were, actuallyunder the influence of the drug or when they attempted to obtainit? Again, the responses indicated considerable uncertainty inall three, groups. One-third of the, respondents were eitherunsure or did not respond to either proposition. About twice thenumber of respondents thought that the crimes occurred while inthe attempt to obtain marihuana (31.0%) rather than while tinderthe influence of marihuana (16.8%). Table 7 shows the percentage of respondents indicating theprobable truth and probable nontruth of the two propositions(Appendix 1, Section 11, Questions 2a, 2b). The data show that half of the respondents denied thecommission of non-drug crimes while under the influence of thedrug, suggesting that marihuana itself does not have the capacityto produce criminogenic effects. About one-third of therespondents, however, believed that these crimes occur when theuser is attempting to obtain the drug, suggesting an addictionmodel; that is, that users commit crimes to support a"habit."` This interpretation is corroborated by the significantfindings that 65% of the respondents either did not know (23%) orthought that a few (21%), some (17%) or most (4.4%) of theregular users were physically addicted to marihuana Table 7.-RESPONSES OF JUDGES, PROBATION OFFICERS AND COURTCLINICIANS TO STATEMENTS ABOUT NON-DRUG CRIMES COMMITTED BYMARIHUANA USERS (Figures in Percentages) Most non-drug crimes committed by persons who use marihuanaoccur when the offender is- Under the in- Attempting to fluence of mari- obtain marihuana huana Prob- Prob- Prob- Prob- ably ably ably ably true not true true not true Judges 17.1 % 46.8 % 34.2 %, 30.4 %, Probation officers 21.8 47.3 30.0 37.3 Court clinicians.. .. . 10.4 65.2 16.5 60.0 Total 16.8 49.6 31.0 35.7 The National Survey of the general public (Abelson, et al.,1972) likewise showed that large segments of the population (65%of all adults and 48% of all youth) regard marihuana asaddictive. Even among the users, 40% of adults and 21% of theyouth believed marihuana to be addicting (p. 22) These findings, taken together, suggest that much of theconfusion regarding the relationship between marihuana and crimemay be predicated on public and professional misconceptions aboutthe drug's addiction potential. The Commission's National Surveyshowed that, among those persons who believed marihuana to beaddicting, 67.5% of the adults and 52.3% of the youth believedthat many crimes are committed by persons under the influence ofmarihuana. Among those who said that marihuana was not addicting,34.6% of the adults and 30.2% of the youth agreed that manycrimes are committed by marihuana users. Table 8 below shows thisrelationship (unpublished data, Abelson, et al., 1972). Table 8.-RELATIONSHIP BETWEEN PERSONS WHO THINK MARIHUANA ISADDICTIVE AND THOSE WHO THINK THAT MANY CRIMES ARE COMMITTED BYPERSONS UNDER THE INFLUENCE OF MARIHUANA (Figures in Percentages) Persons who think marihuana is Addictive Not addictive Youth Adults Youth Adults Many crimes are committed under the influence of marihuana: Mostly agree.. . . 52.3 67.5 30.2 34.6 Mostly disagree 20.8 14.5 39.9 41.1 Other 2.3 3.1 4.4 2.0 Not sure/no answer 24.6 14.9 25.6 27.3 Table 6.-THE OPINIONS OF JUDGES, PROBATION OFFICERS AND COURTCLINICIANS REGARDING THE NATURE OF THE RELATIONSHIP BETWEENMARIHUANA USE AND OTHER CRIMINAL OR DELINQUENT BEHAVIOR (Figures in Percentages) Judges Probation Court Total (N=556) officers clinicians (N=781) (N=110) (N 1.15) Use of marihuana causes or leads to antisocial behavior in thesense that it leads one to commit other criminal or delinquent acts33.8 18.2 1.7 26.9 Involvement in a criminal or delinquent subculture causes orleads to the use of marihuana 18.3 20.0 14.8 18.1 There is a statistical relationship or association betweenmarihuana use and other criminal or delinquent behavior, but it is not a cause-effect relationship 31.1 40.0 60.0 36.6 There is absolutely no relationship between marihuana use and other criminal or delinquent behavior 6.7 14.5 15.7 9.1 (X2=76.895, p<.001). To summarize, these opinion surveys demonstrate that there isconsiderable uncertainty about the existence and the nature of arelationship between marihuana use and crime and that thisuncertainty exists among youth and adults, practicingprofessionals in the criminal justice community and the laypublic, marihuana users and non-users alike. The data suggest,however, that the persistent and fairly widespread belief in acause-effect relationship between marihuana and crime may, atleast in part, be predicated on the erroneous but equallyprevalent belief that marihuana is physically addicting. To theextent that the general public operates under this misconception,they may be more likely to believe that, like the heroin user,the marihuana "addict" commits crime in order tosupport his "habit" and obtain the drug. The logical extension of this belief is that marihuana users,like heroin user-,, will be considered more likely to committheir crimes in the attempt to obtain the drug than while underthe influence of the drug. Stated another way, persons whobelieve that marihuana is physically addicting would be morelikely to base the purported causal relationship betweenmarihuana and crime not on the chemical effects of the drug perse but on the user's physical need for the drug. As such, theywould be more likely to postulate that most crimes committed byusers occur not when the offender is under the influence of thedrug (which, like heroin, makes one passive, lethargic andstuporous) but when the, "addict" needs a"fix" and is desperately trying to obtain the drug orthe money to buy it. This interpretation is, indeed, supported bythe findings of the Commission-sponsored survey of judges,probation officers and court clinicians and is suggested from thefindings of the National Survey. STUDIES OF OFFENDER POPULATIONS Over the years, numerous studies have relied on offenderpopulations and zero-order statistical correlations to"demonstrate" a cause-effect relationship betweenmarihuana and crime. This method of " proof byenumeration" has become probably the most common approach to"demonstrating" the purported causal relationship. As Goode (1970) has noted, however: Not even marihuana's staunchest supporter would argue thata crime has never been committed by a user while high. Yet,incredible as it seems, the burden of many proofs of marihuana'scriminal effects has been precisely the simple fact that it ispossible to locate crimes committed in conjunction with smokingmarihuana. "Proof" by enumeration is no proof at all.By examining an enumeration of crimes which were committed underthe influence of marihuana (even were this definitely known), itis impossible to determine the " cause" of the eventtaking place, in this ease the crime-or, indeed, that marihuanahas anything whatsoever to do with its commission (pp.215-216). Even if these studies are taken at face value, their findingsdo not generally support the thesis of a positive and significantstatistical association. In most instances, marihuana has notbeen found to predispose one to commit crime or to serve as aninitiator of criminal careers; nor does the use of the drugappear to alter the progression to other non-drug offenses amongthose without prior criminal records or histories ofpsychological maladjustment. Predictably, however the data do indicate a greater rate, of progression amongmarihuana-using offenders (both those arrested specifically fortheir marihuana offenses and those charged with non-drug crimes)than that which might be expected from similar, non-usingoffenders or from the general population. Because these studies do provide at least interesting insightsinto the possible nature and direction of a relationship betweenmarihuana and crime or, conversely, a non-existent relationship,several of these studies are summarized below. Bromberg, 1939. Between 1932 and 1937, Bromberg and his teamof researchers reviewed all cases eventuating in conviction byNew York's Courts of General and Special Sessions; conductedinterviews with about 17,000 drug and non-drug-using offenders;and analyzed the statistics from both courts. The report of thiswork, published in 1939, yielded the following information. Among the 16,854 offenders convicted of felonies in the courtof General Sessions, 67 (.005%) were identified as marihuanausers. Of these 67, 46 (697c) had been convicted on charges ofpossession with intent to sell; 16 (24%) were charged withburglary, robbery and grand larceny; two persons were chargedwith assault and one each was charged with petty larceny, forgeryand murder. The researcher points out that in only nine cases did the,offenders' criminal records commence with a drug charge,"indicating that there was not in those cases a closerelationship between drugs and the beginning of a career incrime" (p. 10). In a 25% random sample of offenders convicted in the Court ofSpecial Sessions (misdemeanors), 135 or 9% were charged withpossession of marihuana. Of these 135, 93 or 69% had no previousrecord, 8 had been charged previously with drug violations only,5 had mixed drug and non-drug charges and 29 (21%) had onlynon-drug arrests. In summary, the researcher stated that: As measured by the succession of arrests and convictions inthe Court of General Sessions (felonies) . . . , it can be said that drugs generally do not initiatecriminal careers. Similarly, in the Court of Special Sessions(misdemeanors), only 8% of the offenders had previous charges ofusing drugs and 3.7% had previous charges of drugs and otherpetty crimes. In the vast majority of cases . . . then, theearlier use of marihuana apparently did not predispose to crime,even that of using other drugs. . . . The expectancy of majorcrimes following the use of cannabis in New York County is small,according to these experiences (p. 10). Bromberg and Rodgers, 1946. A study of 8,280 naval and marineprisoners at the U.S. Naval Prison in Portsmouth, New Hampshire(1946) revealed that 40 or .0048% of the offenders were marihuanausers. The offenses they committed while in the service were:AWOL or AOL (32, or 80%), assault or striking an officer (3),theft (3), and narcotics violations (2). Their previous civilianoffenses included three each of assault, theft and trafficviolations and one each of gambling and narcotics violations,drunkenness, draft dodging, and violation of the Mann Act.Twenty-eight or 70% of the marihuana users had no previouscivilian criminal records (p. 825). The preponderance of psychiatric disorders in the user groupover the non-users (40 randomly selected non-using navalprisoners) led the researchers to conclude that "marihuanausage is but an aspect of some type of mental disorder orpersonality abnormality" (p. 826), a conclusion also reachedby Charen. and Perchan 1946), Ausubel (1958), Andrade (1964),Lambo (1965), Bloomquist (1968), Simmons (1969) and Grinspoon(1971). Gardikas, 1950. The researcher reviewed the criminal recordsof "379 individuals either sentenced or arrested flagrantedelicto for using hashish publically" between 1919 and 1950.More than half (55%) of these individuals were already known tolaw enforcement authorities prior to their use of hashish and anadditional 14% had no subsequent difficulties with the law exceptfor hashish and vagrancy offenses. The researcher notes, however,that the remaining 117 offenders (31% of the original sample)went on to become " confirmed criminals after their firsthashish arrest." Dividing this last subgroup of 117 into three approximatelyequal parts, Gardikas. then described the subsequent criminalityof each group. The first group was given 332 more sentencesfollowing their first sentence for using hashish; 142 (43%) wereadditional hashish offenses, a similar number were for violentcrimes or crimes involving weapons, 18 were for"insults" and two were for "high treason." In a critique of the Gardikas study, Kaplan were accumulated;mostly for hashish offenses (42%) and thefts (20%). Althoughthere were a small number of violent crimes subsequentlycommitted by this group of offenders, most sentences subsequentto their initial hashish sentence were for such relatively minoroffenses as illegal gambling, living on immoral earnings,"false statements of identity," and "fishing withdynamite,." The, third group discussed by Gardikas, comprised of those"who after having, made use of hashish becamecriminals," accumulated 332 additional sentences. Hashishoffenses were again responsible for 30% of these offenses andmost of the rest were for theft. Gardikas notes with respect tothis group that although not all of these individuals werecriminal before they used hashish, their use of hashish"turned [them] into habitual hashish smokers and habitualcriminals with a, strong propensity leading toward crime ofdishonesty and particularly theft and f rand. At least one-halfof them surely and undoubtedly are even to be characterized asdangerous idle, vagrants" (p. 203). In a critique of the Gardikas study, Kaplan (1971) has statedthat: The basic problem underlying Gardikas' paper is hisconclusion that hashish use caused his subsample of 117 arreststo become criminals. This assumes, first. that they had notengaged in crime before beginning to use hashish and, second,that it was the hashish use and not something else that turned-them toward crime. Neither of these assumptions is justified bythe data. . . . As for the first assumption . . . all we know isthat they had not been arrested or convicted for other crimesfirst. . . . The second assumption . . . is also impossible tojustify. Even if the members of the subsample had not previouslybeen criminals, it may very well be difficult to distinguish thecriminogenic effects of hashish from those of conviction andsentence to Greek jails. Even aside from any criminogenic effect of the Greek penalsystem, the figures may indicate only that once somebody has beenarrested for hashish-and probably served a term in jail aswell-lie is more likely to be picked up by the police whenfurther crimes are committed. Finally, the years from 1919through 1950 . . . were a period of enormous social dislocation[in Greece] . . . . It is obviously an almost impossible task tosort out how much of the subsequent criminality in the subsamplewas due to hashish use and how much to the social chaos thatprevailed in Greece (pp. 103-104). Andrade, 1964. The researcher retrospectively reviewed theexaminations of 120 patients sentenced between 1951 and 1960 by aBrazilian Court to Heitor Carrilho insane asylum. Sentencing inall cases was based on the allegation that cannabis was directlyresponsible for their crimes. The researcher concluded that: In the 120 patients examined, we did; not find anycriminogenic action that could be attributed to cannabis; ... Inthe majority of cases examined (83), we found patients withpsychotic disturbances. . . . In the cases in which we did notfind mental disturbances, a total of 37, the crime attributed tothem was that of carrying or selling marihuana.... In the studyof the dynamics of the crimes of all the others, we saw thatthere was a link between the crime and the illness, independentof the use of cannabis (Tinklenberg, 1971: 12). Lambo, 1965. The researcher compiled lists of crimes occurringover a, two year period in three West African nations andrecorded the number of offenders perpetrating these crimes. Hefound that approximately one-fourth of the offenders had previousconvictions. Forty-seven percent of the 863 offenders convictedfor false pretenses, 61% of the 2,880 convicted burglars and 54%of those convicted on charges of "culpable driving"were said to have histories of cannabis use. Many of these users,however, were also shown to have long histories of psychologicalmaladjustment (p. 10). The researcher suggests that "the useof cannabis enhances suggestibility in certain individuals, andthis may be a factor in the commission of crime, by these chronicabusers" (p. 11). THE RELATIONSHIP BETWEEN MARIHUANA AND CRIME: AN EXPLANATION As indicated at the outset, enumerative studies of the crimescommitted by apprehended marihuana, law violators and non-drugoffenders identified as marihuana users cannot, by their verynature, either prove or disprove a causal connection between theuse of cannabis and the commission of crimes; nor can their ratesof crime be projected onto the larger universe of marihuanausers. As several researchers have pointed out, those individualsapprehended for marihuana offenses represent only a. tinyfraction of all marihuana users (Kaplan, 1971; Weitzner, et al.,1971) ; likewise, those in other offender samples who areidentified as marihuana users represent only a small proportionof the offender populations of which they are a part (Bromberg,1939; Bromberg and Rodgers, 1946; Kaplan, 1971). Although the data do indicate that some individuals identifiedas marihuana users are subsequently involved in crime, bothdrug-specific and non-drug offenses, they do not provide supportfor the thesis that cannabis was the determining factor in theircriminal careers. Likewise, they fail to indicate that the rateof progression to other crimes manifested by these offenders wassignificantly greater than that which might be expected in eithera non-using criminal subgroup or the general population. As Tinklenberg (1971) has stated: The important issue is that unless one has systematic dataon the proclivities toward crime of the various subgroups ofmarihuana users, one cannot answer the crucial question ofwhether the use of marihuana alters the actual rate of crimeamong these various subgroups over the criminality which would beexpected. At this time, it is unknown whether individuals withthese characteristics seek the use of marihuana or whether theuse of marihuana in any way contributes to the development ofthese traits (P. 24). By reading between the lines of these enumerative studies,however, one would be tempted to postulate that individuals withcertain psychological, social and cultural characteristics aremore likely to seek the use of marihuana, than is marihuanalikely to contribute to the development of delinquent or criminalbehavior patterns. The number of researchers pointing to individuals with longhistories of psychological maladjustment or disturbances hasalready been noted. Others have alluded to persons involved,prior to cannabis use, in criminal or delinquent subcultures(Blumer, 1967; Robins, et al., 1970; Kaplan, 1971; Weitzner, etal., 1971). Still others suggest that marihuana use is morelikely to develop among persons living in underprivilegedcommunities or within a social structure that limits achievementand advancement (Asuni, 1964; Blumer, 1967; Goode, 1972). In recent years, considerable evidence has been gathered tosuggest that the use of other drugs and association withdrug-using friends are also likely to enhance the probability ofmarihuana use (Hochman and Brill, 1971; Goode, 1972; Abelson, etal., 1972). Because many of these characteristics are likely' to beassociated with both criminal or delinquent behavior andmarihuana, use, some individuals have mistakenly concluded a.cause-effect relationship rather than a statistical correlation. The studies reviewed in the following pages axe probably themost methodologically adequate assessments of the. purportedrelationship between marihuana and crime undertaken to date. Thedata show that the seemingly significant statistical correlationoften observed between marihuana, use and crime is spurious; itis dependent not on the chemical effects of the drug but upon theoperation of several extra-pharmacological variables which havelittle or nothing to do with the use of marihuana. per se. The first of these studies (Goode, 1970) is based on a sampleof marihuana users. Because it, like the study by Robins and hiscolleagues (1967, 1970) referred to earlier, involves a selectedpopulation, the extent to which its findings can be applied tothe general population remains speculative. The second study presented, a Commission sponsored survey ofyoung male urban dwellers, is probably the most adequateassessment to date of the relationship between marihuana use andcrime. The results are based on a representative sample of thegeneral population of males, 15 to 34 years of age, the selfreports of criminal behavior have been cross-checked withPhiladelphia Police Department files; and numerous statisticalcontrols have been applied to the data. The study thereforeprovides at least tentative answers to the following questions: -Do young, male marihuana users and nonusers in the generalpopulation differ significantly in the nature and extent of theircriminal activities? -Is marihuana use, in and of itself, the principal determinantof any observed differences? -If not, what are the variableswhich explain a statistical correlation between marihuana use andcrime? Goode, 1970. Between February and September of 1967,face-to-face interviews were held with 204 marihuana usersresiding in the New York City Metropolitan Area. The sample,admittedly nonrepresentative, was drawn front membership lists ofdrug-related organizations and also included friends andacquaintances of the researcher. The sample, suspected of differing to some unknown extent froma random sample of marihuana users, can be characterized -asprimarily male (53%), young (median age 22 years), white (89.5%),single (78%), middle class urban dwellers, including students,dropouts, business people, housewives and the unemployed (p.316). All of the respondents, by virtue of their marihuana use,possession or sale, had engaged in law violative behavior, but,only nine marihuana arrests were reported. This finding indicatesthat persons who are arrested for marihuana related activitiesconstitute only a small fraction of total marihuana users. Because of their marihuana-related criminal activity, onewould expect that persons in this sample would have a higherprobability of being arrested than would the "average"person from the general population. To determine if, in fact,this might be the case, the researcher computed the rate ofarrest for his sample and compared it with the national rate ofarrest provided by the Federal Bureau of Investigation for theyear 1965. Despite the fact that the rates are not strictlycomparable (the sample rate is based on arrests ever experienced;the national rate is based on the number of arrests recorded forone year), the similarity is striking. The national rate wasgiven as 3.7 per 100; the sample rate was computed to be 3.9 per100 per year, 4.5 if one adds the marihuana arrests (p. 236). Although the arrest, rates of the users and the generalpopulation were found to be roughly similar, the types of crimescommitted by the users differed significantly from those crimesrecorded for the population as a whole. In contrast to themajority of drunkenness and disorderly conduct charges noted forthe general population, the offenses of the users most oftenresulting in arrest involved participation in politicaldemonstrations (19 out of the 55 arrests). No other singleoffense attracted more, than a few arrests (p. 2335). In addition to examining arrest rates and the types ofoffenses committed, the researcher also investigated therelationship between the amount of marihuana smoked and thecriminal behavior of the user. If it were true that marihuana didproduce a dangerous and criminogenic state in the user, thegreater would be his likelihood of committing crimes and of beingarrested. The data, however, show no relationship; excluding the"political crimes" (which were most common among theleast frequent smokers and least common among the most frequentsmokers), the "serious" crimes committed by 15respondents (non-marihuana narcotics possession, disorderlyconduct, drunkenness, burglary, theft, assault, auto theft,serving liquor to a minor and larceny) resulted in a total of 21arrests. The heavy smokers did not commit these crimessignificantly more frequently than did the light smokers. Similarly, there was no relationship found between thefrequency of use and the likelihood of arrest; three of the dailysmokers, three of those who smoked three to six times per week,three who smoked one or two times weekly, one who smoked fourtimes monthly and three who were less than monthly smokers werearrested for committing these "serious" crimes (pp.237-38). The researcher concludes that: Although these numbers are extremely small, the fact oftheir perfect dispersal is perhaps indicative of the lack of acrime-inducing effect of the drug. It is, at any rate, aproposition which ought to be tested more systematically in thefuture with more complete data. For the moment, there areindications that point to the fact that the marijuana smoker isno more criminal than the rest of the population (p. 238). Goode, 1972. The Commission-sponsored Philadelphia survey setout to resolve these issues. Goode (1972) analyzed the datacollected during August of 1971 from an interview survey of 55915-to-34-year-old residents of West Philadelphia. That part of the report devoted specifically to the analysisof the data is presented in its entirety below. The onlydeletions made were the author' references to previous studiesbearing on the issues addressed, the findings of which have beenpresented earlier in this chapter. Excerpts From MARIJUANA USE AND CRIME* PREFACE *Prepared by Professor Erich Goode for the National Commissionon Marihuana and Drug Abuse, January 15, 1972. The data on whichthis report is based were obtained from a survey conducted by theInstitute of Survey Research of Temple University. All tablesreferred to in Professor Goode's text are found at the end ofthese excerpts. 'The interview schedule was developed andexecuted and the data processed for the Commission by TempleUniversity's Institute for Survey Research, in Philadelphia. The data analyzed in this report were gathered in August 1971by the Institute for Survey Research of Temple University InPhiladelphia; the author of this report did not have a hand inany phase of the data gathering, including constructing theinterview schedule, although he is solely responsible for thedata analysis. The sample consists in toto of males age 15through 34 living in households located in a section of WestPhiladelphia. Each respondent was interviewed; a total samplesize of 559 was collected. (The refusal rate was 10%, which istypical for house-to-house surveys of this type.) The area inwhich the sample was drawn is composed mainly of twoheterogeneous populations: lower-middle and working-class, highschool educated blacks, and college-associated whites-studentsand professionals associated with [Drexel University and] theUniversity of Pennsylvania. About four respondents in ten in thissurvey are black, and just over half are white. (The number ofOrientals and Puerto Ricans or Mexicans is too small to permit ameaningful statistical analysis, so that when race is discussedin this report, only the black-white comparison will be made.)The racial composition is roughly equivalent to the censusfigures for the sample area although no attempt was made, througha weighting of cases, to "correct" any discrepancieswhich might have prevailed in population composition. Moredetailed information is available from the Institute for SurveyResearch. A quarter of the sample (23%) had never smoked marijuana; in17 cases (3%), no information on marijuana use was given by therespondent. Of the marijuana users the question asked aboutfrequency of use during the respondent's most recent year ofuse-about 1 in 10 smoked marijuana daily or more, about 1 in 5smoked approximately once or twice a week, 1 in 4 smoked once ortwice per month, on the average, and about 4 in 10 smokedmarijuana several times a year. (The study also asked how oftenthe respondent smoked marijuana in his first year of use avariable which I have not made use of in this report.) Questionswere also asked concerning the respondent's use of otherdrugs-"stimulants or uppers, such as bennies, speed, ordex," "sedatives or downers, such as sleeping pills,amytal or blues, or nembutal, or yellow jackets,""hallucinatory drugs, such as LSD, mescaline, or STP,"and "hard drugs, such as heroin, morphine, demerol, cocaine,or codeine." In addition, questions on one's friends' druguse-both marijuana and these other drugs--were asked. The commission of various offenses formed another segnient ofthe questionnaire. There were 16 of them, and ranged from thosewhich would not be considered crimes in most instances-such as"disturbing people"-to those which would be consideredfelonies, drawing long prison sentences such :as rape, armedrobbery, and assault. As would be expected], the serious offenseswere committed (or admitted to) by very, very few respondents-andthus, any comparison between users and non-users has to be mademainly on the basis of committing trivial offenses.... III. THE EFFECTS OF MARIJUANA At this point, I will introduce the data from the Philadelphiamarijuana use and crime study, specifically mandated by theNational Commission on Marihuana and Drug Abuse. This survey'sdata will form the bulk of the factual evidence on themarijuana-crime connection in the report which follows. The question of marijuana's relationship to crime andaggressive behavior is obviously closely related to the drug'seffects. One of the most fundamental generalizations inpsychopharmacology to be obtained from thousands of recentresearch efforts is that the same drug does not have standard andinvariant "effects," but that effects are sensitive toa number of extra-pharmacological variables, including thepersonality of the user, the social setting in which drug, usetakes place, the user's past experience with the drug, hisexpectations, and so on. Thus, it is elliptical and somewhatartificial, and incomplete, to speak of any drug's"effects," as if they occurred under any and allconditions, in all users. We should bear this qualification inmind when looking at the relationship between the ingestion of adrug and any subsequent behavior-with the latter supposedly",Caused" by the effects of the drug. Drug effectsvary, and, in addition, even standard effects do notautomatically translate into specific forms of human behavior.Even opposite forms of behavior could follow the same effects,given different individuals taking the drug, different settingsin which the drug is used, different definitions of the drug andits use and so on.... The data collected by the Philadelphia survey on thesubjective effects of marijuana dovetail precisely with those ofearlier studies. The effects agreed to by the users in the sampleare clearly inconsistent with aggressive behavior. This does notmean that marijuana cannot be related to the commission ofcriminal or aggressive acts-but it does suggest that the effectsof marijuana, per se, may have nothing to do with the commissionof crimes, especially violent crimes. Table 1 summarizes theresults from this survey's question on marijuana's effects, whichwas: "I am going to read to you some of the ways usingmarijuana may affect people. For each could you tell me whethermarijuana had this effect on you almost every time, more thanhalf the time, less than half the time, or never or almost never,when using marijuana." The effects asked about were relatedto feelings generally thought of as criminogenic either in apositive or a negative direction. Those that are generallyconsidered to be related to crimes deal with anger andfrustration, or with derangement, or with suggestibility. Thoseinversely related to the commission of crimes and aggressive actsdealt with relaxation and sleepiness. As can be readily seen from Table 1, users overwhelmingly denythat marijuana has effects on them which could be interpreted ascriminogenic or violent in nature. Nearly all respondentsspecifically denied that aggressive feelings came over themduring the marijuana intoxication. When asked whether, under theinfluence of marijuana, they had a feeling of wanting to hurtsomeone, 96% said that this occurred never or almost never. Whenasked whether they had feelings of wanting to do somethingviolent, 95% said never or almost never. Almost nine in 10 (88%)said that they never or almost never felt more angry when high.And almost eight in 10 (78%) said that they never or almost neverfelt frustrated when tinder the influence. Thus, thefrustration-anger-aggressive impulse syndrome seems to be anextremely rare phenomenon associated with the marijuanaintoxication. Likewise, the suggestibility syndrome does notappear to be characteristic, although it seems to be somewhatmore common than aggressive feelings. About six in 10 (or 59%) ofthe respondents said that they had a feeling of "being morewilling to follow other people's suggestions," never oralmost never. And about three-quarters (77%) said that they had a"feeling of being able to do anything," never or almostnever. Those sensations, however, which would be seen asinhibiting criminal and aggressive im pulses and acts weredecidedly more common, Exactly half of the respondents said thatthey felt "a feeling of relaxation" almost all thetime. About a third (31%) said that they felt less angry thanusual almost all the time. About a fifth (22%) felt drowsy andsleepy almost all the time-and another quarter (25%) felt thismore than half the time. These data suggest-but do not demonstrate-that the effects ofmarijuana per se are probably not related in any meaningful orcausal manner to aggressive or criminal acts. They give us aclue, but do not prove, that in and of itself, marijuana use doesnot "cause" the commission of criminal acts. In fact,if we were to look at the subjective effects of marijuanathemselves, they appear to point in exactly the oppositedirection-they would seem to inhibit crime, indeed, activity ofall kinds. The effect of marijuana would be more in the directionof reducing than stimulating aggressive, criminal or violentactivity. Two final qualifications would appear to be in order before Iexplore the marijuana-crime link more systematically and fully.One has to do with the length of time that the marijuanaIntoxication lasts. Two facts bear on this issue. First, eachepisode of use generally produces an intoxication which lastsroughly three or four hours, at the most. Marijuana's effectswear off about three hours or so after the user smokes the drug.Secondly, from previous studies ... as well as the survey whosedata I am analyzing In this report, it is clear that the average,or median, level of marijuana use Is roughly once a week. Thismeans that the typical marijuana user is under the influenceabout three or four hours per week, or roughly 3% or so of hiswaking hours, and under a "normal" state of mind theremaining 97%. Now, it is possible that this tiny segment of timewould influence some users in some significant way, but the factof its briefness of duration ought to be kept in mind whenreasoning about the impact of the drug on the lives of users. Thedaily user comprises roughly one marijuana user out of 10, andthe individual who is high all, or nearly all, of his wakinghours, probably constitutes about I or 2% of all marijuanasmokers. These facts cannot be ignored in our exploration of thecausal connection between the effects of marijuana and criminalactivities. And the last issue I will raise in the marijuana effects topichas to do with the truthfulness of the answers given by users. Aplausible objection to taking the word of users concerning theeffects of the drug on them would be that they areuntrustworthy-that they have a motive for lyIng, for portrayingthe drug and their experiences in a positive light. Actually,what nearly all researchers have found in an interview situationwith drug users is that they very rarely lie; in fact, theirhonesty about themselves and their activities and experiencesappears to be the rule, overwhelmingly. . . . The overall picture that we receive from . . . various studiesis that, like most interview subjects, marijuana users mayoccasionally lie or hide the truth, but their answers will, ingeneral, be truthful. This does not mean that everything they saymust be taken at face value-as with any other group ofinterviewees, anything which the researcher is capable ofchecking independently, and which we have data on, we shouldcorroborate with what we learn in the interview situation. At thesame time, we would be as fallacious in assuming that everythingthat marijuana smoker-, said to be true is suspect as if weaccepted everything they said to be true in all respects. Whatall of this means is that we must reason with caution fromself-reported data, use them whenever we must, and check themwhenever we can. IV. CRIMES UNDER THE INFLUENCE The Philadelphia survey on marijuana use and crime askedseveral questions concerning 16 different offenses. The questionsbegan as follows: "'Many people in every community commitacts which others consider offenses, delinquent acts, andviolations. Here is a list of these acts." The specificquestions dealt with whether the respondent had ever committedeach one, how often, how old lie was when the offense occurred,whether lie was caught by the police, and whether the respondenthad been drinking, or was under the influence of marijuana, 24hours or less before committing the act-as well as whether therespondent thought that using marijuana influenced him to committhe act; these questions were asked about the first as well asthe most recent such of. fense, if they occurred. The offenseswere: hurting someone in a minor way, hurting someone badly,carrying a knife. stealing a car, disturbing people, threateningto hurt someone, taking money, stealing from a store, making anobscene telephone call, forcing sexual intercourse with a woman,breaking into a house or store, damaging property, buying stolenproperty, setting off an alarm, carrying a gun, and using aweapon to steal. From these facts, it might be interesting tofind out what proportion of acts involved some drug use occurringwithin 24 hours-and whether that drug is alcohol or marijuana. Iwill explain after the data are presented what these facts canand cannot tell us. We must not be too hasty in reading too muchinto any given set of data. Table 2 presents summary information from this set ofquestions. I have presented figures for only six offenses:stealing from a store, damaging property, hurting someone in aminor way, breaking into a house or store, stealing a ear, andhurting someone badly. Some of the crimes asked about werecommitted by so few respondents (such as forcing sexualintercourse) that any statistical analysis would be completelymeaningless. Other offenses seem to be unrelated to theaggressive syndrome associated with marijuana use-such as buyingstolen property. The six I have chosen are, in any case,representative. Tile first three are relatively minor, and wouldusually be classified by the law as misdemeanors; the second twoare considerably more serious, and would often be classified asfelonies. Table 2 presents the proportion who drank alcohol, andsmoked marijuana 24 hours or fewer before the crime wascommitted; the figures in the first two columns are for the firsttime the respondent committed the offense, and the second twocolumns are for the most recent time, if it occurred more thanonce. What generalizations may we make front Table 2? First of all, committing these crimes is atypical. Not onethese six offenses was committed by a majority of the sample.Secondly the more serious the offense, the less likely it was tobe committed. Minor offenses were committed at least once bybetween four and five out of every 10 respondents, but majoroffenses had been committed at least once by something like onerespondent in 25. (And two of the offenses not in the table wererarer still; forcing sexual intercourse was admitted to by sixrespondents, or about one in 100, and using a weapon to steal wasreported by only three respondents, or one out of 200.) What about drugs and crime? Compared with not being under theinfluence, drugs tend to be atypical in the commission of crimes.For none of these categories, whether first offense or mostrecent, was being under the influence of either alcohol ormarijuana characteristic of over a quarter of all offenses, andmost are considerably below this. Most crimes here were committedwhen the offender was not under the influence of any drug,marijuana, or alcohol, when lie was in a "normal" stateof mind pharmacologically.* Secondly, in terms of absoluteincidence, alcohol is involved in the commission of crimeconsiderably more often than marijuana. Adding together all ofthe offenses committed 24 hours before each drug was used,alcohol had been used in conjunction with first offenses a totalof 47 times, and marijuana only five times-a ratio of not quiteten to one. For the most recent offenses, alcohol was involved atotal of 66 times, and marihuana 19--a ratio of about three toone. In conjunction with this point, it should be stressed that theclassic, aggressive, violent crimes traditionally andhistorically associated with the marijuana intoxication are very,very rarely committed-by anyone, high or normal, user or non-useralike. Six men in this survey admitted to forcing a woman to haveintercourse with him as a first offense, and three admitted torape more than the first time. In two out of the six first-timecases, the offender said that he had been drinking 24 hoursbefore, and in one out of the three most recent-time cases,drinking was involved as well. But in none of the six first timecases, and in none of the three recent-time cases, had anyonesmoked marijuana 24 hours before. (None of the men had beenapprehended for this offense, incidentally.) Only three of themen in the survey said that they had used a weapon to steal as afirst offense, and two admitted this offense more than the onetime-and none said that lie had either drunk or smoked 24 hoursbefore the offense. *Several facts should he born in mind when considering thisgeneralization. First of all, the survey asked about the use ofeach drug 24 hours before the offense was committed or less-andhence, the respondent was not necessarily under the influencewhen the offense was committed, although certainly manyrespondents were under the influence at that time. Secondly,anyone who uses marijuana is far more likely to becomeintoxicated with each episode of use than is true of each episodeof alcohol use. Considering the fact that the typical marijuana smoker in thisstudy had been intoxicated several hundred times for a total ofwell over a thousand hours, and therefore in a state of mindwhich, if the "causal" theory is correct, is aggressiveand criminogenic, then this almost total absence of violent andaggressive crimes committed by users should be puzzling. Thisfact indicates that the "causal" theory may beinadequate and erroneous. However, it is not possible to tell from Table 2 whether thecommission of crimes is more frequent for alcohol or marijuana ona relative basis during the period of intoxication. That is, ifanyone wanted to know whether a thousand hours of a marijuana oran alcohol intoxication was more like to result in the commissionof various crimes, this table would not convey this information.Unfortunately, this survey did not ask a question on thefrequency with which the respondents drank alcohol or, indeed,whether they drank at all so that an alcohol -marijuanacomparison cannot be more systematically made. It is entirelypossible that alcohol-related crimes are far more frequent thanmarijuana-related crimes. simply because alcohol is still, evenin this sample, probably the drug of choice among young people,and is more often used than marijuana (just as not being undertile influence of any drug is more frequently involved withcrimes than being under the influence, simply because mostpeople, most of the time, are not intoxicated). As to which drugis more "criminogenic" in the sense of what proportionof the time under the influence of marijuana vs. alcohol onecommits various crimes cannot be determined from the data fromthis study. However, in absolute terms, alcohol is considerablymore often used before crimes than marijuana. Another generalization that may be made from Table 2 is thatthe contribution of marijuana from first offense to most recentoffense grows somewhat relative to alcohol. That is, for thefirst offense, alcohol is used before it about 10 times asfrequently as is marijuana, but for most recent offense, alcoholis only three times as frequent. This probably is a reflection ofthe following two trends: (1) Marijuana smoking is considerablymore frequent today (i.e., closest in time when the most recentoffense occurred) titan a few years ago (i.e., closest in timewhen the first offense occurred), and hence, its frequencyrelative to alcohol would be greater in conjunction with anyactivity-criminal or non-criminal as well-simply because its useis more common ; (2) Marijuana smoking is more common among youngadults (the age group most closely represented by the age whenlast offense was committed) than among adolescents andpreadolescents (the age group most closely represented by the agewhen first offense was committed) and, moreover, as age rises,marijuana use rises faster than alcohol use rises, at least up,until early adulthood. . . . It is possible that, as marijuana usage increases, the numberof crimes committed under the influence of this drug may increaseas well. However, the question as to marijuana's directcontribution to the commission of crimes, especially aggressivecrimes, is ail independent issue, and one in need of exploration. V. WHO COMMITS CRIMES AND WHO DOESN'T? In this section, it is our job to explore two basic issues: Do marijuana users commit crimes and offenses any more frequently titan non-users do? Are any variables with which marijuana use is strongly related also correlated with criminality? In the next section I will deal with a third question, and onewhich is probably the most crucial one in this report: Can themarijuana-crime connection be explained mainly by the use ofmarijuana in and of itself, or is use itself dependent on thirdvariables which themselves explain the commission of offenses? As the principal measure of committing crimes, this study hasemployed the number of different types of offenses admitted to inthe 16 categories asked about. Naturally, there are many othercrimes not asked about, and, in addition, some of these crimeswould not correspond to the image most people would have of"classic" aggressive offenses-such as "disturbingpeople," or receiving stolen goods. However, as a generalindex or overall measure of criminality of different groups orcategories of individuals, this one is as good as any others thathave been employed, and is probably adequate for our purposes.(The survey, it must be noted, did not ask questions about anywhite collar crimes, which must be reckoned into an adequatemeasure of output of criminal behavior-but these crimes do notcorrespond with the public's image of aggressive crimes committedunder the influence of marijuana, and so their absence is lessrelevant than would appear at first glance.) Throughout theremainder of this report, the number of crimes and offenses willbe employed as the dependent variable-the outcome to beexplained. And throughout, I will be examining themarijuana-crime connection-as well as other relationships-insofaras it bears on file basic issue. Before the analysis proceeds, it should be pointed out that ofthe 16 offenses, not one of the violent crimes correlated withmarijuana use in any meaningful way at all, and a very weakrelationship was evidenced with only five of theoffenses-stealing from a store, buying stolen property,disturbing people, damaging property, and hurting someone in aminor way (the last of which showing the weakest association ofall). The statistical differences in rates of offenses betweenusers and non-users rest on adding together a small number ofweakly correlated offenses. When offense differences arediscussed, the reader should not hold the mistaken impressionthat they indicate massive differences, or differences indicatinga higher rate of classic, violent crimes among users. With thatwarning in mind, we may now proceed to user/non-user differencesin offenses. The first relationship to be presented, then, is whethermarijuana users as a whole commit offenses any more frequentlythan non-users as a whole. The answer is yes. I have employed twoindicators of marijuana use; one is frequency of marijuana useduring the period of most recent use (which may have been in thepast, or may be at present), and whether or not the respondenthas ever, or has never, used marijuana. Both indicators ofmarijuana use correlate very powerfully with committing offenses.For both tables, the differences are significant beyond the .001level, employing Chi-square as a test of significance, whichmeans that the differences observed could occur at random onlyone chance in a thousand. This is considered extremelysignificant. There is a regular and step-wise relationshipbetween frequency of use and committing offenses; the more that agiven respondent smokes marijuana, the greater is the likelihoodthat lie will have committed four or more offenses, and the loweris his likelihood of committing no offenses at all. Over a third(38%) of those who have never smoked marijuana said that theycommitted none of the 16 offenses asked about-but this was trueof only one respondent in eight (or 12%) of the regular smokers.At the other end, there was a 17% difference between non-usersand regular users (24% vs. 41%) in admitting to four or more ofthese offenses. Tables 3 and 4 present these data in detail. We would be remiss in our duties as sensitive and acute socialanalysts if we ended the analysis there. The simple correlationbetween marijuana use and offenses may very well mask importantand even more basic relationships buried beneath it. Marijuana iscorrelated in a simple manner with the commission of crimes,, butdoes it remain correlated when controls are applied? In otherwords, is it a spurious relationship, or one which will remainwhen crucial variables are held constant' Which-factors are alsorelated to the commission of offenses-which might actuallythemselves explain the simple marijuana-crime connection? Thereare several such variables-race, age, education, the use of otherdrugs, and the respondent's involvement in the drug subculture.Blacks are significantly less likely to use marijuana (64% of theblacks in the survey said that they had tried marijuana, but 86%of the whites said that they had done so), but slightly morelikely to admit to the commission of offenses--41% of all blackssaid that they committed four or more offenses but this was trueof only 25 ) % of all whites (see Tables 23 and 25). Does themarijuana-crime correlation hold up for blacks and whitesseparately? Age was also related to both offenses and marijuana.The oldest respondents (age 29-34) were least likely to havetried marijuana (61%), the youngest (15-20) were next least(73%), and the intermediate age groups (21-23 and 24-28) weremost likely to have tried marijuana (82% and 80%). There was alinear relationship between age and offenses, however. Theyoungest group was least likely to have committed no offenses(20%), and most likely to have committed four or more (42%) ; theoldest group was most likely to, have committed no offenses(35%), and least likely to have committed four or more (22%) (seeTables 29-31). Thus, we would want to know whether marijuana andcrime still correlate in each age group separately. The samething can be said for education (Tables 26-28), the use of drugsother than marijuana (Tables 11-16), and having friends who usedrugs (Tables 17-22)-the relationship between marijuana use andcrime could be mitigated or even transformed altogether if thesethird variables are considered. One possibility is that themarijuana-crime relationship is wiped out altogether with theapplication of these controls-that is, that the relationship iscompletely spurious. A second possibility is that themarijuana-crime connection may be specific to some groups orcategories, but not others. And the third possibility is that thesame original relationship remains basically unaltered, or evenis strengthened, by the application of these controls. Special attention ought to be paid to the drug-relatedvariables. There is a powerful and significant associationbetween the use of marijuana and the use of other drugs. Althoughrecent studies have presented evidence that this basicrelationship is probably not due to the effects of marijuana perse, but to friendships and associations made in conjunction withmarihuana use . . . , the simple relationship between marihuanaand other drugs is a statistical fact. There is, in addition, astrong and marked association with using drugs other thanmarijuana and the commission of crimes. Thus, a legitimatequestion to be explored is whether "marijuana only"users have a greater crime rate than non-users, whether thehigher rate of the commission of offenses cannot be attributedlargely or solely to using drugs other than marijuana. VI. MARIJUANA USE AND CRIME: CAUSAL OR SPURIOUS Our first clue as to the nature of the underlying relationshipbetween marijuana use and crime is obtained by examining Table 5,which documents the association between number of offenses andmarijuana use, taking into account the use of other drugs aswell. Table 5 shows that "marijuana only" marijuanausers are only very slightly more likely to commit crimes thannon-users. Tire original nine percentage point difference betweenusers and non-users in committing four or more offenses hasshrunk to only two percentage points (in fact, only onepercentage point--we are comparing 24.4% with 25.5%, and theoriginal 19 percentage point difference between users andnon-users in committing no offenses has been reduced to 13percentage points. In fact, the "marijuana only" useris far more similar to the non-user in number of offensescommitted than he is to the user of marijuana plus two or moreother drugs. The application of the control involving other drugsclearly attenuates the marijuana-crime relationship, and much ofthe user-non-user differences in offenses committed can be tracedto the fact that marijuana users are significantly more likely touse other drugs, rather than the use of marijuana per se.* *The exploration of the "escalation" hypothesis-thequestion of whether or not marijuana "leads to" the useof other more dangerous drugs-would take us far afield in thisreport. The issue is dealt with in a separate report by theauthor prepared for the National Commission on Marihuana and DrugAbuse, however. Our confidence in the lack of basic association betweenmarijuana use itself and offenses--and our ability to attributethe simple original relationship to the use of drugs other thanmarijuana-is strengthened when we examine the relationshipbetween frequency of use and offenses, holding the use of otherdrugs constant. Table 5A presents these data. Among"marijuana only" users, there is no statisticallysignificant correlation between frequency of use and thecommission of crimes--the differences are small, insignificant,and in no consistent direction. Among users of one other drug,likewise, frequency of marijuana use is extremely looselyassociated with committing offenses-the differences which areobserved are small, statistically insignificant, and point in noparticular direction. And lastly, among users of two or moreother drugs aside from marijuana, the association betweenfrequency of marijuana use and the commission of the offensesdescribed earlier is loose and not at all significant. Table 5Avery strongly indicates the validity of the "spurious"model. Closely related to the use of other drugs is a control whichshould be explored: the respondent's involvement with adrug-using subculture-with others who also use drugs. Naturally,as we saw in the last section, individuals who use marijuana tendto have friends who also use marijuana. What we would like toknow is whether the social patterns they exhibit can be traced totheir use of the drug. or to the fact that they have friends whouse drugs. Thus, we should be very interested in looking at theindividual who uses marijuana, but who does riot have drug-usingfriends, as well as the individual who does riot rise marijuana,but has drug-using friends. If interesting changes take place inthe original marijuana-crime correlation, then we haveindications that it is the individual's social relations, and nothis rise of marijuana, per se, that determine marijuana use'scorrelation with crime. Tables 6 and 7 deal with this issue; theyshould be examined in conjunction with one another. Among respondents with no marijuana-using friends (out oftheir 10 closest friends). as well as those with no drug-usingfriends at all. almost an identical relationship betweenmarijuana use and crime obtains as in the original Table 3.Marijuana users are, significantly (but not strikingly) morelikely to commit four or more offenses, and significantly lesslikely to commit none. The percentage differences in Tables 6 and7 are almost the same (even slightly more) as those in Table.3-about 25% at the "none" end vs. 19% for the originaltable, and about 18% at the "four or more" end vs. 9%for the original table (Table 3). If we were to rely only onthese segments of the table, we would be led to the, inferencethat marijuana is meaningfully related to the commission ofcrimes. However, an extraordinary thing happens to the other segmentsof the table: among those with drug-using friends, there is norelationship at all between marijuana use and committingoffenses. The differences are so small as to be statisticallyinsignificant. (And they are actually in the oppositedirection-non-users are slightly more likely to commit four ormore offenses than users are.) In other words the marijuana-crimerelationship is completely wiped out by the application ofcontrols-in this case, integration into the drug-usingsubculture. We are led overwhelmingly to the conclusion thatmarijuana users tend to be somewhat more likely to commit crimessolely because they are part of a drug-using subculture; theactual properties of marijuana appear to be completelyunassociated with criminal behavior. Anyone (whether he usesmarijuana or not) who makes friends and becomes involved withothers who use drugs-especially others who use drugs in additionto and aside from marijuana stands a higher likelihood ofcommitting offenses, simply because this segment of thepopulation tends to be more lax about obeying the law. It ismerely because marijuana users tend to associate with others whoare part of this subculture that their crime rate is somewhathigher. In other words, the marijuana-crime relationship-in termsof the causal or effects model is completely spurious. What of the marijuana-using isolate? What of those who usemarijuana but who have no friends who use drugs-either marijuanaor other drugs? How can we explain the fact that the originaldifference in offense rate between users and non-users were notwiped out among those without drug-using friends-in contrast tobeing wiped out among those who had drug-using friends? Lookingback at Tables 6 and 7, we are struck by the fact that theoffense rate of the marijuana-using group without drug-usingfriends is as high as the groups with drug using friends. Whatdoes this indicate? First of all, involvement with a drug-risingsubculture is clearly not the only determinant of a high rate ofcommitting offenses. Probably something else is at work. The factthat the offense differences wash out among those involved withthe drug subculture indicates that rise by itself (i.e., beinghigh) cannot be a factor in the original marijuana-crimerelationships difference cannot explain two things that aresimilar. The using isolate, however, is probably a (Qualitativelydifferent social being from those who either do not rise, orthose who use and have friends who also use. The isolate isprobably deviant in a variety of ways crime being one of them.The fact that he uses in spite of having no friends who use(although lie may have friends who do not use) means that he usesmost of the time alone. has not integrated his activities into asocial life or a subculture, and probably pursues some activitieswhich the dominant society would judge to be eccentric andunusual. In other words, it is possible that his involvement withcrime is related to his social isolation from a group whichpursues drug activities similar to his own, rather than his useof marijuana. However, these remarks must be regarded asspeculation, since more complete information is not available. A related process occurs when race is employed as the controlvariable. Among blacks, the original relationship remains intact;marijuana users are significantly (although not markedly) morelikely to commit four or more offenses, and less likely to commitnone, than is true of non-users. (The relationship is significantat the .004 level, using Chi-square.) However, among whites, theoriginal relationship is completely washed out; users are not atall more likely to commit offenses. Table 8 presents these data.The minor differences can be completely accounted for by randomfluctuations; the relationship is not significant at any level. When education is treated as the control variable in thisrelationship, the marijuana-crime connection follows a patternparallel to the two previous explorations-that is, it iscompletely washed out for some groups, but remains for others. InTable 9, we see that marijuana users who have at least attendedcollege, but not graduate school, are not any more likely tocommit offenses than college non-users. The percentagescommitting four or more crimes, and those committing none, arealmost identical for users and non-users alike. (The differencesare insignificant, and due to random fluctuation.) However, amongrespondents with only a high school education, the same basicrelationship produced in Table 3 is upheld: marijuana users aresignificantly more likely to have committed offenses thannon-users. However, at least two variables are compounded here,since most respondents with a college education are white. Thus,the retainment of the original marijuana-crime correlation amonghigh school education respondents, and its wash-out among collegeeducated respondents, should not come as any surprise. However,among respondents with at least some graduate school education,the original relationship asserts itself; users are more likelyto commit offenses than non-users. (The differences observed aresignificant at the .05 level; in other words, the differenceshave a one in 20 chance of occurring purely at random.) Table 9presents the marijuana-crime relationship, holding educationconstant. Using age as a control variable also produces mixed results.Among the two youngest age groups (15--20 and 21-23), thedifferences obtaining between users and nonusers arestatistically insignificant, and could have occurred by chancealone; in the youngest of these two groups, the non-user isslightly more likely to have committed four or more offenses, andin the next to youngest of these groups, the user is slightlymore so--but in both, the differences are too small to bemeaningful. In the 24-to-28-year-old group, the differencesapproach statistical significance, but they are not substantial(.07 level of significance, using Chi-square). However, among theoldest group (age 29 to 34), the same basic difference inoffenses as obtained in the original relationship holds up here;users are about twice as likely to have committed four or moreoffenses as non-users (28% vs. 13%), and less than half as likelyto have committed no offenses (21% vs. 58&). These dataappear in Table 10. VII. SUMMARY AND CONCLUSIONS The central effort in this report has been to determinewhether marijuana use, in and of itself, is meaningfully andcausally related to the commission of crime. Two models have beenused in the past to answer this issue: the causal model, whichholds that using marijuana, being under the influence of thedrug, actually does stimulate the will to commit antisocial acts,and the spurious model, which holds that marijuana use is merelya reflection of independent and more powerful forces, and that initself, marijuana use is unrelated to criminal and aggressivebehavior. Some small amount of research has been conducted in thepast on this issue, but no consistent findings have been turnedup; . . . It is because of these factual lacunae that theNational Commission on Marihuana and Drug Abuse mandated a studyof marijuana use and crime, which culminated in the Philadelphiasurvey, as well as this report. The findings from this study strongly support the view thatmarijuana, use by itself is not related in any meaningful orsystematic fashion to criminal behavior, that marijuana useprobably does not "cause criminiality. The"spurious" model appears to be a far more accuratedescription of the marijuana-crime connection than does the"causal" model. The use of marijuana per se is probablycompletely unrelated to criminal and aggressive behavior. Thedrug does not "cause" any significant number of usersto commit crimes, or aggressive or violent behavior. The effectsof the drug seem to be, from what can be gathered from theavailable data on the question, without criminogenic causality.This does not mean that it is not possible to commit crimes,including aggressive crimes, under the influence of marijuana-butthat being high does not increase one's probability of doing so,that on an hour-for-hour, crime-for-crime basis, there areprobably no significant differences between being intoxicated onmarijuana and being "normal," not under the influenceof any drug. A wide variety of data have been brought to bear on themarijuana-crime issue. First of all, regarding the subjective self-reported effectsof marijuana, all indications are that the effects classicallydescribed as being related to aggressive behavior and thecommissions crimes-feeling angry, frustrated, wanting to -hurtsomeone, being willing to follow any and all suggestions ofothers, being deranged, wanting to do something violent-have noempirical support whatsoever; users consistently describe these"effects" as non-existent or as extremely rare andatypical, no different from normally. In fact, precisely theopposite is the case: if anything, the effects of marijuana wouldhave far more to do with reducing the criminal"impulse," whatever that might be, due to the fact thatthey tend to be in the direction of relaxation, feeling calm, ofnot wanting to move about, feeling somewhat drowsy, sleepy.Activity of any sort tends to be inhibited by the marijuanaintoxication. Secondly, the Philadelphia survey asked the respondents aboutusing marijuana and/or alcohol 24 hours or less before variouscrimes were committed. Marijuana very rarely figured into thecommission of crimes in any way. For only a tiny minority of allcrimes committed was the respondent under the influence. This wasespecially the case for serious and aggressive crimes. Alcoholwas far more likely to be used soon before criminal activity thanmarijuana. - The third type of information brought to bear on themarijuana-crime question was the self-admitted offense rate ofusers versus non-users. The total number of different types ofcrimes which respondents said that they had committed wascompared. The simple relationship between using marijuana andcommitting offenses was positive and statistically significant,and there was also a high correlation between frequency ofsmoking marijuana and committing offenses. However, a wide rangeof other variables, themselves related to both crime and tomarijuana use, were also correlated-race, education, age, the useof other drugs, and having drug-using friends. Thus, the issuebecame: is it the causal connection with these third variableswhich produces the marijuana crime simple correlation, or doesthe correlation hold up even when these factors are controlled?In other words, which is right, the causal or tile, spuriousmodel? Is marijuana use merely dependent itself on larger,broader, more potent factors-or does it exert an independentpower? Do users commit crimes more frequently than nonusersbecause they use marijuana or because they happen to be the kindsof people who, would have a higher crime rate, marijuana or nomarijuana. The evidence from these three-variable tests support the"spurious" model. The control tables show that thedifferences in crime rate between users and non-users is, in mostcases, dependent not on marijuana use per se, but on these largerfactors. The fact that the relationship disappears, or is wipedout, when some controls are applied shows that themarijuana-crime connection is dependent on sociologicalvariables, and not chemical effects. When the use of other drugswas held constant, the marijuana-crime correlation was severelyattenuated, and in some cases, washed out entirely. When thevariable of having friends who use other drugs-both marijuana aswell as stimulants, sedatives, hallucinogens and "harddrugs" was applied, the relationship disappeared among thosewith drug-using friends, but not those who had no drug-usingfriends. When race was held constant, the marijuana-crimeconnection was wiped out completely among whites, but not blacks;among white marijuana users, their crime rate was notstatistically different from non-users, but black users did havea higher crime rate than non-using blacks-similar in magnitude tothe original relationship. When education was used as a controlvariable, we saw that among college-educated respondents, themarijuana-crime correlation was nonexistent, but it remainedamong respondents with a high school education, and for those whohad attended graduate school. And lastly, age was applied as acontrol. Among the youngest groups, the marijuana-crimerelationship was attenuated, but it remained somewhat strongamong the two oldest age categories. If there were truly a causal relationship between marijuanause and crime, these disappearing correlations would not occur.The application of sociological variables cannot wash out achemical reaction in the user. The enormous variability dependenton social factors indicates that marijuana effects do notinherently produce behavior of a criminal nature. The kinds ofpeople who use the drug tend to follow Patterns of behaviorregardless of whether or not they use marijuana. By itself,marijuana, use is not a potent producer of behavior, andcertainly not criminal behavior. Individuals who commit criminalacts are those who would do so with or without the use ofmarijuana. The data from this study support-the conclusion, almostwithout qualification, that marijuana use does not cause criminalbehavior.* *A subsequent regression analysis with the six variables usedindependently as controls showed that when all six variables areapplied simultaneously, the use of marijuana in and of itselfaccounts for less than 1% of the variance in committing offenses(personal communication by the author, 24 January 1972). Contents | Feedback | Search DRCNet Library | Schaffer Library | Major Studies Marihuana, A Signal of Misunderstanding WT01-B25-2IA086-000614-B047-351http://206.61.184.43:80/schaffer/Library/studies/nc/nc1m.htm 206.61.184.43 19970122022845 text/html 8348HTTP/1.0 200 OKDate: Wednesday, 22-Jan-97 02:28:35 GMTServer: WebSitePro/1.1f (S/N wpo-0deb)Allow-ranges: bytesContent-type: text/htmlLast-modified: Saturday, 28-Dec-96 06:56:48 GMTContent-length: 8131 Summary and Conclusions: Marihuana and Crime Contents | Feedback | Search DRCNet Library | Schaffer Library | Major Studies Marihuana, A Signal of Misunderstanding The Report of the National Commission on Marihuana and DrugAbuse Summary and Conclusions: Marihuana and Crime The Commission's review of the available evidence bearing onthe relationship between marihuana use and criminal, aggressiveand delinquent behavior has yielded the following information. The once prevalent belief among the general public and theprofessional law enforcement, criminal justice and researchcommunities that marihuana causes crime, violence, aggression anddelinquency has moderated appreciably over the years. Recentevidence indicates that increased attention has been devoted,instead, to a possible statistical correlation rather than acause-effect relationship. At present, however, considerable confusion and uncertaintyexists among both the general and professional publics, amongyouth and adults, and among marihuana users and non-users aboutthe relationship between marihuana and criminal, aggressive ordelinquent behavior. The confusion and uncertainty stem from ageneral lack of knowledge and understanding about the effects ofthe drug, including its potential for physical addiction. Manypersons are still under the misapprehension that marihuana isaddicting and that crimes are committed in order to support adrug "habit." In general, recent changes in public and professional opinionhave corresponded with and reflected the increased use ofmarihuana, particularly within the middle class segment ofsociety; more direct observation of and professional experiencewith the marihuana user; new and more enlightened informationabout the drug and its effects; and concomitant changes in thepublic image of the user. There is no systematic empirical evidence, at least that drawnfrom the American experience, to support the thesis that the useof marihuana either inevitably or generally causes, leads to orprecipitates criminal, violent, aggressive or delinquent behaviorof a sexual or nonsexual nature. Laboratory studies of effects have revealed no evidence toshow that marihuana's chemical properties are, by themselves,capable of producing effects which can be interpreted ascriminogenic; that is, that marihuana is an independent cause ofcriminal or aggressive behavior. If anything, the effectsobserved suggest that marihuana may be more likely to neutralizecriminal behavior and to militate against the commission ofaggressive acts. The research community has recently gathered considerableevidence to show that marihuana and criminal, aggressive anddelinquent behavior are statistically and significantlycorrelated when measured together in isolation from variableswhich are related to marihuana use and other forms of antisocialbehavior. The data also show, however, that this statisticalassociation either attenuates significantly or disappearscompletely when the proper statistical controls are applied. In other words, the observed relationship between the, use ofmarihuana and criminal, violent, aggressive and delinquentbehavior is spurious. It is dependent on suchextra-pharmacological factors as the age, race and education ofthe user; the type of community in which he lives; his pasthistory of psychosocial maladjustment; and his involvement in acriminal or delinquent subculture (use of other drugs; drugbuying and selling activities; associations with friends who alsouse, buy and sell cannabis or other drugs). To reiterate what Professor Goode has so cogently stated, If there were truly a causal relationship between marihuanause and crime, these disappearing correlations would not occur.The application of sociological variables cannot wash out achemical reaction in the user (1972:52). To put it still another way, to believe that marihuana causescriminal, violent, aggressive or delinquent behavior is toconfuse the effects of the drug with the people who use it. From the perspective of marihuana's relationship to antisocialbehavior of a criminal or violent nature, the drug cannot be saidto constitute a significant threat to the public safety. If itsuse, therefore, is to be discouraged, it must be discouraged ongrounds other than its role in the commission of criminal orviolent or delinquent acts. The enormous increases in marihuana arrests over the pastseveral years are ample evidence that the police have takenseriously their role of maintaining law and order with respect tomarihuana use and that they have responded to public pressure andconcern about the increase in marihuana use. Yet, in theirexperience with the marihuana user they have been placed in theunenviable position of having to enforce a law either disregardedor discredited by large segments of the population they serve. Over and over again they have seen their efforts in thisrespect negated by the de jure or de facto modification, if notnullification, of the laws against possession by prosecutors,judges and even legislators. Their increasing frustration anddemoralization, therefore, at least with respect to the marihuanauser, is quite, understandable. These other officials, however, are likewise placed in adifficult position; for they, too, must enforce and apply thecriminal law, and they, too, must respond to public pressures andconcerns. In some instances, they have demonstrated particularresistance to criminalizing the user and subjecting him tocriminal penalties which are deemed to be unwarranted if notunwise. In the case of marihuana, recent changes in law enforcementpractices with respect to the user have, in fact, reflected theincreased use and public tolerance of marihuana. The statutorychanges now taking place at the state and local levels arefurther evidence of the trend toward greater public acceptance ofthe user. In these instances, the laws and their enforcement werealtered because they no longer performed the symbolic function ofexpressing society's disapproval of marihuana use. Contents | Feedback | Search DRCNet Library | Schaffer Library | Major Studies Marihuana, A Signal of Misunderstanding WT01-B25-3IA086-000614-B047-392http://206.61.184.43:80/schaffer/Library/studies/nc/nc1n.htm 206.61.184.43 19970122023003 text/html 39268HTTP/1.0 200 OKDate: Wednesday, 22-Jan-97 02:29:27 GMTServer: WebSitePro/1.1f (S/N wpo-0deb)Allow-ranges: bytesContent-type: text/htmlLast-modified: Saturday, 28-Dec-96 06:56:44 GMTContent-length: 39050 Marihuana and Driving Contents | Feedback | Search DRCNet Library | Schaffer Library | Major Studies Marihuana, A Signal of Misunderstanding The Report of the National Commission on Marihuana and DrugAbuse Marihuana and Driving The United States Department of Transportation has estimatedthat in 1970, more than 111 million Americans were licenseddrivers and that there were approximately 109 million vehiclesregistered and regularly traversing America's streets andhighways. The Commission-sponsored National Survey (Abelson, etal., 1972) has revealed that approximately 21 million or 15% ofall American adults 18 years and over have tried marihuana andthat about 6.9 million adults currently use the drug. At the present time, there is no reliable estimate of theproportion of marihuana users who drive while "high,"but America's tragic experience with highway accidents andfatalities involving persons driving under the influence ofalcohol raises serious questions about the extent to whichmarihuana impairs driving skills and performance and therebyconstitutes a public safety hazard on this nation'sthoroughfares. In recent years, public safety experts, along with the medicaland scientific communities, have devoted increasing attention tothe effects of any mind-altering drug on driving, but there is asyet little evidence to inform discussion. As part of its moregeneral concern with the impact of marihuana on public safety,the Commission has reviewed the available research and hasconcluded that the evidence which presently exists is, at best,inconclusive. In view of this finding and prior to a rather brief summary ofthe knowledge we now have, the Commission feels compelled to urgethe public to consider these findings as only tentative, to adoptan extremely cautious attitude about the effects of marihuana ondriving skill and performance, and perhaps most importantly, toavoid driving at all while under the influence of anymind-altering drug or intoxicant. THE CURRENT STATE OF KNOWLEDGE The literature on drugs and driving contains severalreferences to the role of drugs, including marihuana, in trafficviolations, accidents and fatalities. They differ considerably,however, in the nature and extent to which they influence oraffect driving behavior (Waller, 1965; Chetta, 1967, Commissionon Narcotic Drugs, 1968; Third Triannual Congress on TrafficAccidents, 1969; Waller, 1970; Klein, Davis and Blackbourne, 1971National Institute of Mental Health, 1972). The studies examine the relationship between marihuana anddriving and tend to be either statistical and enumerative withregard to traffic accidents or experimental with respect to thephysiological and psychological effects of marihuana use deemedto be related to driving skill and performance. All of themsuffer to one degree or another from an overabundance or dearthof extraneous variables and have, therefore, precludedgeneralization of the results and the production of conclusive,and valid findings. The difficulty in interpreting the data gathered fromstatistical or enumerative studies of traffic accidents derivesprimarily from the inability to isolate precise cause. There areno tissue, urine or blood analysis methods currently andsystematically in use outside the laboratory, similar to thoseavailable for alcohol, for determining the presence of marihuanain the bodily fluids of drivers. Statistical Studies The statistical or enumerative studies generally can becharacterized as two types. In the first type, samples ofarrested marihuana, or other drug law violators are selected andtheir traffic violations or accident rates are compared withthose in the general population. In the second type, samples aredrawn initially from lists of persons known to have committedtraffic violations or been involved in traffic accidents. Thesamples are then divided into persons who in some way areidentified as marihuana users and those who are not and theincidence of traffic violations or accidents in the two groups isthen compared.5 5 Dr. E. J. Woodhouse, a chemist, is now in the process ofdeveloping a marihuana testing method. At the present time hereports being able to detect the presence of marihuana byanalyzing urine samples (Polak, 1971). Waller (1965), compared the crash rates per unit miles ofdriving of known marihuana users with those of other drivers ofsimilar age distribution. He found that the crash risk was notincreased by the use of marihuana. A similar study yielding similar results was performed in theState of Washington (Crancer and Quiring, 1968). There were nosignificant differences in the crash rates per 100 driversbetween those who did use marihuana and those who did not. Theresearchers compared the driving records of persons arrested forillegal drug use (100 narcotics users, 123 dangerous drug usersand 79 marihuana users) with those of 687,228 licensed driversliving in the same general driving environment (King's County,Washington). Comparisons were made of the number of accidents,the number of violations and the type of violations accumulatedbetween January 1, 1961 and October 1, 1967. All three drug using groups had significantly higher accidentand violation rates than did the comparison group matched for ageand sex; the accident rate for the marihuana users was 39%higher; for the narcotics users, 29% higher; and for thedangerous drug users, 57% higher. The violation rates were 180 %higher, 149 % higher and 16% higher, respectively. Table 9 below shows the percentage of marihuana users andcounty drivers, by sex, with none and 10 or more trafficviolations and accidents between January 1, 1961 and October 1,1967. Since the majority of the users were first arrested for theirillegal drug use in 1964, the researchers compared theirviolation rates before and after that time. The data show aviolation rate of 1.78 per marihuana driver prior to 1964(January 1, 1961 to June 30, 1964) ; the rate increased to 3.44per driver between July 1, 1964 and October 1, 1967. For the sametime periods, the county group's violation rate per driverincreased from 0.4-4 to 0.53. The violation rates for both reckless and hit-and run drivingwere significantly higher for the marihuana users than for thecounty comparison group. In short, these data suggest that marihuana users are muchmore likely to have many violations and accidents and are muchless likely to have clear accident and violation records than area comparison group of drivers drawn from the same generalpopulation. Them findings are difficult to interpret moreprecisely, however, because Such variables as the number of milesdriven and overall driving experience were not taken intoaccount. Table 9.-MARIHUANA USERS AND COUNTY DRIVERS HAVING NONE ANDTEN OR MORE TRAFFIC VIOLATIONS AND ACCIDENTS, BY SEX, JANUARY 1,1961OCTOBER 1, 1967 (Figures in Percentages) Marihuana users County drivers Male Female Male Female None... 10.0 33.3 41.1 67.7 10..... 22.9 11.1 2.2 0.1 Source: Crancer and Quiring, 1968:9. A survey of 12,453 Virginia high school students was conductedduring 1970 by the Virginia Highway Safety Division (Ferguson andHoward, 1971). The objectives of the survey were to determine theextent of drug use in the Virginia high school population and toassess the number of traffic crashes which could be caused bydrug-impaired drivers. The data, show that 2.9% of the sample reported experiencing,either as a passenger or driver, at least one traffic crash inwhich drug use "could have been a causal factor." Thedata also show that the students were more likely to attributethe crashes to marihuana (54%) than to other drugs (46%). Use ofmarihuana was found to be slightly more common than was the useof other drugs among drivers involved in non-fatal collisions butwas used with equal frequency in those drivers involved in fatalcrashes (p. 31). The researchers suggest as an explanation for their findingsthe fact that marihuana. usage was greater among this population(12.3%) than was the use of other drugs (7.7%). This explanationis not completely adequate, however, in that the survey ignoresboth the possible presence of alcohol along with marihuana andother drugs, either separately or in combination. As such, itcannot be said that marihuana causes more accidents than do otherdrugs, including alcohol. Klein, Davis and Blackbourne (1971) surveyed students at fouracademic institutions in Florida in an effort to assess the roleof marihuana in traffic involvements. Respondents were dividedinto five groups of marihuana users: (a) non-users, (b) previoususers, (c) using less than four times a month, (d) using four toeight times per month, and (e) using more than eight times permonth. For each group information was obtained relative to thefrequency of alcohol and tobacco use; respondents' ability tojudge speed, time and reaction time; traffic involvements; andlicense revocations. In addition, respondents were asked theiropinion about whether or not persons under the influence ofmarihuana should be permitted to operate aircraft and variousother vehicles, including taxis and private automobiles. With respect to traffic involvements, the data show that 18%of the infrequent users and 53% of the frequent users reportedhaving been stopped by the police while under the influence ofmarihuana. The data also show that as the frequency of useincreases, so too does the number of license revocations. As Nichols (1971) has pointed out, however: Apparently no attempt was made to compare the number oftimes they were stopped while under the influence of marihuana asopposed to the number of times they were stopped while not underthe influence. Thus, the data do not give any indication ofwhether the violations were due to the effects of marihuana orwhether they were the result of poor driving habits in the firstplace (pp. 28-29). Both experimental and quasi-experimental approaches toassessing the effects of marihuana on driving suffer frommethodological shortcominogs and inconsistent results. Theprimary deficiency in the experimental investigations lies intheir inability to hold constant the numerous external variableswhich actually affect driving behavior and which, therefore,precludes valid comparisons of actual driving performance withthat simulated in a controlled but unrealistic environment. Inthe quasi-experimental studies using interviewing techniques, theaccuracy of self-reports becomes a question which must be raisedwith respect to the, effects of marihuana on driving skills andperformance. The data derived front these studies, however, suggest thatmarihuana does interfere, at least in some users, with theability to judge time, speed and distance ; with reaction time;and with the ability to control the vehicle and respond to anemergency situation (Zinberg and Well, 1969; James, 1970- Hochmanand Brill, 1971; Klein, et al., 1971). Data from a survey of 10% of the undergraduate students atUCLA (Hochman and Brill, 1971) show that one-third of allmarihuana users drive, occasionally while "high." Ofthe chronic users, 42% drive frequently while high and 10% alwaysdrive while "stoned" (p. 22). According to the researchers, "both (marihuana) users andnon-users were universally of the opinion that (marihuana)'intoxication' affected driving, but users thought, that theycompensated by being more cautious, driving more slowly, andconcentrating on the driving," (p. 22). The researchers alsoreport that as usage of marihuana becomes more chronic,"fear" and avoidance of driving while intoxicateddecreases and the ability to compensate for the drug's effectsincreases. With respect to traffic violations, the data show that 4% ofoccasional and chronic marihuana users had received traffictickets when they were intoxicated by the drug but that none hadbeen discovered to be intoxicated at the time. These findings corroborate those, from an earlier study(Zinberg and Weil, 1969) in which the researchers stated that"users appear to be able to compensate 100% for thenonspecific effects of ordinary doses of marihuana on ordinarypsychological performance" (p. 39). In another report Weil(1969) wrote that "it appears that once a person becomesaccustomed to the effects of cannabis, he, can compensate fullyfor the drug's influence on performance of tasks of ordinarycomplexity." (p. 6). Experimental Studies Controlled laboratory experiments have attempted to measurethese and other effects on driving with greater specificity.Manno and his associates (1970) found that there are significantimpairments of motor and mental performance attributable tomarihuana. In an experiment conducted by Frank and his colleagues (1971),marihuana smokers demonstrated "a marked and very consistentincrease in the amount of time required to recover from glare . .. This ranged up to four times as long with a mean peak of almosttwice as long (171%) after smoking marihuana. . . . Furthermore,this increase in glare recovery time persisted for severalhours" (p. 9) and did not seem to be dose related. These researchers did not find significant differences betweenmarihuana users and nonusers, however, in pulse, rate, timeestimation or dilation of the pupils. With respect to marihuana's effect on emotional reactions, Dr.S. E. Miller (1959) suggested that "these drugs (Includingmarihuana) have similar abilities for changing normal emotionalreactions, even causing individuals to become oblivious orindifferent to their surroundings" (p. 864). Klein and hiscolleagues (1971), however, urge against generalizing thesefindings from the laboratory situation to the complex task ofactual driving. Crancer and his coworkers (1969) conducted a study designed todetermine the effects of a "normal social marihuanahigh" on simulated driving performance among 36 experiencedmarihuana smokers and compared the effects they discovered withthose occasioned by alcohol use. The researchers found that experienced marihuana users underconditions of a "normal social marihuana high" (fromtwo cigarettes totalling 1.7 grams of THC) accumulatedsignificantly more speedometer errors than under controlconditions. No significant differences were found, however,relative to accelerator, brake, signal, steering or total errorsin simulator scores. Comparing the effects of alcohol (at a blood level of0.10%-the legal limit of intoxication) and marihuana intoxication(1.7 grams THC), the researchers concluded that moderateintoxication by marihuana was less detrimental to simulateddriving performance than was the presence of alcohol at the 0.10%blood level. The mean error scores were 84.46 for the controlgroup, 84.49 for the marihuana group and 97.44 for the alcoholgroup (p. 6). There have been several criticisms leveled at this study,however, and several researchers have cited contradictoryfindings. Frank and his associates (1971) have pointed out thefact that the subjects did not have, complete control over theirsimulated drive. Kalant (1969) noted that "it does not followautomatically that lack of effect of a drug on the simulated taskwill correlate with lack of effect on the actual task" (p.640). He also criticized the use of dissimilar doses of marihuanaand alcohol for the comparison and in this regard stated that"the finding that a heavy dose of alcohol caused moreimpairment than a mild dose of marihuana is neither surprisingnor helpful in assessing the relative effects of the two drugs inthe relative doses in which they are normally used" (p.640). Lastly, Kalant pointed out that Crancer and his colleaguesfailed to indicate if any measures were actually taken to ensureeffective absorption of the doses by the experimental subjects.This may be important, if the findings of dose dependentimpairments observed by Dagirmanjian and Boyd (1962) and Isbelland his associates (1967) are valid. Although Crancer and his fellow researchers did not feel thatthe impairments found were related to either dosage level orexperience with the drug, this latter finding is also subject toquestion in view of the earlier findings of the Mayor's Committeeon Marihuana (1944) and Weil and his colleagues (1968) that theperformance of drug-naive subject, was more impaired than wasthat of experienced marihuana users. In a more recent simulator study, attention was directed tothe effects of marihuana on risk acceptance (Dott, 1971). Theexperimental situation involved the placement of 12 experiencedmarihuana users under four conditions (non-smoking, placebo, lowdose, and high dose) in order to compare subjects' reactions tovarious passing situations, some of which required an immediateresponse to an emergency. The data show that even though more accidents occurred underthe two marihuana conditions than under the placebo (and normal)condition, the differences were not significant. Significantdifferences were found in the number of passes completed and inthe time needed to make pass decisions. Not only did themarihuana smokers complete fewer passes (174 in placebocondition, 153 in low dose condition, and 133 in the high dosecondition), but they took more time to make the pass decisionswhile under the influence of the drug. The researcher concludedthat "marihuana appears to make the subject less willing toaccept risk, and it delays elective decision reaction time.Effects were most noted in situations which did not have a highattention demanding value. . . . In those situations which wereof an emergency nature and which demanded immediate attention andresponse . . . . no drug effects were noted" (p. 28). Dott also found, in contrast to Frank and his associates(1971) that pulse rate did seem to be affected by marihuanaintoxication. Based upon a comparison with the same experiment performedyears before in relation to alcohol (Light and Kelper, 1969),Dott stated that "the effects of marihuana on drivingbehavior are more subtle and less hazardous than the effects ofalcohol." McGlothlin (1971) is presently conducting another simulatorstudy and is attempting to measure the effects of marihuana,methadone and alcohol on simulated driving, attention,information processing abilities and other measures related todriving efficiency such is peripheral vision, depth perceptionand glare recovery. At this time, five experiments have beenconducted and the researcher has stated that: concentrated and divided attention for both auditory andvisual modalities are significantly impaired by smoked marihuanacontaining 15 mg. THC.... In general, where impairment was foundfor the marihuana treatments, it appears to be equivalent to thatresulting from a blood alcohol level of about 0.01%. Frequentmarihuana users (one or two times per week) typically showed lessimpairment than those using less frequently (p. 22.). The inconclusive and controversial nature of the research todate suggests that there is enough of a potential risk involvedto both the individual and the public safety to recommendstrongly against driving while intoxicated-no matter what theintoxicant. Although marihuana does not seem to produce seriousimpairments of driving skills or performance, to say that thedrug does not at all adversely affect driving behavior or that itmay not be a factor in traffic violations or accidents is tomisrepresent the current state of knowledge. As the NationalInstitute of Mental Health (1972) has noted, "obviously,more research is needed in elucidating the role of various drugson highway accidents . . ." (p. 220). References Abelson, H.; Cohen R.; and Schrayer, D., Public AttitudesToward Marihuana, Part 1, Princeton: Response Analysis, 1972. "A Drug and Insanity," New York Daily Worker,January 28, 1940. Cited in Solomon, D., ed. The Marihuana Papers,New York: Signet Books, 1968, p. 288. Allentuck, S., "Medical Aspects: Symptoms andBehavior," in Mayor's Committee on Marihuana, The MarihuanaProblem in the City of New York, Lancaster: Jacques CattellPress, 1944, pp. 35-51. Allentuck, S. and Bowman, K. M., "The Psychiatric Aspectsof Marihuana Intoxication," American Journal of Psychiatry,99: 248-251, 1942. Ames, P., "A Clinical and Metabolic Study of AcuteIntoxication with Cannabis Saliva and its Role in the ModelPsychoses," Journal of Mental Sciences, 104 (437) :972-99,1958. Amir, M., Patterns in Forcible Rape, Chicago: University ofChicago Press, 1971. Andrade, 0. M "The Criminogenic Action of Cannabis(Marihuana) and Narcotics," UN Bulletin of Narcotics, 16:23-28,1964. Anslinger, H. J., "Marijuana-Assassin of Youth,"American Magazine, July 1937. Anslinger, H. J. and Tompkins, W., The Traffic in Narcotics,New York: Funk and Wagnalls, 1953. Asuni, T., "Socio-Psychiatric Problems of Cannabis inNigeria," UN Bulletin on Narcotics, 16: 17-28, 1964.Ausubel, D. P., Drug Addiction: Physiological, Psychological, andSociological Aspects, New York: Random House, 1958. Bloomquist, E. R., Marijuana, Beverly Hills: Glencoe Press,1968. Blum, R H., and Associates, Society and Drugs, -San Francisco:Jossey-Bass, 1969. Blumer, H., et al., The World of Youthful Drug Use, Berkeley:School of Criminology, University of California, 1967. Bouquet, J., "Cannabis," UN Bulletin on Narcotics, 2(4) :14-30, October 1950. Brenner, J. H.; Coles R. and Meagher, D., Drugs and Youth, NewYork: Liveright, 1970. Bromberg, W., "Marihuana: A Psychiatric Study,"Journal of the American Medical Association, 113: 4-12, 1939. Bromberg, W., "Marihuana Intoxication: A Clinical Studyof Cannabis Sativa Intoxication," American Journal ofPsychiatry, 91 (2) : 23-30, 1934. Bromberg, W. and Rodgers, T. C., "Marihuana andAggressive Crime," American Journal of Psychiatry, 102:825-827,1946. Brotman, R. and Suffet, F., "Marihuana Users' Views ofMarihuana Use," in Zubin, J. and Freedman, A., eds., ThePsychology of Adolescence, New York: Grime and Stratton, 1970,pp. 258-72. Brown, T. T., The Enigma of Drug Addiction, Springfield:Charles C Thomas, 1961. Carstairs, G. H., "Darn and Bhang: Cultural Factors inthe Choice of Intoxicants," Quarterly Journal of Studies onAlcohol, 15: 220-237, 1954. "The Case Against Cannabis," Pharmaceutical Journal(England), 199 (5425) :399-400,1967. Charen, S., and Perelman, L., "Personality Studies ofMarihuana Addicts," American Journal of Psychiatry, 102:674-82,1946. Chetta, N. J., "Alcohol, Drugs and Driving," Journalof the Louisiana State Medical Society, 119 (9) : 344347, 1967.Commission of Narcotic Drugs, 23rd Session on Drug Abuse, October21, 1968. Chopra, R. N. and Chopra, 1. C., "Cannabis Sativa inRelation to Crime and Mental Disease in India," AmericanJournal of Medical Research, 30: 155-171, 1942. Chopra. R. N. andChopra, G. S., "The Present Position of Hemp Drug Addictionin India," Indian Medical Research Memoirs, No. 31, July1939. Crancer, A., Jr., and Quiring, T). L., "Driving Recordsof Persons Arrested for Illegal Drug Use," Report 011, Stateof Washington, Department of Motor Vehicles, May 1968. Reprintedin part in The Police Chief, 36: 41-43. February 1969. Crancer, A.. Jr.; Dille, J. M.; Delay, J. C.; Wallace, J. E.and Haykin, M. D., "Comparison of the Effects of Marihuanaand Alcohol on Simulated Driving Performance," Report 021,State of Washington, Department of Motor Vehicles, April 1969,Reprinted in Science, 164: 851-54, May 16, 1969. Dagirimaijian, R. and Boyd, E. S., "Some PharmacologicalEffects of Two Tetrahydrocannabinols," Journal ofPharmacology and Experimental Therapeutics, 135: 25-33, 1962. Dott, A. B., "Effect of Marihuana on Risk Acceptance inan Automobile Simulator," RR71-3, Injury Control ResearchLaboratory for the U.S. Department of Health, Education andWelfare, 1971. "Drugs and Reckless Driving," New Jersey Journal of.Pharmacy, 40 (1) : 30, 1967. Ewens, G. F. W., "Insanity Following the Use of IndianHemp," Indian Medical Gazette, 39: 401-13, 1904. Ferguson, W. S. and Howard, W. L., Marihuana and Drug Use andHighway Safety-A Survey of High School Students in Virginia,Virginia Highway Research Council, July 1971. Fort, J., "Playboy Panel: The Drug Revolution,"Playboy, 17(2) : 53-55 et. seq., February, 1970. Frank, I. M.; Hepler, R. S.; Stier, S.; Rickles, W. H. andUngerleider, J. T., "Marihuana, Tobacco and FunctionsAffecting Driving." Paper presented to annual meeting of theAmerican Psychiatric Association, Washington, D. C., May 1971. Freedman, H. L. and Rockmore, M. I., "Marihuana: Factorin Personality Evaluation and Army Maladjustment.` Journal ofClinical Psychopathology, 7: 765-82, 8: 221236,1946. Gardikas, C. G., "Hashish and Crime," Enkephalos 2-3201-211, 1950, Cited in Tinklenberg, J., "Marihuana andCrime," Paper prepared for the National Commission onMarihuana and Drug Abuse, 1972, pp. 11-12. Gebhard, P. H.; Gagnon, J. H.; Pomeroy, W. B., andChristenson, C. V., Sex Offenders: An Analysis of Types New York:Bantam, 1967. Goode, E., "Drug Use and Sexual Behavior on a CollegeCampus," American Journal of Psychiatry, in press. Goode,E., "Marijuana and Sex," Evergreen Review, 66:19-21,72-74,1969. Goode, E., The Marijuana Smokers, New York: Basic Books, 1970. Goode, E., "Marihuana Use and Crime," prepared forNational Commission on Marihuana and Drug Abuse, Jannary 15,1972. Grinspoon, L., Marihuana Reconsidered, Cambridge: HarvardUniversity Press, 1971. Gusfield, J., "On Legislating Morals: The SymbolicProcess of Designating Deviance," California Law Review, 56:54-73, January 1968. Halikas, J. A.; Goodwin, D. W.; and Guze, S. B.,"Marihuana Effects: A Survey of Regular Users," Journalof the American Medical Association, 217: 692-94, August, 1971. Hochman, J. S. and Brill, N. Q., "Marijuana Use andPsychosocial Adaptation," Paper presented to annual meetingof American Psychiatric Association, Washington, D.C., May3,1971. Hollister, L. E.; Richards, R. K.; and Gillespie, H. K., "Comparison of Tetrahydrocannabinol and Synhexyl inMan," Chemical Pharmacology and Therapeutics, 9: 383-391,1968. Hollister, L. E., "Marihuana in Man: Three YearsLater," Science, 172 (3978) : 21-29, April 2, 1971. Indian Hemp Drugs Commission, Marijuana, 1894. Reprinted,Silver Spring, Maryland: Thomas Jefferson Publishing Co., 1969. Insurance Institute for Highway Safety, Report an WashingtonState Studies-Drug User Accident Rate, 8 (4), August, 1968. InTech Corporation, Research on Marihuana Use as aContributing Factor in the Commission of Criminal Acts as Well asJuvenile Delinquency, Final Report, Prepared for the NationalCommission on Marihuana and Drug Abuse, November 19,1971. Isbell, H.; Gorodetzky, C. W.; Jasinski, D.; Claussen, U.; VonSpulak, T.; and Korte, F., "Effects of (-)-delta-9.Trans-Tetrahydrocannabinol in Man," Psychopharmacologia, 11(2) : 184-88, 1967. James, T., "Dagga and Driving," S. A. MedieseTydskrif, 44: 580-81, May 16, 1970. Johnson, R. D., "'Medico-Social Aspects of MarijuanaRhode Island Medical Journal, 51: 171-78, 1968. Kalant, H., "Marihuana and Simulated Driving,"Science, 166: 640, August 22, 1969. Kaplan, J., Marijuana: The New Prohibition, New York: PocketBooks, 1971. Klein, A. W.; Davis, J. H.; and Blackbourne, B. D.,"Marihuana and Automobile Crashes," Journal of Di-mgIssues, 1 (1) :18-26,1971. Kolansky, H. and Moore, W. T., "Effects of Marihuana onAdolescents and Young Adults," Journal of American MedicalAssociation, 216 (3) : 485-92, April 1971. Lambo, T. A., "Medical and Social Problems of DrugAddiction in West Africa," UN Bulletin on Narcotics, 17 (1): 3-13,1965. LaRoe, A. D., "Growth of the Marijuana Habit Among OurYouth," American Weekly, 1940. Light, W. 0. and Keiper, C. G., "Effects of ModerateBlood Alcohol Levels on Automobile Passing Behavior,"RR-69-4, Injury Control Research Laboratory, U.S. Department ofHealth, Education, and Welfare, 1969. Lindesmith, A. R., Addiction and Opiates, rev. ed., Chieago:Aldine, 1968. MacDonald, J. M., Rape, Offenders and Their Victims,Springfield: Charles C. Thomas, 1971. Manno, J. E.; Kiplinger, G. F.; Halne, S. E.; Bennett, I. F.;and Forney, R. B., "Comparative Effects of Smoking Marihuanaor Placebo on Human Motor and Mental Performance," ClinicalPharmacology and Therapeutics, 2 (6) :808-15,1970. Maurer, D. W. and Vogel, V. H., Narcotics and NarcoticsAddiction, Springfield: Charles C. Thomas, 1962. Mayor's Committee on Marihuana, The Marihuana Problem in NewYork City, Lancaster: Jacques Cattel Press, 1944. McGlothlin, W. H., "Cannabis: A Reference," in TheMarihuana Papers, Solomon, D., ed., New York: Signet Books, 1966,pp. 455-72. McGlothlin, W. H., Progress Report (on Marihuana and DrivingStudy), Department of Psychology, University of California at LosAngeles, August, 1971. Merrill, R. T., Marihuana, the New Dangerous Drug, OpiumResearch Committee, Foreign Policy Association, Washington, D.C.,March, 1938. Miller, D. E., "Marihuana: The Law and ItsEnforcement," Suffolk University Law Review, 3: 81-96, Fall1968. Miller, S. E., "The Physician and the Prevention of MotorVehicle Accidents," Medical Times, 87 (7) : 861-69, July1959. Murphy, H. B. M., "The Cannabis Habit: A Review of RecentPsychiatric Literature," UN Bulletin of Narcotics, 15 (1) :15-23, 1963. National Institute of Mental Health, Statement to the SelectCommittee on Crime, U.S. House of Representatives, Marijuana, H.Rept. No. 91-798, 91st Cong., 2d Sess., 1970, p. 113, National Institute of Mental Health, U.S. Department ofHealth, Education, and Welfare, Marihuana and Health: SecondAnnual Report to Congress from the Secretary, Health, Education,and Welfare, Washington, D.C.: U.S. Government Printing Office,1972. Nichols, J. L., Drug Use and Highway Safety: A Review of theLiterature, Prepared for U.S. Department of Transportation, July1971. Oursler, W., Marijuana: The Facts, The Truth, New York: Pap _IS. Eriksson, 1968. P_olak; "Chemical Analysis: Pot Test Developed for Use onDrivers," Washington Evening Star, November 26,1971, p. 7. President's Commission on Law Enforcement and Administrationof Justice, Task Force Report: Narcotics and Drug Abuse,Washing-ton, D.C.: U.S. Government Printing Office, 1967. "Report of the Third Triannual Congress on TrafficAccidents," Bulletin de Medecine Legate et de ToxicologicMcdecale, 12(4) :161-65,1969. Robins, L. N. and Murphy, G. B., "Drug Use in a NormalPopulation of Young Negro Men," American Journal of PublicHealth, 57: 1580--96, September 1967. Robins, L. N.; Darvish, H. S.; and Murphy, G. E., "TheLong-Term Outcome of Adolescent Drug Users," in Zubin, J.and Freedman, A., eds., The Psychology of Adolescence, New York:Grime and Stratton, 1970, pp. 159-78. Robinson, V., "Concerning Cannabis Indica," in Bookof Grass: An Anthology of Indian Hemp, Andrews, G. and Vinkenoog,S., eds., New York: Grove Press, 1967, pp. 135-139. Rosevear, J., Pot: A Handbook of Marihuana, New York:University Books, 1967. Rowell, E. A. and Rowell, R., On the Trail of Marihuana: TheWeed of Madness, Mountain View, California: Pacific Press, 1939. Schofield, G. W., Unpublished Survey of the views of policeofficers regarding marihuana and aggression (1968), in Kaplan,J., Marijuana: The New Prohibition, New York: Pocket Books, 1971,pp. 110-115. Schoenfeld, D. D., "The Sociological Study," inMayor's Committee on Marihuana, The Marihuana Problem in the Cityof New York, Lancaster: Cattell Press, 1944, pp. 1-25. Siler, J. P., et al., "Marihuana Smoking in Panama,"The Military Surgeon, 73: 269--280,1933- Simmons, J. L., Deviants, Berkeley: Glendessary Press, 1969. Solomon, D., ed., The Marihuana Papers, New York: SignetBooks, 1966. South Africa Interdepartmental Committee on Abuse of Dagga,Report, Government Printer, 1952. Tart, C. T., On Being Stoned: A Psychological Study ofMarijuana Intoxication, Palo Alto: Science and Behavior-Books,1971. Taylor, N., Narcotics: Nature's Dangerous Gifts, rev. ed., NewYork: Dell, 1963. Tinklenberg, J., "Marihuana and Crime," Prepared forNational Commission on Marihuana and Drug Abuse, October 1971. Tinklenberg, J. R. and Stillman, R. S., "Drug Use andViolence," in Daniels, D. N., et al., eds., Violence andMan's Struggle for Existence, Boston: Little, Brown and Company,1970. Trocchi, A., "Marihuana and Sex," in Book of Grass:An Anthology of Indian Hemp, Andrews, G. and Vinkenoog, S., eds.,New York: Grove Press, 1967, p. 108. U.S. House of Representatives, Committee on Ways and Means,Taxation of Marihuana, 75th Cong., 1st Sess., 1937. Waller, J. A., "Chronic Medical Conditions and TrafficSafety: A Review of California Experience," New EnglandJournal of Medicine, 273: 1413-20, Dec. 23, 1965. Waller, J. A., "Medical Impairment and HighwayCrashes," Police, 14 (6): 24-27, July-August, 1970. Walton,R. P., Marihuana: America's New Drug Problem, Philadelphia:Lippincott, 1938 Watt, J. M., "Dagga in South Africa," UN Bulletin onNarcotics,13 (3):9-14,1961. Weil, A. T., "Cannabis," Science, 164: 2-8,September 1969. Weil, A. T.; Zinberg, N.; and Nelsen, J. M.,"Clinical and Psychological Effects of Marihuana inMan," Science, 162: 1234-42, 1968. Weiss, B. and Laties, V. G., "Enhancement of HumanPerformance by Caffeine and Amphetamines," PharmacologicalReviews, 14: 1-37,1962. Weitzner, M.; Smith, H. B.; Gerver, I.; and Pollack, H.,"A Study of the Relationship Between Severity of Dispositionand Subsequent Criminal Behavior in a Sample of YouthfulMarijuana Offenders in New York State." Prepared for theNational Commission on Marihuana and Drug Abuse, 1971. White House Conference on Narcotic Drug Abuse, Proceedings,Washington, D.C.: U.S. Government Printing Office 1962. Williams, G., cited in Wilson, E., "The CrazyDreamers," Colliers, June 4,1969. Zinberg, N. E. and Weil, A. T., "The Effects of Marihuanaon Human Beings," Addictions, 16 (4) : 2G-42 Winter 1969. Contents | Feedback | Search DRCNet Library | Schaffer Library | Major Studies Marihuana, A Signal of Misunderstanding WT01-B25-4IA087-000632-B016-113http://206.61.184.43:80/schaffer/Library/studies/nc/nc2.htm 206.61.184.43 19970122091512 text/html 95497HTTP/1.0 200 OKDate: Wednesday, 22-Jan-97 09:15:02 GMTServer: WebSitePro/1.1f (S/N wpo-0deb)Allow-ranges: bytesContent-type: text/htmlLast-modified: Saturday, 28-Dec-96 06:54:47 GMTContent-length: 95279 Control of Marihuana, Alcohol and Tobacco Contents | Feedback | Search DRCNet Library | Schaffer Library | Major Studies Marihuana, A Signal of Misunderstanding The Report of the National Commission on Marihuana and DrugAbuse I. Control of Marihuana, Alcohol and Tobacco History of Marihuana Legislation* This chapter traces the legislative histories of marihuana,alcohol, and tobacco. In the first section, "History of MarihuanaLegislation," the origins of the intoxicant use of cannabisin this country during the early 20th century are noted alongwith the subsequent state and federal statutes enactedprohibiting use, distribution, production and sale. Proscriptions began appearing on the books after about 1914and continued through 1971, which brings the reader to the pointsubsequently covered by the rest of this Appendix. Early colonial laws regarding alcohol are described in thebeginning of the next section, "History of AlcoholProhibition." From that point in history, the nationalmovements which spread over the next two centuries, culminatingin the enactment of National Prohibition from 1920 to 1933, aredescribed. The various state modes of control which appeared after Repealare then briefly enumerated along with a discussion of thepresent state controls over production, distribution, and sale ofintoxicating beverages. The introduction of tobacco cultivation in 1613 in the colonyof Virginia opens the third section, "History of TobaccoRegulation." The widespread use of tobacco in the latter1800's into the first half of the 20th century is traced alongwith the increasing pressure from groups fearful of tobacco'sdeleterious effects on health. Federal sumptuary regulations are outlined along, with adiscussion of the impact further federal controls might have onthe tobacco economy. History of Marihuana Legislation* *This section is drawn from the manuscript of The MarihuanaConsensus: A History of American Marihuana Prohibition, in press1972, by Professors Charles H. Whitebread, 11, and Richard J.Bonnie of the University of Virginia Law School. "Marihuana" or Indian hemp, labeled Cannabis SativaL. by Linneas in 1753, has been used for centuries in Asia andAfrica for its intoxicant properties. It was cultivated as asource of fiber in North America in the early 17th century. Yet,cannabis was not used as an intoxicant in North America until thelate 19th century, and in the United States until the early 20th. Cannabis use was prevalent in Mexico by 1898. Widelycultivated and growing wild, the drug was readily available foreating, drinking, or smoking, the latter being by far the mostcommon method of ingestion. Soldiers in Pancho Villa's army arereputed to have used the drug freely. The path of theintroduction of marihuana smoking for pleasure into the UnitedStates was not via Europe, which transmitted the fiber, oil, andmedicinal uses of hemp, but via Mexico and the West Indies. The plant and its intoxicant use in the United States in thefirst decades of the 20th century encountered a political andsocial climate which was not particularly conducive to heartygrowth. Gradually criminal prohibitions appeared on the statutebooks of nearly every state where the drug was used. Well into the thirties, however, marihuana smoking attractedlittle attention from the national policy and opinion apparatuswhich was deeply ensnared in drug matters of much wider socialimpact than the limited, regional use of this new drug. The "villain" theory of American marihuanaprohibition - attributing the drug's illegal status to theFederal Bureau of Narcotics and its longtime head, Harry J.Anslinger - has been particularly popular in recent years. Although the federal narcotics bureaucracy, with CommissionerAnslinger at the helm, was to become marihuana's leadingantagonist in the mid-thirties, a restrictive, public policytoward the drug was well-rooted locally before that time. Duringthe "local" phase of marihuana prohibition, lastingroughly from 1914 to 1931, practically every state west of theMississippi, except for two, had prohibited use of the drug fornon-medical purposes. The real story of marihuana policy in the United States beginsas a series of distinctly local tales. STATE PROHIBITION: 1914-1930 Marihuana use was a familiar phenomenon in the border towns ofTexas and New Mexico after 1910. First to note the use of thedrug were El Paso law enforcement officials who quickly secured alocal ordinance in 1914 banning sale and possession of the drug.El Paso officials and local representatives of the Customs andAgriculture Departments of the Federal Government agitated forstate and federal legislation to combat the "killerweed." After an official request by the Secretary of Agriculture, theSecretary of the Treasury issued a decision under the Food andDrug Act prohibiting importation of cannabis after 1915 for otherthan medical purposes. On the state level in Texas, legislation was slow in coming.Marihuana use was still a local problem in the 'border towns andit attracted little statewide interest. The Texas Legislatureincluded marihuana when it passed a general narcotics statute in1919, prohibiting transfer of listed narcotics except for medicalpurposes (Texas, 1919: 278). In 1923, the statute was tightenedto prohibit possession with intent to sell (Texas, 1923:156-157). The legislature's failure to prohibit simple possessionor use reflected an objection to interfering with privateconduct. The degree of public interest in narcotics and marihuana iswell-illustrated by the limited newspaper coverage. In its onlydirect reference to the 1923 marihuana legislation, the AustinTexas Statesman, which had given the legislature extensivecoverage, stated: The McMillan Senate Bill amended the anti-narcotic law soas to make unlawful the possession for the purpose of sale ofmarihuana or other drugs. Marihuana is a Mexican herb and is saidto be sold on the Texas-Mexican border (Austin TexasStatesman, 1923). Even more surprising is the fact that the El Paso Times didnot mention the McMillan bill before or after its passage. New Mexico in the same year prohibited sale, cultivation andimportation of cannabis. Mere possession was not expresslyprohibited but anyone found in possession was presumed to haveimported the marihuana illegally (New Mexico, 1923: 58-59). TheSanta Fe New Mexican, hometown newspaper of the bill's sponsorspaid scant attention, noting only that: The Santa Fe representative, however, had better luck withhis bill to prevent sale of marihuana, cannabis indica, Indianhemp or hashish as it is variously known. This bill was passedwithout any opposition. Marihuana was brought into localprominence at the penitentiary board's investigation last summerwhen a convict testified he could get marihuana cigarettesanytime he had a dollar. The drug produces intoxication whenchewed or smoked. Marihuana is the name commonly used in theSouthwest and Mexico (Santa Fe New Mexican, 1923). In addition to coming in via Mexico, marihuana was beingsmuggled in by sailors from Cuba and other points in the Indiesvia New Orleans. Dr. Frank Gomila, Commissioner of Public Safetyof New Orleans, began his campaign for federal legislation whichwould later bear fruit. He observed that the traffic was quiteorganized amounting to thousands of kilograms a year: ... [T]he custom was to keep [marihuana] In warehouses orstorerooms for further distribution. It was sold by thewholesaler to the retailer who In turn put the 'weed' through aprocess known as 'sweating.' The dried leaves and stems weresoaked in sugar water and dried on butcher's brown papers (Gomilaand Lambow, 1938: 29). According to Dr. Gomila and the newspapers, the demand in NewOrleans in the mid-twenties was so great that the"peddlers" were able to become exceptionally prosperousby dividing the market. One had exclusive jurisdiction over theblacks unloading the fruit boats, another over the lobby in acertain hotel, and so forth. It should be noted that marihuanawas also available at the local pharmacy without a prescriptionbefore 1923 in Texas and 1921 in Louisiana. After that marihuanahad to be bought on the street unless the user could successfullyforge a prescription. Different pictures emerge, of the marihuana user in El Pasoand San Antonio on the one hand and New Orleans and Galveston onthe other. In the border towns, he was a Mexican laborer,indolent to some, volatile to others. Local authorities were, byand large, unable to generate any significant public or politicalinterest, although there were no political objections to makingthe Mexican weed illegal. In the port cities, however, the marihuana user was a"dope fiend," the basest element of American society.He was a narcotics addict, a pimp, or a gambler; she was aprostitute. In New Orleans, marihuana was simply another narcoticin a city with a major narcotic problem. It was always open tosensationalism. Even before public attention was excited, however, theprevalence of marihuana use came to the attention of thePresident of the Louisiana State Board of Health, Dr. OscarDowling. On August 21, 1920, he advised the Governor of theincreasing availability of marihuana, a "powerful narcotic,causing exhilaration, intoxication, delirious hallucinations, andits subsequent action, drowsiness and stupor. . ." (Jones,1920). At the same time, Dr. Dowling wrote to the Surgeon General ofthe United States, Dr. Hugh Cummings, to advise him of theincreasing traffic in morphine, opium, and marihuana, and to seekfederal cooperation. An interesting sidelight of this request for assistance fromWashington is that four months later Dr. Dowling was to becomeembroiled in a bitter battle with the Federal Government over anorder to close his pet project, the New Orleans morphine clinics(Dowling, 1920). Ultimately he would lose, and one of theearliest attempts to deal with narcotics addiction would besuppressed for a half century (Lindesmith, 1967: 135-161). Very little, however, was done about the marihuana issue untilthe press seized upon it. In the fall of 1926, the New OrleansItem dispatched an army of reporters among the smoking andselling population. A series of articles published by the more widely circulatedMorning Tribune (both the Item and the Tribune were owned by thesame publishing company) exposed the immense profits being madeand commented upon the volatile effects of the drug upon its"addicts." It was reported that marihuana: Numbs the sense, creates wild fancies and has a hypnoticeffect upon the user, making his will easily subordinated to thatof others. What emerged from these articles, however, was not a vision ofaddicts on the streets and pushers on the docks but ratherpeddlers who lurked on playgrounds seeking to entrap young minds."Over two hundred children under fourteen are believed to beaddicted to the marihuana habit," the paper reported, and"at least 44 schools were definitely being infected"(Gomila and Lambow, 1938: 29-31). Local policy-makers wasted no time. The New Orleans PoliceDepartment immediately launched a round-up. They arrested morethan 150 persons for violation of a law which had lain dormantfor two years (Gomila and Lambow, 1938: 29-31; WCTIT, 1928). Dr. Dowling soon circulated "a warning to parents,guardians, and teachers of children against this menace"(WCTIT, 1928: 1). The Women's Christian Temperance Union jumpedon the bandwagon, focusing its attacks on the "softdrink" bars which had sprung up all over New Orleans duringProhibition: The soft drink stand and the corner drug store have takenthe place of the saloon as a social meeting place. Here is wheremarihuana and liquors can sometimes be bought (WCTU, 1928:3). Beyond these immediate effects, a more substantial impact ofthe local policy reaction in New Orleans was the formation of atightly knit coterie of New Orleans law enforcement, publichealth, and social welfare officials who would carry theircampaign to Washington, with ultimate success. The drug and the practice of smoking it spread during themid-twenties from the Gulf Coast and border town points-of-entryin two directions north and west from the border together withits ethnic identity and north and east from New Orleans with itsidentity as a narcotic and enslaver of youth. Practically every state west of the Mississippi Riverprohibited the possession or sale of marihuana during the period1915 to 1930. Most of them acted by 1930: California (1915), Iowa(1921), Nevada (1923), Washington (1923), Arkansas (1923),Nebraska, (1927), and Wyoming (1929). The Bureau of Immigration records the entry of 590,765Mexicans during this period, two-thirds of them remaining inTexas, the others settling in states in the Rocky Mountain area,most of them as farm laborers (U.S. Bureau of Immigration, 1915to 1930). Whether motivated by outright ethnic prejudice or by simplediscriminatory disinterest, the proceedings before statelegislatures resembled those in Texas in 1923. There was little,if any, public attention and no debate. Pointed references weremade to the drug's Mexican origins and sometimes to the criminalconduct which inevitably followed when Mexicans ingested the"killer weed.," The Colorado Legislature first prohibited possession,cultivation and sale of the drug in 1927, the year after the useof marihuana noticeably increased (Colorado, 1927: 309). At thattime., according to a subsequent newspaper report, the drug was" used almost exclusively . . . by the Mexican populationemployed in the beet fields" (Rocky Mountain News, 1931). Similarly, in 1929, the Montana Legislature amended itsgeneral narcotic law to marihuana, prohibiting use, sale orpossession without a prescription (Montana, 1929: 5). On sevendifferent days from June 24 to February 10, the date of thebill's passage, the Montana Standard succinctly noted theprogress of the bill through the legislature. The legislature'sattitude was characterized in the January 27 issue: There was fun in the House Health Committee during the weekwhen the marihuana bill came up for consideration. Marihuana isMexican opium, a plant used by Mexicans and cultivated for saleby Indians. "When some beet field peon takes a few rares ofthis stuff," explained Dr. Fred Fulsher of Mineral County,"he thinks he has just been elected President of Mexico sohe starts out to execute all his Political enemies. I understandthat over in Butte where the mexicans often go for the winterthey stage imaginary bullfights in the 'Bower of Roses' or put ontournaments for the favor of 'Spanish Rose' after a couple ofwhiffs of marihuana. The Silver Bow and Yellowstone delegationsboth deplore these international complications." Everybodylaughed and the bill was recommended for passage (MontanaStandard, 1929: 3). About the same time, Mexican laborers bad begun to appear inIdaho and the mayor of Boise remarked: 'The Mexican beet field workers have introduced a newproblem-the smoking in cigarettes or pipes of marihuana or grifo.its use is as demoralizing as the use of narcotics. Smoking grifois quite prevalent along the Oregon Short Line Railroad; andIdaho has no law to cope with the use and spread of thisdangerous drug (WCTU, 1928: 3). Idaho passed a law in 1927 (Idaho, 1927: 98). By 1931, the Texas Legislature finally got around toprohibiting possession of marihuana. By now alcohol prohibitionhad withdrawn any philosophical barrier to making possessionillegal. The San Antonio Light reported that: At last the state legislature has taken a definite steptoward suppression of traffic in a dangerous andinsanity-producing narcotic easily compounded of a weed(marihuana) indigenous to this section. This newspaper has urgedthe passage of prohibitory legislation and is gratified that thesolons at Austin have acted, even if tardily, in the suppressionof traffic in a drug which makes, the addict [read Mexican]frequently a dangerous or homicidal maniac (San AntonioLight, 1931). In the East, appearance of the practice was not a necessaryprerequisite for prohibition. That Maine (1913), Massachusetts(1914), Vermont (1915), and Rhode Island (1918) barred the saleof cannabis without a prescription before 1920 does not indicatethat marihuana smoking had appeared there on any significantscale. Rather, in the course of anticipating and implementing thenational anti-narcotics policy declared by the Harrison Act in1914, medical representatives on the drafting committeesrecommended the inclusion of "another narcotic" towhich addicts could resort once the other opiates becamedifficult to obtain. The New York Times in 1914 described cannabis as a"narcotic [having] practically the same effect. as morphineand cocaine," (New York Times, 1914: 6) and it noted in aneditorial that: [T]he inclusion of cannabis indica among the drugs to besold only on prescription is only common sense. Devotees ofhashish are now hardly numerous enough here to count, but theyare likely to increase as other narcotics become harder to obtain(New York Times, 1914: 8). By 1923, the New York Times referred to marihuana as thecity's "latest habit-forming drug" when reporting itsexhibition at a Women's Club meeting (New York Times, 1923: 24).Finally, in 1927, whether responding to an increase in use or tothe substitution admonition, the legislature included marihuanain its definition of "habit forming drugs" in acomprehensive narcotics bill (New York, 1927: 1695). The situation in Chicago paralleled that in New York until1927. Large Mexican communities developed in Chicago and Gary,Indiana, during the twenties and marihuana smoking became commonin these areas and among journeymen musicians as well. As in NewYork, there was little public concern. The New Orleans patterntook over around 1927, however, when the attention of local lawenforcement officials was suddenly drawn to the Mexicans andtheir "muggles." One law enforcement official reportedthat: There are about 7,000 Mexicans in Gary, 10,000 in IndianaHarbor and 8,000 in South Chicago.... The Mexicans depend on thesteel mills, railroads, and construction gangs for employment.Many are drifters when slack labor conditions prevail....[T]wenty-five percent of these Mexicans smoke marihuana. In fact,many of them make their living by raising and peddling the drug (Paul,1929: 4). A situation perceived to be so widespread was naturallyconsidered likely to infect the rest of the community. As in NewOrleans, reports started to appear that high school students weresmoking the weed (Paul, 1929: 1; Chicago Tribune, June 3, 1929). Since there was then neither state nor federal legislationprohibiting sale of marihuana, the local United States attorneydeclared war armed with an Internal Revenue statute prohibitingproduction and transfer of "a cigarette substitute" onwhich tax had not been paid. In June 1929, he raided wholesalehouses "believed to have disposed of large quantities ofmarihuana cigarettes, sold to school pupils and other youthfulthrill seekers." He arrested nine men "most of themMexicans" (Chicago Examiner, June 22, 1929). At the sametime, local officials began to use a statute which prohibitedtransfer of "any cigarette containing any substancedeleterious to health" (Chicago Examiner, June 19, 1929). The Chicago Tribune, lobbying heavily for anti-marihuanalegislation then pending before the Illinois Legislature,reported that day-to-day progress of the enforcement activity(Chicago Tribune, July and October, 1929). Every stall in thelegislature earned a banner headline such as: BAN ON HASHISH BLOCKED DESPITE RAVAGES OF DRUG In an article appearing in June, 1929, the paper noted: The number of addicts is growing alarmingly according toauthorities, because of the ease with which [marihuana] can beobtained. The habit was introduced a dozen years ago by Mexicanlaborers . . . but it has become widespread among American youthsand girls even among school children. The legislation, however, was killed. Marihuana prohibition had become widespread. In states whereeither Mexicans or the drug had appeared, its use was quicklysuppressed. Soon after being apprised of its presence, local lawmakersinvoked the criminal law. In New Orleans, Denver, and Chicago thespectre of a doped school population was the cornerstone of theprohibitory effort. And, during alcohol prohibition, paralleled by the local phaseof marihuana prohibition, it was naturally imperative to suppressa drug which frustrated alcohol users might substitute, for theircustomary intoxicant. THE UNIFORM NARCOTIC DRUG ACT Following the ad hoc local phase of marihuana legislation inthe United States was the nationalization phase. During thisperiod marihuana became integrated at both the state and federallevels with the nation's narcotics policy which had beenmanifested forcefully in Congress' adoption of the HarrisonNarcotics Act in 1914. The Harrison Act, a taxing measure, required registration andpayment of an occupational tax by all persons who imported,produced, dealt in, sold or gave away opium, cocaine or theirderivatives. The Act required all legitimate handlers of thesenarcotics to file returns setting forth in detail their use ofthe drugs. Since the Act also provided that only legitimate users couldregister and no one but a registered user could obtain thespecified form, any transfer by an illegitimate user was aviolation of the Act. For those failing to comply with itsregistration requirements, the original Harrison Act providedpenalties of not more than $2,000 in fines or more than fiveyears imprisonment, or both. Drafted as a tax law rather than an outright criminal statute,the Act was intended to do indirectly what Congress believed itcould not do directly: regulate possession and sale of theopiates. However, because the Act essentially was arevenue-raising measure imposing a tax on transfers of narcotics,it could not effectively prohibit the possession of drugs. This indirect regulation of narcotics traffic had a number ofsignificant consequences. First, since the Act could not penalizeusers of addiction directly, there was an immediate need forcomplementary residual state legislation in order to dealeffectively with the drug problem. Second, the enforcement of the Act was as signed to theInternal Revenue Service in the Treasury Department. The firstenforcement agency for the Harrison Act was the NarcoticsDivision of the Prohibition Unit of the Internal Revenue Servicecreated in 1920 (Schmeckebier, 1929: 143). This division wasincorporated in the Prohibition Bureau which was created in 1927(Act, 1927:1381). In 1930, the enforcement of the narcotics laws was severedfrom the Bureau of Prohibition and established as the separateBureau of Narcotics in the Treasury Department (Act, 1930: 585).The existence of this separate, agency has done as much as anysingle factor to influence the course of drug regulation from1930 to 1970 (King, 1953: 736). Although the impact of the Bureau on the passage of theUniform Narcotic Drug Act and the Marihuana Tax Act will beexplained in detail in subsequent sections, it is important hereto note that the existence of a separate bureau havingresponsibility only for narcotics enforcement and for educatingthe public on drug problems inevitably led to a particularlyprosecutorial view of narcotics addiction and the use and abuseof all drugs. After the passage of the Harrison Act in 1914, there remaineda considerable lack of uniformity regarding the offensesprohibited and the penalties imposed by the several states. In 1919, the American Medical Association asked theCommissioner of Internal Revenue to call a conference, toconsider better control of traffic in narcotic drugs. Theprofession was uncertain of its obligations in the matter becausethey were faced with an amalgam of conflicting laws. The A.M.A.asked that the wholesale, retail, and manufacturing druginterests be among those attending, along with delegates from themedical profession in each state. The proposal received noofficial or unofficial response either from the Commissioner ofInternal Revenue or the Bureau of Prohibition. Nevertheless, the American Medical Association, through itsown Council on Health and Public Instruction, did hold aconference in early 1922 during which a uniform state narcoticcontrol law was presented. At the November meeting of thatconference, there were present 15 representatives of 10pharmaceutical organizations and two representatives of themedical profession. The draft of a uniform law was approved unanimously by allpresent. The American Medical Association set out to codify thedraft and to send it for approval to each of the constituentorganizations (White, August 3, 1932; Woodward, August 6, 1932).After securing approval, all the associations agreed to pursueenactment first in New York. The general lack of uniformity in anti-narcotics legislation,the weakness of state enforcement procedures, and the growinghysteria about dope fiends and criminality converged in severalrequests outside the medical community for a uniform statenarcotic law (Anslinger and Tompkins, 1953: 159). The drafting of the Uniform Narcotic Drug Act must also beviewed against the background of two larger movements: (1) thetrend toward the creation and dissemination of uniform state lawsby the National Commissioners on Uniform State laws, a group towhich each state sent two representatives appointed by thegovernor; and (2) the general concern in the late 1920's andearly 1930's with interstate crime, manifested , for example, bythe creation in 1930 of the nearly autonomous Federal Bureau ofInvestigation. Because the concept of states' rights and narrowlyconstrued federal power was then so powerful, an appeal to theNational Commissioners was the inevitable recourse for thosepressing for uniform anti-narcotic regulation. DRAFTING THE UNIFORM ACT By 1924, the Commissioners had appointed Committee to draft auniform narcotic drug act At the 1925 meeting of Commissioners,the chair man of the Committee reported that he himself hadprepared a first tentative draft based on the New York Act, theWashington state legislation, the Harrison Act, and a bill thenbefore the New York Legislature. Presumably this was the ondrafted by the A.M.A. Conference after its 192 meeting. The chairman noted, however, that Dr. William Woodward, headof the A.M.A.'s Bureau of Legal Medicine and Legislation, withwhom he had only recently conferred, had made "some veryvaluable suggestions." Because the tentative draft hadalready been printed before these suggestions, he requested thatit "not be read but be re-committed to the Committee"(1925 Handbook: 977-985). This first draft included cannabis inthe list of "habit-forming drugs," although all suchdrugs could be distributed and used for medical purposes (1925Handbook: 978). A second tentative draft was presented in 1928 and again thedraft was not discussed at the conference but recommitted forfurther study. The second draft was essentially an exact copy ofthe 1927 New York Statute. It also included cannabis in the classof habit-forming drugs (1928 Handbook: 75-78,323-333). There was a lack of concern on the part of the Commissionersthemselves with the whole narcotics problem between 1924 and1928. The President of the Conference, introducing Dr. Woodward,said: In view of the importance of the act I think it would notbe amiss to listen to the Doctor for a few minutes, that he maypoint out to us why it is important. In some of the states we donot recognize the importance because it has not been called toour attention (1928 Handbook: 76-77). Nor was the Bureau of Prohibition particularly concerned atthis time with the cannabis provision. Lack of official concernand interest continued to be the Bureau's attitude toward thesecond tentative draft (Nutt, June 13,1929). Since neither the Commissioners nor federal narcoticsofficials were particularly concerned about state and localcontrol of narcotics generally and marihuana in particular, itseems clear that neither was responsible for the inclusion ofmarihuana in the category of "habit-forming drugs. Rather,it would appear that it was included in the first draft becausethat had been drawn from the 1923 Washington statute which hadlisted cannabis. Insofar as the second draft was a copy of the 1927 New YorkAct, inclusion of cannabis in this draft is not unusual. Few, ifany, of the persons involved in the drafting were concerned aboutmarihuana smoking or even aware of its use. Two third drafts were submitted, the first in 1929 and thesecond in 1930. The initial one closely resembled the secondtentative draft, and once again it included cannabis in thecategory of "habit-forming drugs.` Again, the growth,distribution, and possession of cannabis was prohibited exceptfor medical purposes. The nascent Congressional interest in marihuana in 1929 andthe Bureau of Prohibition's subsequent resistance to amending,and thereby endangering, the Harrison and Export and Import Acts,caused the Bureau to take full notice of this 1929 third draft.Like its predecessors, however, the initial third draft wasrecommitted for further study (1929 Handbook : 43, 332-346). The second third tentative draft, submitted in 1930, was thefirst to remove cannabis from the definition of"habit-forming drugs" and to include only asupplemental provision for dealing with the drug (1930 Handbook:485,97). When the Conference of Commissioners met to consider thesecond third tentative draft, Judge Deering, the Chairman of theCommittee on the Uniform Narcotic Drug Act, recommended itsrecommission for further study because the Committee had not yethad an opportunity to consult the newly created Bureau ofNarcotics. At the time of this conference, August 14, 1930, no one hadyet been appointed Commissioner of the Bureau, although Harry J.Anslinger was Acting Commissioner (1930 Handbook: 126-127). TheSenate confirmed Anslinger's appointment as Commissioner onDecember 18, 1930. The Bureau of Narcotics their became actively involved in thedrafting process. Commissioner Anslinger was pressing forinclusion of the cannabis provision. He stated that he felt thelimited medical use for cannabis was far outweighed by the needto control potential cannabis addiction (Anslinger, July28,1930). Dr. Woodward and the pharmaceutical industry advocatedoptional inclusion of marihuana on the one hand, and federalnarcotics representatives urged not only inclusion butelimination of medical use, on the other. The fourth tentative draft retained the optional cannabisprovision. At a session before the convening of the fullConference of Commissioners from September 9-12, 1931,Commissioner Anslinger and A. L. Tennyson of the Bureau met withJudge Deering to discuss the Bureau's feelings about the fourthtentative draft. At this time Commissioner Anslinger stated that the Bureaufelt strongly that inclusion of cannabis in the state law oughtto be mandatory. Moreover, the Bureau urged that the onlysuccessful way to deal with the marihuana drug traffic, becauseof its domestic nature and the easy availability of the weed, wasto prohibit the cultivation of the plant altogether and to findsome substitute for the limited medical use (Tennyson, September16, 1931). However, the fourth tentative draft presented to theConference of Commissioners included the optional marihuanaprovision. And, the Conference tentatively approved the fourthtentative draft and directed the Committee to prepare a finaldraft (1931 Handbook: 127-128, 390-402). The American Medical Association played a key role in thedrafting process prior to 1931. Their efforts had been largelyresponsible for consideration of the Uniform Drug Act in thefirst place. From the beginning in 1925, Dr. William Woodward,the Director of the A.M.A.'s Bureau of Legal Medicine andLegislation, actively assisted in the drafting of the Act andwidely circulated the drafts to interested persons for theircomments. It appears, however, that Dr. Woodward's personal style andthe preeminent position of the American Medical Association inthe drafting process were resented by the two remaining interestgroups-the Federal Bureau of Narcotics and the retail andwholesale pharmaceutical associations. The Bureau had beencommenting on drafts only after they had been drawn by the A.M.A.and did not feel it was playing an active role in the draftingprocess. The pharmaceutical industry felt that their interestswere considered only peripherally and that they had been excludedfrom the heart of tire, drafting process. As a result of the dissent, a conference of interested partieswas scheduled before the final draft was to be presented to theConference of Commissioners. Present at this preliminary conference on September 15, 1932,were representatives of the Drug Committee the Federal Bureau ofNarcotics, the Department of State, the Public Health Service,the American Medical Association, and delegates from the drugindustry and other medically related industries andorganizations. The final version of the Uniform Narcotic Drug Actwas hammered out at this session. The Bureau was central to thedrafting process and Commissioner Anslinger made a major effortto involve the drug manufacturers and the wholesale and retaildrug trade in it to protect the Act from possible subsequentpolitical disagreement (Anslinger, August 1, 1932): Finally, theconference agreed on a draft to be presented to the NationalConference. The manufacturers of drug products were strongly opposed tothe inclusion of cannabis under any criminal regulatory scheme.Representatives of the industry opposed a mandatory cannabisprovision. The final conclusion reached by all the partiespresent was: After considerable comment, it was decided to eliminateSection 12 (Cannabis) and leave it to the Conference ofCommissioners as to whether it should be included under thegeneral provisions of the Act (Report of PreliminaryConference, 1932: 23). The Bureau was no longer insisting on the mandatory inclusionof in absolute marihuana prohibition; it did not want to risk theopposition of the drug industry to the, entire Act. The fifth tentative draft did, however, include a significantchange in form which would have important consequences in thedecades to come. Although the marihuana provision remainedsupplemental to the main body of the Act, any state wishing toregulate the sale and possession of marihuana was instructed,simply, to add cannabis to the definition of "narcoticdrugs." All the, other provisions of the, Act would theirapply to marihuana as well as to the opiates and cocaine. TheCommissioners adopted this form as it had been prepared at theSeptember 15, 1932, preliminary Conference. The only recorded opposition to the adoption of the finaldraft came from some Commissioners who objected to tying theUniform State Law to the terms of the federal Harrison Act. Thislast obstacle was over-come by the argument that a number ofstates already had passed such legislation so that the states'rights problem need not stand in the way. The Act was adopted 26to 3 (1932 Handbook: 107). ENACTMENT OF THE UNIFORM ACT BY THE STATES After final acceptance of the Uniform Act, the Bureau set towork at once to secure state enactment-including an adequatemarihuana provision. A comprehensive campaign was undertaken inthe press, in legislative chambers, and in any other forum togain public support for the Uniform Act. In addition, perceiving the absence of public awareness ofmarihuana and needing to encourage positive action to overcomethe drug's optional status, the Bureau also sought to arousepublic interest in marihuana through "an educationalcampaign describing the drug, its identifications and its evileffects" (Federal Bureau of Narcotics, 1937 : 59). That there was little general knowledge about cannabis isillustrated by the fact that as late as 1934, it was necessary toshow marihuana to the New York police so that they couldrecognize it growing or in dried, smokable form (New York Times1934: 6). The Bureau's district supervisors and local agents werecampaigning actively in the legislatures before which the Act waspending. A press campaign was conducted across the country togain the support of civic groups and other interested parties.Mr. Anslinger sought editorial support in newspapers (Anslinger,October 22, 1936) and assisted in the, drafting of articles forpopular magazines (Anslinger, December 23, 1936). To mobilize theBar, Bureau officials wrote an article for law journalsexplaining the need for the Uniform Narcotic Drug Act (Anslinger,1932: 52; Tennyson, 1932: 55). Despite these efforts, it appears that the Uniform Act had arough time in state legislatures during its early life. By April26, 1933, only two states had enacted it in full. As late asMarch 1935, only 10 states had enacted the Uniform Law. A number of significant objections had emerged in the statelegislatures considering the passage of the Uniform Narcotic DrugAct. First among these was the potential cost to the state ofenforcing the Act. Second, there was concern over the number ofregistrants who would have to be licensed due to the belief thatthe Uniform Act would require special licensing of doctors,dentists, and veterinarians. Third, the limit on the amount ofexempt preparations which could be sold caused a great deal oftechnical difficulty with the Act. Fourth, many criticized theright of the court to revoke or suspend the license to practicemedicine or pharmacy. And finally, there seemed to be widespreadmisunderstanding of the record-keeping requirements of the Act. Although these objections were largely administrative, theynevertheless posed what appeared to be serious stumbling blocksto the successful passage of the Uniform Law in all the states. The combination of public apathy and administrative resistancenecessitated a new approach in generating public interest.Beginning in late 1934, Commissioner Anslinger gradually shiftedthe focus of the FBN's educational campaign away from theliability of federal law enforcement agencies to deal effectivelywith the local drug problems to the need to cope with the newdrug menace-marihuana. The clearest reflection of the, change in Bureau policy isfound in two official statements of Commissioner Anslinger, onemade in 1933 and the other in 1936. One 1933 statement explains the need for a Uniform NarcoticDrug Law and emphasizes United States international obligations,the need for more effective coordination in law enforcement, andthe impact the law will have on the dangers of morphine, cocaine,and opium addiction (FBN Paper, July 1933). In the laterstatement, however, more than half of the time is devoted to adiscussion of the "worst evil of all" the marihuanaproblem. To aid the new approach's objective, Commissioner Anslingermade speeches and contributed articles to journals. The mostinfluential of his efforts was "Marihuana Assassin ofYouth" which appeared in the widely circulated AmericanMagazine in July 1937 (Anslinger and Cooper,1937). The FBN files contain more than 50 letters addressed to theCommissioner which say: "Your article was the first time Iever heard of marihuana." Among the most effective proponents of the Uniform Act was theHearst newspaper chain. These papers began editorializing infavor of enactment within days after the Act had been approved in1932. The Hearst chain was not alone. A Birmingham, Alabama, paperon August 22, 1935, emphasized the need to control marihuana as areason for adopting the Act (Birmingham Age Herald, August 22,1935). A Washington Post columnist in September, 1934, devotedthree quarters of his article to marihuana with quotes fromAnslinger and Stanley urging adoption of the Uniform Act(Washington Post, September 29, 1934). Other large-city newspapers such as the Cleveland Plain,Dealer and the St. Louis Star Times kept a steady, ifintermittent, stream of anti-marihuana articles flowing in the,period just before the passage of the Uniform Act in those areas.In Missouri, especially, local concern generated by the extensivecoverage in the Star Times speedily pushed the legislature toadopt the Uniform Act. Often it has been supposed on the basis of this increasedcoverage that the use of marihuana increased around 1935. Sincethere was some larger design involved, however, a firm conclusionis unwarranted. At the same time, it is possible that use, didspread after the publicity campaigns, especially among the young. Judging from the tremendous expansion in coverage by the NewYork Times beginning in 1935, the evidence supplied by theLaGuardia Commission in its 1944 Report and the, leap inenforcement activity, marihuana, finally came to New York City inthe 1930's, though then probably on a smaller scale than inDenver land the, border towns of Texas. Apart from the press, another influential participant in themarihuana campaign, especially after the Repeal of Prohibition,was the Women's Christian Temperance Union. Although the WCTU haddistributed a pamphlet on marihuana as early as 1927, theirpublication, the Union Signal, does not reflect any significantinterest either in the Uniform Act or marihuana, until 1934.Before that year the "narcotic" receiving the mostattention was nicotine. Beginning in 1936, however, the UnionSignal had a direct line to the FBN national office, and fromthen on every issue contained material on marihuana (WCTU boundvolumes, yearly). The World Narcotic Defense Association and its head, RichmondP. Hopson, were also involved in the drive for state enactment.They were continually in postal contact with almost every statelegislator in the country (WNDA, 1937). The most well-financedgroup in the campaign, the Association underwrote nationalbroadcasts and distributed a lengthy pamphlet on marihuana, in1936. The General Federation of Women's Clubs also contributedenergetically. The Federation educated its membership about theneed for the Uniform Act and about the evils of marihuana inparticular. The Chairman of the Federation's department oflegislation noted: The situation concerning club women particularly is theaccessibility of the frightening degenerating marihuana weed,which is rolled in cigarettes ... and has been playing such havocwith young high school boys and girls (WCTU, 1936: 285). The state and local clubs immediately began to unite locallegislators and to conduct educational campaigns for parents,teachers and children (WCTU, 1937: 36; Wood, January 13, 1936).An FBN agent appeared at a New York meeting of the localFederation with two marihuana plants. They were exhibited at alocal flower show: Marihuana Plant exhibit at Flower Show of Katrina Trask Garden Club Tomorrow, 3 P.M. on at the Casino This plant is the cause of a dread menacewhich in being fought by the State Department of Health. Public Invited to Show-25 cents (Saratogian,1936: 5) Other groups such as the YWCA , the National PTA and theNational Councils of Catholic Men and Women were all in touchwith the Bureau and were made, aware of the Bureau's dual aims of"influencing and creating public opinion in favor of thepassage of the Uniform Narcotic Drug Act and awakening theparents of the country to the increasing danger of the use ofmarihuana." (Anslinger, March 28, 1935). However, arousing public opinion alone was not the ultimategoal of the campaign. The FBN was interested in the enactment ofthe Uniform Act along with prohibitory marihuana legislation inall the states. By early 1935, only 10 states had adopted the Uniform Act.And, three of these states had not included marihuana (Anslinger,March 1, 1935). The Bureau embarked upon its marihuana strategyin 1935, the turning point in state enactment. Whether or notpublic interest actually existed, public opinion-makersinfluenced legislative opinion and created a "feltneed" for legislation. Within the next year, 18 more states adopted the Act and everyone of them which did not have previous legislation includedmarihuana (Anslinger, January 13, 1936; WCTU, 1937: 75). ENACTMENT OF THE MARIHUANA TAX ACT Despite the public opinion campaign conducted in the early1930's the general public was largely unaware of the drug, itsuse, or its alleged effects; only regional interest was aroused. A change seems to have occurred after 1935. The increasednational awareness played a significant role in the decision ofthe Treasury Department to seek federal legislation. On April 14,1937, the "Secretary of the Treasury, on behalf of theCommissioner of Narcotics," submitted the"administration proposal to Congress to impose an excise andtransfer tax on dealings in marihuana" (Schaller, 1970: 70). The scheme of the Marihuana Tax Act was threefold: arequirement that all manufacturers, importers, dealers, andpractitioners register and pay a special occupational tax; arequirement that all transactions be accomplished through use ofwritten order forms; and the imposition of a tax on all transfersin the amount of $1 per ounce for transfer to registered personsand a prohibitive $100 per ounce for transfers to unregisteredpersons. The key departure of the marihuana tax scheme from that of theHarrison Act is the notion of the prohibitive tax. Under theHarrison Act, a person not required to register, that is, anon-medical user, could not legitimately buy or possessnarcotics. To the dissenters in the Supreme Court decisionsupholding the Act, this clearly demonstrated that Congress'motive was to prohibit conduct rather than to raise revenue. The seemingly bizarre legal formulation of this tax measurewas precipitated by the recognized need for the FederalGovernment to take action forbidden to it under prevailingconstitutional doctrine. Hearings on the proposed marihuana taxation were held beforethe House Ways and Means Committee. During five mornings oftestimony by FBN officials, government witnesses, and industryrepresentatives, the Bureau presented the following four-foldargument: (1) marihuana was a disastrous drug; (2) its use wasincreasing alarmingly and had generated public hysteria; (3)state legislation was incapable of meeting the threat posed bythe drug, thus, federal action was required; and (4) thegovernment might best act through separate legislation ratherthan through an amendment to the Harrison Act. No definite scientific study of the effects of marihuana waspresented to substantiate the position that marihuana was adangerous drug. No synthesis of available scientific informationwas submitted nor was there any statement by the Public HealthService. Neither of the government's own public health experts,Assistant Surgeon General, Dr. Walter Treadway, and Dr. LawrenceKolb, testified, nor did Drs. Walter Bromberg or J. F. Siler whohad recently published scientific articles on the effects ofcannabis in humans (Siler, et. al., 1933: 269-280; Bromberg,1934). Instead, the scientific aspects were presented by a lawenforcement agency, the FBN: Despite the fact that medical men and scientists havedisagreed upon the properties of marihuana, and some are inclinedto minimize the harmfulness of this drug, the records offer ampleevidence that it has a disastrous effect upon many of its users.Recently we have received many reports showing crimes of violencecommitted by persons while under the influence of marihuana. The deleterious, even vicious, qualities of the drug renderit highly dangerous to the mind and body upon which it operatesto destroy the will, cause one to lose the power of connectedthought, producing imaginary delectable situations and graduallyweakening the physical powers. Its use frequently leads toinsanity. I have a statement here, giving an outline of casesreported to the Bureau or in the press, wherein the use ofmarihuana is connected with revolting crimes (U.S. Congress,1937: 30). Instead of having one of the few researchers who had done anysignificant research into the effects of cannabis on humans, theBureau chose a Temple University pharmacologist, Dr. James Munch,whose experience was confined to experimentation of the effectsof cannabis on dogs. The second component of the Bureau's case was the contentionthat marihuana use had spread alarmingly in recent years,provoking a public outcry. To demonstrate this, the Bureausubmitted, for the record, the Gomila article cited earlier, anda 1936 letter from the city editor of the Alamoosa Daily Courier(U.S. Congress, 1937: 32-37). The letter described an attack by aMexican-American, allegedly under the influence of marihuana, ona girl of his region.: I wish I could show you what a small marihuana cigarettecan do to one of our degenerate Spanish-speaking residents.That's why our problem is so great; the greatest percentage ofour population is composed of Spanish speaking persons most ofwhom are low mentally, because of social and racial conditions (Baskette,September 4, 1936). The third component of the Bureau's case was that even thoughevery state now had marihuana legislation, local authoritiescould not cope with the marihuana menace. To support thisproposition editorial pleas from the Washington newspapers wereoffered along with Bureau testimony that officials of severalstates had requested federal help. Senator Brown asked Commissioner Anslinger "to make clearthe need for Federal legislation." He continued: You say the states have asked you to do that. I presume itis because of the freedom of interstate traffic that the statesrequire the legislation. Anslinger agreed: [W]e have had requests from the states to step in becausethey claimed it was not growing in that state, but that it wascoming in from another state (U.S. Congress, 1937:16). Nothing was presented to support that statement; no lettersfrom local authorities and no investigative reports by FBN agentsdescribing the trafficking apparatus. The congressmen and senators participating in the hearingsaccepted the Bureau's argument. In fact, Senator Brown, Chairmanof the subcommittee which considered the legislation in theSenate, and Chairman Doughton of the Ways and Means Committee,had been thoroughly briefed by the Bureau in advance of thehearings. There was no probing of the Government witnesses. Infact, the Government made its case in the House in one session,and the next three sessions were devoted to countering thetechnical objections of the oilseed, birdseed, and hempindustries (U.S. Congress, 1937:59-65 67-86 . On the last morning of scheduled hearings, Dr. William C.Woodward appeared on behalf of the AMA to oppose the bill. Dr.Woodward objected to H.R. 6385 because he believed that itsultimate effect would be to so restrict medical use by red tapethat any medical use would be impossible. He admitted that therewere currently few therapeutic applications but he observed thatthe bill inhibited further research which might bear fruit. Hewent even further to imply that the bill was designed with thisobjective in mind. He noted that if federal legislation wasconsidered necessary, it could be achieved without sacrificingmedical usage by simply amending the Harrison Act. Dr. Woodward's most pointed attack was directed against theassumption that federal legislation was needed to control themarihuana habit. He argued that existing state legislation wasmore than sufficient if properly enforced and that if lack ofcoordination was the problem, that was the FBN's fault. Noting that the FBN already had the authority to "arrangefor the exchange of information concerning the use and abuse ofnarcotic drugs in [the] states and for cooperation in theinstitution and prosecution of suits . . .," he assertedthat the Bureau had not done its job: If there is at the present time any weakness in our statelaws relating to cannabis or to marihuana, a fair share of theblame, if not all of it, rests on the Secretary of the Treasuryand his assistants who have had this duty imposed upon them for 6and more years (U.S. Congress, 1937: 93). Dr. Woodward also contended that the law would be a uselessexpense to the medical profession and unenforcible. He noted:"Since marihuana grows so freely, and every landowner was apotential producer, whether wittingly or unwittingly, fullenforcement would require inspection of the entire land area ofthe country, a task which would be unseemly for the FederalGovernment to undertake" (U.S. Congress, 1937: 94-95). Finally, Dr. Woodward wondered why, if federal legislation wasconsidered necessary, the Congress did not simply amend theHarrison Act. To the Bureau's argument that such a course wouldbe unconstitutional, he inquired how Treasury's counsel couldargue that the present bill was constitutional since thetechnique was identical. Dr. Woodward's own view was that theamendment of the Harrison Act would be constitutional and thatsuch a course would dispel the professional objections which heraised (U.S. Congress, 1937:97). After accusing Dr. Woodward of obstructionism, evasiveness,and bad faith, the Committee did not even thank him for histestimony (U.S. Congress, 1937: 121). When the Senate FinanceCommittee conducted hearings on the bill, now styled H.R. 6906,two months later, Dr. Woodward submitted instead a short letterwhich stated the AMA's reasons for opposing the bill (U.S.Congress, 1937: 33-34). Both Committees reported the bill favorably despite Woodward'sobjections. The Ways and Means Report stated: Under the influence of this drug the will is destroyed andall power of directing and controlling thought is lost.Inhibitions are released. As a result of these effects, itappeared from testimony produced at the hearings that manyviolent crimes have been and are being committed by persons underthe influence of the drug Not only is marihuana used by hardenedcriminals to steel them to commit violent crimes, but it is alsobeing placed in the hands of high-school children in the form ofmarihuana cigarettes by unscrupulous peddlers. Cases were citedat the hearings of school children who have been driven to crimeand insanity through the use of the drug. Its continued useresults many times in impotency and insanity (U.S. Congress,1937: 1-2). The Marihuana Tax Act passed the House of Representatives verylate in the afternoon of a long session on June 14, 1937; theonly opposition came from congressmen who had no idea whatmarihuana was and desired further information before voting(Congressional Record, 1937: 5575, 5689). Instead of a detailedanalysis they received a statement of one of the members of theWays and Means Committee, which repeated uncritically the luridcriminal acts attributed to marihuana users at the hearings.After less than two pages of debate, the Act passed without aroll call (Congressional Record, 1937: 5575). TIGHTENING THE LAW After the passage of the Marihuana Tax Act, the FBN began witha four-pronged enforcement policy: Control of cultivation of the plant for legitimate purposes and eradication of wild growth; Pacification of marihuana-sensationalism in the press; Education of the federal judiciary toward strict application of the law; and Allocation of federal enforcement resources toward major trafficking rather than petty possession offenses. The scope of the plant's growth, the transportability of theseeds, the dormancy of the seeds, and the lack of a highlyefficient herbicide militated against a comprehensive eradicationprogram. The cost of such a program would have been substantialeven if success were assured. No active effort was undertaken toconduct an acre-by-acre survey of the United States. The eradication "program" became simply a matter ofreaction to routine information-letters from farmers who hadidentified the plant and discoveries of acreage by lawenforcement agents. As the Bureau's interest in marihuana subsided during the1940's, so did the effort to eradicate the wild growth. In fact,the Federal Government encouraged the cultivation of hemp duringthe war, even though an inactive strain had not been developed,because sources of sisal rope had been severed by Japan'soccupation of the Philippines. All over the United States, theweed remained plentiful and largely undetected. After passage of the Act, Commissioner Anslinger directed hisagents to discourage local officials from playing up any allegedinvolvement of marihuana with crime to the press. On April 11,1938, the Commissioner told his New York District Supervisorthat: Our present policy is to discourage undue emphasis onmarihuana for the reason that in some sections of the countryrecently press reports have been so exaggerated that interest inthe subject has become almost hysterical and we are thereforetrying to mold public opinion along more conservative and sanerlines (Anslinger, April 11, 1938). Immediately following passage of the Act, the FBN alsodirected an "educational" effort toward the federaljudiciary to emphasize the need for severe sentences formarihuana offenders. The Bureau also concentrated on the stiflingof suppliers, large interstate traffickers, and smugglers. Smallpossession cases were to be left to local authorities. Several factors, however, served to frustrate this policy.First, marihuana traffic was highly disorganized and there was nonational or regional network as such (New York City, 1945).Second, use was still concentrated geographically andsocioeconomically and was not a major enterprise. Finally, duringthe war years, the Bureau abandoned responsibility for mostmarihuana law enforcement to the states, where the disorganizedtraffic and regional use could be most effectively controlled.The FBN chose instead to concentrate on the opiates. After the relative quiet of the war years there was apparentlya significant increase in narcotic drug abuse in the late, 1940'sand the public began to be concerned with the spread of narcoticaddiction, particularly among young persons. Congressional furorwas aroused by the assertion that the use of marihuana inevitablyled to the use of these harder drugs, particularly heroin. The new legislation came in two waves. In 1951, Congresspassed the Boggs Act (Boggs Act, November 2, 1951: 767) whichincreased penalties for all drug violators. For the first time infederal drug legislation marihuana and the narcotic drugs werelumped together, since the Act provided uniform penalties for theNarcotic Drugs Import and Export Act (Boggs Act, November 2,1951: 767) and the Marihuana Tax Act (21 USC 1964). The statesfollowed the federal lead. Then, in 1956, Congress passed theNarcotic Control Act, escalating the penalties still further.Once again the states responded in kind. The hearings before the Subcommittee of the House Ways andMeans Committee and the floor debate indicate that the Boggs Actwas motivated by a. perceived increase in narcotic use in theperiod 1948 to 1951 (Kefauver Committee Hearings, 1951: 240-241;New York Times, 1951). Representative Boggs, speaking during the Congressional debateon his bill, enunciated a concern which was reflected in manyother quarters. After noting that there had been a 24% increasein arrests for narcotic violations between 1949 and 1950 and a70% increase between 1948 and 1950, Representative Boggs stated: The most shocking part about these figures is the fact thatthere has been an alarming increase in drug addiction amongyounger persons. In the first six months of 1946, the average ageof addicted persons committed . . . at Lexington, Kentucky, was37.5 years. Only three patients were under the age of 21. Duringthe first six months of 1950, only four years later, the averagehad dropped to 26.7 years and 766 patients were under the age of21... (Congressional Record, 1951: 8197). Representative Boggs and others supported the mandatoryminimum sentences for drug peddlers because they felt that somefederal judges had been lax in enforcing the narcotic laws(Congressional Record, 1951: 8197, 8207, 821 1). Public opinionwas overwhelming that harsh sentences, including the deathpenalty for peddling narcotics to minors, would strangle the drugmonster then stalking the American youth (Kefauver CommitteeHearings, 1951: 430-431). The Boggs Act was directed in large part at the federaljudiciary since a key provision removed judicial discretion insentencing by providing that upon conviction for a second orsubsequent offense the imposition or execution of the sentencecould not be suspended nor probation granted. There had been no concerted lobbying effort by the judicialcommunity during the legislative process; however, James V.Bennett, Director of the U.S. Bureau of Prisons, aroused thejudges in the Fifth U.S. Circuit District into eventuallyrecommending the amendment of the law to remove provisions formandatory minimum sentences (Yew Orleans Statesman, May 28, 1954;New Orleans Times-Picayune, May 28, 1954). Even while the Boggs Act was still pending in Congress, theBureau of Narcotics encouraged the states to modify theirexisting narcotic and marihuana legislation to enact"penalties similar to those provided in the Boggs Bill[which] would be of material assistance in the fight against thenarcotic traffic" (Federal Bureau of Narcotics, 1950: 6). Seventeen states and the territory of Alaska responded bypassing "little Boggs Acts" by 1953 and 11 other statesincreased their penalties by 1956. Two of the latter group, Ohioand Louisiana, enacted penalty provisions which weresubstantially more severe than those passed previously in anyjurisdiction (Federal Bureau of Narcotics, 1956: 28). The Ohio law, approved June 16,1955, provided a 20 to 40 yearsentence for the sale of narcotic drugs. The Louisiana measure,adopted the following year, provided severe prison sentenceswithout parole, probation, or suspension for the illegal sale,possession, or administration of a narcotic drug. The sentencesranged from a five-year minimum to a 99-year maximum (FederalBureau of Narcotics, 1951: 8). Underlying the inclusion of marihuana in the scheme ofincreased penalties was the progression theory. In the Boggshearings many witnesses testified to the link between marihuanause and ultimate heroin addiction. Commissioner Anslinger, forexample, testified: The danger is this: Over 50 percent of these young addictsstarted on marihuana smoking. They started there and graduated toheroin; they took the needle when the thrill of marihuana wasgone (Boggs Act Hearings, 1951: 206). Representative Boggs himself summed up the stepping-stonethesis in House floor debate: Our younger people usually start on the road which leads todrug addiction by smoking marihuana. They then graduate intonarcotic drugs-cocaine, morphine, and heroin. When these youngerpersons become addicted to the drugs, heroin, for example, whichcosts from $8 to $15 per day, they very often must embark oncareers of crime ... and prostitution ... in order to buy thesupply which they need (Congressional Record, 1951:8197-8198). The stepping-stone theory thus supplanted the older hypotheseswhich had linked marihuana to addiction, insanity and violentcrime. In a paper filed as an exhibit to the hearings on the BoggsAct, Dr. Harris Isbell, Director of Research at the Public HealthService Hospital in Lexington, Kentucky, stated that marihuanawas not physically addictive, although he paid lip service to thepsychological dependence hypothesis (Boggs Act Hearings, 1951:147-148). Acknowledging the possibility of "temporarypsychosis" in "predisposed individuals," Isbellotherwise disputed the crime and insanity thesis. Before theKefauver Committee in the Senate he testified that: [M]arihuana smokers generally are mildly intoxicated,giggle, laugh, bother no one, and have a good time. They do notstagger or fall, and ordinarily will not attempt to harm anyone. It has not been proved that smoking marihuana leads tocrimes of violence or to crimes of a sexual nature. Smokingmarihuana has no unpleasant after-effects, no dependence isdeveloped on the drug, and the practice can easily be stopped atany time. In fact, it is probably easier to stop smokingmarihuana cigarettes than tobacco cigarettes (KefauverCommittee Hearings, 1951: 119). Some observers felt that the narcotics problem had disappearedalmost entirely from the national scene after the Boggs Act waspassed. Nevertheless, state and federal law enforcementauthorities, armed with data suggesting that the strengthening ofthe drug laws had at least halted the increase in drug use,pressed for further increases in penalties in order to root outthe drug menace entirely (Federal Bureau of Narcotics. 1956: 28).Without extended debate or widened public interest, Congresspassed the Narcotic Control Drug Act in 1956 (Daniel CommitteeHearings, 1955: 57). There was less attention paid to marihuana duringCongressional debate in 1956 than had been the case in 1951. But,the established precedent of classifying marihuana with hardnarcotics continued and resulted in a proliferation of marihuanaoffenses and a, further increase in penalties based on the theorythat the end of the American narcotics experience could therebybe assured. However, efficacy of still higher penalties was not uniformlyaccepted among law enforcement officials; the Deputy Commissionerof the FBN suggested that more severe penalties might press grandjuries not to indict and the petty juries not to convict in drugcases. Others rejected this view and felt strongly that moresevere penalties were imperative if society was to be rid of itspresent peddlers and if new entrants into the narcotics businesswere to be deterred (Good, July 31, 1954). Among congressmen considering the Bill, there was no dissentfrom the proposition that harsher penalties were the means toeliminate the illicit use and sale of all drugs (CongressionalRecord. 1956: 10689). In addition to facilitating enforcement of narcotics lawsthrough a number of ancillary provisions, the Narcotics ControlAct of 1956 established the following penalties: Possession Minimum sentence First offense 2 years Second offense 5 years Third and subsequent offense 10 years Fine $20,000 Sale Minimum sentence First offense 5 years Second offense 10 years Sale to minor by adult 10 years Parole or probation were made unavailable to all except firstoffenders in the possession category (26 TTSC, 1964). The Act also created a new offense by prohibiting illegalimportation of marihuana. Simple possession was by statutesufficient to convict the possessor of knowingly receivingillegally imported marihuana (21 USC, 1964). Few legislators recognized that marihuana was in any waydifferent from the physically addictive narcotics. The HouseSubcommittee on Narcotics, which produced what became theessentials of the 1956 Act, had inserted a footnote to the majorheading "Narcotics" which stated in fine print that theterm narcotics included marihuana (U.S. Code Cong. and Ad. News,1956: 3294). Only once during the Congressional debates on theHouse and Senate versions of the Bill was the subject ofmarihuana as a separate substance even raised. Moreover, in a statement reflecting the general acceptance ofthe stepping-stone concept, Senator Daniel, Chairman of theSenate Subcommittee that investigated the drug problem, describedmarihuana: That is a drug which starts most addicts In the use ofdrugs, Marihuana, in itself a dangerous drug, can lead to some ofthe worst crimes committed by those who are addicted to thehabit. Evidently, its use leads to the heroin habit and then tothe final destruction of the persons addicted (U.S. CodeCong. & Ad. News, 1956: 3294). By the fifties, marihuana had been fully integrated into thenarcotics legislation of every state in the Union and of thenational government. Possession of the drug, even for one's ownuse, was a felony everywhere, and the user was subject to longperiods of incarceration as punishment for his indulgence. 1960-1970: NEW LEGISLATIVE APPROACH From the mid-fifties to the mid-sixties, federal activity inmarihuana and narcotic law enforcement was relatively stable. Thenumber of offenders apprehended and convicted in both areasremained constant (U.S. Courts, 1956-1964). However, in the early and mid-sixties a new phenomenon wasoccurring. Drug abuse began to spread. It no longer confineditself to the ghettos and certain socioeconomic and ethnicgroups; the new users were the sons and daughters of the middleclass. It began striking home at the average American and becamea national, major issue of concern (Rosevear, 1967: 117-131; U.S.Bureau of Narcotics, 1966: 40). The new middle class use of marihuana induced significantmedical inquiry into the nature of the drug and spurred a newlegislative approach. One commentator stated: Nobody cared when it was a ghetto problem. Marihuana-well,it was used by jazz musicians or the lower class, so you didn'tcare if they got 2 to 20 years. But when a nice, middle-classgirl or boy in college gets busted for the same thing, then thewhole community sits up and takes notice. And that's the name ofthe game today. The problem has begun to come home to roost-inall strata of society, in suburbia, in middle-class homes, in thecolleges. Suddenly, the punitive, vindictive approach wastouching all classes of society. And now the most exciting thingthat's really happening is the change in attitude by the people.Now we have a willingness to examine the problem as to whetherit's an experimentation, or an illness rather than 'an evil' (NewYork Times, Feb. 5, 1970: 14). Congress initially acted by passage of the Drug Abuse ControlAmendments of 1965 (Public Law 89-74,1965). This legislationestablished a Bureau of Drug Abuse Control within the Food andDrug Administration and created criminal, misdemeanor penaltiesfor the illegal manufacture and sale of depressant and stimulantdrugs and hallucinogens. The dramatic increase in the use of marihuana and other drugsduring the latter 1960's was a matter of high public visibility.In response, President Johnson offered Reorganization Plan No. 1of 1968 (H. Doe. No. 249,1968). This reorganization was effectiveon April 8, 1968 and placed the Federal Bureau of Narcotics (ofTreasury) and the Bureau of Drug Abuse Control (of FDA) in theDepartment of Justice and designated it the Bureau of Narcoticsand Dangerous Drugs. What had been obvious with the passage of the 1965 DrugAmendments became glaring with this reorganization, that is, thetremendous disparity in penalties for violations involvingdangerous drugs as opposed to narcotics and marihuana. As aresult of increased medical and scientific inquiry, LSD andseveral other drugs 'were acknowledged as being more powerfulhallucinogens than marihuana. To compound the disparity, tetrahydrocannabinol (THC), themajor active ingredient in marihuana, was placed under controlswhereby someone in unauthorized possession of THC was subject tono penalty, but someone in possession of marihuana was subject toa minimum mandatory penalty of two years imprisonment (FederalRegister, 1968: 14880). Congress then changed the possessionpenalty, tinder the Drug Abuse Control Amendments, to amisdemeanor and increased the penalties for sale or manufactureof LSD and the other controlled drugs to up to five years (PublicLaw 90-639, 1968). Nevertheless, a great disparity regarding penalties for thesesubstances still existed. The atmosphere for change was ripe.Adding pressure to the situation was the criminalization ofincreasing numbers of young persons whose sole crime waspossession of marihuana for their own use. In late 1968, the newly formed Bureau of Narcotics andDangerous Drugs drafted legislation which would nationalizecontrol of the drugs under the Bureau's jurisdiction. Theproposed law vested on the commerce clause rather than on thetaxing powers. The change in authority was prophetic because the Learydecision, which was handed down by the Supreme Court on May 19,1969, held that the order form procedure necessary to meet therequirements of the Marihuana Tax Laws, forced an individual toincriminate himself in violation of the Fifth Amendment (Leary v.U.S., 1969). Ostensibly, this decision left BNDD with nomarihuana possession law and was another factor in evidence ofthe need for a revision of the law. This new bill , H.R. 13742, covered the regulation of narcoticdrugs, "dangerous drugs" and marihuana. It wastransmitted by President Nixon on July 14, 1969. Emerging from this legislation was an overall balanced schemeof criminal penalties. Minimum mandatory offenses wereessentially abolished and the offense of possession of acontrolled substance for one's own use was made a misdemeanor.Further, in first-offense, simple possession cases, the court wasgiven the discretion to place a defendant on probation, for up toone year. If, at the end of the probation period, the defendantbad not violated any of the conditions of the probation, hisconviction could be expunged. The same misdemeanor penalty and opportunity for firstoffender treatment was provided for the distribution of a smallamount of marihuana for either: (1) no remuneration; or (2) thecost of the drug. This provision was included in recognition of the large numberof such transactions which take place among youth and inrecognition of a phenomenon which surfaced as a substantialchallenge to the traditional picture of the national marihuanatrade. Legislators had formerly stereotyped the"seller" as the vicious criminal pushing his wares forhigh profit and felt that extraordinarily harsh penalties werejustified for sellers (Narcotics Legislation Hearings, 1969: 4). But several studies showed that the structure of marihuanatraffic bore little or no relation to the traditional stereotype.One survey of 204 users found that 44% had sold to friends atleast once. Many casual users sold to leave themselves enoughprofit to cover the amount of their own use (Goode, 1969: 7).Under the new Act, they would not be punished as distributors. The new legislation also made a distinction between marihuanaand narcotic drugs. Marihuana was placed in a category withhallucinogenic drugs and their difference from narcotics wasemphasized by the difference in penalties as follows: Maximum sentences Marihuana and other non-narcotic controlled substances Narcotics lst offense 2nd offense lst offense 2nd offense Simple possession:* Years 1 2 1 2 Dollars 5,000 10,000 5,000 10,000 Unlawful distribution, possession with intent to distribute, manufacture, importation or exportation: Years 5 10 15 30 Dollars 15,000 30,000 25,000 50,000 * Distribution of small amounts of marihuana for noremuneration is treated the same as simple possession. The bill was passed by Congress (and signed into law byPresident Nixon) on October 27, 1970, as the Comprehensive DrugAbuse Prevention and Control Act of 1970. In conjunction with this new federal law, a uniform state actwas drafted by the National Conference of Commissioners onUniform State Laws and approved by them as the Uniform ControlledSubstances Act at their annual conference August 1-7, 1970. The following statement in the preface of the Act explains itspurpose: This Uniform Act was drafted to achieve uniformity between thelaws of the several states and those of the Federal Government.it has been designed to complement the new federal narcotic anddangerous drug legislation and Provide and interlocking trellisof Federal and state law to enable government at all levels tocontrol more effectively the drug abuse problem. The Uniform Act does not recommend penalties except withrespect to possession for one's own use. For such offenses, theConference recommended that it be treated as a misdemeanor. To date, 26 states and three territories have adopted the Actin its entirety or in a varied form. Currently, 10 to 15 statesare considering it. The most recent chapter in the legal history of marihuanaappears in other pages of this Appendix. The appointment of theNational Commission on Marihuana and Drug Abuse and the issuanceof its Report are themselves significant events from anhistorical point of view. References Act of June 14,1930, Ch. 488,46 Stat. 585. Act to Create a Bureau of Customs and a Bureau of Prohibitionin the Department of the Treasury, Ch. 348, 44 Stat. 1381 (1927). Anslinger, H. J., letter to Dr. Woodward (July 28,1930). "The Reason for Uniform State Narcotic Legislation,"Georgetown Law Journal, 21: 52 (1932). letter to Judge Deering (August 1, 1932). letter to Reverend John J. Burke (March 1, 1935). letter toMiss Agnes Regan, Executive Secretary of the National Council ofCatholic Women (March 28, 1935). letter to Mrs. Roberta Lawson, President of General Federation ofWomen's Clubs (January 13, 1936). letter to Frank Allen of the Cleveland Plain Dealer (October 22,1936). letter to F. J. Reynolds, Director, Readers Research Bureau, P.F. Collier and Son Corporation (December 23,1936). letter to Williams (April 11, 1938). and Cooper, C. R.: "Marihuana: Assassin of Youth,"American Magazine, 18-19 (July, 1937). and Tompkins, W.: The Traffic in Narcotics, New York: Funk andWagnalls Co. (1953), P. 159. Austin Texas Statesman (Austin, Texas), June, 1923. Baskette, Floyd K., letter to Federal Bureau of Narcotics(September 4,1936). Birmingham Age-Herald (Birmingham, Alabama), August 22, 1935. Boggs Act, Chapter 666, 65 Stat. 767 (November 2, 1951). Boggs Act Hearings, "Hearings on H.R. 3490 before theSubcommittee on Narcotics of the House Committee on Ways andMeans," 82nd Cong., 1st Sess., 147-148 (1951). Bromberg, Walter, "Marihuana Intoxication: A ClinicalStudy of Cannabis Sativa. Intoxication," American Journal ofPsychiatry (91) 1934. Chicago Examiner (Chicago, Illinois), June 19, 1929. June22,1929. Chicago Tribune (Chicago, Illinois), June 3, 1929. July 1,1929. October 17,1929. Colorado, "Colorado Laws." Chapter 95, 309 (1927). Congressional Record, 75th Cong., 1st Sess., 5575, 5689-5692(1937). 82nd Cong., 1st Sess., 8197-8198, 8207, 8211 (1951). 102:10689 (1956). Daniel Committee Hearings, "Hearings on Illicit NarcoticsTraffic Before the Subcommittee on Improvements In the FederalCriminal Code of the Senate Committee on the Judiciary,"84th Cong., 1st Sess., 57 (1955). Dowling, Dr., letter to Acting Surgeon General Periz (December3, 1920). Federal Bureau of Narcotics,: "The Need for UniformNarcotic Drug Act-White Paper" (July, 1933). : "Traffic in Opium and Other Dangerous Drugs," 59(1937). "Traffic in Opium," 6 (1950). 8 (1951). 28 (1956). Federal Register, 33: 14880 (October 4, 1968). Gomila, F. R. and Lambow, M.C.: Marihuana: America's New DrugProblems, Philadelphia: Lippincott (1938), pp. 29-31. Good, 0. S., letter to H. J. Anslinger (July 31, 1954). Goode,E.: "The Marihuana Market,": Colum. P., 12: 7 (Winter,1969). 1925 Handbook of the National Conference of Commissioners onUniform State Laws and Proceedings, pp. 977-985 (1925). 1928 pp. 75-78. 323-3-33 (1928). 1929 pp. 43, 332--340 (1929). 1930 pp. 97, 126-427, 485 (1930). 1931 pp. 127-128, 390-402 (1931). 1932 P. 107 (1932). House Document No. 249, Transmitted to 90th Cong., 1st Sess.(February, 1968). House Report No. 91-1444 (Part 1) 91st Cong., 2d Sess.(September 10, 1970). Idaho, "Idaho State Laws," p. 98 (1927). Jones, letter in U.S. Surgeon General's files to R. P. Smith(August 21, 1920). Kefauver Committee Hearings, "Hearings Before the SpecialSenate Committee to Investigate Organized Crime in InterstateCommerce," 82d Cong., Ist Sess., pt. 14, exhibit 1,119,240-241, 430-431 (1951). King: "The Narcotic Bureau and the Harrison Act,"Yale Law Journal, 62: 736, 737-739 (1953). Leary v. United States, 395 U.S., 6, 89 S. Ct. 1532 (1969). Lindesmith, A. R.: The Addict and the Law, Bloomington:Indiana University Press (1967), pp, 135-161. Los Angeles Daily News (Los Angeles, California), June 18,1951. Montana, "Montana Laws," Chapter 6, p. 5 (1929). Montana Standard (Butte-Anaconda, Montana), January 22, 1929,p. 3, col. 6. Narcotics Legislation Hearings, "Hearings Before theSubcommittee to Investigate Juvenile Delinquency of the SenateCommittee on the Judiciary," 91st Cong., 1st Sess., 267, 4(1969). New Mexico, "New Mexico Laws," Chapter 42, Sections1-2, pp. 58-59 (1923). New Orleans Statesman (New Orleans, Louisiana), May 28, 1954. New Orleans Times-Picayune (New Orleans, Louisiana), May28,1954. New York, "New York Laws," Chapter 363, p. 1695(1927). New York City Mayor's Committee on Marihuana: TheMarihuana Problem in the City of New York, Lancaster: JacquesCattell. Press (1945), p. 12. New York State Senate: "Joint Legislative Committee toInvestigate the Laws In Relation to the Distribution and Sale ofNarcotic Drugs," Final Report, Doe. No. 35 (1918), as quotedby Terry & Pellens, The Opium Problem (1928), p. 834. New York Times (New York, New York), July 30, 1914, pp. 6,8,col. 12. January 11, 1923, p. 24, col. 1. September 16,1934, p. 6, col. 3. June 19,1951, p. 25, col, 1. February 5,1970, p. 14. Nutt, Colonel L. C., Deputy Commissioner, Bureau ofProhibition, letter to Walter Clephane, Chairman, Section onSocial Welfare, Conference of Commissioners on Uniform State Laws(June 13, 1929). Paul, A. E., Memorandum from Chief, Chicago Station, Food, Drug and Insecticide Administration, U.S. Department ofAgriculture, to Chief, Central District, pp. 1, 4 (June 27,1929). Public Law 89-74, H.R. 2 (July 15, 1965). Public Law 90-639, H.R. 14096 (October 24, 1968). "Report of Preliminary Conference on Fifth Tentative.Draft of the Uniform State Narcotic Law," pp. 9-10, 23(September, 1932). Rocky Mountain News (Denver, Colorado), September 27, 1931. Rosevear, J.: Pot: A Handbook of Marihuana, New Hyde Park:University Book (1967), pp. 117-131. San Antonio Light (San Antonio, Texas), May 4, 1931,editorial. Santa Fe New Mexican (Santa Fe, New Mexico), January 31, 1923. Saratogian (Saratoga, New York), September 9, 1936, P. 5. Schaller, Michael: "The Federal Prohibition ofMarihuana," Journal of Social History, 4: pp. 61-78 (1970).Schmeckebler: "The Bureau of Prohibition," in BrookingsInstitute for Government Research Service Monograph (57) :143(1929). Siler, J. S., et al., "Marihuana Smoking in Panama,"Military Surgeon, 73: 269-280 (1933). Tennyson, A. L.: "Consideration of a Uniform StateNarcotic Law by the National Conference of Commissioners ofUniform State Laws at Atlantic City, New Jersey, September 9-12,1931," memorandum for file dated September 16,1931. _: "Uniform State Narcotic Law," Federal BureauAssociation Journal 1: 55 (1932). Terry, C. and Pellens, M.: The Opium Problem (1928), p. 834. Texas, "General Laws," Chapter 150, p. 278 (1919). Texas, "Special Session Laws," Chapter 61, pp.156-157 (1923). U.S. Bureau of Immigration: "Commissioner General ofImmigration Annual Report" (1915-1930). U.S. Bureau of Narcotics: "Traffic in Opium," 2: 40(1966). 21 U.S. -Code, 174 (1964). 26 U.S. Code, 4741-4776, 7237 (1964). U.S. Code Cong. and Ad. News, 3294 (1956). U.S. Congress, "Hearings Before the House Committee onWays and Means on H.R. 6385," 75th Cong., 1st Sess.,Washington (1937), 6, 30, 32-37, 59-65, 67-86, 92, 93-95, 97,121. -, "Hearings Before the Senate Finance Committee on H.R.6906," 75th Cong., 1st Sess., Washington (1937), 16, 33-34. "Report of the Committee on Ways and Means on H.R.6385," 75th Cong., Ist Sess., Washington (1937), 1-2. U.S. Courts, "Disposition of Defendants Charged with theViolation of Narcotic Drug Laws," Administrative Office,Division of Information Systems (1956-1964). Washington Post(Washington, D.C.), September 29,1934. White, Dr. William, letter to Surgeon General Treadway (August3, 1932). Women',, Christian Temperance Union: Marihuana, Evanston: WCTUPublishing House (1928), pp. 1, 3. "Union Signal" (Evanston, Illinois), 1936, p. 285. January 30, 1937, pp. 36, 75. (yearly bound volumes). Wood, Will S., letter to Mrs. Roberta Lawson, President ofGeneral Federation of Women's Clubs (January 13, 1936). Woodward, William, letter to Dr. S. L. Hilton (August 6,1932). World Narcotic Defense Association, letter to legislators(February,1937). CliffSchaffer's Home Page Contents | Feedback | Search DRCNet Library | Schaffer Library | Major Studies Marihuana, A Signal of Misunderstanding WT01-B25-5IA087-000632-B016-140http://206.61.184.43:80/schaffer/Library/studies/nc/nc2a.htm 206.61.184.43 19970122091538 text/html 90671HTTP/1.0 200 OKDate: Wednesday, 22-Jan-97 09:15:24 GMTServer: WebSitePro/1.1f (S/N wpo-0deb)Allow-ranges: bytesContent-type: text/htmlLast-modified: Saturday, 28-Dec-96 06:56:26 GMTContent-length: 90453 History of Alcohol Prohibition Contents | Feedback | Search DRCNet Library | Schaffer Library | Major Studies Marihuana, A Signal of Misunderstanding National Commission on Marihuana and Drug Abuse History of Alcohol Prohibition* *This section is based in large part on a paper preparedfor the Commission by Jane Lang McGrew, an attorney fromWashington, D.C. In 1920, the national policy of Prohibition began. The 18thAmendment to the Constitution had been officially ratified: It sought, by law, to make the whole Nation into enforcedteetotalers and to put an end to all evils associated withdrinking. It sought to eradicate a taste deeply rooted in thehabits and customs of a large part of the population throughoutlawing the business that ministered to its satisfaction(Hu, 1950: 48). 1650-1750: THE FIRST HUNDRED YEARS In fact, it started earlier. "Ministers shall not givethemselves to excess in drinkinge, or riott, or spending theirtyme idellye day or night," ruled the Virginia ColonialAssembly in 1629 (Cherrington, 1920:16). Massachusetts ordered that no person shall remain in anytavern "longer than necessary occasions" in 1637, whilePlymouth Colony in 1633 prohibited the sale of spirits "morethan 2 pence worth to anyone but strangers just arrived"(Cherrington, 1920: 18). This sampling of the earliest colonial laws is representativeof the attempt, continued since those times, to control excessiveconsumption. Excessive drinking, it was considered, producedbehavior unseemly in some, such as ministers, and dangerous inothers, such as Indians. But drinking per se was not frowned upon. Indeed, when thePuritans set sail to Massachusetts, they had taken care to carrywith them 42 tons of beer (in contrast with 14 tons of water) and10,000 gallons of wine (Lee, 1963: 15). The regulation of liquor consumption was a matter ofconsiderable concern in certain colonies. Thus, for a time,Massachusetts went so far as to prohibit the drinking of healthsin 1638 (Lee, 1963: 19). The law was soon abandoned for reasonsobvious, albeit unrecorded. It rapidly became clear, however,that liquor laws could do more and perhaps better, than controlconsumption: they could provide a source of revenue. By the turnof the 18th century, the regulatory impulse was concentrated onfines, excise taxes and license fees. Fines were imposed for drunken behavior, unlawful sales to adrunken tippler or to Indians, and for selling without a license.Court records indicate that these laws were enforced withreasonable regularity (Krout 1967: 29-30). Licenses often carriedtheir own fees, and excise taxes were levied upon distilledspirits as well as beer and fermented drink in many cases. Until the 18th century, however, there was no attempt toprohibit the manufacture, importation, sale, or consumption ofalcoholic beverages. Quite the contrary, at least oneindividual-in some cases a reluctant individual-was required inmany towns to run the local inn or public house for visitors andtravelers. Although colonial statutes made it clear that tipplers andidlers were unwelcome, the diary of a colonial traveler, SarahKemble Knight, suggests that such laws were unsuccessful incontaining the ribaldry which took place in many such houses.Madam Knight complained: I could get no sleep, because of the Clamor of some of theTown Tope-ers in the next room.... I heartily fretted &wish't 'am tongue tyed.... They kept calling for Tother Gill, Wchwhile they were swallowing, was some Intermission, But presently,like Oyle to fire, encreased the flame (Miller, Johnson,eds., 1963: 430-431). Persons other than Madam Knight were to become more outspokenabout their concern for the use of spirits. The, most significantpremonition was the Colony of Georgia's action in 1735 when thefirst prohibitory statute against the importation of "ardentspirits" was enacted. At the same time, however, theconsumption of beer was encouraged (Grant, 1932: 1). The time fortemperance had not yet arrived. 1750-1825: TEMPERANCE STIRRINGS As the evils of intemperance began to attract the attention ofthe ministry, John Wesley denounced the sin of distilling -anddeclared for its Prohibition in 1773 (Cherrington, 1920: 37-38). On his heels came the publication of a pamphlet entitled"The Mighty Destroyer Displayed and Some Account of theDreadful Havoc Made by the Mistaken Use, As Well As the Abuse, ofDistilled Spiritous Liquors," by Anthony Benezet, a memberof the Society of Friends, advising against the use of any drink"which is liable to steal away a man's senses and render himfoolish, irrascible, uncontrollable, and dangerous"(Cherrington, 1920: 38). Nevertheless, typical of the century's ambivalence, the firstmaster at Harvard was fired when it was found that Harvardstudents had been left "wanting beer betwixt brewings a weekand a week and a half together" (Lee, 1963: 16). Concern for the effect of liquor upon the public weal wasexpressed by John Adams who noted in his diary on February 29,1760, that the taverns were "becoming the eternal haunt ofloose, disorderly people . . ." (Cherrington, 1920: 37).Worst of all he continued: ... These houses are become the nurseries of ourlegislators. An artful man, who has neither sense nor sentiments,may, by gaining a little sway among the rabble of the town,multiply taverns and dram shops and thereby secure the votes oftaverner and retailer and of all; and the multiplication oftaverns will make many, who may be induced to flip and rum, tovote for any man whatever (Dobyns, 1940: 215). The health argument in behalf of temperance was first made byNathaniel Ames, in the 1752 edition of his Almanack, who wrotethat Strong Waters were formerly used only by the Direction ofPhysicians; but now Mechanicks and low-li'd Labourers drink Rumlike Fountain-Water, and they can infinitely better endure itthan the idle. unactive and sedentary Part of Mankind, but DEATHis in the bottom of the cup of every one (Lee, 1963: 22). Dr. Benjamin Rush shared his concern, publishing in 1785 hisnow famous "Inquiry into the Effects of Ardent Spirits Uponthe Human Body and Mind." Enumerating the diseases of thebody and mind which plague the drinker of distilled liquors, Dr.Rush outlined the symptoms, including "unusual garrulity,unusual silence, captiousness ... an insipid simpering ...profane swearing ... certain immodest actions" and"certain extravagant acts which indicate a temporary fit ofmadness" (Rush, 1943: 323, 325-326). Although the rumblings of the temperance movement were thusperceptible in the late 18th century, there is no evidence thatits effects were felt. In 1766, it is recorded that the repeal ofthe Stamp Act was greeted in Providence, Rhode Island with"32 of the most loyal, patriotic and constitutionaltoasts" (Lee, 1963: 18). Notwithstanding this evidence ofdevotion to His Majesty. it was often thereafter the tavern whichprovided the meeting places for the most defiant revolutionaries. Subsequently, when the colonial period disappeared into thepost-Revolutionary era, Alexander Hamilton adopted the ideaearlier effected by the individual colonies, to tax distilledliquors for revenue purposes. In 1791 , the tax was enacted aspart of the Revenue Act. The following year, the Second Congressof the United States added license fees for distilleries andtaxes on liquors distilled from imported materials. Incensed by this federal action, farmers in WesternPennsylvania mobbed revenue collectors and armed to resist thisintrusion by the new Federal Government. It required 15,000militia to bring the so-called Whiskey Rebellion to an end(Peterson, 1969: 119-120). Such was the first indication that theliquor industry in the United States would be a force with whichthe government would have to reckon. Toward the end of the 18th century, a temperance movement, assuch, became discernible. The Methodist Church took a staunchposition against the sale or imbibing of ardent spirits"unless in cases of extreme necessity." Five yearslater, in 1789, even the exception was excised (Cherrington,1920: 50). A similar platform was adopted by the PresbyterianSynod of Pennsylvania and by the Yearly Meeting of Friends of NewEngland (Cherrington, 1920: 51, 58). On a non-clerical level, the movement began to organize.Although there is some dispute as to the identity of the originaltemperance society, it appears that as early as 1778, there wasan organization calling itself the Free African Society whichexcluded men of drinking habits, followed soon thereafter by theOrganization of Brethren, and the Litchfield, ConnecticutAssociation of "the most respectable farmers" inConnecticut determined to discourage the use of spirits(Cherrington, 1920: 49, 58). The turn of the century saw the vitalization of the temperancespirit. Religious leaders, including Cotton Mather, Dr. LymanBeecher, John Wesley and Reverend Andrew Elliott inveighedagainst the consumption of liquors. Temperance activity figuredprominently in the concerns of the Presbyterian, Methodist,Universalist, Baptist, and Friends churches. "Had. the temperance reform in America awaited for anon-church or a non-Christian leadership," theorizes onehistorian, ... the temperance revolution of the past century would yetremain to be accomplished.... Every successful temperancemovement of the last century has been merely the instrument-themachinery and equipment through which the fundamental principlesof the Christian religion have expressed themselves in terms oflife and action (Cherrington, 1920:92). Whatever the Christian input , however, it is also apparentthat a desire to reform was aroused in the country, very muchlike that which was to be experienced a century later during theProgressive Movement. Thus, Massachusetts Society for theSuppression of Intemperance of 1813, damned not only rum, but allof the "kindred vices, profaneness and gambling" andbeseeched members to "discourage... by ... example andinfluence, every kind of..... immorality" (Lee, 1963: 23).Mingling with the potential temperance leaders during this periodwere the future spokesmen of abolitionism, feminism, andutopianism. In the meantime, the industry was able to report triumphantlythat the federal taxes on distilling and importing spirits wererepealed in 1802. From 1813 until 1817, the retailers' anddistillers' licenses bore a federal tax, but beginning in 1818the industry enjoyed a tax-free era which was to last until 1862.Thomas Jefferson rejoiced-"as a moralist"-explainingthat: It is an error to view a tax on that liquor as merely a taxon the rich. It is a prohibition of its use in the middling classof our citizens, and a condemnation of them to the poison ofwhisky, which is desolating their houses. No nation is drunkenwhere wine is cheap; and none sober, where the only antidote isthe bane of whisky (Peterson, 1969: 122-123). Future prohibitionists would likewise castigate the governmentfor drawing its revenues from the liquor industry andparticipating in the profits of evil thereby. 1825-1870: THE PLEDGE Temperance was not always equated with teetotalism. Beer andusually wine were initially exempt from denunciation in bothsermons and treatises. There developed in the mid-19th century,however, the conviction that all brews, be they "ardentspirits," beer, ale, or wine, were anathema. The, new temper of the movement was epitomized by the travelsof Father Theobald Matthew of Ireland who toured the UnitedStates from 1849 to 1851, administering the pledge of totalabstinence to some 600,000 persons in 25 states. A White Housedinner and a Senate reception stamped official approval upon hissojourns (Furnas, 1968: 80). Thus did temperance drift into a newphase, with its ardent spokesman, Congressman Gerrit Smith,crying that: I would that no person were able to drink intoxicatingliquors without immediately becoming a drunkard. For, who, thenwould . . . drink the poison that always kills, or jump into thefire that always burns? (Furnas, 1968: 15). It was in this atmosphere that the first prohibitionexperiments were undertaken on a statewide basis. "Until theliquor traffic is abolished . . . all efforts at moral reformmust languish," judged one of the earliest prohibitionists. In "Grappling with the Monster," T. S. Arthurstated, "The CURSE is upon us, and there is but one CURE:Total Abstinence, by the help of God, for the Individual, andProhibition for the State" (Furnas, 1968: 15). In 1847, the first such cure was enacted for the state ofMaine (Cherrington, 1920: 134). (Actually, the first Prohibitionlaw went into effect in 1843 in the territory of Oregon. This wasrepealed five years later.) A wave of prohibition statutes followed. Delaware, on theheels of Maine, passed its first prohibition law only to have itdeclared unconstitutional the following year. Similar laws wereenacted in Ohio, Illinois, Rhode Island, Minnesota,Massachusetts, Connecticut, Pennsylvania and New York during thenext few years. They met with varying fates, including veto bythe governors, repeal by the legislatures and invalidation by thestate supreme courts. The evaluations by several historians of these early trialswere to he heard again in the 20th century: the enactments lackedsupport from a large portion of the population, makingenforcement exceedingly difficult. Ultimately, all but one of thestates repealed the prohibition statutes of the 19th century(Grant, 1932: 5; Peterson, 1969: 123). Notwithstanding this record, prohibitionists took heart."This thing is of God," cried Lyman Beecher from thepulpit. "That glorious Maine law was a square and grand blowright between the horns of the Devil" (Furnas, 1968: 167).Temperance societies, established in all but three states by 1832and destined to proliferate, began to consolidate as well. The American Temperance Society, later to become the AmericanTemperance Union, was organized in 1826. It quickly begatauxiliaries, so that by 1835, 8,000 locals existed (Cherrington,1920: 92-93). As the years passed, they witnessed the founding of moretemperance, organizations of a general and national characterthan during any other period in the United States' history. TheWashingtonian movement, organized in the City of Baltimore in1840, was followed by the Martha Washington movement in 1841. The Sons of Temperance came into existence in 1842, at, thesame time the Order of Rechabites was organized, and theCongressional Temperance Society of 1833 was revived on the basisof total abstinence. They took heart at their early state,successes and fought against the defeats of repeal. In the meantime, however, the United States government, whichhad heaped honors upon Father Matthew, concluded a treaty withKing Kamehameha III of Hawaii in 1850 permitting the introductionand sale of liquor on his island. As further evidence of the national dichotomy, Chicagoans inthe 1850's fought virulently against the enforcement of Sundayclosing laws. To protest, an armed mob burst into the businessdistrict of the city, to be met by police. Fortunately, the mobwas dispersed before the mayor found it necessary to use thecannon he had hurriedly planted around City Hall (Peterson, 1969:120). It was the time when patent medicines, 40 proof and more,began to develop their clientele. And although the Demon Rummight threaten their health and life, Lydia Pinkham's Compoundoffered a cure for any and all ails and aches. By the time of the Civil War, both the assimilative andcoercive traditions of the temperance movement had crystallized:that is, temperance proponents were determined to save the weakand to destroy the recalcitrant (Gusfield, 1963: 69-70). Thehardening of positions was accompanied by the development ofpolitical consciousness in the movement and recognition ofpolitical objectives. These processes were only temporarilyblunted by the Civil War in the 1860's and the diversion ofinterest to the abolitionist cause. Part of the heritage of the Civil War was the tax on liquorand beer imposed in 1862. Rates were increased several timesbetween 1863 and 1868, so that the tax imposed at the rate of 20cents per gallon rose to $2 per gallon. An interesting phenomenon was noted by the Federal Government:as the rates increased, the revenue did not. In fact, the numberof gallons reported actually declined. As the decade went on,attempts were made to enforce the tax laws and in 1868, $25,000was actually appropriated to detect violators. Fraud continuedalmost unabated. Stockpiling of liquor was popular to hedgeagainst future, increases, for they were not applicable to liquoron hand. The infamous Whiskey Ring was active in these days and was notfinally broken up until 1875, when, in a peak of nerve, membersestablished a corruption fund in the District of Columbia to haltthe prosecution of 321 persons charged with violations of therevenue laws. Before then, however, Congress apparently hadsecond thoughts about the implications of the revenue collectionsand reduced the tax from the high of $2 per gallon to 50 cents in1869. The happy result was to see a rise in collections from$13.5 million in 1868, to $45 million in 1869, and $55 millionthe following year. Taking further precautions, the governmentstipulated that new stamps be developed to precludecounterfeiting and tampering (History of the Alcohol 14-20;Cherrington, 1920: 156162). Congress did not escape unscathed by criticism and reaction.It came from both sides of the temperance issue. Temperanceadvocates such as Senator Wilson of Massachusetts and SenatorPomeroy of Kansas decried the fact that federal revenues would bedrawn from the liquor industry. At the same, time, however, the industry revolted, leading tomass tax evasion schemes and devices and the organization oftheir first industry lobby, the United States BrewersAssociation. The Association rapidly launched a, legislativecampaign and succeeded in 1863 in reducing the tax rate of beerfrom $1 to 60 cents (Cherrington, 1920:157). By 1870, the Civil War dust had cleared and the temperancebattle lines were drawn, already tested by the skirmishes of the1840's and 1850's. The most interesting feature of their warstrategy was soon to become apparent: women and children werewelcomed at the battlements. 1870-1913: TOWARD A NATIONAL CONSCIENCE A series of "isms" was aroused in this era:feminism, unionism, socialism, and progressivism. Prohibitionabsorbed elements of them all, and vice versa. The feminist movement originated early in the 1800's. Untilthe 1870's, however, feminine involvement in the temperanceeffort was largely peripheral. The Women's Crusade of 1873 andthe organization of the Women's Christian Temperance Union in1874 marked the formal entrance of women into the temperancemovement. The WCTU was devotedly headed by Frances E. Willard, a ladyequally committed to the principle of equality of the sexes.Temperance was to bridge the gap, she believed: Drink and tobacco are the great separatists [sic] betweenmen and women. Once they used these things together, but woman'sevolution has carried her beyond them; man will climb to the samelevel . . . but meanwhile ... the fact that he permits himselffleshly indulgence that he would deprecate in her, makes theirplanes different, giving her an instinct of revulsion (Furnas,1968: 281). Although the WCTU was organized initially around thetemperance issue, it was not long before Miss Willard'sleadership expanded its conscience. A statement of principles was adopted in its early years: We believe in a living wage; in an 8-hour day; in courts ofconciliation and arbitration, in justice as opposed to greed ingain; in "Peace on Earth and Good Will to Men"(Gusfield, 1963: 76). Within three years of its inception, the WCTU reported thatits concerns included "a better Indian policy" and"wiser civil service reform" (Gusfield, 1963: 77).There were those in the Union who felt that their interestsshould be limited to temperance. But, forecasting the mood ofProgressivism, Miss Willard steered the organization along thebroader lines to social reform. The WCTU was responsible for part of the early campaign toeducate the public about temperance. Children were recruited tosing praises of "the true and the brave" who signed theabstinence pledge. They were assisted in this effort byMcGuffey's Readers which denounced the licensing of liquor storesand saloons: Licensed-to do thy neighbor harm, Licensed-to kindle hire and strife, Licensed-to nerve the robber's arm, Licensed-to whet the murderer's knife, Licensed-like spider for a fly, To spread thy nets for man, thy prey, To mock his struggles, crush his soul, Then cast his worthless form away (Lee, 1963: 34-35). Whiskey makes "the happy miserable" and impoverishesthe rich, the, McGuffey books concluded. And the word spread. By1902, the temperance campaign had permeated the public schoolsystems: every state but Arizona had introduced compulsorytemperance education. Their texts teemed with both facts andmisinformation such as "Alcohol sometimes causes the coatsof the blood vessels to grow thin. They are then liable at anytime to cause death by bursting." (Sinclair, 1962: 43). The WCTU was not carrying the burden of reform alone, however.In 1869, the National Prohibition Party was born. Three yearslater, the first party ticket was put forth in the presidentialcampaign of 1872, headed by John Black, who received 5,607 votesfor President. Success at the polls ultimately peaked in 1892when John Dedwell, the Prohibition presidential candidate,received a total of 270,710 votes. Thereafter, its partisansdeclined in number, having failed to break voters away from theirtraditional affiliations (Cherrington, 1920: 165-169). As a rule, the WCTU eschewed partisanship. Their objectiveswere far broader and more practical than those contemplated bythe Prohibition Party. Only once it supported the ProhibitionParty in the notorious election of 1884. The election of 1884 carried a variety of implications forfuture candidates on the temperance issue. In New York Cityalone, 1,007 primaries and conventions reportedly were held bythe various parties. Of these, over 60% took place in saloons(Peterson, 1969: 123), recalling to mind the complaint of JohnAdams a century before (Cherrington, 1920: 37; Dobyns, 1940:215). The meeting places were indicative of the fact that at thistime neither party could afford to adopt a dry plank in itsplatform, for New York would be a pivotal state in the racebetween Republican James G. Blaine and Democrat Grover Cleveland. Blaine campaigned hard, trying to overcome the defection ofseveral thousand dry Republicans to the Prohibition Party.Speaking in behalf of Blaine at a New York City rally,Presbyterian minister Samuel Burchard denounced the Democrats asthe party of "Rum, Romanism, and Rebellion." Needlessto say, the Catholic vote, as well as the wet vote, quicklyswelled the Democratic totals. Blaine, having thus alienated bothwets and drys, lost the state--and the election-by a tiny margin(Furnas, 1968: 273; Lee, 1963: 29-30). In case the lesson that temperance was an issue to be reckonedwith in national politics was lost on the parties after 1884, theevents of the decade culminating in the birth of the Anti-SaloonLeague in 1895, dramatized the point. A second wave of stateprohibition laws was experienced between 1880 and 1890. Theresults of much of the legislation during those years were lessthan satisfying to temperance advocates, however; only six statesemerged with state-wide prohibition by statute or constitutionalamendment. Numerous other states had enacted local option, whichpermitted towns to go dry if they so chose by referendum. Withoutstate or federal insulation from wet communities, however, theso-called dry towns were scarcely temperance models. In the wake of these state legislative actions, South Carolinaintroduced a state dispensary system in order to eliminate themotive of private gain from the liquor business. Politicalscandals which quickly developed tended to discredit it, however,if indeed it had enjoyed much support from any corner(Cherrington, 1920: 250-251). With this discomfiting history behind it, the Anti-SaloonLeague arose to the challenge, while Carrie Nation independentlythrust her way into the public eye. The League was to develop theart of lobbying or "pressure political" to its mostdramatic heights. Scarcely more than 10 years after organization,it was described as "the most dangerous political movementthat this country has ever known" by the National ModelLicense League, a wet (and harassed) association. A more rationalviewpoint was expressed by the president of the New York StateBrewers Association in 1913: We are not dealing with a theory which is the delusion ofthe fanatic alone, but with a real condition which is in thehands of a well organized force, led by aggressive, experienced,and untiring leaders (Odegard, 1928: 23). The focus of the League's indictments included not simplyalcohol, but the saloon itself, as the purveyor of spirits. Themyriad League publications denounced the saloon for "annuallysending thousands of our youths to destruction, for corruptingpolitics, dissipating workmen's wages, leading astray 60,000girls each year into lives of immorality and banishing childrenfrom school" (Odegard, 1928: 40-59). "Liquor is responsible for 19% of the divorces, 25% ofthe poverty, 25% of the insanity, 37% of the pauperism, 45% ofchild desertion, and 50% of the crime in this country,"the League determined. "And this," it concluded, " is a very conservative estimate" (Odegard,1928: 60). League posters appeared everywhere depicting the saloon-keeperas a profiteer who feasted on death and enslavement. Othersscreamed out the dire consequences of alcohol. "Alcoholinflames the passions, thus making the temptation to sex-sinunusually strong," advertised one (Sinclair, 1962: 51). It was the League which geared up the campaign, but it was notalone. As the Progressive spirit caught the national interest inthe early 19th century, the movement for reform embraced thecause of temperance. The temperance movement assumed an aura ofevangelism, combining the concept of America's mission with thevision of Messianism. Through the combination of temperance andprogressivism, it was believed that the Kingdom of God couldactually come to the United States. In an article in Appleton's Magazine in 1908, the ReverendCharles F. Aked articulated the aspirations of the reformers: We are spending our lives, many of us, in the effort tomake the world a little better and brighter for those that shallcome after us.... we want to open out life and liberty to all thesons of men. We want to make possible for all of life in thewhole, the good and the beautiful ... and the common sale ofintoxicating liquor renders our work a thousand times moredifficult ... (Timberlake, 1063: 34-38). Others were more mundane. Scientists began accumulatingevidence of the effect of quantities of alcohol on the nervoussystem and general physical condition. The myth that alcoholconsumption improved muscular power was exploded. Therelationship between mental psychoses and alcohol was documented,and thus did the condemnation of alcohol as a poison assumescientific support. Finally, in 1915, whiskey and brandy werediscreetly removed from the list of authoritative medicinal drugscontained in the United States Pharmacopoeia (Timberlake, 1963:47). Who were the people fueling the movement? Largely middleclass, rural, Anglo-Saxon and Protestant comprised the temperancemovement and they confronted the urban and industrial communitieshead-on. "The Anglo-Saxon stock is the best improved,hardiest and fittest.... [I]f we are to preserve this nation andthe Anglo-Saxon type we must abolish [saloons]," proclaimedone temperance publication (Gusfield, 1963: 100). Calling itself"The Protestant church in action" (Sinclair, 1962:108), the Anti-Saloon League concentrated single-mindedly andevangelically on the cause of temperance and refrained fromdabbling in other reforms (Gusfield, 1963: 108). Nevertheless, the Episcopal and Lutheran churches neveraligned themselves with the AntiSaloon League, while Jewish andCatholic groups generally opposed their objective. The convictionshared by Anti-Saloon Leaguers expressed by Reverend FrancisAscott McBride was: "The League was born of God" (Lee,1963: 35). Thus one had to be for or against the movement; therewas no half-way commitment. When the sides were lined up initially, industrialists andunion leaders alike preferred to keep God on their side. From thecompany's point of view, the saloon was often responsible forindustrial injuries and absenteeism. Some believed that thedrinking man demanded higher wages than his sober counterparts.Furthermore, union locals tended to congregate in saloon meetinghalls maintained for that purpose and, it was sometimessuspected, for the plottings of anarchistic conspirators (Furnas,1968: 310). Accordingly, it was not long before industry moved from anacquiescent position to an active role in the temperancemovement. Various methods were adopted to encourage sobriety,including lectures, literature and job preferences forteetotalers. Businessmen opined that sobriety expandedproductivity, increased bank deposits, improved collections andstimulated the retail trade (Timberlake, 1963: 67-79). At the same time, the prospect of diverting patronage of theliquor industry to other products tantalized some industries.Thus the Welch Grape Juice Company advertised: Get the Welch Habit-It's one that won't get you!(Timberlake, 1963: 77). Opinion was not unanimous, of course. Businessmen, includingbankers, whose interests were tied to the liquor industry couldill afford to be beneficent toward temperance. Others, includingthe DuPonts, Rockefellers, Kresges, and Wanamakers spent freelyto cover the League's annual campaign costs of $2.5 million(Odegard, 1928: 126). As surely as liquor was the enemy of the home, it was alsoproclaimed the enemy of the working man. "The great sinkholefor the workers' wages is the saloon," wrote the editors ofone League publication, The California Liberator. "When thatabomination is destroyed, labor is freed from its greatestcurse" (Odegard, 1928: 53). The logic appealed to the unionleadership. According to one official of the American Federationof Labor: No force in our country has been as effective in thepromotion of temperance among working people as the organizedlabor movement. The labor movement has achieved more for thecause of temperance than all the temperance societies combined... (Timberlake, 1963: 83). Since similar credit has been claimed for the League, theProtestant church, and business interests, it is difficult toapportion the plaudits. Subsequent events suggest that the laborinterests failed to live up to this claim, however. Notwithstanding Terrence V. Powerderly's early speech against"the strong right hand of labor itself . . . that carrieswith it the rum which drowns reason," his own Knights ofLabor repealed their constitutional provision which deniedmembership to anyone connected with the liquor trade (Timberlake,1963: 85-86). As the reports of the National Commission on Enforcement ofthe Prohibition Laws (known as the "WickershamCommission") were later to record, it was particularly theworkers who resented the paternal legislation which they believedwas directed at them and their habits (National Commission on LawObservance, 1931: 345). In addition, there were. those whose livelihoods would bedirectly affected-indeed, effaced-by the success of the campaign:brewery workers, bartenders, glass workers, waiters, andmusicians among others. Thus, even though the Socialist Party resolved in 1908 that "anyexcessive indulgence in intoxicating liquors by members of theworking class is a serious obstacle to the triumph of our causesince it impairs the vigor of the fighters in political andeconomic struggle" (Timberlake, 1963: 98), theindustrial urban centers of the country continued to harbor andstimulate antagonism towards the temperance movement. The identification of the saloon and its offerings with theurban, immigrant working class further enraged Prohibitionists.As one sociologist observed, "The saloon appeared as thesymbol of a culture which was alien to the ascetic character ofAmerican values . . ." (Gusfield, 1963: 100). Thus,Americanism became a central issue in the temperance movement. One temperance spokesman, cited in Barker's "The SaloonProblem," vented these sentiments: The influx of foreigners into our urban centers, many ofwhom have liquor habits [sic], is a menace to good government. .. . [T] he foreign born population is largely under the socialand political control of the saloon. If the cities keep up theirrapid growth they will soon have the balance of political powerin the nation and become storm centers of political life (Timberlake,1963: 118). 1913-1933: NATIONAL PROHIBITION -- PROLOGUE AND FINISH The distrust of the immigrant population became morepronounced as the economic, political, and social power of thecities developed. It was given a strong impetus by theanti-German tremors which shook the country in a mood ofanticipation before World War 1. The United States Brewers Association misread the prevailingtemper and associated itself with the German-American Alliance tooppose the temperance advocates and defend German kultur in theUnited States. As the United States came closer to war, the antipathy whichdeveloped against the Central Powers was directed with equalforce against brewers and tipplers (Furnas, 1968: 334-35) : Pro-Germanism is the only froth from the German's beersaloon. Our German Socialist Party and the German AmericanAlliance are the spawn of the saloon. . . . Prohibition is theinfallible submarine chaser (Sinclair, 1962:122). The war gave the prohibition cause new ammunition. Literaturedepicted brewers and licensed retailers as treacherously stabbingAmerican soldiers in the back. Raw materials and labor were beingdiverted from the war effort to an industry which debilitated thenation's capacity to defend itself. It was urged that wartimeprohibition would stop the waste of grain and molasses and wouldremove a handicap on workers' efficiency. "Liquor is a menace to patriotism because it puts beerbefore country," preached Prohibitionist Wayne Wheeler(Odegard, 1928: 72). The fact that names Pabst, Schlitz, andBlatz broadcast their national origin only did further injury totheir interests. In this atmosphere the Wartime Prohibition Act was passed in1918. It followed a series of federal laws such as the WilsonOriginal Packages Act and the Webb-Kenyon Act, attempts toprotect dry states from their wet neighbors. The Wilson Original Packages Act was passed on August 8, 1890,and provided that all intoxicating beverages shipped interstatewould be subject to the laws of the destination state uponarrival. No mechanism for federal enforcement was provided. The Webb-Kenyon Act, enacted March 1, 1913, was intended toreinforce the 1890 Act by providing that it was a violation offederal law to ship an intoxicating beverage interstate with theintent that it be used or sold in any manner in violation of thelaws of the destination state. The lack of federal enforcementrendered the statute virtually meaningless. The Reed Amendment, enacted four years later, provided a fineof $1,000 for transporting liquor into a dry state with nogreater effect. None of the earlier acts met with substantial success incurbing the flow of liquor into purportedly dry regions, but theydid mark a change in federal policy. Formerly liquor laws weredesigned solely to produce federal revenue; Congress now tookcognizance of the role it could play in the regulation ofconsumption. The role was actually forced upon a reluctant Congress atfirst. Indeed, the government had passed up numerous prioropportunities to involve itself in the temperance movement assuch. The particular part it was to play was forecast by the Sonsof Temperance who, in 1856, declared themselves for nationalconstitutional prohibition. Twenty years later, Congressman Henry Blair of New Hampshireintroduced a prohibition amendment to the Constitution for thefirst time in Congress. As a senator, he introduced another suchresolution in 1885, along with Senator Preston Plum of Kansas.After consideration by the Senate Committee on Education, thebill was reported out favorably and placed on the Senate Calendarin 1886. Nevertheless, no action resulted (Cherrington, 1920: 317). In the meantime, states continued the struggle between thewets and the drys, with great success for the temperanceadvocates. By 1913, nine states were under stateside prohibition.In 31 other states, local option laws were in effect. By reasonof these and other variants of regulatory schemes, more than 50%of the United States population was then under prohibition. The national constitutional campaign was resumed as such in1913 when the Anti-Saloon League went on record at its 15thNational Convention in favor of immediate prosecution of theobjective of constitutional amendment. The National Temperance Council, founded at the same time,coordinated the activities of numerous temperance organizationswith the same object. In 1913, the demands of the League wereformally presented to Congress by the Committee of 1,000. The measure was then introduced in the House by CongressmanThompson and in the Senate by Senator Sheppard. The followingyear, the first joint resolution failed to secure the necessarytwo thirds majority for submitting a constitutional amendment tothe states. A second resolution was submitted in 1915 andfavorably considered by the Judiciary Committees of both houses,but neither ever came to a vote. Ultimately, in 1917, the resolution to prohibit themanufacture, sale, transportation or importation of alcoholicbeverages in the United States was approved by Congress and sentto the states for ratification (Cherrington, 1920: 317-330). It took only one year and eight days for the 18th Amendment tosecure the necessary ratification. On January 8, 1918,Mississippi proudly became the first state to ratify, and onJanuary 16, 1919, Nebraska completed the job as the 36th state(Lee, 1963: 42). By the end of February 1919, there remained onlythree hold-outs: New Jersey, Connecticut, and Rhode Island(Cherrington, 1920: 330). October 28, 1919, was the day that Congress enacted theNational Prohibition Act-more often known as the VolsteadAct-with the intent to give effect to the new constitutionalamendment. Officially, the liquor drought was to begin on January17, 1920. The celebrants of the occasion were concentrated in themembership of the Anti-Saloon League, which could rightly claimthat its consummate skill in pressure politics had maneuvered thecountry into its dry state. The early experience of the Prohibition era gave thegovernment a taste of what was to come. In the three monthsbefore the 18th Amendment became effective, liquor worth half amillion dollars was stolen from Government warehouses. Bymidsummer of 1920, federal courts in Chicago were overwhelmedwith some 600 pending liquor violation trials (Sinclair, 1962:176-177). Within three years, 30 prohibition agents were killedin service. Other statistics demonstrated the increasing volume of thebootleg trade. In 1921, 95,933 illicit distilleries, stills,still works and fermentors were seized. in 1925, the total jumpedto 172,537 and up to 282,122 in 1930. In connection with theseseizures, 34,175 persons were arrested in 1921; by 1925, thenumber had risen to 62,747 and to a high in 1928 of 75,307(Internal Revenue, Service, 1921, 1966, 1970: 95, 6, 73).Concurrently, convictions for liquor offenses in federal courtsrose from 35,000 in 1923 to 61,383 in 1932. The law could not quell the continuing demand for alcoholicproducts. Thus, where legal enterprises could no longer supplythe demand, an illicit traffic developed, from the point ofmanufacture to consumption. The institution of the speakeasyreplaced the institution of the saloon. Estimates of the numberof speakeasies throughout the United States ranged from 200,000to 500,000 (Lee, 1963: 68). Writers of this period point out that the law was circumventedby various means. Although there may have been legitimate,medicinal purposes for whiskey, the practice of obtaining amedical prescription for the illegal substance was abused. It isestimated that doctors earned $40 million in 1928 by writingprescriptions for whiskey. The legal system was equally evasive; the courts convictedabout seven percent of those charged with liquor violations(Sinclair, 1962: 193-195; Dobyns, 1940: 292). The exception forsacramental wine from protection under the Volstead Act alsoinvited abuse. In 1925, the Department of Research and Educationof the Federal Council of the Churches of Christ reported that: The withdrawal of wine on permit from bonded warehouses forsacramental purposes amounted in round figures to 2,139,000gallons in the fiscal year 1922; 2,503,500 gallons in 1923; and2,944,700 gallons in 1924. There is no way of knowing what thelegitimate consumption of fermented sacramental wine is but it isclear that the legitimate demand does not increase 800,000gallons in two years (Dobyns, 1940: 297). The smuggling trade was revived with new vigor and newincentives. Rum-runners, often under foreign flags, broughtliquor into the country from Belgium and Holland. In 1923, therewere 134 seizures of such vessels. The following year, 236 wereapprehended (History of the Alcohol . . . 928). With fewer risks,liquor was readily smuggled across the Canadian border. One wayor the other, the Department of Commerce estimated that, as of1924, liquor valued at approximately $40 million was entering theUnited States annually (Sinclair, 1962: 198). The manufacture of "near-beer" and industrialalcohol provided other opportunities for diversion from licitchannels, while the salvage of the California grape industry wassection 29 of the Volstead Act (27 U.S.C.  46) which authorizedthe home production of fermented fruit juices. Although thesection was allegedly inserted to save the vinegar industry andthe hard cider of America's farmers, it was welcomed by homewinemakers as well. In the spirit of cooperation, the grapegrowers even produced a type of grape jelly suggestively called"Vine-go" which, with the addition of water, could makea strong wine within two months (Sinclair, 1962: 206). One of the great ironies of the prohibition era was the fact,noted by the Wickersham Commission, that women happily took todrink during the experimental decade, and, what is more, did soin public. As the counterpart of the WCTU, the Women'sOrganization for National Prohibition Reform was founded, statingin its declaration of principles that Prohibition was "wrongin principle" and "disastrous in consequences in thehypocrisy, the corruption, the tragic loss of life and theappalling increase of crime which has attended the abortiveattempt to enforce it" (Dobyns, 1940: 107). Drinking at an earlier age was also noted, particularly duringthe first few years of Prohibition. The superintendents of eightstate mental hospitals reported a larger percentage of youngpatients during Prohibition (1919-1926) than formerly. One of thehospitals noted: "During the past year (1926), an unusuallylarge group of patients who are of high school age were admittedfor alcoholic psychosis" (Brown, 1932:176). In determining the age at which an alcoholic forms hisdrinking habit, it was noted: "The 1920-1923 group wereyounger than the other groups when the drink habit wasformed" (Pollock, 1942: 113). AVERAGE AGE AT FORMATION OF DRINK HABIT Period Males Females 1914 21.4 27.9 1920-23 20.6 25.8 1936-37 23.9 31.7 To be sure, the Volstead Act was enforced in the United Stateswherever it had popular support. In the rural South and Westprohibition was effective and in some cases still is. Thefailures of prohibition enforcement were spotlighted in the bigcities where the law was flagrantly defied and in the smallertowns, populated by miners and industrial workers, where the lawwas simply ignored (National Commission on Law Observance, 1931:345). Notwithstanding the weak enforcement of the Volstead Act, somebelieve that it was only the coming of the Depression with itsdemand for increased employment and tax revenues which finallykilled the experiment (Gusfield, 1963: 127). Others observe thatProhibition was a by-product of the stress and excesses of warand could not have survived in peacetime even under optimaleconomic conditions (Sinclair, 1962: 23-24). Finally, there arethose who accuse the selfishly motivated businessmen of theUnited States for repeal which they allegedly brought aboutthrough the same high-pressure tactics so successfully employedby the partisans of temperance in the preceding decades (Dobyns,1940: 5-130 passim). Despite mixed motivations, the repeal movement was financedand driven by the Association Against the Prohibition Amendment(AAPA). The members declared that "the principal business andobjective of the Association shall be to educate its members asto the fundamental provisions, objects and purposes of theConstitution of the United States" (Dobyns, 1940: 5). Theyworked for the election of Congressmen who agreed to submit thequestion of repeal to a vote of the people in each state. Theywere successful fund-raisers and by January 1, 1931, had almost$3 million in cash in the bank (Dobyns, 1940: 9). The sources of the funds included a number of converts fromthe dry cause. In 1928, the DuPont family abandoned the drys,followed in 1932 by John D. Rockefeller and S. S. Kresge(Gusfield, 1963: 128). Their conversion was effected under thestrong influence of the income tax. Doggedly, Pierre S. DuPontcirculated a brochure concluding that "the British liquorpolicy applied in the United States would permit the totalabolition of the income tax both personal and corporate"(Dobyns, 1940: 22). Concern for the effects of the prohibition laws was notlimited to the private, wealthy sector. In 1928, a dry-wetconfrontation emerged in the presidential election between AlfredE. Smith, a Catholic New Yorker, and Herbert Hoover. Hooversolemnly praised the "great social and economicexperiment" and tightened his grip on the dry vote. Notwithstanding the popular image of Smith as a staunch wet,his platform tried to avoid any outright repeal sentiment. Heasked instead for an amendment of the Volstead Act which wouldprovide a "scientific definition of the alcoholic content ofan intoxicating beverage." This would enable each state tointerpret and apply the federal standard within its borders. Inaddition, he favored what was to be known as the "statestore" system of manufacturing and dispensing alcoholicbeverages (Lee, 1963: 212). In retrospect, it is difficult to ascertain whether it was thereligious campaign or the dry campaign which defeated Al Smith.H. L. Mencken may have written accurately that "if [AlSmith] loses, it will be because those who fear the Popeoutnumber those who are tired of the Anti-Saloon League"('Sinclair, 1962: 303). Nevertheless, Prohibition survived the1928 election, as did Hoover's campaign pledge to establish acommission to investigate the conditions under Prohibition. Headof the Commission was George W. Wickersham, former AttorneyGeneral under Taft. Although the Commission's purpose was setforth as an examination of the problems of enforcement, it soondecided to undertake much broader policy considerations. The Commission's report, published in 1931, included opinionsurveys, statistics on the number of deaths connected withenforcement efforts, testimony by consultants and experts, and ananalysis of the organization, personnel and methods ofprohibition enforcement. On the basis of the five volume report,the Wickersham Commission ironically concluded in its summarythat: There have been more sustained pressures to enforce thislaw than on the whole has been true of any other federal statute,although this pressure in the last four or five years has metwith increasing resistance as the sentiment against prohibitionhas developed . . . . That a main source of difficulty is in theattitude of at least a very large number of respectable citizensin most of our large cities and in several states, is made moreclear when the enforcement of the national prohibition act iscompared with the enforcement of the laws as to narcotics. Thereis an enormous margin of profit in breaking the latter. The meansof detecting transportation are more easily evaded than in thecase of liquor. Yet there are no difficulties in the case ofnarcotics beyond those involved in the nature of the trafficbecause the laws against them are supported everywhere by ageneral and determined public sentiment (Sinclair, 1962:367-368). Notwithstanding this dire analysis, 10 out of the 11commissioners signed a summary of conclusions of the report whichstated that the Commission as a whole opposed the repeal of the18th Amendment, the entry of the Federal or state governmentsinto liquor business, or even the modification of nationalprohibition to permit the sale of light wines and beer (Sinclair,1962: 364). Walter Lippmann commented, "What was done was to evade adirect and explicit official confession that Federal prohibitionis a hopeless failure" (Sinclair, 1962: 365). Whether or notLippmann correctly read the Commission's intentions, there wasclearly a gap between the input and the outcome of the report. It is difficult to assess the relative numbers of the wet anddry partisans during the last few years of national prohibition.In terms of strength, however, the wets surely had the edge whichless than two decades before had belonged to the drys. The newwet strength showed up at the National Convention of theDemocratic party held in Chicago in 1932, where Mayor Cermak ofthat city filled the galleries with his supporters. And, thoughFranklin D. Roosevelt had wooed the dry vote for some time, henow came forward on a platform which favored the outright repealof the 18th Amendment. Accepting his nomination, he stated: I congratulate this convention for having had the courage,fearlessly to write into its declaration of principles what anoverwhelming majority here assembled really thinks about the 18thAmendment. This convention wants repeal. Your candidate wantsrepeal. And I am confident that the United States of Americawants repeal (Dobyns, 1940: 160). While dry leaders looked on with disgust, Roosevelt waselected president and Congress turned a somersault. The repealamendment was introduced February 14, 1933, by Sen. Blaine ofWisconsin and approved two days later by the Senate 63 to 23. TheHouse followed four days later, voting 289 to 121 to send theamendment on to the States (Lee, 1963: 231). It required approvalby 36 states. Michigan was the first state to ratify it; 39states voted, on the amendment during 1933, with 37 approving itsratification and two-North and South Carolina-voting against itsratification. The final ratification was accomplished on November7,1933, when Kentucky, Ohio, Pennsylvania and Utah gave theirapproval. Congress officially adopted the 21st Amendment to theConstitution on December 5, 1933. Within three weeks of taking office, President Rooseveltwitnessed the first sales of 3.2 beer, following a redefinitionby statute of the terms "intoxicating liquors." Themore popular, higher alcohol-content beer was relegalized byCongress under the Cullen-Harrison Act. Sale of beer became legalon April 7, 1933, in the District of Columbia and the 20 stateswhere state laws did not prohibit its sale. During the next fouryears the remaining states changed their laws to permit its sale,with Alabama and Kansas in 1937, as the last to join the legalsale ranks. The job of total repeal was accomplished with the help of thedetermined AAPA during the succeeding year. Their lawyersassisted the states in preparing bills for conventions andrelease of various forms of political propaganda, therebyenacting a serious satire on the 1919 campaign launched by theAnti-Saloon League. Notwithstanding their high and enduringconstitutional principles, on December 31, 1933, with repeal areality, the AAPA ceased to exist and sent its files to theLibrary of Congress. "Having attained its objective . . .the Association resisted the temptation to linger on as a'sentinel of American liberty' '', the New York Times observed inthe organization's obituary (Dobyns, 1940: 132). PROHIBITION IN PERSPECTIVE During 13 years, what did Prohibition accomplish? There is nosingle compilation of Prohibition statistics which would enableus to determine the degree of success which Prohibition enjoyedduring its lifetime. In discussing the relative successes and failures ofProhibition, most observers conclude that the undertaking failed."Prohibition destroyed the manufacturing and distributiveagencies through which the demand for liquor had been legallysupplied. But the demand remained" (Hu, 1950: 51). In its Report on the Enforcement of the Prohibition Laws ofthe United States, the Wickersham Commission concluded that thecountry had prohibition in law but not in fact. They reported: There was general prevalence of drinking in homes, clubsand hotels.... Throughout the country people of wealth,businessmen and professional men and their families, and thehigher paid workingmen and their families, are drinking in largenumbers in open flouting of the law. And neither Congress nor thestates set up adequate machinery or appropriated sufficient fundsfor the enforcement of the prohibitory legislation. Federal andstate legislation, as a matter of fact, strove to satisfy sothat, as it was aptly said, the drys had their prohibition lawand the wets had their liquor (Hu, 1950: 52). Although some view the theory of prohibition as reasonable, itis generally conceded that the realities of manufacture anddistribution make it unworkable, for in one form or another,alcohol can be easily produced by farmers, high school chemistrystudents, and ordinary citizens. Prohibition has been attempted many times in various parts ofthe world; except for some Moslem areas, attempted legislativecontrols have not proven adequate. In spite of many sincere anddetermined efforts, no country in Europe or the Americas has yetsucceeded in eliminating the use of alcohol by society bylegislative fiat (H.E.W., 1968: 41). Those who had been accustomed to using alcoholic beveragessought other sources of supply "in disregard of thelegislative mandate. In the presence of high pecuniary returnsthere [was] a strong tendency for supply to meet demand in spiteof prohibition" (Hu, 1950: 51). Consumption. Although it is impossible to make anaccurate determination of the consumption of alcoholic beveragesunder Prohibition-since there are no statistics compiledregarding the output and sale of the outlaw industry-estimateshave been made by those examining the economic results ofProhibition as well as by the Bureau of Prohibition of the U.S.Department of Justice. The Bureau placed the consumption ofalcoholic beverages at 73,831,172 gallons, or 0.6 gallon percapita in fiscal year 1930 as contrasted with 166,983,681 gallonsor 1.7 gallons per capita in 1914. In terms of pure alcohol, the Bureau concluded that per capitaconsumption in 1930 was 35% of the 1914 rate of legalconsumption. These estimates have been criticized as being fartoo low (Tillitt, 1932: 35). The figures published by the Department of Commerce in theStatistical Abstract of the United States reflect a differentpicture. The average annual per capita consumption of hard liquorfrom 1910-1914, inclusive, was 1.46 proof gallons. "This5-year period was before the rise of abnormal conditionscoincident to the World War and may be taken as fairly indicativeof the normal rate of drinking that - prevailed in thePre-Prohibition 'era" (Rosenbloom, 1935: 51). The per capita rate for the Prohibition years is computed tobe 1.63 proof gallons. This is 11.64% higher than thePre-Prohibition rate (Tillitt, 1932: 35). Based on these figuresone observer concluded: "And so the drinking which was, intheory, to have been decreased to the vanishing point byProhibition has, in fact, increased" (Tillitt, 1932: 36). Others disagree with the implications of these unverifiedstatistics noting that persons of limited means, formerly unableto patronize the expensive speakeasies, once again had cheapaccess to alcohol following repeal and thereby increasedconsumption (Harrison & Laine, 1936: 1). Popular opinion is equally inconclusive; a survey conducted bythe American Institute of Public Opinion in 1936 asked whetherconditions (drinking customs, consumption, etc.) were betterworse or without significant change since Repeal 36% indicated aworsening and 31% could see no appreciable change (Harrison &Laine, 1936: 2). Perhaps indicative of a gradual process ofadjustment, however, the results of later Gallup polls suggest agradual decline in the use of alcohol. Of a national sample, 67%indicated they used alcohol in 1945, in contrast to 60% in 1950and 55% in 1958 (Gusfield, 1963: 135). Alcoholic Psychoses. There was a notable decrease inalcoholic psychoses and in deaths due to alcoholism immediatelypreceding the enactment of Prohibition and a gradual increase inalcoholic psychosis and in deaths from alcoholism in the generalpopulation since 1920. "These facts appear to indicate that since 1920,Prohibition [was] increasingly impotent as a means of preventingexcessive use of alcohol to an extent productive of seriousmental disorders and untimely death. 1920 marks the end of thedecline and the beginning of the rise in the trends of alcoholicmental diseases and of deaths from alcoholism in the generalpopulation" (Brown, 1932: 88). The increase in mental disorders and deaths from alcoholismafter 1920, however, also coincides with the heavy consumptionperiod-early 1900's-which would have resulted in an increase inalcoholism some years later. The following table reflects the decrease prior to 1920 andthe subsequent gradual increase in percentage of alcoholicpsychosis among new admissions to 56 hospitals in 25 states aswell as among admissions to New York civil state hospitals(Brown, 1932: 76-77; Malzburg, 1949: 294) : 56 Hospitals Year All new admissions New admissions with alcoholic psychoses NY State - civil hospital percent admission with alcoholic psychoses. Number Percent 1910 17,439 1,486 8.5 ... 1911 17,299 1,366 7.9  1912 17,570 1,567 8.9 ... 1913 17,525 1,633 9.3 9.3 1914 19,134 1,573 8.2 7.4 1915 18,875 1,331 7.1 5.7 1916 17,929 1,370 7.6 6.1 1917 20,041 1,576 7.9 8.2 1918 19,741 1,021 5.2 5.2 1919 19,737 841 4.3 4.1 1920 19,579 485 2.5 2.0 1921 20,368 567 2.8 2.8 1922 20,741 798 3.8 3.2 1923 20,316 861 4.2 4.0 1924 19,818 896 4.9 5.4 1925 20,857 1,017 4. 9 5.8 1926 20,911 997 4.8 5.9 1927 21,982 1,268 5.8 7.0 1928 23,293 1,257 5.4 6.0 1929 23,242 1,380 5.9 6.2 1930 24,100 1,251 5.2 6.0 Deaths from Alcoholism. In New York City, from 1900through 1909, there was an average of 526 deaths annuallyattributable to alcoholism. From 1910 through 1917, the averagenumber was 619. It plummeted to 183 for the years 1918 through1922. Thereafter, the figure rose, averaging a new high of 639for the years 1923 through 1927 (Rice, ed., 1930: 122). Total deaths from alcoholism in the United States show acomparable trend, with the gradual increase resuming somewhatearlier, about 1922 (Brown, 1932: 61, 77; Feldman, 1927: 397;U.S. Department of Commerce, 1924: 55). Year Deaths from all causes rate per 100,000 Deaths from alcoholism rate per 100,000 1910 1,496.1 5.4 1911 1,418.1 4.9 1912 1,388.8 5.3 1913 1,409.6 5.9 1914 1,364.6 4.9 1915 1,355.0 4.4 1916 1,404.3 5.8 1917 1,425.5 5.2 1918 1,809.1 2.7 1919 1,287.4 1.6 1920 1,306.0 1.0 1921 1,163.9 1.8 1922 1,181.7 2.6 1923 1,230.1 3.2 1924 1,183.5 3.2 1925 1,182.3 3.6 1926 1,222.7 3.9 1927 1,141.9 4.0 1928 1,204.1 4.0 1929 1,192.3 3.7 The highest death rates from alcoholism occurred during thedecade prior to Prohibition as did the highest death rates fromcirrhosis of the liver. These statistics should be qualified bythe observations of Dr. Charles Morris, Chief Medical Examinerfor New York City: "In making out death certificates(which are basic to Census Reports) private or family physicianscommonly avoid entry of alcoholism as a cause of death wheneverpossible. This practice was more prevalent under the National DryLaw than it was in preprohibition time" (Tillitt, 1932:114-115). Even if reliable, per se, such statistics may be unrelated tothe consumption of alcoholic beverages in any given year. Anotherwriter of this period noted: "The relation of fatalalcoholic diseases to consumption of alcohol must be oneextending over a long period of years and the actual duration ofthe critical period can hardly be estimated" (Jellinek,1942: 48-1). According to one sociologist, rates of alcoholismand related mental and physical diseases reflect past drinkinghabits, developed ten to 15 years earlier (Gusfield, 1963: 119). A shorter "lead time" is suggested by a mentalhygiene statistician who attributes the temporary reduction inalcoholic psychoses "to the legal restriction of the saleand use of alcoholic beverages, made effective by the support ofpublic opinion which during the war period had discountenancedself-indulgence, of all sorts" (Brown, 1932: 88). He adds,however, that the notable increase in alcoholic psychoses anddeaths from alcoholism towards the end of the prohibition era(1927-1932) indicated that: ... since 1920, prohibition has become increasinglyimpotent as a means of preventing excessive use of alcohol to anextent productive of serious mental disorders and untimely deaths(Brown, 1932: 88). The highly limited statistical label of death from alcoholismhas been noted elsewhere: The trend of death from alcoholism reflects hardly anythingelse than progress in the treatment of the so-called diseases ofchronic alcoholism. Nevertheless, statistics of death fromalcoholism have been used by both Drys and Wets to prove thatProhibition or repeal has greatly improved the rate of death fromalcoholism. . . . Death from alcoholism is simply not an index ofthe prevalence of inebriety. Death from alcoholism could fall tozero in response to medical progress, while at the same time therate of inebriety might rise many fold (Jellinek, 1947: 39). Arrests Arrests for drunkenness also provide a sourceof information about the extent of drinking in the United States.It must be noted, however, that statistics of this sort vary withlocal police policies. For example, during a six-year period inthe 1930's, the arrests for drunkenness were from 14 to 31 timeshigher in Philadelphia than in New York (Kolb, 1941: 608). Nevertheless, gross statistics drawn from 383 cities indicatethat arrests for drunkenness per 10,000 population reached a highof 192 in 1916 and fell to 71 in 1920. From this level, they rosesteadily again to reach 157 in 1928 (Warburton, 1932: 102). Ofcourse, arrests prior to Prohibition may not bear the samerelation to the use of alcohol as they did subsequently,Warburton theorizes: . . . [U]nder Prohibition, especially during the earlyyears, police were more strict in making arrests, and . . . alarger proportion than formerly of persons appearing on thestreets under the influence of liquor are arrested. Also, sincethe sale of liquor is illegal and cannot be obtained in publicsaloons, and when the police are more strict in arrestingintoxicated persons, it is reasonable to suppose that drinking isless public and that fewer drunken persons appear on the streetsrelative to the quantity of liquor consumed (Warburton, 1932:103). Nevertheless, the cyclical trend suggested by these figurescoincides with statistics on alcoholism (Brown, 1932: 61, 71,77). Whatever their independent validity, however, they correlateearth the theory of one author that: [T] he l8th Amendment could not have been passed withoutthe support of the psychologically tolerant, made temporarilyintolerant by the stress of war. But when the moderates desertedthe drys in the time of peace, the hard core of the movement wasrevealed (Sinclair, 1962: 23--24). Without the support of the moderates, the author theorizes,Prohibition was to become itself a symbol of excess, unsupportedby the vast majority of the population. Outcome. What, then, did Prohibition accomplish? To a greatextent it eliminated the saloon from American life. While barsand taverns reopened joyfully following repeal, they ceased to bethe centers of systematic political corruption and debaucherywhich they had once been. Part of this may be attributable to thegreater sophistication of the electorate and politics generally.Part, no doubt, is owing to the fact that women were welcome ascustomers in the new cocktail lounges, having shown themselves tobe eager patrons of the speakeasies. And finally, the change in the character of the saloon waseffected by public determination that it should be changed. Thisattitude was expressed in the post-repeal statutes concerned withthe physical appearance of the saloon and the character ofpersons authorized to operate them. Prohibition did make the nation conscious that corruption ofthe law and of the populace may be the consequence of a law whichis not reflective of the morals and mores of the time. It playedout some of the deepest social class resentments, culminating inthe realization that the behavioral standards of some could notbe impressed -upon others. It demonstrated that the fervor of warand the cult of patriotism may be abused-and abuse the country inreturn. Repeal reimposed the burden of regulation upon the states.They were required to develop a system of control directed at theparticular objectives they wished to achieve. The post-repeal erawas to prove an exercise not only in states' rights but instates' responsibilities. 1933-1971: AFTER THE DELUGE On December 4, 1933, the day before final ratification of therepeal amendment, the President established the Federal AlcoholControl Administration, pursuant to Executive Order No. 6474.FACA was to have the power to grant or revoke permits to engagein the alcoholic beverage industry-not the brewing industry-aswell as the power to control plant capacity and production; itwas also to engage in consumer protection through regulationsdesigned to prevent misbranding and false advertising ofalcoholic beverages. In addition, FACA prohibited the ownershipof retail outlets by manufacturers and wholesalers (Harrison& Laine, 1936: 24-29). This scheme fell under the Schecter Poultry decision by theSupreme Court. The Treasury, Federal Trade, Commission and Foodand Drug Administration then moved in. A new alcohol controlagency was proposed, leading to a dispute as to whether it shouldbe independent or part of the Treasury. Joseph H. Choate, Jr., first head of the FACA, testified that: The Treasury has not been an organization whose duty it wasto study and understand the liquor business, the interest of thepublic in that business, or the method by which that businessought to be carried on in order to subserve the interests of boththe public and state governments. It has been a creature of oneidea, that one idea being, quite properly, to get revenue and getit as fast and as copiously as it could (Harrison &Laine, 1936: 33). The Department of the Treasury agreed with Choate's analysis. Nevertheless, this testimony was disregarded and the FederalAlcohol Administration was created as a division of Treasury in1935. This arrangement was superseded in 1936 when the Liquor TaxAdministration Act established FACA as an independent agency ofthe government. Soon thereafter it was reorganized, once again asan arm of the Department of Treasury, and even its separateidentity was abolished as of June 30, 1940. Today, the Treasuryretains full authority to administer all federal liquor laws. The current federal laws regulating trade in intoxicatingbeverages may be classified in the following categories: (1) Revenue: Taxes are imposed on rectifiers, brewers,manufacturers of stills, dealers; wholesale and retail stamps arerequired on distilled spirits (26 USC, 1971a). (2) Criminal Penalties: Criminal penalties are provided forunauthorized production, sale or possession, transportation intostates prohibiting sale, C.O.D. shipments and unlabeled shipments(26 USC, 1971b; 18 USC, 1971). (3) Interstate Transportation: Interstate shipments ofalcoholic beverages are subject to the laws of the receivingstate (27 USC, 1971a). (4) Permits: Importers, manufacturers and sellers ofintoxicating beverages must have permits (27 USC, 1971b). (5) Unfair Practices: Exclusive sales arrangements, tying,bribery and false advertising or labeling are prohibited (27 USC,1971b). The intent of the Federal Government to reserve all decisionsregarding regulation of consumption is quite clear from federalstatutes presently in force. The states have reacted with avariety of regulatory schemes controlling to varying degrees theseller, the buyer, the place, time and opportunity for sale and,through revenue measures, the cost. In 18 states, the state store or state monopoly system hasentirely displaced the private wholesale or retail sale ofintoxicating beverages. Other states permit the sale of liquor,wine and beer through private, licensed outlets. The license system may be implemented by different, means.Administration may be solely by the state, or control may beshared by the counties or municipalities. Local control may be exercised to a greater or lesser degree.For example, in the 1930's, immediately after repeal,Massachusetts and New Mexico permitted local boards to grantretail licenses only after investigation and approval ofapplicants by the state board. During the same period, otherstates, predominantly in the South, gave local authoritiessupplemental powers to issue licenses while requiring concurrentstate licenses as well. In some jurisdictions, the local license had to be obtainedfirst, and the state license could be granted thereafter. InIllinois, however, the state commission's power was curtailed byrequiring that a state license be granted once the local licensewas secured. And although the state was given the power to revokeits license, it was given no power to inspect places of sale todetermine grounds for revocation (Harrison & Laine, 1936:50-53). The license system has been suspect by many wets as well asdrys because of the opportunities it may afford for politicalabuse. On the other hand, there is substantial opinion whichholds direct participation in the sale of liquor in contempt. Asto the relative efficacy of each, there are no reliable means ofmaking a judgment. Each apparently depends on the integrity andcapacity of the individuals charged with the job of enforcementand oversight. Superimposed on the basic system of regulating the sale ofliquor are other sumptuary laws which are directed at thepurchaser. Sales are not permitted to minors or intoxicatedpersons. Credit is often prohibited on liquor sales as well.Criminal penalties may be imposed for driving under the influenceof alcohol as well as for drunken behavior. The sale of liquor by the drink is permitted in most states,but some still require that it be sold in packaged form only,reflecting the continuing fear of the resurrection of the saloon.In many states Sunday closing laws are enforced, and mandatoryclosing times are imposed upon bars and package stores alike.Sales are prohibited almost uniformly on Election Day, at leastduring polling hours, and, in many places, on Thanksgiving,Memorial Day, Christmas and other holidays. Local option is still granted in most states, in voting unitsranging from the plantation to the city or county. Of themonopoly or control states, only Utah and Wyoming fail to makeprovision for local option at all. Wyoming maintains a statemonopoly at the wholesale level only. Private retailer sellersare licensed. In the remaining monopoly states, it is often possible fortowns within a wet county to go dry, and sometimes vice versa. Ofthe 33 license states, only 10 (including the District ofColumbia) do not permit local option at any level. Notwithstanding the various patterns of regulation, SenatorArthur Capper's words of the 1930's still seem to be correct: We can repeal prohibition, but we cannot repeal the liquorproblem (Peterson, 1969: 126). Neither the states nor the population have yet come to gripswith the problems of alcoholism and alcohol abuse. Both themonopoly system and the license system are directed at otherconcerns. They, no more than Prohibition, have been able tocontrol or even alleviate the very real and dire consequences ofalcohol use by society. References Brown, F. W.: "Prohibition and mental Hygiene"Annals, 163: 61, 71, 76-77, 88, 1176 (September, 1932). Cherrington, E. H.: The Evolution of Prohibition In The UnitedStates of America, Westerville, Ohio: American Issue Press(1920), pp. 16, 18, 37-38, 49-51, 58, 92-93, 134, 156-162,165-169, 250-251, 317-330. Dobyns, F.: The Amazing Story of Repeal, Chicago: Willett,Clark & Co. (1940), pp. 5, 5-130 passim, 9, 22, 107, 132,160, 215, 292, 297. Feldman, H.: "Prohibition: Its Economic and IndustrialAspects," New York City: Appleton and Co. (1927), p. 397. Furnas, J. C.: The Life and Times of the Late Demon Rum, NewYork City: Putnam (1965), pp. 15, 80, 167, 183, 273, 281, 310,334-335. Grant: "The Liquor Traffic Before the 18thAmendment," Annals, 163: 1, 5 (September, 1932). Gustield, J. R.: The Symbolic Crusade, Urbana: University ofIllinois Press (1963), pp. 69-70, 76-77, 100, 108, 119, 127-128,135. Harrison, L. V. and Laine, E.: After Repeal, New York City: Harper & Bros. (1936), pp. 1-2, 24-29, 33, 50-53,63. Health, Education and Welfare: "Alcohol andAlcoholism," p. 41 (1968). Prepared for NationalClearinghouse for Mental Health Information. History of the Alcohol and Tobacco Tax Division, pp. 1420, 28(undated, unsigned monograph in the library of the DistilledSpirits Institute). Hu, T.: The Liquor Tax in the U.S.: 1791-1947, New York City:Columbia University Press (1950), pp. 48, 51-52. Internal RevenueService: "Alcohol and Tobacco Summary Statistics," pp.6, 73, 95 (1966, 1970, 1921). Jellinek, E. M.: "Death From Alcoholism in the U.S. in1940," Quarterly Journal of Studies on Alcohol, 3 (3): 484(December, 1942). : "Recent Trends in Alcoholism," Quartely Journal ofStudies on Alcohol, 8 (1) : 39 (September, 1947). Kolb., L.: "Alcoholism and Public Health," QuarterlyJournal of Studies on Alcohol, 1: 608, 610, 613 (March, 1941). Krout, J. A.: The Origins of Prohibition, New York City:Russell & Russell (1967), pp. 29-30. Lee, H.: How Dry We Were: Prohibition Revisited, EngleWoodCliffs: Prentice Hall Inc. (1963), pi). 15-16, 1819, 22-23,29-30, 34-35, 42, 68, 212, 231. Malzburg, B.: "A Study of First Admissions with AlcoholPsychoses in New York State 1943-44," Quarterly Journal ofStudies on Alcohol, 10: 294 (December, 1949). Miller, P. andJohnson, T. H. (eds.) : 11 The Puritans, New York City: AmericanBook Co. (1963), pp. 430-431. National Commission on Law Observance and Enforcement:"Report On The Enforcement of the, Prohibition Laws of theU.S.," H.R. Doe. No. 722, 71st Cong., 3d Sess., 8, 345(1931). Odegard, P. H.: Pressure Politics-The Story of The AntiSaloonLeague, New York City: Columbia University Press (1928), pp. 23,40-60, 53, 70-72, 126. Peterson, W.: "Vitalizing Liquor Control," Journalof Criminal Law and Crime, 40: 119-120, 122-123, 126 (July,1939). Pollock, H. M.: Mental Disease and Social Welfare, Utica,N.Y.: State Hospital Press (1942), 1). 113. Rice, S. A. (ed.) : Statistics In Social Studies,Philadelphia: University of Pennsylvania Press (1930), 1). 122. Rosenbloom, M. V.: The Liquor Industry: A Surrey of ItsHistory, Manufacture, Problems of Control and IMportance,Braddock: Ruffsdale Distilling Co. (1937 ed.), pp. 27, 51-52(1935)). Rush, B.: "Inquiry Into the Effects of Ardent SpiritsUpon The Human Body and Mind," Quarterly Journal of Studieson Alcohol, 4: 323,325-326 (September, 1943). Rutgers Center ofAlcohol Studies: "Selected Statistics on Consumption ofAlcohol (1850-1968) And On Alcoholism (1930-1968)," 1). 4(1970). Sinclair, A. : The Era of Excess, Boston: Little, Brown(1962), pp. 23-24, 43, 51, 108, 122, 176-177, 190, 193-195, 198,206, 303, 364-365, 367-368. Tillitt, M. H. : The Price of Prohibition, -New York City:Harcourt, Brace & Co. (1932), pp. 35-36, 114-115. Timberlake, J. H.: Prohibition and the Progressive Morement,Cambridge: Harvard University Press (1963), pp. 34-38, 42-55,67-79, 83, 85-86, 98, 118. Towne, C. IL: The Rise and Fall of Prohibition, New York City:The MacMillan Co. (1923), pp. 211-212. U.S. Department of Commerce: "U.S. Census MortalityStatistics," 55 (1924). Warburton, C.: The Economic Results of Prohibition, New YorkCity: Columbia University Press (1932), pp. 102104, 216. 26 U SC   5081-5416 (1971a). 26 USC  5061-5691 (1971b). 18 U SC   1261-1265 (1971). 27 USC  121, 122 (1971a). 27 USC  205 (1971b). Contents | Feedback | Search DRCNet Library | Schaffer Library | Major Studies Marihuana, A Signal of Misunderstanding WT01-B25-6IA087-000632-B016-166http://206.61.184.43:80/schaffer/Library/studies/nc/nc2b.htm 206.61.184.43 19970122091553 text/html 92457HTTP/1.0 200 OKDate: Wednesday, 22-Jan-97 09:15:44 GMTServer: WebSitePro/1.1f (S/N wpo-0deb)Allow-ranges: bytesContent-type: text/htmlLast-modified: Saturday, 28-Dec-96 06:54:27 GMTContent-length: 92239 History of Tobacco Regulation* Contents | Feedback | Search DRCNet Library | Schaffer Library | Major Studies Marihuana, A Signal of Misunderstanding National Commission on Marihuana and Drug Abuse History of Tobacco Regulation* *This section is based in part on a paper prepared for theCommission by Jane Lang McGrew, an attorney from Washington, D.C. Since 1613, when John Rolfe introduced a successful experimentin tobacco cultivation in Virginia (Morison, 1965 : 52) the leafhas assumed major social, industrial, economic and medicalimplications. Consequently, persons concerned with tobacco on acommercial or personal basis have been subject to a variety ofdifferent regulations over the past 360 years. Tobacco has been attacked by social observers and medicalauthorities for the damage it has allegedly done, to the socialand physical condition of man. Yet it has also provided asubstantial source of revenue to the state and Federalgovernments of the United States. As is now the case with alcohol, tobacco has long been subjectto regulatory controls over the quantity and quality ofproduction. On the other hand, sumptuary laws affecting tobaccohave been far fewer-and weaker-than those aimed at alcohol. Infact, there has never been a time when tobacco was prohibitedthroughout the United States although consumption under certaincircumstances has been forbidden at various times in differentjurisdictions. Tobacco-associated today with smoking of cigarettes, and to alesser extent, of pipes and cigars-has been popular at times forboth snuffing and chewing. Indeed, until about 1870 cigaretteswere relatively rare in the United States, and almost all tobaccoconsumed domestically was chewed during the mid-19th century(Gottsegen, 1940: 9-10). What ever the preferred mode of consumption, however, the,commodity has always been the subject of debate respecting theappropriate governmental attitude. On the one hand, proponents ofthe leaf stress its social benefits and its economic andindustrial significance. Some enthusiasts even endorse itsalleged medical and psychological benefits. Opposed are those whocite the health hazards of smoking and others who are convincedof its immorality. The motivation for regulation has come from both sides of thecontroversy. Most sumptuary restrictions were fostered by thelatter group in an effort to suppress the habit. Those who seekto institutionalize and foster use of the drug focus on theregulation of the quantity and quality of production. This section does not attempt to weigh the merits of thevarious regulatory schemes. Rather, it will trace from JohnRolfe's day the three threads of regulation which havecircumscribed both the producer and consumer of tobacco in theUnited States. REGULATION OF PRODUCTION In the opinion of King James I of England, tobacco was"loathsome to the eye, hateful to the nose, harmful to thebrain" and "dangerous to the lungs" (Middleton,1953: 93). Whether the King was prescient, or simply sensitive,was irrelevant in the 17th and 18th centuries, however, fortobacco rapidly became the mainstay of the Maryland and Virginiaeconomics. Within seven years of John Rolfe's first imaginativeexperiment,, Virginia exported nothing but tobacco and a littlesassafrass to England (Middleton, 1953: 93-94). Almost asquickly, the leaf became the staple of the colony of Maryland andcompetition developed in Carolina as well. In Massachusetts Bay, the product fared less well. The firstgeneral letter (April 17,1629) from an official of the NewEngland Company to the Massachusetts Bay settlers prohibited theplanting of tobacco except in small quantities for medicinalpurposes (Werner, 1922: 100). Next door in Connecticut, however,the colonists attempted to rival the southern planters with alocal leaf. Indeed, the infant industry was coddled by theprotectionist General Court at New Haven, which promulgated arule in 1641 that: No persons within this jurisdiction shall [smoke] any otherTobacco but such as is or shall be planted within these[districts], except they have license from the Courte (TobaccoInstitute, Connecticut, undated: 20). Notwithstanding the royal attitude and the fear of certainpatent holders of the London Company that Virginia had become a"colony founded on smoke" (Tobacco Institute,,Virginia, 1971 : 19; Middleton, 1953: 94), England encouraged thegrowth of the tobacco industry. Monopolies to import tobacco fromthe colonies were granted by the Crown to court favorites whosoon prospered as a result of this trade. In 1621, a bill was introduced which, according to onecontemporary commentator, was "extremely remarkable":No tobacco was to be imported after the 1st of October, 1621,except from Virginia and Bermuda; and, after that day, none wasto be planted in England. Although the act was initially defeatedby the House of Lords, James I in 1922 himself granted the importmonopoly to the Virginia and Bermuda, companies and prohibitedthe domestic cultivation of tobacco (Brooks, 1952: 88). The system worked well for the British importers, but themethods of financing they employed became onerous to the colonialplanters. The tobacco was marketed by consignment to an Englishmerchant who deposited the proceeds of the sale to the planters'accounts. Often, however, the high commissions charged and thecost, of goods ordered by the Virginians in payment for theircrop contributed to the growth of colonial indebtedness. Theextension of credit to cover the deficiencies caused the debts togrow constantly, but the only alternative to the consignmentsystem was to sell the product in the colony at a lower price(Middleton, 1953: 104-107). Industrial competition in this market provided the impulse forcertain regulatory relief. Importation of the Carolinian productinto Virginia was forbidden by an act of 1679, amended in 1726 toprohibit importation by land as well as by sea. Nor was NorthCarolina permitted to export its tobacco from Virginia ports. InGreat Britain, the Privy Council looked with disfavor upon suchcolonial legislation which threatened the financial well-being ofthe merchants and so disallowed the Virginia Act in 1731(Middleton, 1953: 114-115). Competition similarly induced both Virginia and Maryland toenact laws prescribing the dimensions of the hogshead in whichtobacco was packaged in 1658. Vying for purchasers, the twocolonies gradually enlarged the statutory size of the hogsheaduntil, under edict from the Privy Council in Britain, Marylandwas ordered to pass a gauge act establishing the size of thehogshead in the same dimensions as those fixed in Virginia. Notwithstanding such legislation, however, the manufacture ofhogsheads was still characterized by carelessness andirregularity until the warehouse inspection system went intoeffect in the 18th century (Middleton, 1953: 116-117). It was not long before the colonial planters were faced with amore serious problem-overproduction-which was causing a declinein prices as well as quality of the leaf. In 1619, the firsttobacco inspection law was passed by the Virginia House ofBurgesses, ordering the lowest grade of tobacco to be destroyedand prohibiting "second growth" tobacco and themarketing of trash leaves. This act was followed in 1621 by a more direct attempt torestrict production. Each cultivator was required to limit hisgrowth to 1000 plants of nine leaves each. Although this orderwas soon rescinded as a patent failure, an act of 1629 permittedeach planter to tend only 3000 plants with an additionalallowance of 1000 for non-laboring 'women and each child (Brooks,1952: 96). Notwithstanding the statutory effort, the problem intensified.Virginia attempted to encourage the other tobacco colonies toreach agreements restricting plantings, but in Maryland, LordBaltimore resisted. If planters were poor, he asserted: It is not from the low price of Tobacco, but from theirowne sloth, ill husbandry and profusely spending their croppe inBrandewine, and other liquors (Robert, 1949: 11). Carolina, Maryland and Virginia actually reached a decision toprohibit the planting of the staple from. February 1667 toFebruary 1668. This "stint" proved a less effectivemeans of control than the winds of 1667, which almost destroyedthe, crop ready for harvest that year (Tobacco Institute,Virginia, 1971: 19). Acts of God failed to provide an ultimate solution, however,and severe economic dislocation in Maryland and Virginiaintensified. By 1681, the Virginia governor, Lord Culpeper,complained: ... [T]hat which is more to us than all other things puttogether, and will be the speedy and certain ruin of the colony,is the low price of tobacco. The thing is so fatal and desperatethat there is no remedy; the market is overstocked and every cropoverstocks it more. It is commonly said that there is tobaccoenough now in London to last all England for five years.... Ourthriving is our undoing, and our purchase of negroes, byincreasing the supply of tobacco, has greatly contributed thereto(Brooks, 1952: 112-113). The failure of the Virginia Assembly to pass another actrequiring a "stint"' led the so-called "cuttersand pluckers" to take the matter into their own hands in1682 by burning both their own crops and the plants of theirneighbors (Roberts, 1949: 11). The riot stimulated legislativeaction in 1684 of a less helpful sort: the destruction of tobaccowas made a criminal offense,, subject to the death penalty(Brooks, 1952: 12). Seventeenth century quality control laws proved no moresuccessful in the effort to relieve the depression of theindustry. Renewed efforts were made in early years of the nextcentury, however. In 1713, the Virginia House of Burgesses established awarehouse system to enforce tobacco inspection. Forty publicwarehouses were created. Strong opposition to the system led thePrivy Council to disallow the act In 1717, but the ensuingdepression of the 1720's was convincing evidence of the need forrelief. Accordingly, the system was reinstated with Britishapproval in 1730, cornplete with public warehouses and officialinspectors (Middleton, 1953: 120-121). The apparent success of the system appealed to Maryland,suffering also from a surfeit of tobacco. "Tobacco, ourmoney, is worth nothing wrote one Marylander in 1724, "'and[there is] not a Shirt to be had for Tobacco this year in all ourcountry" (Tobacco Institute, Maryland, 1971: 21). Tobacco riots ensued when the Mary] and Assembly initiallyrefused to follow Virginia's example. One individual was moved toinform Lord Baltimore that no improvement in the economic stateof the colony was possible until inspection laws were passed that"will prevent the sending to Market Such trash as is unfitfor any other use but Manure" (Tobacco Institute,,,Maryland, 1971: 23). Accordingly, Maryland followed Virginia inthe creation of an inspection system in 1747,and Carolina didlikewise in 1754 (Brooks, 1952: 165). Tobacco entirely dominated the economic and social structureof Virginia and Maryland. "Tobacco requires us to abhorcommunities or townships," wrote a 17th century governor ofMaryland, "since a planter cannot carry on his affairswithout considerable elbow room within his plantation"(Brooks, 1952: 98). In Virginia, tobacco had gained such ascendancy that it wasused as money. For example, when, in 1621, a cargo of twelveyoung women made its way to the colony, each one was valued at120 pounds of the best leaf (Brooks, 1952: 93). By law,Virginia's ministers were paid in tobacco at 16,000 poundsannually in 1696. The law provided that: A competent and sufficient provision for the clergy will bethe only means to supply this dominion with able and faithfulMinisters whereby the glory of God may be advanced,the churchpropagated, and the people edified (Werner, 1922: 102). Not until the Option Act was passed by the Virginia Assemblyin 1755 could the clergy's fees be paid in either money ortobacco (Brooks, 1952: 167). The regulation of tobacco in the colonies was devised inresponse to the industry with the intent to further theprosperity of the planters who dominated the economy. This themecontinued to pervade all related regulatory efforts in thetobacco-producing states thereafter, as new practices developedin the marketing of the leaf. The initial hogshead inspection system gradually gave way tothe sale of loose-leaf tobacco by auction. In 1849 the VirginiaCode recognized these methods in lieu of the sale of hogsheads ofthe leaf as provided in the 1730 Act. By 1865, the tobaccoauction had completely replaced the earlier marketing techniquesin Virginia (Tobacco Institute, Virginia, 1971: 28-29). More than a half century later Maryland followed suit. In1939, the loose-leaf auction warehouse system was introduced toreplace the hogshead system, and the conversion occurred almostovernight. The practices engaged in are regulated by the MarylandState Tobacco Authority, established in 1947 by law. TheAuthority itself is supervised by eight representatives selectedby the Governor from the producing counties, the University ofMaryland, the buyers and the sellers (Tobacco Institute,Maryland, 1971: 9-10). The Federal Government came to recognize the significance ofthe tobacco industry in response to state pressures. Accordingly,since 1930, several bills have been enacted to aid the growers. Enacted in 1935, the Tobacco Inspection Act directs theSecretary of Agriculture to establish quality standards and todesignate auction markets (7 U.S.C. 511 (b) and (d)). Thefollowing year, the Tobacco Control Act was passed, bestowingCongressional approval upon state compacts which regulate theproduction of tobacco, and subsidizing the expenses of the statecommissions involved (7 U.S.C. 515). Thus, the two elements ofinitial colonial regulation were preserved: the encouragement ofquality and the discouragement of quantity. The latter objective was further implemented by theAgricultural Adjustment Act of 1938. Since that time, paritypayments have been made to tobacco producers: In amounts which, together with the proceeds thereof, willprovide a return to such producers which is as nearly equal toparity price as the funds so made available will permit (7U.S.C. 1303). In addition, the Secretary of Agriculture is authorized to setnational marketing quotas respecting each kind of tobacco (7U.S.C. 1312), to apportion the quotas among the states, and toallot the portions among the farms (7 U.S.C. 1314). Penalties areimposed for overproduction (7 U.S.C. 1314). There is nothing subtle about these measures, of course. Theirintent is obvious: to assure the economic stability of anindustry which, as of 1960, provided the United States populationwith more than 150,000,000 pounds of manufactured tobacco forconsumption annually (Heimann, 1960: 93), and which provided morethan $4.8 billion in taxes in 1971 (USDA, Tobacco Situation,1971b: 44). During the same year, growers' gross receipts reached about$900 million (Tobacco Tax Council, 1970: 2), while cigarettesales alone grossed for the manufacturer and seller approximately$5 billion (Tobacco Tax Council, 1970: 53). The commercialmotivation is sound enough if considered abstractly. Whencombined with the revenue incentive, however, it has largelyobscured sumptuary controls. REGULATION FOR REVENUE Alexander Hamilton's tax package of 1794 proposed the firstfederal excise taxes upon tobacco products. To the distress ofPhiladelphia snuff manufacturers (Brooks, 1952: 146), however,the tax was restricted after serious Congressional debate totheir product only. James Madison led the opposition to a general tobacco tax; hisviews were summarized in the Annals of Congress on May 2, 1794: As to the subject before the House, it was proper to choosetaxes the least unequal. Tobacco excise was a burden the mostunequal. It fell upon the poor, upon the sailors, day-laborers,and other people of these classes, while the rich will oftenescape it (Robert, 1949: 100). The legislative decision was probably tempered as well byconsiderations of the enforceability of the measure: snuff had tobe manufactured, while quid and pipe tobacco were often homegrownleaf at the time (Heimann, 1960: 155). In any case, the snuffbill was ultimately enacted, modified, suspended and repealed,with small, if any, effect upon federal revenues. The opportunity to distill tax money from tobacco was seizedupon more vigorously at the time of the Civil War. On July 1,1862, an ad valorem tax was imposed upon cigars for the firsttime. This tax was raised two years later when a separate taxupon cigarettes was also imposed (Werner, 1922: 358). (Even theConfederacy sought to levy a tax-in-kind upon tobacco crops, butwas precluded from doing so by the inspection system whichrequired the inspector to deliver the full amount of tobaccospecified in the warehouse receipt (Robert, 1949: 117).) Thereafter, the taxes were raised in 1865, 1866 and 1875. Atemporary reduction followed, until the Spanish-American Warnecessitated further increases. Concurrently, taxes were leviedupon smoking and manufactured tobacco and snuff, lest the burdenfall unequally upon smokers (Werner, 1922: 559). By 1880, the tobacco taxes bad largely stabilized. At thattime, they accounted for 31% of total federal tax receipts, or$38.9 million. Of this, 50% of the collections was derived fromsmoking and chewing tobacco, 40% from cigars and cheroots, andless than 2% from cigarettes (Heimann, 1960: 156). Since that time, federal tax collections on tobacco productshave risen almost annually. Between 1910 and 1920, they increasedmore than 500%, the greatest increase in any single decade. By1970, they accounted for almost $2.1 billion, down slightly fromthe two preceding years (Tobacco Tax Council, 1970: 5). Indicative of changing patterns of consumption, the taxes oncigarettes, as a percentage of the total federal tobacco revenuejumped from 13.6% in 1910 to 51.1% in 1920. By 1970, thepercentage at 97.2% far outdistanced those revenues derived fromother forms of the product (Tobacco Tax Council, 1970: 5). Excise taxes have proved profitable and easy to collect. Therevenue schemes are simple on both the federal (26 U.S.C. 5701 etseq.) and state levels. In the past, no justification for themhas been deemed necessary since Madison's protest. No elaboratelicensing or state monopoly system, such as those designed tocontrol commerce in alcohol, has ever been imposed. In 1921, Iowa became the first state to cash in on the cropdirectly by taxing cigarettes. By 1930, 11 other states hadadopted the revenue measure (Robert, 1949: 256). In 1950, 40 states and the District of Columbia taxedcigarettes. The rates ranged from one cent to five cents for apack of 20 except in Louisiana which levied an eight cent tax oncigarettes. In 1958, Montana imposed an equivalent rate. Between 1950 and 1962, 43 of the 47 taxing states raised theirrates at least once. The frequent increase in cigarette taxesnarrowed the gap between the rates in low tax states and highertax states. In the 12-year period, the median tax rate rose fromthree cents to six cents per pack (Federal Trade Commission,1970: 3) ; the maximum rate remained at eight cents in Texas,Louisiana, Montana and New Mexico, in contrast to the two centrate in the District of Columbia and Kentucky. The four leading states in terms of both production andrelative dependence on the crop have been North Carolina, SouthCarolina, Kentucky and Virginia, the latter two being the onlystates in the history of cigarette taxation to decrease theirtaxes; the reduction was only .5 cent (from three cents to twoand a half cents) in 1960 and 1961, respectively. By 1966, Oregon became the 49th state to impose a tax oncigarettes; the rate was four cents per pack. Finally, in 1969North Carolina imposed a cigarette tax-two cents. The cigarette excise taxes continued to increase during thesixties. By 1970, the taxes ranged from North Carolina's twocents to Pennsylvania's 18 cents for a weighted average of 10.7cents. Twenty nine states levied taxes of 10 cents or more perpack (USDA, Tobacco Situation, 1971b: 40). Local governmentssuperimposed further excise taxes on the state taxes, rangingfrom one cent to 10 cents per package (Tobacco Tax Council, 1970:iv). By mid-1971, the range had widened further Connecticut at 21cents and North Carolina at two cents, the weighted average statetax being 11.1 cents (USDA, Tobacco Situation , 1971a: 7). TOBACCO REVENUES A peculiar relationship exists between production and revenue.In 1970, cash receipts from tobacco brought in $11 million forPennsylvania; tobacco farmers and cigarette taxes amassed $194.6million for the state. By comparison growers in North Carolinacollected $576 million while the state collected only $13.4million in cigarette revenues (USDA, Tobacco Situation, 1971b:43). The federal excise tax on a package of cigarettes is currentlyeight cents and has remained so since 1951. The combined stateand federal tax was highest in Pennsylvania; 26 cents for 20cigarettes, which was 58.2% of the retail price. Connecticut's 24cents and Texas's 23.5 cents were close behind; the average forthe United States was 46.8%. To the Federal and state governments today, tobacco is afinancial asset. The total federal and state revenue collected from all tobacco products in 1971 amounted to over $4.7 billion.Local governments excised the product further bringing the sumtotal to $4.8 million (USDA, Tobacco Situation, 1971b: 44). From the years 1890 to 1930 cigarette tax collections fromtobacco soared from approximately $1 million to over $339million. By 1950, they exceeded $1.2 billion. Totals for the years 1890 to 1970 are recorded in thefollowing chart (Tobacco Tax Council, 1970: 5) Cigarette tax Years Collections 1890 $1,100,000 1900 4,000,000 1910 7,900,000 1920 151,300,000 1930 359,800,000 1940 533,000,000 1950 1,242,800,000 1960 1,863,600.000 1970 2,036,100,000 REGULATION OF CONSUMPTION Even as far back as the 16th century, smoking was consideredto have medicinal value. Juan de Cardenas, a Spanish physicianwho lived in Mexico in the late 1500's, wrote that "Soldierssubject to privations, kept off cold, hunger, thirst by smokingand all the inhabitants of the hot countries of the Indiesalleviate their discomforts by the smoke of this blessed andmedicinal weed" (Wagner, 1971: 63-64). During, the recurrent epidemics of plague in the 17th century,it was widely believed that smokers were spared; it has beenreported that men who attended the sick and accompanied the deadkept their pipes lit (Wagner, 1971: 63-64). In 1614, one Scottish doctor praised the tobacco plant which: Prepareth the stomach for meat; it maketh a clear voice: itmaketh a sweet breath . . . in a few words it is the princess ofphysical plants (Gottsegen, 1940: 87). King James disagreed strenuously, and in 1604 ordered asubstantial increase in the import duty on the leaf. Smoking, hewrote in "A Counterblaste to Tobacco", is: A custom loathsome to the eye, hateful to the nose, harmfulto the brain, dangerous to the lungs, and in the black stinkingfume thereof, nearest resembling the horrible Stygian smoke ofthe pit that is bottomless (Brooks, 1952:56, 71). Another more passionate moralist wrote: . . . imagine thou beheldest here a firme-sucker's wifemost fearfully fuming forth very fountains of blood, howling foranguish of heart, weeping, wailing, and wringing her handstogether . . . while she _pitifully pleads with her husband thus:Oh husband, my husband . . . ! Why dost thou so vainly prefer avanishing filthy fume before my permanent virtues? (Brooks,1952: 72). Notwithstanding such alliterative literature, the habit ofsmoking increased in popularity, particularly in the colonies. AFrench visitor observed in 1686 that: Large quantities of it [tobacco] are used in this country,besides what they sell. Everyone smokes while working and idling.I sometimes went to hear the sermon; their churches are in thewoods, and when everyone has arrived the minister and all theothers smoke before going in. The preaching over, they do thesame thing before parting. They have seats for that purpose. Itwas here I saw that everybody smokes, men, women, girls and boysfrom the age of seven years (Robert, 1949: 99). It was said that even in New England, women of the colony"smoke in bed, smoke as they knead their bread, smoke whilstthey're cooking" (Gottsegen, 1940: 147). In the tobacco colonies, of course, there was no attempt torestrict Consumption of tobacco. It was, after all, theireconomic mainstay. Officials in the northern colonies were less enthusiasticabout the habit, however. In 1632, the General Court ofMassachusetts Bay took the initiative and forbade smoking inpublic tinder penalty of a fine (Tobacco Institute,Massachusetts, 1971 : 17). In 1638, the proscription was expandedto prohibit anyone from smoking in any inn or public house exceptin his own room "so as neither the master of the house norany of the guests there shall take offense thereat which if theydo, then such person is forthwith to forebear upon paying of twoshillings sixpence fine for every offense" (Werner, 1922:100). This law was followed by another in 1646 which prohibitedsmoking except on a journey of five miles or more from any town.Nor could a citizen of the colony bring a pipe or tobacco intothe precincts of the court (Werner, 1922: 100), although he mightsmoke at "the ordinary tyme of repast comonly calleddynner" (Heimann, 1960: 83). Plymouth colony was similarly strict. In 1638, a law waspassed forbidding anyone from smoking on the streets. Thefollowing year, it was decreed that jurymen might not smoke, onpain of a five shilling penalty. In 1641, even the importation of tobacco was forbidden,although the law was repealed a year later. A law passed in 1646prohibited all from smoking, but exempted "soldiers in timeof their training." And, finally, in 1669, it was orderedthat anyone found smoking on the Sabbath within two miles of ameeting house, would be fined 12 pence (Werner, 1922: 101). The colony at New Haven, Connecticut, essayed a like series ofstatutes to regulate tobacco consumption. In 1646, the GeneralCourt decreed that: No person under the age of twenty years nor any other thathath not already accustomed himself to the use thereof, shalltake any tobacko, until he hath brough a certificate under thehands of [a physician] that it is usefull for him, and also, thathe hath received a license from the court for the same.... Noneshall take any tobacko, publickly in the street or any openplaces unless on a journey of at least ten miles. (TobaccoInstitute, Connecticut: 20-21). Within three years those laws were repealed (Werner, 1922:102). However, it was further ordered in 1655 that: No tobacco shall be taken in the streets, yards or aboutethe howses in any plantation or farme in this jurisdictionwithout dores, neere or aboute the towne, or in the meetinghowse, or body of the trayne Souldiors, or any other place wherethey may doe mischief thereby, under the penalty of 84 pence apipe for a time, wch is to goe to him that informs and prosecuts (Heimann,1960: 83). As a result of the regulation, snooping became a profitableundertaking. In the end, however, the laws were of no avail insuppressing tobacco. By 1680, the governor of Connecticut recognized thesignificance of the leaf and reported that, "We have no needof Virginia's trade, most people planting so much Tobacco as theyspend," (Heimann, 1960: 84). Indeed, by the early 18thcentury, New England-grown tobacco was being produced in greatenough quantity for both domestic consumption and export (TobaccoInstitute, Connecticut: 22-23). Tobacco was not one of the major concerns of the 18th centuryeither before or after the Revolution. Social reform wasgenerally secondary to political issues. By the end of thecentury, however, Dr. Benjamin Rush had published his"Observations upon the influence of the Habitual use ofTobacco upon Health, Morals, and Property" in his collectionof Essays, Literary, Moral and Philosophical. It appeared in1798, and stressed the Doctor's thesis that smoking and chewingprovoked drunkenness: One of the usual effects of smoking and chewing is thirst.This thirst cannot be allayed by water, for no sedative or eveninsipid liquor will be relished after the mouth and throat havebeen exposed to the stimulus of the smoke, or juice of Tobacco. Adesire of course is excited for strong drinks, and these whentaken between meals soon lead to intemperance and drunkenness.One of the greatest sots I ever knew, acquired a love for ardentspirits by swallowing ends of Tobacco, which he, (lid, to escapedetection in the use of it. . . (Robert, 1949: 106). There was little immediate response to Rush's dire warnings,although in the year his tract was published, Boston enacted astatute to prohibit the carrying of a lighted pipe or cigar inpublic streets-apparently with the intent to reduce the hazard offire (Brooks, 1952: 245). An anti-tobacco crusade was launched in the 19th century,although with considerably less fervor that its sister movementagainst alcohol. Among the leaders were Rev. George Trask whosaid tobacco and alcohol were Satan's twins; and the Rev. OrinFowler, who declared in 1833: "Rum-drinking will not cease,,till tobacco-chewing and tobacco smoking and snuff -taking shallcease" (Robert, 1949: 107). Another, Dr. Joel Shew,attributed delirium tremens, perverted sexuality, impotency,insanity and cancer to the effects of smoking and chewing(Brooks, 1952: 219). The crusade warned as the pipe continued to attract adherents.From the 18th century on, the cigar too began to grow in favor,particularly after 1840. It is estimated that by 1850, theaverage number of cigars smoked was approximately 19 per capita.Within 10 years, the number had increased to about 26 (Gottsegen,1940: 8-10). Women smoked and chewed as well as the men. Indeed, Mrs.Andrew Jackson and Mrs. Zachary Taylor both smoked their pipes inthe White House (Heimann, 1960: 90). And, of course, the otherresidents of the Capital engaged heavily in the practices of bothchewing and spitting, to the extent that Charles Dickens, duringhis tour of the States, felt called upon to report that: Washington may be called the headquarters oftobaccotinctured saliva.... In all the public places of America,this filthy custom is recognized. In the courts of law, the judgehas his spittoon, the crier his, the witness his, and theprisoner his; while the jurymen and spectators are provided for.. . . The stranger will find [the custom] in its full bloom ofglory, luxuriant in all its alarming recklessness, at Washington (Brooks,1952: 215-216). Chewing and snuffing remained popular until the time of theCivil War. Thereafter, cigarette smoking was gradually adopted inNorth America, a habit indirectly acquired through the Britishfrom their Turkish and French allies during the Crimean War(Werner, 1922: 105). By 1870, approximately 13.9 million cigarettes were smokedannually in the United States, or .36 per capita. Over the next60 years, the number was to reach 976.91 per capita (Gottsegen,1940: 28). As more persons took to cigarettes, the zeal of reformers,which had ebbed during the Civil War, was renewed. Pamphlets,like those of the Temperance Movement, were published, urgingabstinence from smoking: "I'll never use tobacco, no; It is a filthy weed; I'll never put it in my mouth." Said Little Robert Reed. "It hurts the health ; it makes bad breath; 'Til very bad indeed. I'll never, never use it, no!" Said Little Robert Reed (Brooks, 1952: 242-243). During the period following the Civil War and prior to theformation of the American Tobacco Company in 1890, theanti-liquor forces continued to snipe at tobacco in all forms. Areformed drinker and temperance lecturer, John B. Gough, wouldpull from his pocket a square of tobacco, smell it as if it werea rose, cry out "Ali you black devil, I love-you" andthrow it away. The anti-tobacconists were led by Lucy Gaston, the greatest,warrior in the anti -cigarette campaign who was trained in theoffice of the Women's Christian Temperance Union and then movedover into the anti-tobacco Movement in the 1890's. Miss Gastonencouraged children to wear anti-tobacco pins or buttons andorganized armies of children to sing and preach to and againsttheir smoking elders (Wagner, 1971: 40). "All hostility to tobacco seems nowadays to beconcentrated on cigarettes," noted Harper's Weekly,observing the scene in 1905 (Robert, 1949: 169). It was scarcelya startling revelation. Twenty years earlier, the New York Timeseditorialized that: A grown man has no possible excuse for thus imitating thesmall boy.... The decadence of Spain began when the Spaniardsadopted cigarettes and if this pernicious habit obtains amongadult Americans the ruin of the Republic is close at hand . . . (Brooks,1952: 253). Miss Gaston witnessed some legislation victories. Between 1895and 1921, 14 states banned the sale of cigarettes (Neuberger,1963: 52). Even in the city of New York it was declared unlawfulfor women to smoke in public (Brooks, 1952: 271). Curiously,However, the city of Boston repealed its law which prohibitedsmoking in public in 1880 (Gottsegen, 1940: 153). The apparent success of the prohibitionists revived theanti-tobacconists' enthusiasm. "Prohibition is won; now fortobacco!" pledged Billy Sunday. Miss Gaston also renewed herdedication and actually announced her candidacy for thepresidency of the United States in 1920 on an antitobaccoplatform. For many anti-tobacconists, when it became apparent that theelder generation may be lost, the war against tobacco was focusedon the youth of the country. The National Education Associationpledged its membership to cooperate in efforts made in the city,state and nation to safeguard the health and morals of youth fromcigarette smoking to the end that high ideals for Americanmanhood may be, preserved for the coming generation (Hamilton,1927: 168). The National Congress of PTA, in Atlanta, Georgia, in 1926resolved "to lend its force to the cause of eliminatingthroughout the United State-, the use of cigarettes by minors andmake this a special work for the ensuing year for the good of ouryouth" (Hamilton, 1927: 168). It is for these reasons that the WCTU declared an educationalwar against tobacco, but declined to seek prohibitory legislation(Robert, 1949: 247). The disenchanting experience of Prohibition, the omnipresenceof the tobacco industry, the need for new sources of staterevenues and the prevalence and popularity of cigarette smokingcombined to frustrate the anti-tobacco campaign. Cigarettes didprovide a new source of revenue. Federal income from tobaccotaxes soared to new heights because of increased cigaretteconsumption and advanced rates. In any event, by 1927, each of the 14 states which had enactedprohibitory laws against cigarettes had repeated them (Neuberger,1963: 52). Immediately thereafter these, states imposed taxesupon the once forbidden product (Robert, 1949: 256; Federal TradeCommission, 1970: 3). STATE REGULATION Only those laws which forbade the sale of tobacco products tominors remain on the books, a trend set by New Jersey andWashington in 1883 (Gottsegen, 1940: 155). All but a few statutes restricting tobacco products to minorswere enacted between 1916-1920, simultaneous to the developmentand popularity of the domestic-blend cigarette. All 50 states bad laws banning sales to minors by 1950. Sincethen, Georgia,. Louisiana, and Wisconsin have repealed theirs leo 47 states plus the District of Columbia, WIL Vs prohibitingsales to minors. The most common age of restriction for cigarettes and tobaccoproducts today applies to persons under the age of 18. In aneffort to ensure stricter enforcement 11 states have lowered theage of restriction from 21 to 15 (Tobacco Merchants Association,1971: 1-2). In contrast to this trend, however, the, CaliforniaLegislature, 1971 defeated a bill to allow school smoking areasand lowering the sale to minor restrictions to 15 years old (NICSmoking and Health, 1971: 1). According to a Special Report released by the TobaccoMerchants Association of the United States, the liability forinfractions in all states is on the vendor and donor ofcigarettes. In a few states, manufacturer and persons advising orcompelling the minors to smoke, or owning the premise where suchbehavior occurs are also liable. However, in some states theinfraction does not extend to the parent or guardian. Some statespenalize the minor himself and others require that he divulge hissource. Most of the statutes that prohibit the furnishing ofcigarettes to minors extend the ban also to one or more othertobacco products. Only I 1 states restrict the sale"only" to cigarettes. The efficacy of such statutes, inthe day of the cigarette machine, is subject to substantialskepticism. A complete listing of existing state statutes concerningpossession by and sales to minors follows (Tobacco MerchantsAssociation, 1971: 3-4) : State Alabama Alaska Arizona Arkansas California Colorado Connecticut Delaware District of Columbia Florida Georgia ,see footnotes at end of table. Sale to minors Prohi I bited Age Yes Minor Yes Under 18 Yes Minor YeS Under 18 Yes Under 18 Yes Under 16 Yes Under 16 Yes Under 17 .. Yes Under 16 Yes Minor No provision Use or possession Prohibited Age No provision No provision Yes I Minor. No provision Yes (4). No provision No provision No provision No provision No provision No provision Sale to minors Use or possession State Prohibited Age Prohibited Age Hawaii Yes Under 15 No provision Idaho Yes Under 18 Yes Under 18. Illinois Yes 5 Under 18 Yes Under 18. Indiana Yes Under 16 Yes Under 21. Iowa Yes Under 18 (57) Under 18. Kansas Yes Under 18 Yes Under 18. Kentucky Yes Under 18 Yes Under 18. Louisiana No provision No provision Maine Yes Under 16 No provision Maryland Yes Under 15 No provision Massachusetts Yes' Under 18 No provision Michigan Yes Under 21 Yes Under 21. Minnesota Yes Under 18 Yes Under 18. Mississippi Yes5 Under 18 No provision Missouri Yes Under 18 Yes Under 18. Montana Yes Under 18 No provision Nebraska Yes Under 18 Yes Under 18. Nevada Yes 5 Under 18 No provision New Hampshire Yes Minor No provision New Jersey Yes Under 16 No provision New Mexico Yes5 Under 18 8 No provision New York Yes Under 18 No provision North Carolina Yes Under 17 No provision North Dakota Yes Under 21 Yes Under 18.9 Ohio Yes Under 18 No provision Oklahoma Yes Minor (6) Minor. Oregon Yes Under 18 Yes Under 18. Pennsylvania Yes Minor (6) Minor. Rhode Island Yes Under 16 Yes Under 16. South Carolina Yes Under 18 (6) Under 18. South Dakota Yes Under 18 Yes Under 18. Tennessee Yes Under 18 No provision Texas Yes,' Under 16 No provision Utah Yes Under 19 Yes' Under 19. Vermont Yes5 Under 17 No provision Virginia Yes Under 18 No provision Washington Yes Under 21 Yes Between 18 and 21.1 West Virginia Yes Under2l Yes Under 21. 'Wisconsin No provision No provision Wyoming Yes Under 18 No provision 1 Includes a prohibition against the purchase of cigarettes byminors (in Illinois without written order of parent or guardian),as well as use or possession by 2 if other than parent or guardian. 3 However, inmates in State correction institutions 16 orover, with consent of parent or guardian, may be furnishedtobacco and tobacco products. Eighteen and over. in junior college if not permitted bygoverning board. Without consent of parent or guardian. Minors smoking or in possession of cigarettes are required togive source of cigarettes; use or possession not otherwiseregulated. in addition, high school students may not smoke. And any pupil of any school in State. Or a minor pupil in any school. Purchase or possession by misrepresentation of age amisdemeanor. THE IMPETUS FOR FEDERAL SUMPTUARY REGULATION The effect of smoking on health has been the subject ofdiscussion for hundreds of years. Early participants in thetobacco controversy, beginning in the late 16th century, did notassociate the use of tobacco with the production of cancersalthough they credited it with causing or curing nearly everyother known disease. Dr. John Hill, of London, a physician, botanist and prolificwriter, first suggested the relation in 1761. In Cautions Againstthe Immoderate Use ol Snuff, he reported six cases of"polypusses" related to excessive indulgence in tobaccoin the form of snuff. One such "polypus" was describedas a swelling in one nostril that was hard, black and adherent ona broad base. Painless at first, it later developed "all thefrightful symptoms of an open cancer." Dr. Hill believedthat this lesion could be fatal and placed the blame for itsorigin on tobacco. Dr. Hill has been noted as the first to reportan association of tobacco with cancer (Redmond, 1970: 21). In 1939, the first scientific study linking lung cancer withsmoking was published. Between 1950 and 1954, 14 studiesassociating cigarettes and serious diseases were completed(Fritschler, 1969: 145). At the present time, there is no government agency with clearjurisdiction over the health aspects of cigarettes. The FederalTrade Commission can act on matters of advertising and packageinformation. The Food and Drug Administration concerns itselfonly with foods, drugs, solids, or liquids that are eaten ordrunk. Tobacco is neither a food nor a drug under current legaldefinitions. Nor are cigarettes eaten or drunk; they are inhaled. The 1890 edition of the U.S. Pharmacopoeia, an officiallisting of drugs published by the government, included tobacco.In later editions, tobacco was dropped. Former Senator MaurineNeuberger has claimed that the removal of tobacco from thePharmacopoeia was the price paid to get support of tobacco-statelegislators for the Food and Drug Act of 1906. The leaf wasthereby removed from the jurisdiction of the FDA (Wagner, 1971:74). The first statement from the Public Health Service on thesubject was made by its Surgeon General, Leroy F. Burney, M.D.,in the Journal of the American Medical Association in November,1959. The heart of this statement was that "the weight ofevidence at present implicates smoking as the principaletiological factor in the increased incidence of lungcancer" (Diehl, 1969: 154). In June, 1961 the American Cancer Society, the American HeartAssociation and the National Tuberculosis and Respiratory DiseaseAssociation jointly requested that a commission be appointed"to consider the responsibilities of government, of businessand of voluntary agencies relative to the health hazards ofcigarette smoking and to recommend a solution of this healthproblem that would protect the public and would interfere leastwith the freedom of industry and the happiness ofindividuals" (Diehl, 1969: 155). On June 7, 1962, the then Surgeon General, Dr. Luther Terry,announced, with the approval of the President, that he wasestablishing an "expert committee to undertake acomprehensive review of all data on smoking and health." The members of this committee were respected scientists whohad previously expressed no opinion about the relationship oftobacco to health. All members were approved for appointment bythe tobacco industry as well as by the American MedicalAssociation and several national health agencies. Half of thecommittee members were cigarette smokers. On January 11, 1964, after some 15 months of intensive study,this Advisory Committee- to the Surgeon General issued itsmonumental unanimous report stating that "cigarette smokingis a health hazard of sufficient importance in the United Statesto warrant, appropriate remedial action." The committee stated unequivocally that "cigarettesmoking is causally related to lung cancer in men; the magnitudeof the effect of cigarette smoking far outweighs other factors.The data for women, though less extensive, point in the samedirection." Air pollution was found to be a very minorfactor in the cause of the disease, far outweighed by cigarettesmoking. The death rate from heart disease, the report noted, was 70percent higher in cigarette smokers than in nonsmokers, andalthough there was not enough evidence to say positively thatsmoking causes heart disease, there was enough to assume that itis a cause and to take action against it. Another conclusion of great importance was that"cigarette smoking is the most important of the causes ofchronic bronchitis in the United States and increases the risk ofdying from chronic bronchitis and emphysema." The report analyzed the statistical, pathological, clinical,and experimental evidence in relation to smoking and otherdiseases. A total of more than 4,000 published reports werestudied and more than 150 investigators were personallyinterviewed. "The result was the most comprehensive andauthoritative report on this subject ever made" (Diehl,1969: 156). THE HEALTH WARNING REQUIREMENT At the time the Surgeon General's Report was published, nostatute, administrative ruling or court decision required thatcigarette packaging or advertising contain any statement aboutthe dangers to health attributable to cigarette smoking. After Trade Regulation Rule Proceedings in March and June1964, the Federal Trade Commission concluded that cigaretteadvertising was deceptive (misleading) and that advertisers had aresponsibility to warn the public of the health hazards ofcigarette smoking. To accomplish this, the Commission proposed that cigarettepackages state the amount of tar and nicotine in the smoke of thecigarette which the package contains and that cigarette packagesand cigarette advertising carry a statement such as:"Caution: Cigarette 'Smoking is Dangerous to Health. It MayCause Death from Cancer and Other Diseases." This warning was to be required on cigarette packagesbeginning January 1, 1965, and in cigarette advertising beginningJuly 1, 1965. The tobacco industry first obtained a postponementof the effective dates of this ruling and then prevailed uponCongress to vitiate the ruling by passing the Cigarette Labelingand Advertising Act, requiring all packages of cigarettes sold inthis country to carry the label "Cigarette Smoking May beHazardous to Your Health," but prohibiting the Federal TradeCommission and state and local governments from requiring anyother label on cigarette packages and any warnings in cigaretteadvertising at least until 1969. A New York Times editorial called the Cigarette Labeling andAdvertising Act of 1965 "a shocking piece ofspecial-interest legislation-a bill to protect the economichealth of the tobacco industry by freeing it of properregulation" (Cigarette Labeling and Advertising, 1965). Anarticle in the Atlantic Monthly described the politicalmaneuvering behind this legislation under the title "TheQuiet Victory of the Cigarette Lobby: How It Found the BestFilter Yet-Congress" (Diehl, 1969:162). Public concern attending publication of the Surgeon General'sreport, Smoking and Health, and the pending FTC regulations forwarnings on cigarette packages and in cigarette advertisingapparently convinced the tobacco industry that some action byCongress was inevitable. Reportedly the industry decided to accept a weak label oncigarette packages provided that the legislation would preventany regulation of cigarette advertising. This was accomplished byinserting into the proposed law the provision precluding the FTCand all state or local governments from requiring any warning oncigarette packages other than the one approved by Congress andalso preventing any warnings in cigarette advertising. At House and Senate committee hearings, committee membersfriendly to the industry attempted to discredit both the SurgeonGeneral's Report and the testimony given by the Surgeon General,the Chairman of the Federal Trade Commission, and therepresentatives of various medical and health organizations. Thetobacco industry then presented a number of physicians whotestified that they disagreed with the conclusions of the SurgeonGeneral's Advisory Committee and that in their opinion there wasno real evidence that cigarette smoking is harmful (Diehl, 1969:162). Although this act temporarily prevented any requirement thattar and nicotine content be indicated on cigarette packages, theFederal Trade Commission did establish a laboratory to determinethe, tar and nicotine content of the smoke of cigarettes on theAmerican market, making the results of these tests availableperiodically to the public. The Cigarette Labeling and Advertising Act also required thatabout July 1, 1967, and annually thereafter the Federal TradeCommission report to Congress concerning the effectiveness of thewarning label, and upon current practices of cigaretteadvertising and promotion, with "recommendations forlegislation that are deemed appropriate." After an intensive study the Federal Trade Commission made adetailed report to Congress with the following summary andrecommendations: "There is virtually no evidence that thewarning statement on cigarette packages has had any significanteffect." Sales remained constant and the industry continued to investhundreds of millions of dollars in advertising; $200 million ayear was being spent on radio and television alone in 1967;cigarette advertisers had become the single largest productadvertisers on television accounting for about eight per cent oftelevision advertising time (Wagner, 1971: 166). THE FAIRNESS DOCTRINE Another government agency had become concerned with cigaretteadvertising. The Federal Communications Commission is mandated toassure that the airways, which belong to the public, are used inthe public interest. John P. Banzhaf, III, who has been called the "RalphNader of the tobacco industry" was responsible for the FCC'sinvolvement in the cigarette advertising controversy. Afterviewing several cigarette commercials on television, Banzhafconcluded that "what he was seeing might be consideredlegally 'controversial"' (Wagner, 1971: 168). He then wroteto WCBS-TV in New York on December 1, 1966, requesting that he orsome other responsible spokesman be given an opportunity topresent contrasting views on the issue of the benefits andadvisability of smoking. Banzhaf's letter cited three commercials that presented theview that smoking is "socially acceptable and desirable,manly, and a necessary part of a rich full life. "Heasked-free time roughly approximate to that spent on thepromotion of the "virtues and values of smoking." CBSroutinely turned down the request. He sent a second letter to CBSand submitted a formal complaint against WCBS-TV to the FCC inWashington. The FCC, in a letter to the television station dated June 2,1967, said programs it had broadcast dealing with the effect ofsmoking on health were insufficient to offset the effects of paidadvertisements broadcast for a total of five to 10 minutes eachbroadcast day. "We hold that the fairness doctrine isapplicable to such advertisements" the Commission said. Theyrejected Banzhaf's claim for equal time, however. The FCC called on the station to provide free each week"a significant amount of time for the other viewpoint,"thereby implementing the smoking education campaigns launched bythe government under the cigarette labeling law. "Thisrequirement will not preclude or curtail presentation by stationsof cigarette advertising which they choose to carry." TheFCC basically decided that it was not in the public interest forthe airways to be used by radio and television to advertisecigarettes without some warning of the health hazards involvedwith smoking (Wagner, 1971: 169). The FCC was deluged with requests to reconsider its action.The agency stood firm in its unanimous decision. As a result ofthe ruling many of the voluntary health agencies and the PublicHealth Service made available to the television and radioindustries spot announcements and other program materials on theserious consequences to health caused by cigarette smoking. The FCCs decision was upheld by the U.S. Court of Appeals onNovember 21, 1968; the court said the agency could indeed use itsfairness doctrine to require free time for anti-smokingcommercials. "The danger cigarettes may pose to health is,among others, a danger to life itself," the Court said. As the Commission emphasized, it is a danger inherent in thenormal use of the product, not one merely associated with itsabuse or dependent on intervening fortuitous events. It threatensa substantial body of the population, not merely a peculiarlysusceptible fringe group. Moreover, the danger, though notestablished beyond all doubt, is documented by a compellingcumulation of statistical evidence (Wagner, 1971: l66-173). (The cigarette manufacturers then asked the Supreme Court toreview their case, but the high court turned down the request,leaving the appeals court decision standing.) "Most observers agree that the dramatic entrance ofthe FCC into the smoking controversy was probably the mostimportant single event during the three-year moratorium onrequiring health warnings in cigarette advertisements imposed byCongress on the FTC" (Wagner, 1971 : 175). THE BAN ON ADVERTISING Both the U.S. Public Health Service and Federal TradeCommission have annually reported findings to Congress sincepassage of the cigarette labeling law. The FTC recommended thatthe Act should be amended to: "Warning: Cigarette Smoking IsDangerous to Health and May Cause Death From Cancer and OtherDiseases." Additionally, the FTC recommended legislation to require thesame warning to appear in all cigarette advertisements and torequire statements of tar and nicotine content on all cigarettepackages and in all advertising. Legislation to accomplish these objectives as well as thefollowing were recommended by the FTC: Cigarette advertising on television and radio should bebarred entirely. Alternately, cigarette advertising on televisionand radio should be limited as to hours in which it may appear;the extent to which it may appear; and the types of programs onwhich it may appear; Increased appropriations, should be made to the Departmentof Health, Education, and Welfare for education of the public(especially young people) as to the health hazards of smoking; Appropriations should be made for research under thedirection of the National Institutes of Health on the developmentof less hazardous cigarettes. "By 1969, the stage had been set for a showdown overcigarette advertising and promotion" (Wagner, 1971: 190).The U.S. Government was increasing its efforts to discourage thesale of cigarettes. Post office trucks carried posters:"100,000 Doctors Have Quit Smoking." The Surgeon General continued to release reports about theadverse health effects of smoking. Dr. Daniel Horn, director of the National Clearinghouse forSmoking and Health, was urging doctors to deliver antismokingappeals to patients in their offices. Movie personalities had become involved in the American CancerSociety's campaign called I.Q. (for "I Quit") thatpassed out lapel buttons and dispatched public speakers aroundthe country to discourage the habit. Doris Day, Debbie Reynoldsand Lawrence Welk refused to allow tobacco companies to sponsortheir TV shows. Two ad agencies--Ogilivy and Mather and Doyle DaneBernbach-and a few radio and television stations would not acceptcigarette business. Several magazines did not accept cigaretteadvertising as a matter of principle: Reader's Digest, the NewYorker, and the Saturday Review. The Christian Science Monitorhad never carried cigarette ads; the Boston Globe announced inMay, 1969 that it would no longer accept such advertising"because accumulated medical evidence has indicated thatcigarette smoking is hazardous to health" (Wagner, 1971:220). In April 1969, a few weeks before the House Interstate andForeign Commerce Committee was scheduled to open hearings on theFTC proposals, a series of bills were introduced in the House byrepresentatives of tobacco producing states. One such bill, H.R.7177, co-sponsored by all eleven of North Carolina's HouseDelegation, proposed "to establish a comprehensive Federalprogram to deal with cigarette labeling and advertising withrespect to any relationship between smoking and health." Identical measures were introduced under the sponsorship ofcongressmen from Virginia, Maryland, Kentucky, and Florida. Someaccounts of the activity on Capitol Hill during this periodattribute these bills to the tobacco interests' intention"to prevent strengthening of the warning label and makepermanent the ban on state and Federal regulation of cigaretteadvertising, which was due to expire on June 30. Passage of thislegislation was the best tobacco interests could have hoped forunder the circumstances" (Wagner, 1971: 205). After testimony from both sides, the House Committee approveda stiffer health warning but prohibited regulatory action oncigarette advertising for six years and in other ways generallyupheld the status quo. The Senate, Commerce Committee, on December 5, 1970, voted outa bill banning cigarette commercials from the air as of January1, 1971. The FTC was prohibited from acting on cigarette ads innewspapers and magazines until the middle of 1972. The labelingprovision in the Senate bill was weaker than that established inthe House-voted measure, and the bill also precluded cigaretteregulatory action by the fifty states and local governments. In a session on December 12, a floor amendment was introducedwhich loosened the Committee's proposed restriction on the FTC byallowing the agency to require health warnings in advertising asof July 1, 1971. The bill also authorized the FTC to move soonerif it found that tobacco companies were switching from broadcastto print advertising so massively that it could be considered a" gross abuse." This bill also approved a new requiredhealth warning for cigarette packages"Warning: CigaretteSmoking Is Dangerous to Your Health." After Senate passage, the measure still had to -pass a jointSenate-House Conference Committee where important differencesbetween the two bills had to be reconciled. The bill that emerged from conference differed only slightlyfrom the Senate measure. The cautionary label to which theconferees agreed provides: "Warning: The Surgeon General HasDetermined That Cigarette Smoking is Dangerous to YourHealth." "In a final concession to the broadcasters,the conferees agreed to delay for one day the blackout ofcigarette commercials from December 31, 1970, to midnight January1, 1971. That would give them a last shower of cash from the NewYear's Day football bowl games" (Wagner, 1971: 216). It wasestimated that the loss to television and radio stations wouldamount to about $220 million a year, or about 7.5% of their totaladvertising revenues. President Nixon signed the Act on April 1, 1970. Some observers marvel that the bill was passed "in spiteof massive pressure that had been brought to bear against it andagainst the regulation of cigarette advertising generally, by thetobacco industry, the broadcasting industry, and the lobbyistsand their political allies. This was a combination that for yearshad proved invincible against a counterforce of scientists andpublic health and public interest advocates who, armed withformidable statistics on the damage to health and life caused bycigarette smoking, had sought to protect consumers by requiringall cigarette advertising to provide adequate warnings of thesedangers" (Whiteside, 1970: 58). There are those observers , on the other hand, who do not viewthe ban of cigarette advertising on television and radio as sucha success for the consumer. Rather, they cite the statistics onconsumption in other countries to point up the fact that bans onadvertising do not reduce sales. In Czechoslovakia, for example, no direct advertising oftobacco is permitted; yet consumption increased 14% between 1953and 1958. Advertising of foreign cigarettes was banned in 1962 inItaly; the following year sales increased 39.4% and in 1964, 11.7%. Sales increased in England after television cigaretteadvertisements were banned in 1965. Consumption figures for thefollowing three years in Britain reveal increases: 112 billioncigarettes in 1965, 118 billion in 1966; and 119.1 billion in1967 (Cigarette Advertising, 1970: 113-114). Robert Miller, an agricultural economist in the Department ofAgriculture's Economic Research Service, reports that cigaretteconsumption is up in every part of the world although advertisingwas banned in several European countries some years ago. Hepredicts an eventual decrease in sales during the next five yearsand perhaps a 12-13% decrease in tobacco consumption (TobaccoAdvertising Could End, 1970: 7). Other observers can see a gradual reduction in cigaretteconsumption as a result of a prohibition on advertising; somefeel a ban on advertising merely makes it difficult to launch anew brand. Others predict that the ban will eliminate the socialacceptability of the habit although consumption will not go down. The "live dangerously novelty" has also beenidentified as a possible cause for gains in consumption;"such a philosophy might well be prevalent among the young,the very ones that antismoking advocates are most anxious toprotect" (Cigarette Advertising, 1970: 112-113). Another consequence of the ban on cigarette commercials wasthe FCC ruling that the broadcasters' obligation to airantismoking messages had ended. The stations continue to run themas public service spots; however, the volume was decreasedconsiderably from the former 1 to 3 ratio established by the FCC.The antismoking forces are fearful that a decrease in these spotsis harmful to their cause and may retard their efforts to reducecigarette consumption. On October 20,1971, a U.S. District Court ruled that theCongressional ban on cigarette advertising is constitutional. Theruling stated that such advertising does not qualify under theFirst Amendment's guarantee of freedom of speech; a sharpdistinction was drawn between guarantees of freedom. of speechfor individuals and the "limited extent" to whichbroadcast advertising qualifies for such protection. The court also ruled that Congress had more than one"rational basis" for excluding cigarette ads fromtelevision and not the printed media one being that broadcastsare the "most persuasive" types of advertising(Cigarette Ad Ban, 1971). Ultimately, the constitutional questionwill have to be decided by the United States Supreme Court. CONSUMPTION TRENDS Cigarette smoking is widespread in America today; 45.9% of themale population 17 years of age and over and 30.5% of females 17and over are smokers. In 1970, about $10.6 billion ofindividuals' expenditures was for cigarettes. Data on cigarette sales and advertising has been obtained bythe FTC from domestic cigarette manufacturers; the table belowprovides cigarette sales for the years 1963 to the present(Federal Trade Commission, 1970: 3) : TOTAL CIGARETTES SOLD Year Billions 1963 516.5 1964 505.0 1965 521.1 1966 529.9 1967 535.8 1968 540.3 1969 527.9 1970 534.2 The reduction in sales in 1964 coincides with the publicattention given the Report of the Surgeon General issued onJanuary 11, 1964. Public awareness of the dangers cited in theReport was high. It was soon forgotten, for in 1965 the totalnumber of cigarettes sold was almost 5 billion higher than theyear prior to the Surgeon General's Report. In 1969 there was another significant decline; it has beensuggested that this decline is attributable to severalhigh-visibility events and also by sales tax increases. Forexample, the FCC ruling was upheld in November 1968 givingimpetus to the antismoking TV campaign; the federal government'santi-smoking campaign was in full swing during 1968-69; thepublic outcry was being felt by economic interests-magazines,newspapers, personalities and advertising agencies which refusedsponsorship for business from tobacco companies. There were significant state tax increases immediately priorto 1969 which probably contributed to the reduction in salesduring that year. During fiscal year 1967, 15 states increasedtheir cigarette tax rates; the average increase was 3.5 cents.The rate increase ranged from New York's, Ohio's, and Illinois'two cents to California's and Florida's seven cents. The nextyear, seven more states increased their cigarette taxes. Therates ranged from Massachusetts' and Vermont's two cents toMinnesota's, Rhode Island's, and Tennessee's five cents theaverage increase approximately four cents (Council of StateGovernments, 1968: 196-197). The ban on cigarette advertising on television and radio beganon January 2, 1971, yet several calculations reflect a rise incigarette sales during the past year. Business Week projectionsof industry sales and brand rankings show that a record 529billion cigarettes were consumed in 1971, 1.5% more than 1970'ssales (Where Cigarette Makers Spend, 1971: 56). Tobacco industrysources estimate that consumption has risen in 1971 by 1.5% to535 billion cigarettes (Cigarette Sales Up, 1972: 3). John C. Maxwell, tobacco analyst for Oppenheimer &Company, a brokerage firm, also reported a rise-2.3% in domesticunit sales in 1971. He relates part of the growth in cigaretteconsumption to the population mix the increase hit the 20-40 yearage group, where smoking is heaviest. The Maxwell report suggeststhat the rest of this growth must be related to "governmentoverkill, wherein many voices in Washington suggest thateverything we eat or drink is harmful" (Maxwell, 1971: 1). An industry specialist with Manufacturers Hlanover TrustCompany, on the other hand, attributes both the lag in sales in1969 and the new increase to the "very effective antismokingads on television. Since the ban, these commercials rarelyappear" (Cigarette Sales Up, 1972: 3). Another industry executive notes, "For years we havebelieved that the role of cigarette advertising is to attractsmokers from competitive brands rather than induce nonsmokers tostart smoking. We failed to convince the Federal CommunicationsCommission of this, but it is borne out by our industry'sexperience since the TV ban. Within a relatively stable market,some companies have continued to gain while others lost. Somebrands have increased their share of market while others havedeclined" (Where Cigarette Makers Spend, 1971: 56). Skepticscontinue to argue that tobacco companies have also been trying torecruit new young smokers. TOBACCO: ECONOMICS AND POLITICS It is generally accepted that tobacco has been an extremelypowerful force in American politics. Approximately 50 millionsmokers smoked 535 billion cigarettes in the past year. More than100,000 employees receive $500 million in wages annually fromtobacco manufacturing companies; over 4,500 wholesalers handlethe distribution of tobacco products and hundreds of thousands ofmerchants depend on tire sale of cigarettes as a source of theirincome. Cigarette companies had been spending over $200 million peryear on radio and television advertising, and since the ban,almost all of this money has been diverted to other mediaadvertising providing many thousands of jobs in ad agencies andin the various media. Three million people from about 750,000families receive $1.4 billion annually for the cultivation oftobacco used in cigarettes. Peripherally affected are those involved in producing the 40million pounds of moisture-proof cellophane, the 70 millionpounds of aluminum foil, the 27 billion printed packs, and the2.7 billion cartons (Cigarette Advertising, 1970: 110-111;Wagner, 1971: 120; USDA, Tobacco Situation, 1971a: 29-31). One writer, reporting on the present public policy trend,notes that "attempts to discourage smoking would affect thelives of millions of people and would have profound economic andpolitical consequences" (Wagner, 1971: 121). Advocates of cigarette smoking today are organized intoextremely powerful groups, each having its own specific functionand plentiful resources. The Tobacco Tax Council, established in 1949, compiles data onthe taxation of tobacco products by the Federal, state and localgovernments. The Council's annual booklet, "Cigaret Taxes inthe United States" has been superseded by " The TaxBurden on Tobacco" since 1966. This pamphlet"undertakes to trace the history of tobacco taxes from theyears of the Civil War down through [the present year]"(Tobacco Tax Council, 1970: iii). The trade association promoting the welfare of the tobaccoindustry is the Tobacco Merchants Association of the U.S. It iscomposed of manufacturers, wholesalers, retailers, importers,exporters, leaf dealers, suppliers, and firms interested in theindustry. Its Bulletins cover legislation, trends, specialreports; its numerous other publications and activities seek toimprove industry operations and expand outlets (e.g.,international) f or potential sales (Tobacco MerchantsAssociation, 1971: 1-4). The tobacco industry's point of view is nurtured and protectedby the Tobacco Institute, a nonprofit corporation founded in1958. Its membership includes major U.S. manufacturers ofcigarettes, smoking and chewing tobacco, and snuff: The BlochBrothers Tobacco Company, Brown & Williamson TobaccoCorporation, Conwood Corporation, G. A. Georgopulo & Company,Helme Products, Larus & Brother Company, Liggett & Myers,Lorillard, Philip Morris Incorporated, R. J. Reynolds Industries,Scotten-Dillion Company, and United States Tobacco Company. The Institute is financed by contributions from the largecorporations according to their share of the market. Theinstitute reports on the pro-tobacco side of the medical story,attempting to discredit antismoking publicity, and publishesinformation on the historical role of tobacco, its place in thenational economy, the industry itself, and the public's use oftobacco products. The Council for Tobacco Research, created in 1953 in responseto medical bulletins reporting on the hazards of smoking,processes and administers millions of research grants."Although research money was to be awarded with no stringsattached [The Council] nicely serve[s] the purpose of identifyingthe industry with the welfare of humanity and spreading good willthrough the scientific community" (Wagner, 1971: 80). The scientific data continue to be attacked from both sides.Since 1954 a great quantity of research has been published and,in turn, disputed. For example, "the press played up theHammond and Auerbach study and the claim that twelve beagles haddeveloped lung cancer" from cigarettes. "The findingshave subsequently been downgraded by ' v the author to twomicroscopic tumors with the further revelation that two dogs inthe control group also developed tumors" (Maxwell, 1971: 1). Another area of contention has developed around therelationship between cigarette smoke itself and lung cancer. Arecent paper by Dr. Geoffrey Myddelton given at the Second WorldConference on Smoking and Health in London, September 20-24,1971, compares the incidence of smoking and lung cancer invarious countries. He indicates, "Japan smokes 86% as muchas Britain but has only 27% of its lung cancer. Canada smokestwice as many cigarettes as the Netherlands but has only 69% asmuch lung cancer." He goes on to correlate the use of dieselfile] in England to lung cancer (Maxwell, 1971: 2). From the other side, the United States Public Health Service1972 report The Health Consequences of Smoking maintains that"nonsmokers as well as smokers may be harmed by cigarettes,. . . tobacco smoke in closed cars and poorly ventilated roomscan contaminate the atmosphere for everyone. . . . The chiefdanger is exposure to low levels of the deadly gas, carbonmonoxide. Experiments, with animals have shown that variousconcentrations of the colorless, odorless, and tasteless gas'adversely affect' the structure and function of the heart andlungs. The implication is that this may also be true in man"(Study Says Cigarette Smoke Also May Harm Nonusers, 1972: 1). It is estimated that at the present time one and a half to twomillion adults give up smoking every year. Sensing the hazards ofthe future, some cigarette, companies sought fiscal security indiversification and substitution; tobacco manufacturers are nowmarketing, for example, safety razors, fertilizers, dog food,ballpoint pens, peanut butter and other non-nicotine products. By1967, sales on non-tobacco products accounted for approximatelyone-third of the, total sales of cigarette manufacturers. It remains to be seen whether tobacco power will be whittledaway any further in the next few years. Some feel that "thetobacco subsystem has succeeded in keeping the health question alow priority item on the government's agenda by playing onegovernment agency off against another.... This subsystem cutsacross institutional lines and includes the paid representativesof tobacco growers, marketing organizations and manufacturers.,.Congressmen representing tobacco growing states [are] leadingmembers of four subcommittees, including two ,appropriationssubcommittees and two committees in each house of Congresshandling tobacco legislation. . . . Tobacco power [is] thusfirmly entrenched and well supported" (Wagner, 1971: 121). On the other hand, a strongly worded commentary by an industryspokesman cites Justice John Marshall's statement to illustrateindustry's precarious position: "The power to tax involvesthe power to destroy." He continues with a description ofthe tobacco industry's present situation: The onslaught of state and local taxes on tobacco products... represents a most serious threat to all segments of ourindustry.... We are now facing a calculated attempt to destroy,or at least drastically curtail, the sale of smoking products.The political and economic climate is most favorable for thisattack. Smoking and health is a prime political issue in the samecontext as air pollution, crime in the streets, and consumerism.At the same time, local governments are verging on bankruptcy.Revenue of any sort is therefore a must. It is a tough battle,and cigarette industry is currently bearing the largest part ofthe attack (Regensburg, 1971: 146). The revenues gained from tobacco tax collections aresignificant. Over $2.1 billion in Federal taxes and over $2.5billion in state cigarette taxes were collected in Fiscal Year1971 (Tobacco Tax Council, 1970: 4-6, 8; USDA, Tobacco Situation,1971b: 44). Total tobacco taxes were $4.8 billion in 1971compared with $1.7 billion in 1950. In 1970 tobacco taxes accounted for 1.1% of total federal taxreceipts and represented 13.8 percent of all excise taxes (USDA,Tobacco Situation, 1971b: 40). This places the tobacco tax as theseventh largest source of collection by the Federal governmentbehind the major giants, e.g., income and profit taxes (bothcorporate and individual), employment taxes, manufacturers excisetaxes, alcohol taxes, and estate and gift taxes. In terms ofindividual commodities it ranks behind only alcohol. Thus,federal revenue would be importantly affected if tobaccoconsumption were to decline. CONCLUSION The big question is how the Federal government plans toproceed. Six tobacco bills are now pending in Congress. One ofthese bills would give the Federal Trade Commission authority toset maximum permissible limits on tar and nicotine. Another wouldestablish a graduated cigarette tax based on tar content. The FTC is presently carrying on negotiations with theindustry to come up with a "clear and conspicuous"health warning for its print advertising. It is expected that theindustry, " which has been working closely with the FTC'will' take some 'voluntary' labeling action" (WhereCigarette Makers Spend, 1971: 57). The industry feels the pressure; one member explains: "Weare resigned to it. Over-all.... the industry mood is much morerelaxed-now that we have this first big year behind us"(Where Cigarette Makers Spend, 1971: 57). The public is clamoring for government action; a 1970 CollegePoll'. surveying-youths 18 and older on more than 100 campusesreveals that 96% believe that smoking is dangerous to one'shealth (College Poll, 1971). Further, a 1969 study on teenage (13- to 18-yearolds) smokingattitudes, motivation and habits indicates "deep teenagedissatisfaction with cigarette smoking, considerable knowledge ofits ill effects, but a very exaggerated estimate of theacceptance of smoking by the adult world" (LiebermanResearch, 1969: 1-20). And, a 1970 nationwide survey of teenagersrevealed: "72% of non-smokers identified physicians as theone group that could persuade them not to start smoking and 42%of those who smoked said their physician's advice would influencethem to stop" (Doctors, 1970: 24). Critics of the industry claim: "The controversy aboutsmoking and health continues largely because of the energy, timeand money spent by the tobacco industry in keeping thiscontroversy alive" (College Poll, 1971). In September, 1935, Fortune Magazine published a discussion ofthe medical implications of smoking. It concluded that: This much can be said: That the possible benefit to bederived from tobacco is always less than the possible harm (Robert,1949: 256). Official policy has never accepted this judgment. In recentyears, steps have been taken to discourage smoking, althoughthere is little conclusive evidence that consumption patterns arechanging. It can be expected that official policy and alterationsin individual behavior will both evolve slowly during the comingyears. The socioeconomic impact of a sudden change in officialpolicy would be great, a circumstance reflecting the momentum ofseveral centuries of intense commercial activity. References Brooks, J. E. The Mighty Leaf: Tobacco Thru the Centuries,Boston: Little, Brown & Co., 1952, 12, 27, 56, 71-72, 88,93-98, 102, 112-113, 146-147, 165, 167, 215216, 219, 242-243,245, 258, 271, 274. "Cigarette Ad Ban Ruled Constitutional by Panel,"Washington Post (Washington, D.C.), October 21, 1971."Cigarette Advertising and the Public Health," ColumbiaJournal of Law: Social Problems, 6 (1) : 110-114, 1970."Cigarette Labeling and Advertising Act of 1965," NewYork Times (New York, New York), July 9, 1965. "CigaretteSales Up Despite Ad Curbs," Washington Post (Washington,D.C.), January 1, 1972,3. "College Poll Shows Students' Smoking Habits,"Tobacco Reporter, June, 1971. Council of State Goverments. The Book of the States,1968,196-197,200-208,212-213. Diehl, H. Tobacco and Your Health, New York: McGrawHill BookCo., 1969, 154-156, 161-162. "Doctors Could Disuade Youths From Smoking,"Pediatric News, 4(2) :24, 1970. Federal Trade Commission. "FTC StatisticalSupplement," December, 1970, 3. Fritschler, A. T. Smoking and Politics, New York:Appleton-Century-Cross, Inc., 1969, 145. Gottsegen, J. J. Tobacco-A Study of its Consumption in theUnited States, New York-Chicago: Pitman Publishing Corp., 1940,8-10, 28, 87, 147, 153, 155. Hamilton, A. E. This Smoking World, New York: The Century Co.,1927, 168, 205. Heimann, R. K. Tobacco and Americans, New York: McGraw-Hill Book Co., 1960, 22-23, 83-84, 90, 93, 155-156. Lehman Brothers. About Tobacco, (N.P.), 1955, 39. Lieberman Research, Inc. "The Teenager Looks at CigaretteSmoking," Report of a Study Conducted for the AmericanCancer Society, November, 1969, 1-20. Maxwell, J. C., Jr. "Preliminary Year End Estimate,"The Maxwell Report, November, 1971,1-2. Middleton, A. P. Tobacco Coast, Charlottesville: University ofVirginia Press, 1953, 93-94, 104-107, 114-117, 120-121. Morison, S. E. The Oxford History of the American People, NewYork: Oxford University Press, 1965, 93-94. National InteragencyCouncil on Smoking and Health. "State Activities,"Bulletin, July-September 1971, 1. Neuberger, M. B. Smoke Screen: Tobacco and the Public Welfare,Englewood Cliffs: Prentice Hall, Inc., 1963, 52, 62. Redmond, D. E., Jr., "Tobacco and Cancer: The FirstClinical Report, 1761," New England Journal of Medicine,28-9 (1) : 21, 1970. Regensburg, A. "The Tax That Destroys," NATDCoordinator, XXXI: 146, April, 1971. Robert, J. C. The Story of Tobacco, Chapel Hill: University ofNorth Carolina Press, 1949, 11, 99-101, 106107, 117, 169, 247,256. "Study Says Cigarette Smoke Also May Harm Nonusers,"Washington Post (Washington, D.C.), January 10, 1972, 1 (6). "Tobacco Advertising Could End in 1975," Herald(Lexington, Kentucky), January 18, 1970, 7. Tobacco Institute. "Connecticut and Tobacco,"Washington: Tobacco Institute, Undated], 20-23. "Kansas and Tobacco," Washington: Tobacco Institute,1970, 9. "Kentucky and Tobacco," Washington: TobaccoInstitute, 1971, 0. - "Maryland and Tobacco," Washington: TobaccoInstitute, 1971, 9-10, 21, 23. - "Massachusetts and Tobacco," Washington: TobaccoInstitute, 1971, 17. -"Virginia and Tobacco," Washington: Tobacco Institute,1971, 19, 22, 28, 29. Tobacco Merchants Association. "Sales of Tobacco Productsto Minors," March 1971, 1-4. Tobacco Tax Council. "The Tax Burden on Tobacco,"1970, iii-iv, v, 2, 4-6,8,17,53. U.S. Department of Agriculture. "Tobacco Situation," Economic Research Service, TS-136, June, 1971a, 29-31. -"Tobacco Situation," Economic Research Service, TS-137,September, 1971b, 7, 39-44. Vlassis, T. "Should Pharmacists Sell Cigarettes?"Iowa Pharmacists, 24 (9) : 10, 15, 1969. Wagner, S. Cigarette Country, -New -York: Praeger Publishers,1971, 40, 63-64, 74, 80, 120-121, 166-173, 175, 190, 205, 216,220. Werner, C. Tobacco Land, New York: Tobacco Leaf PublishingCo., 1922, 100-102, 105, 358-359, 559. "Where CigaretteMakers Spend Ad Dollars Now," Business Week, December 25,1971, 56-57. Whiteside, T. "Annals of Advertising: Cutting Down,"The New Yorker, December 19, 1970, 58-80. 7 USC  511 (b) (d), 1935. 7 USC  515, 1936. 7 USC  1303,1938. 7 USC  1312, 1938. 7 USC  1314, 1938. 26-USC -5701, et seq. CliffSchaffer's Home Page WT01-B25-7IA086-000614-B048-56http://206.61.184.43:80/schaffer/Library/studies/duapip/pip1.htm 206.61.184.43 19970122023040 text/html 89594HTTP/1.0 200 OKDate: Wednesday, 22-Jan-97 02:30:29 GMTServer: WebSitePro/1.1f (S/N wpo-0deb)Allow-ranges: bytesContent-type: text/htmlLast-modified: Saturday, 28-Dec-96 07:13:01 GMTContent-length: 89376 Drug Use in America - Defining the Issues Contents | Feedback | Search DRCNet Library | Schaffer Library | Major Studies | Drug Use in America, Problem inPerspective The Report of the National Commission on Marihuana and DrugAbuse Drug Use In America: Problem in Perspective Commissioned by President Richard M. Nixon, March, 1972 Chapter One - Defining the Issues The need to solve the "drug problem" has been arecurrent theme of political and social commentary in the UnitedStates for most of the past decade. The apparent increase in druguse - itself defined as the problem - has precipitated a seriousinquiry into its causes, a massive investment of social effortsto contain it, and a mobilization of medical and para-medicalresources to treat its victims. The Commission does not deny that a "drug problem"exists. We share the public's concern that an apparent rise incrime and other anti-social behavior may be related in part todrug-using or drug-seeking behavior. Likewise, we share thepublic alarm over the attraction to drug use by large portions ofthis nation's youth, particularly when such use is indiscriminateand apparently oblivious to its risks. The lives and futures ofour young people can only be hurt by such behavior. We share,too, the frustration which comes from knowing that drug usespreads by example, and that a continuing growth in the usingpopulation augurs no better for tomorrow. While recognizing that a drug problem exists, we cannot allowour distress to interfere with the performance of our mandate. Wewere appointed not to fan public anxiety, but to convert it intomeaningful activity with constructive proposals. This can be doneonly 'by refusing to accept at face value many of the commonassumptions about drugs and the drug problem. We must examine thereasons behind the fears, conducting the inquiry without passionand with candor. Confident social action comes from anunderstanding of the problem and from an impartial assessment ofthe impact of alternative strategies. We have sought to definethe problem and to provide at least an initial assessment of thepossible responses to it. The Commission has carefully surveyed the social response tothe contemporary drug problem, and has been struck by apersisting uneasiness which seems to color the entire effort. Onthe street and in the councils of government, increasing numbersof drug abuse "experts" wonder whether their commitmentand efforts have had any actual imp-act on the problem. Many ofthem assume optimistic positions in public, while suspectingprivately that no solution will be found. The Commissionunderstands the reasons for this malaise. We are convinced thatpublic policy, as presently designed, is premised on incorrectassumptions, is aimed at the wrong targets, and is too oftenunresponsive to human needs and aspirations. In this Chapter, the Commission seeks to bring the issue ofdrug use into focus. First, we will explore the way our societythinks about drugs by analyzing both the vocabulary of the drugproblem and the historical roots of contemporary attitudes. Afterconsidering the way in which the drug problem is presentlydefined, we will redefine it, first by broadening the scope tocover the entire range of drug use in America and then bynarrowing it to that drug-using behavior which properly shouldarouse social concern. After the problem has been carefully defined, thepolicy-making task begins. In this sense, this Chapter, and thetwo which follow, are designed primarily to create a climate forthe formulation of new policy concepts. Chapter Four details thepolicy-making process and sets forth specific recommendations forimmediate implementation by governmental and privateinstitutions. Chapter Five will then provide a broad perspectiveon the development of a long-term social response to drug-usingbehavior. DEFINITIONAL CONFUSION: WHAT IS DRUG ABUSE? The use of psychoactive drugs is commonplace in American life.Distribution of these drugs is an integral part of the social andeconomic order. In 1970, 214 million prescriptions forpsychoactive drugs were issued, representing annual retail salesof approximately $1 billion (Balter and Levine, 1971). Thealcohol industry produced over one billion gallons of spirits,wine and beer for which 100 million consumers paid about $24billion. What is the pertinence of this information for a Commissionmandated to report to the American people on drug"abuse?" Can such familiar American behavior includedrug abuse, even though that term is generally thought to referonly to the consumption of psychoactive substances obtainedillicitly from a market with an estimated annual volume of $2billion? The Commission concluded early in its deliberations that thefocus of inquiry should not be determined by general impressionsor facile labels. Instead, formulation of a coherent socialpolicy requires a consideration of the entire range ofpsychoactive drug consumption, and a determination as to whetherand under what circumstances drug-using behavior becomes a matterof social concern. For example, does youthful experimentationwith alcohol involve different social policy considerations thanexperimentation with marihuana? Do alcoholism and heroindependence present similar or dissimilar social policy questions?Do the social policy implications of repeated use of barbituratesor minor tranquilizers depend solely on whether a physician hasprescribed the drug or on the motivations for such use? In orderto deal coherently with such questions, it is necessary toexamine how this society thinks about drugs and their use. Drugs-The All-Purpose Concept The meaning of the word drug often varies with the context inwhich it is used. From a strictly scientific point of view, adrug is any substance other than food which by its chemicalnature affects the structure or function of the living organism.From this perspective, the term includes some agricultural andindustrial chemicals. The physician might define a drug as anysubstance used as a medicine in the treatment of physical ormental disease; when treatment of illness is the referent, thelay public may use the word in the same sense. However, when usedin the context of drug "abuse" or the drug"problem," the meaning of "drug" becomessocial rather than scientific. In its social sense, drug is not a neutral term. This point isbest illustrated by the fact that "drug problem" isfrequently used not as a descriptive phrase, but a substitute forthe word drug. In our visits to communities throughout thiscountry and other nations, we have noted that local leaders oftenfeel compelled to report not simply that drugs are available orthat they are used, but that there is a "drug problem." This value component of the word drug is reflected in theselective application of this term by the general public. TableT-1, drawn from a Commission-sponsored National Survey (Abelsonet al, 1973) * illustrates that the public tends uniformly toregard heroin as a drug, as well as other substances associatedwith the drug problem, such as marihuana, cocaine, theamphetamines and the barbiturates. Some psychoactive substances,such as alcohol and tobacco, are generally not regarded as drugsat all. In neither public law nor public discussion is alcoholregarded as a drug. It may be called a beverage, -a food, asocial lubricant or a relaxant, but rarely is it called a drug. *The survey, conducted by Response Analysis, involvedface-to-face interviews with a random sample of 2,411 adults and880 young persons age 12-17 in the contiguous -states. Findingsfrom the Survey are reported and discussed throughout thisReport. The reader should note that surveys which employprobability samples may be generalized to the population as awhole within known limits. it should also be noted that theSurvey data presented here involve unweighted bases withpercentages calculated on weighted bases. Depending on the context in which the term "drug" isused, statements about what a given drug does are liable todiffer. If the therapeutic meaning is employed, for example, thecharacterization is likely to involve the reasons for using thedrug, the dose, the frequency of use and an evaluation of itseffects in terms of medical benefits. It might be asked whetherthe drug made an individual feel better, cured his illness, ormade him less anxious or depressed. If the social meaning isbeing used, however, the analysis generally focuses on toxicity,lethality, dependence liability, possible genetic defects,psychosis and effects of high doses; that is, on drugeffects in terms of their risks. The imprecision of the term "drug" has had serioussocial consequences. Because alcohol is excluded, thepublic is conditioned to regard a martini as somethingfundamentally different from a marihuana cigarette, a barbituratecapsule or a bag of heroin. Similarly, because the referents ofthe word "drug" differ so widely in the therapeutic andsocial contexts, the public is conditioned to believe that"street" drugs act according to entirely differentprinciples than "medical" drugs. The result is that therisks of the former are exaggerated and the risks of the latterare overlooked. This confusion must be dispelled. Alcohol is adrug. All drugs act according to the same general principles.Their effects vary with dose. For each drug there is an effectivedose (in terms of the desired effect), a toxic dose and a lethaldose. All drugs have multiple effects. The lower the dose, themore important non-drug factors become in determining drugeffect. At high dose levels, and for some individuals at muchlower dose levels, all drugs may be dangerous. The individual andsocial consequences of drug use escalate with frequency andduration of use. American drug policy will never be coherentuntil it is founded on uniform principles such as these, whichapply to all drugs. 'Unless otherwise noted, the word drug isIntended to encompass only "psychoactive drugs," orthose which have the capacity to influence behavior by alteringfeeling, mood, perception or other mental states. Drug Abuse: Synonym for Social Disapproval Drug abuse is another way of saying drug problem. Nowimmortalized in the titles of federal and state governmentalagencies (and we might add, in our own), this term has the virtueof rallying all parties to a common cause: no one could possiblybe for abuse of drugs any more than they could be for abuseof minorities, power or children. By the same token, the termalso obscures the fact that "abuse" is undefined wheredrugs are concerned. Neither the public, its policy makers northe expert community share a common understanding of its meaningor of the nature of the phenomenon to which it refers. The Commission has noted over the last two years that thepublic and press often employ drug abuse interchangeably withdrug use. Indeed, m . any "drug abuse experts,"including government officials, do so as well. The Commission was curious about whether the public had anymore precise conception of the meaning of drug abuse than theexperts. In our second National Survey, public attitudes on thisissue were probed. The public was requested to give afree-response explanation of what drug abuse meant. (See TableI-2.) In this multiple-response question, the public was dividedbetween perceptions related to the purpose or motivation of drugtaking (the first three responses) on the one hand, and to theconsequences of use on the other (the remaining responses).Roughly 30% of both youth and adult populations associate drugabuse with the use of drugs for other than medical purposes,including any use of those substances which have been prohibitedbecause they have no medical uses. In contrast, large numbers ofboth adults and youth relate the term to the consequences of drugtaking. Excessive doses (27% and 16%), dependence (17% and 15%)and danger to health (11% and lWc) are the most common examples.Also of interest were those respondents who indicated that theydidn't know what drug abuse meant (13% and 20%). In another part of the Survey, the respondents were askedwhether they regarded ten specific drug-using behaviors as drugabuse. These data illustrate that drug abuse is an entirelysubjective concept. It is any drug use the respondent frownsupon. Most respondents disapprove of the use ofmedically-distributed pills for other than medical purposes(those sanctioned by a physician), any use of heroin, and any usewhich suggests that the user is dependent or seeking pleasure. Significantly fewer respondents seem to disapprove of dailyuse of alcohol, weekly use of marihuana andexperimentation with legitimate pills not obtained through aphysician. (See Table 1-3.) As the National Survey data demonstrate, drug abuse may referto any type of drug or chemical without regard to itspharmacologic actions. It is an eclectic concept having only oneuniform connotation: societal disapproval. The Commission believes that the term drug abuse must bedeleted from official pronouncements and public policy dialogue.The term has no functional utility and has become no more than anarbitrary codeword for that drug use which is presentlyconsidered wrong. Continued use of this term , with itsemotional overtones, will serve only to perpetuate confusedpublic attitudes about drug-using behavior. Drug abuse, or any similar term, creates an impression thatall drug-using behavior falls in one of two clear-cutspheres: drug use which is good, safe, beneficial and withoutsocial consequence; and drug "abuse" which is bad,harmful, without benefit and carrying high social cost. Fromeither a descriptive or an evaluative standpoint, the matter ismuch too complex to be handled in such a polarized fashion. TheCommission urges that the public and its policy makers avoid suchlabels and focus instead on the relative risks and socialconsequences of various patterns of drug-taking behavior. The Roots of a "Problem" We have focused our initial attention on vocabulary for animportant reason. The linguistic symbols which our societyattaches to certain drugs and drug-related conduct illustrate theextent to which present attitudes and social responses are rootedin the past. "Drug abuse" is only the most recent in along line of such symbols which this society has applied todisapproved drug-taking behavior or to disapproved substances. Infact, the history of drug vocabulary is also a history of thechanging perception of the drug "problem" in the UnitedStates. Current social policy is largely an accumulation of ad hoc policyresponses to the use of particular substances. "Street"use of a previously unknown substance at a time of social tensiontends to generate a set of untested assumptions about the drug,often including a presumed consequence of undesirable behavior,and to result in a restrictive legal policy, all of which becomeimbedded in public attitude. Drug policy as we know it today is a creature of the 20thCentury. Until the last third of the 19th Century, America'stotal legal policy regarding drugs was limited to regulation ofalcohol distribution (and the periodic regional attempts toprohibit its use altogether), localized restrictions on tobaccosmoking, and the laws of the various states regulating pharmaciesand restricting the distribution of "poisons."Nineteenth century statutory vocabulary was simple and direct:arsenic, tobacco, alcohol, morphine and other opium alkaloidswere all "poisons." Until the Civil War, distributionof opium and morphine, which were widely used as therapeuticagents, was substantially unregulated. Gradually, however,official reliance was placed on the health professions to policedistribution of these drugs; Pennsylvania enacted what may havebeen the first prescription law in 1860, and most other statesfollowed suit over the next three decades. Medical lexiconsclassified opium and morphine as "narcotics," alongwith most other psychoactive substances then in use, includingalcohol; however, that term was not employed in most of theselaws or in common parlance. As early as the 18th Century, the medical profession was awarethat the oral use of opium could result in the development of an"appetite" or "habit," a phenomenon which wasgenerally classed in the same category as the "alcoholhabit." This awareness was not of sufficient consequence tosuggest the need for caution when morphine was discovered in 1803and when the hypodermic syringe was introduced in the middle ofthe century. As the hypodermic use of morphine became common inthe United States, the syringes were left with patients for theirown use to remedy practically every painful condition. The drug was used indiscriminately during the Civil War forthe wholesale relief of pain and, most significantly, to treatcommon gastrointestinal ailments. After the War, morphine waswidely used in medical practice and was easily available outsidethe medical system in proprietary medicines. Within a few years,"morphinomania" (or the "army" disease)became a recognizable medical entity. Nonetheless, use of thedrug was only minimally restricted either from outside themedical profession or within it, as Terry and Pellens noted intheir classic work: Meanwhile the ease with which pain could be relieved throughthe hypodermic administration of the drug, the time it saved thephysician in his busy rounds, the contentment it brought thepatient, and above all, the all too common inclination to relievesymptoms rather than cause, contributed to increase the practice.Consequently throughout the period of the earlier warnings of itsdangers, the employment of this mode of administration wasincreasing by leaps and bounds wherever medicine was practiced.(Terry and Pellens, 1928) This phenomenon of medically-based opiate use was largelyinvisible and was not a matter of major concern outside themedical profession for several decades. Meanwhile, a public response was triggered by use of thesesame drugs and cocaine in another social context. Beginning withincreased Chinese immigration after the Civil War, the practiceof smoking opium took root on the West Coast and spread rapidlyacross the country to most urban areas. Although the practice wasconfined mainly to the Chinese, it also appeared to attract"sporty characters" and the underworld figures in thecities. In 1875, San Francisco enacted an ordinance prohibiting thesmoking or possession of opium, the possession of opium pipes andthe maintenance of "opium dens." As the practicespread, it generated a succession of similar state laws and local,ordinances. Despite a growing problem of opiate dependencearising from unrestrained distribution of these drugs within themedical system in the United States, it was the"street" use of the opiates and cocaine whichaccelerated professional and public interest in theirhabit-forming properties. By the turn of the century, the nation had become aware of alarge opiate-dependent population in its midst. Althoughcontemporary estimates of its size varied as widely as currentfigures do, most researchers have concluded that the total neverexceeded a quarter of a million, divided evenly between"medical" and "street" dependence. As aresult of increased awareness, the medical profession and statelegislatures intensified their efforts to control availability ofthese substances, primarily by tightening the restrictions on medicaldistribution and prohibiting non-medical distribution. In 1906,the Congress passed the Pure Food and Drug Act, the first majorfederal drug legislation, which required labelling of allpreparations containing "habit-forming" drugs, andproprietaries containing significant quantities of opiates soondisappeared. By 1900, then, policy makers and the medical profession wereattuned to the dangers of chronic drug use, and some commentatorshave suggested that the availability of more accurate informationwithin the profession and improved methods of medical educationwould have retarded the medically-based opiate-dependence problemhad it not been for the introduction of heroin in 1898 (Terry andPellens, 1928). This new cough suppressant was promoted on thetheory that it possessed many of the virtues and few of thedangers of morphine; some even suggested that it would be usefulin the treatment of morphinism itself. From the time of itsintroduction, however, there were conflicting claims regardingits capacity for producing dependence. Regardless of theseclaims, the drug was available for the next decade in proprietarymedicines and throughout medical practice. By 1910, the medical profession had become seriously concernedabout the habit-forming characteristics of heroin. The publicityattending its pleas for legislative controls on the availabilityof this drug, together with a crusade being waged by lawenforcement officials against the street use of opiates andcocaine, aroused public anxiety about a "narcoticsproblem" of major proportions. Although almost every statehad regulatory laws of some kind, most observers contended thatthe states could not control the problem. Federal legislation wasalso said to be necessary to implement international treaties. Inaddition, the movement for national alcohol prohibition begangathering steam in 1913, sensitizing the public to thepossibility of national drug prohibitions. All these factorsculminated in passage of the Harrison Narcotic Act in 1914(.Musto, 1973). The Harrison Act crystallized a national policy of curtailingthe availability of "habit-forming" substances. Theprevious failure to appreciate the habit-forming properties ofnew substances had now resulted in professional and legislativepreoccupation with this issue. Whereas the term narcoticsformerly referred to those substances which producedstupefication and sleep ("narcosis"), includingalcohol, the term now assumed a new meaning, one defined by thepublic policy bearing its name. The term was now associated withany unfamiliar drug which appeared on the streets among thosepopulations which were associated with the opiates and cocaine.The acute effects of the various specific drugs became blurred.Because physicians and policy makers had now become exceedinglycautious about the dependence issue, any new drug was carefullyscrutinized for habit-forming properties; if the drug was used onthe streets it was often presumed "habit forming" andtherefore classified as a "narcotic." Within the next three decades, peyote and marihuana wereinserted in the "narcotics" laws of many states;chloral hydrate, which had been covered by earlier drug laws, wasalso included in the definition of "narcotics" in thenew legislation. It should be noted that legal classification ofa drug as a "narcotic" tended to malign its therapeuticutility. For example, heroin, and later marihuana, were purgedfrom the pharrnacopoeia altogether. In sum, the word"narcotics" had been purged of its scientific meaningand became, instead, a symbol of socially disapproved drugs. Other substances were introduced into the practice ofmedicine, notably the barbiturates and amphetamines, but theywere regulated under general pharmacy laws rather than under the"narcotics" laws. Although amphetamines were introducedin 1929 and the short-acting barbiturates appeared a few yearslater, they did not enter the illicit marketplace on a massivescale in the United States until the 1960's and consequently werenot associated with the narcotics until then. During the last decade, succeeding waves of hallucinogens,amphetamines and barbiturates escaped from the laboratories,pharmacies and medicine chests and found they way into thestreets. Together with marihuana, which moved from onesocio-economic "street" to another, use of these drugsdefined a new phenomenon and became associated with a new kind ofdrug user. To a substantial degree, the narcotics policyhad from the beginning been identified with underprivilegedminorities, criminals and social outsiders in general, although acommon feature of each periodic drug scare, including cocaine atthe turn of the century, heroin in the 1920's, marihuana in the1930's and heroin again in the 1950's, was the fear that drug usewould spread to youth. However, the drug problem of the 1960'swas clearly identified with the children of the middle and upperclasses. Drug use was now associated with unfamiliar life styles,youthful defiance of the established order, the emergence of avisible street culture, campus unrest, communal living, protestpolitics and even political radicalism. The drug taking of this youth population coincided withpervasive social anxieties regarding social disorder in generaland youthful behavior specifically. To many, youthful drug use,offered a convenient explanation for these problems, and, as theCommission noted in its first Report, marihuana in particularcame to symbolize the entire spectrum of social concern. Existinglegislative controls and vocabulary were closely tied to the oldstereotypes, and society responded to this new drug-usingbehavior through separate legislative action (the Drug AbuseControl Amendments of 1965) and a new linguistic symbol."Dangerous drugs" emerged as the statutory label forthe nonnarcotic drugs, such as hallucinogens, amphetamines andbarbiturates, whose non-medical use was socially disapproved. The single-mindedness of American drug policy is illustratedclearly by the reorganization of the federal drug bureaucracywhich took place in 1968. For technical reasons stemming from therevenue structure of the Harrison Act, narcotics enforcement hadalways been lodged in the Treasury Department. When the,"dangerous drugs" were brought under regulatory controlin 1965, enforcement responsibility was assigned to a new bureauin the Department of Health, Education, and Welfare. Then in1968, the responsibilities of the two agencies were merged in anew agency established in the Department of Justice: the Bureauof Narcotics and Dangerous Drugs. Public policy had theappearance of coherence once again. But this was not enough. Marihuana use continued to increasethroughout the decade, and the public was caught up in a highlyemotional debate. For the first time since the inception of theAmerican "narcotics" policy, public opinion focused onsome of the fundamental assumptions. Not surprisingly, debate onthe marihuana issue was often couched in terms of the statutoryvocabulary which has come to symbolize drug policy. For example,the scientifically indefensible classification of marihuana as a"narcotic" immediately provoked an erosion of thesymbolic coherence which had previously characterized drugpolicy. Similarly, the inevitable comparison between alcohol andmarihuana called into question the substantive separation betweennarcotics and dangerous drug policies on the one hand and alcoholpolicy on the other.2 After all, alcoholcan legitimately be classified as a "narcotic" in avery specific sense of that term, and it is surely a"dangerous drug" as well. 2 During most of the period of national alcoholprohibition, the Bureau of Prohibition was responsible forenforcement of the Harrison Act as well as the Volstead Act; butpassage of these two laws had parallel rather than sharedhistories, a point clearly demonstrated by subsequent events. Until the close of the 1960's, official defenses of marihuanapolicy continued to be premised on the implications of thestatutory vocabulary. Although the narcotic ideology was quicklyabandoned, many official pronouncements continued to linkmarihuana with the opiates because of their association in thelaw and to insist that marihuana was a "dangerous drug"even if it was not a "narcotic." An historicalunderstanding apprises us that these classifications arereflections of, rather than reasons for social disapproval. It became clear by the end of the decade that"narcotics" and "dangerous drugs" were nolonger adequate symbols of social policy; consequently "drugabuse" was adopted as a replacement symbol. However, theneed to distinguish marihuana use from other forms of "drugabuse" resulted in yet another distinction: marihuana wasclassified as a "soft" drug as opposed to the"hard" drugs, suggesting the same kind of distinctiondrawn between "hard liquor" and other alcoholicbeverages. But, as has been the case with all drug vocabulary,this distinction serves a social rather than a scientificpurpose. This terminology generally indicates an attempt todistinguish marihuana from heroin and cocaine, the stereotypical"hard" drugs. However, there is no consensus whatsoeveras to which other substances, if any, are considered to be"hard." If hard drugs is a narrow category, referringonly to the opiates and cocaine, it is simply another way ofsaying "narcotics;" on the other hand, if it is takento mean everything other than marihuana, it is simply anexpedient way of disassociating marihuana from other disapproveddrugs. Like "drug abuse," the hard-soft terminologyreflects a nascent effort to reestablish a sphere of"bad" drug use. Within the official community as wellas the general public, attempts are being made to gradedrugs according to their potential hazards, particularly theircapacity for inducing physical dependence. To the extent thatthis is true, the new linguistic symbols suggest that publicconcern has in some ways returned full circle to where it beganalmost a century ago. THE SOCIAL RESPONSE: FALSE PREMISES AND THE PERPETUATION OFA PROBLEM As this brief historical summary illustrates, American drugpolicy is almost seven decades old, and not once during thisperiod have the underlying assumptions been systematicallyevaluated and a broad, coherent foundation for policy makingestablished. As a result, each new occurrence in drug developmentand each new use pattern have been viewed as unfamiliar, with theunfamiliarity breeding a sense of crisis, and the crisisprecipitating ad hoe policy responses. The Commission feels strongly that the present institutionalresponse, despite sincere efforts to move it in the rightdirection, continues to be rooted in the mistakes of the past,and, indirectly, tends to perpetuate the "problem."Accordingly, it is useful to scrutinize the goals toward whichthe policy is directed and the premises which support it, as wellas to describe briefly some of the present governmental responseswhich are guided by these assumptions. Finally, as a prelude tothe remainder of the Report, the concluding sections of thisChapter will attempt to "wipe the slate clean" and tosketch a general frame-work for defining the problem andformulating a coherent social policy. The Assumptions and Premises of Present Policy Elimination of Non-Medical Drug Use American drug policy has been predicated on one fundamental orthe societal objective is to eliminate "non-medical"drug use. Inquiry has rarely been addressed to whether this goalis desirable or possible. Failure to address such questions isabetted by the exclusion of certain drugs and certain types ofdrug taking from the realm of social distress. For example, thenon-medical use of alcohol and tobacco would be inconsistent withthe declared goal; thus, statutory vocabulary and social folklorehave established the fiction that they are not drugs at all.Although use of these substances may arouse concern, they are notviewed in the wider context of drug use. Another area excluded from public discussion is drug usesanctioned by medical judgment. While most medically-approvedconsumption of psychoactive drugs is substantially different fromthe situation where the individual chooses to use the drughimself, this is not always true. The absence of the interveningjudgment of a third party does not mean that the individual'smotivation is "non-medical," or hedonistic. Nor doesthe intervention of medical judgment assure that the drug will beused for medically-intended purposes.3 3 The third party judgment may intervenedirectly, as is the case with prescription drugs, or indirectly,as is the case with over-the-counter preparations previouslyapproved for this purpose by the Food and Drug Administration. Drug policy makers cannot truthfully assert that this societyaims to eliminate non-medical drug use. No semantic fiction willalter the fundamental composition of alcohol and tobacco.Further, even if the objective is amended to exclude these drugs,human history discounts the notion that drug-using behavior canbe so tightly confined as a self-medication in pharmacy, wheretheir prescription drugs with them, the proliferation ofover-the-counter preparations, the advertising of mood-alteringdrugs, and the popularity of minor tranquilizers are allmanifestations of an important contemporary trend. The medical/non-medical distinction has become increasinglyblurred as emotional ailments increase. Many individuals tendtoday to assess their own needs and define the purposes for whichthey use a drug. For this reason, generalized societalproclamations regarding the need to eliminate non-medical druguse raise an important question that must be honestly answered:how does the daily use of a prescribed barbiturate to bring aperson "down" from the day differ from the similar useof a self-prescribed minor tranquilizer or, for that matter, amartini? Deferring for the moment our own view as to what society'sobjective in this area ought to be, we do know that it is not asclear cut as official pronouncements imply. In determining theappropriate objective, a task that we will undertake in ChapterFour, policy makers must recognize the scope and complexity ofdrug-using behavior and develop rational distinctions betweenthat which should be disapproved and that which should betolerated, or even approved. Within the area of disapproval,policy makers should not consider all disapproved drug use to beof equal importance; priorities must be assigned on the basis ofactual and potential social consequence, and not just on thebasis of numbers of users. Risk-Taking and Health Often cited in support of societal disapproval of non-medicaldrug use is the proposition that individuals should not risktheir health by using drugs. Without regard to the philosophicalpropriety of this premise as a guide for social policy, this viewappears to be somewhat at odds with the facts about drug use andwith prevailing social attitudes toward risk-taking in otherareas. Much emphasis has been placed on whether or not a drug is adangerous drug; and analogies have been drawn between"street" drugs and such substances as cyclamates. Theseexamples illustrate how closely public discussion of drug abusehas become tied to matters of individual health. In supportingpresent social policy, spokesmen often list those drug effectswhich are potentially harmful to individual health rather thanfocusing on the social consequences of drug-using behavior. The Commission believes that persons who take this approachhave misconstrued the nature of the drug issue. The assumptionthat all psychoactive drug use is a high-risk behavior presumes aprogression from irregular use of low doses to continuous use ofhigh doses, thereby ignoring pharmacological variations amongdrugs and the importance of frequency of use, method ofadministration, dose, and non-drug factors as determinants ofrisk. In fact, injury to health is associated primarily withchronic heavy use and at times with the acute effects of highdoses. Further, there is no correlation whatsoever between thecapacity of psychoactive drugs to induce behavioral disorders andtheir capacity to induce organic or somatic toxicity orpathology. Of the drugs which are most commonly associated withdependence or drug-induced behavior, alcohol produces the mostclearly established and reproducible brain pathology. Cocaine,amphetamines and other stimulants, heroin and morphine-likedrugs, and cannabis do not appear to have this effect. On theother hand, very heavy use of phenacitin, which has nosignificant behavioral impact at all, may produce renal damage,and heavy tobacco smoking is associated with greatly increasedrisk of lung cancer. If the standard for social policy werepotential injury to individual health, barbiturates, alcohol, andtobacco would present the clearest cases for prohibition. Yet,the latter two are available for self-defined purposes, and theformer is widely used in the practice of medicine. Nonetheless, the approach often applied to "drugs ofabuse" is the same as that applied to non-psychoactivesubstances: risks to individual health will be tolerated only ifthe medical needs for the substance justify the risks. Butindividuals would not choose to use psychoactive drugs if theydid not perceive some advantage to themselves. So the fundamentalquestion arises: Who is to weigh the perceived advantages of druguse against the risk, the individual or the society? To deal with this question, we must examine the pattern ofsocial response to risk-taking behavior in general. For example,we urge our youth -to be curious and to explore. Until recentyears, Americans tended to place a premium on high-poweredautomobiles. We tolerate the private ownership of firearms. Wetend to applaud the courageous mountain climber or otheradventurer who ignores the risks in the effort to establish humandominion over nature. In short, risk-taking behavior is-permitted and often encouraged by many of our socialinstitutions, which defer to individual judgment the weighing ofoften intangible benefits against the quite tangible risks. Society has long been aware of the individual and social risksof alcohol use. Even with the effort now being made to inform thepublic of the risks of tobacco use, society still permits thisdrug to be widely available. In both cases, society clearlysubordinates the risks inherent in such behavior, deferringinstead to individual judgment. The Commission is not suggesting that health risks areirrelevant to the formulation of drug policy. However, whateverappropriate weight is given to health considerations, it is aperipheral, rather than focal, concern. Drug policy must be basedon the social consequences of drug use, and on the social impactof drug-induced behavior. Motivation for Mood Alteration Subsumed within the societal goal of eliminating non-medicaldrug use is the value judgment that use of drugs for the explicitpurpose of mood alteration is per se undesirable. Toharmonize this judgment with approved conduct, we avoid analyzingthe motivations of similar behaviors. As noted earlier, we do not verbalize the motivation f oralcohol use in terms of pleasure but rather in terms of thedrug's function as a relaxant, as a social lubricant, and as abeverage. We do not think about the alcohol experience as analtered state of consciousness but rather as a means to someother end, such as promoting conviviality or stimulatingconversation. Within the medical setting, the individual is increasinglymaking the decision to use medically approved drugs and selectingthem according to their capacity to alter his mood. The NationalSurvey shows that 157o of the adult population reported that they"take a pill to calm down or cheer up" when they feel"out of sorts . . . not really sick, but nervous, ordepressed or under stress." Eighteen percent of the publicreported that they used alcohol for similar purposes. The use ofa variety of new mood altering drugs to cope with stress isundoubtedly a, significant social development, particularly amongwomen. This option to employ drugs for what is essentially anindividual diagnosis of felt needs has, to a large extent,changed public perception concerning the role of the drugs asmood alterants in our society. Whatever the biological and psychological foundations for thecommon human desire to alter consciousness, policy makers mustrecognize that drugs have always been used for this purpose. Mostsocieties have institutionalized at least one form ofdrug-induced mood alteration; only the drugs differ, not theessential purpose. Instead of assuming that mood alterationthrough some drugs is inherently objectionable, while similar useof others is not, the public and its leaders must focus directlyon the appropriate role of drug induced mood alteration. It is nolonger satisfactory to defend social disapproval of use of aparticular drug on the ground that it is a "mind-alteringdrug" or a "means of escape." For so are they all. Drugs and Individual Responsibility Implicit in present policy is the concern that manyindividuals cannot be trusted to make prudent or responsibledecisions regarding drug-taking. Certain drugs are thought topossess even greater powers than they have, including thecapacity to overbear individual will. Most people are notaccustomed to thinking about drug effects in terms ofprobabilities and uncertainties, of dose-response curves, ofmultiple effects (some desirable and some undesirable), ofreactions which vary from individual to individual and from timeto time in the same individual. A deep-seated popular belief that some drugs diminish ordestroy the individual's capacity to control his behavior isreflected in hypotheses such as "drugs cause crime" or"drugs cause dropping out" or "drugs cause mentalillness." Any perceived correlation between use of the drugand the unwanted consequence is attributed to the drug, removingthe individual from any and all responsibility. Similarly, whileit is true that certain drugs offer more intense psychologicalrewards than others, seduction characteristics are attributed toall psychoactive drugs, suggesting a chain of progression fromlight to heavy use, from weak to stronger drugs, all without theintervention of individual choice. A drug has no effect until it interacts with an organism. Theeffects of any drug, psychoactive drugs included, are mainly doserelated. At low or moderate doses they are determined mainly bynon-drug factors, such as the psychological characteristics ofthe individual, the reasons why he uses the drug, what he expectsthe effects will be, the physical and social setting in which heuses it, and how he perceives its use or non-use in relation toself-defined goals. Further, how his friends, his sub-culture,and his society define and respond to his drug use are equallyimportant f actors. These psychological and social criteria notonly influence the reaction to a specific drug but they are keyfactors in determining use or non-use, selection of substance,and the pattern and circumstances of use. An Overview of the Present Response Because of this confusion about objectives, the formalinstitutional response to the drug problem has been morereflexive than rational, more situation-oriented than strategic.The ad hoc responses to use of specific psychoactive drugshave interfered with examination of the fundamental questionsrelating to behavior patterns and the appropriate means of socialcontrol. Research has provided us with an almost endless stream ofpsychoactive substances. The tendency is to identify a newsubstance, determine its potential hazards as a chemical and thento insert it into the existing system. This procedure tends toperpetuate the public focus on the drugs rather than on theprevention of behavior about which society is concerned. When thedrug appears in the streets, as it inevitably does, socialinstitutions respond as if the behavior was unanticipated, andbecause they are ill-prepared to deal with the situation, anatmosphere of crisis is generated. Because the focus has always been on the elimination ofprohibited substances altogether and on the elimination of thestreet use of therapeutically useful drugs, social institutionshave directed primary attention to the problem of use of specificdrugs. Patterns of drug-using behavior have been ignoredexcept as an afterthought of intervention. When increases inprohibited drug use continue to escalate, policy makers respond,not by reassessing the problem from different perspectives, butrather by pressing for ever-more costly mechanisms of control;costly both in terms of resources and important social values.Drug policy can be, thus summed up: increased use of disapproveddrugs precipitates more spending, more programs, more arrests andmore penalties, all with little positive effect in reducing useof these drugs. Details of the present institutional response share theconfusion of purpose which characterizes the, entire socialresponse. We will sketch a few of the key features here althoughthese matters will be considered in some depth in Chapter Four. Throughout this Report, consumption-related offenses willrefer to offenses such as use, possession for personal use,presence in a place where prohibited drugs are being used. Unlessstated otherwise, "possession" means possession forpersonal use. Risk-Education An important operating assumption of the present response isthat if people are educated about the risks of drug taking, theywill not use drugs. It is presumed that presentation ofinformation regarding dangers and risks can quiet curiosity andthe desire for anticipated pleasant psychological sensations, thefactors which account for most individual drug experiences. Society's experience in attempting to discourage use ofsubstances not labeled as drugs is instructive. Campaigns havebeen mounted in the past, both through the mass media and theschools, about the dangers of alcohol use and cigarette smoking.Facts have been marshaled, scientific opinion has been mobilized,and the adverse consequences of use of these drugs have beenamply demonstrated by the number of alcoholics within the UnitedStates and the number of persons dying yearly from heart disease,lung cancer and other respiratory ailments. Still the consumptionof alcohol continues and the number of persons smoking cigarettesincreases. This same kind of educational effort has been directed at theillicit drugs with no apparent impact on behavior. Little insighthas been gained as to why this approach has not worked withalcohol and cigarettes, or as to whether risk-oriented curriculamay actually arouse interest rather than dampen it. Further,assuming that such programs might be useful, little thought hasbeen given to how to transmit the information, the assumptionagain being that the facts speak for themselves. This vastexpenditure of time, money and effort has apparently paid fewmeasurable social dividends, and those that have claimed successhave done so not on the basis of scientific proof, but on thebasis of impressions and anecdote. Coercion If information about risks and moral suasion is insufficientto convince many people not to use drugs, it is assumed that thethreat of a criminal sanction will do so. While a criminalproscription does function as a deterrent to some degree for allbehavior, the strength of this factor varies according to thenature of the offense, the, characteristics of the actor, theprobability of detection and the certainty of punishment. Withregard to drug consumption, all of these factors diminish theutility of the criminal sanction. Drug consumption is anexpressive conduct which normally occurs in private among groupswhich are least influenced by legal condensation. In addition,the consumption-related offenses are no longer supported by thestrong social consensus which once existed, and the emergingambivalence is reflected in the dispositional decisions ofpolice, prosecutors and courts. We note that drug consumption offenses have not beenremarkably successful in curtailing use in general. However, itis important here, as elsewhere, to distinguish between differentpatterns of drug taking behavior. On the one hand, the law maydeter indiscrete use and continued use of a prohibited drug. Onthe other hand, experimental behavior, particularly by youth, isunlikely to be deterred by the law alone. For those who aredependent upon prohibited drugs, such as the heroin-dependentperson, the deterrence concept is functionally inapplicable. Sickness Anyone choosing to use drugs, despite the enumerated risks,moral suasion and threat of criminalization, is often consideredabnormal, emotionally ill and weak of character. The last decadehas seen the pendulum of legislative opinion swing toward thebelief that drug dependence and even drug use is a"medical" problem, that it can be "treated,"and that the user can be "rehabilitated." Like manyideas which aim to correct those previously in vogue, the medicalapproach has itself become a runaway concept. Policy makers haveadopted policy guidewords such as "treatment,""rehabilitation," "contagion," and"epidemic," without regard to their utility in thepresent context. The "sickness" label has been attached to all usersof prohibited drugs without regard to their patterns ofdrug-taking behavior. While very few question that personscompulsively using drugs are in need of some form of therapeuticassistance, the same is rarely true for the experimental andrecreational user. To label drug users in general as mentally illis to place a large segment of American society in need of formalmedical assistance. With regard to drug dependence in particular, the public hasbeen led to believe that this condition is as definable andtreatable as ordinary illnesses of the body. In reality, there isnot, at the present time, any generally applicable cure fordrug-dependent persons let alone non-dependent users of drugs."Success" in treatment programs has been difficult todefine, reflecting the complex relationship between drug use,social functioning and mental health. Even when measured againsttheir own criteria for evaluation, most treatment programs candemonstrate only limited "success." Public policy is committed to the treatment and rehabilitationof all drug-dependent persons. While thousands of persons havebeen aided by treatment efforts in recent years, socialobjectives continue to outstrip professional understanding of thecondition and official capacity to deliver the necessaryservices. Perpetuating the Problem Because of the intensity of the public concern and theemotionalism surrounding the topic of drugs, all levels ofgovernment have been pressured into action with little time forplanning. The political pressures involved in this governmentaleffort have resulted in a concentration of public energy on themost immediate aspects of drug use and a reaction along the pathsof least political resistance. The recent result has been thecreation of ever larger bureaucracies, ever increasingexpenditures of monies, and an outpouring of publicity so thatthe public will know that "something" is being done. Perhaps the major consequence of this ad hoc policyplanning hag been the creation, at the federal, state andcommunity levels, of a vested interest in the perpetuation of theproblem among those dispensing and receiving funds.Infrastructures are created, job descriptions are standardized,"experts" are created and ways of doing businessroutinized and established along bureaucratic channels. Duringthe last several years, drug programming has become amulti-billion dollar industry, one administering to its own needsas well as to those of its drug-using clientele. In the course ofwell-meaning efforts to do something about drug use, this societymay have inadvertently institutionalized it as a never-endingproject. All of these responses stem from one fundamental flaw inpresent drug policy: the problem is defined incorrectly. Theuneasiness which the Commission has encountered among thoughtfulobservers and officials arises largely from their own perceptionsthat the present response, although massive, has so far beenrelatively ineffective. Yet, any challenge to the basic premisesof policy may be viewed by some as a disavowal of the entiresocial response. The Commission does not believe the presentpolicy should be abandoned out of hand. Instead, we hope thatpolicy can be made more coherent and more flexible. In order todo so, we must put aside preconceived notions, setting out afreshto redefine the problem. DEFINING THE PROBLEM The Meaning of Drug Use Throughout history man has used available psychoactivesubstances to seek relief from cold, hunger, deprivation,anxiety, pain and boredom. He also has used such substances toreceive pleasure or to achieve new experiences. Various cultureshave sought out and used naturally occurring plants for theirpsychoactive ingredients, discovering their effects by trial anderror. Modern man has consciously created new chemical substancesand institutionalized their availability for similar uses. Drugs have effects other than those which are sought; and alldrug effects vary with amount and frequency of use, thecharacteristics of the user, and the set and setting in whichthey are used. Consequently, different cultures have applieddifferent values to the presumed consequences of drug use,whether beneficial or deleterious. Each society has decided whichneeds are legitimate, which effects are valuable and which risksare tolerable. These judgments are based on prevailing valuesconcerning specific drugs, their effects, the reasons for whichthey are used, and the people who use them. Man does not ordinarily continue to do something that does notfulfill some real or imagined need. To persist, behavior must bereinforced. To the extent that it does fulfill a need, it willrecur, often at some risk, unless it interferes with some moreimportant need. The need for a drug may be closely related to itsreal or imagined effects or it may be grounded in social ratherthan chemical elements. Use of specific substances may determinegroup membership, or status within a group, or among groups. Itmay function as either a symbol or symptom of rebellion,alienation, independence or sophistication. To better understand current self-defined drug use and todetermine the scope of social concern, one must go beyond thecataloguing of substances (pharmacologically defined wherepossible), the listing of effects, and the counting of users andnon-users of drugs. The inquiry must shift from drugs to people,from pharmacological effects to the meaning and function of druguse. The Incidence of Drug Use The nature and scope of society's drug problem at any giventime are generally perceived in terms of the incidence ofnon-medical use of legal and illegal substances. Tables 1-4 and1-5 present data, of this kind obtained in theCommission-sponsored National Survey. Such statistics may be useful for assessing in general termsthe relative success or failure of institutional efforts tochannel drug taking behavior into prescribed channels. However,these figures, and similar ones, are often used to arouse publicconcern, and do not explain either the meaning of such drug useor the nature and scope of the social problem which it poses. As an example, Table 1-5 illustrates that regular use ofalcohol is extremely widespread among Americans 18 years of ageand older (53%), and that large numbers of the nation's youth(12-17) consume alcohol despite official blandishments (24%). Dothe respective legitimacy and illegitimacy of these behaviorstell us anything about the nature of social concern about alcoholuse? In comparison, Table 1-4 indicates that 16% of the adultpopulation and 14% of the youth have used marihuana despite thelegal proscriptions, and that 8 % of the adults and 7 % of theyouth continue to use the drug. Smaller percentages of thepopulace have also violated the law by trying hallucinogens suchas LSD, cocaine or heroin. Does the illegitimacy and relativeincidence of such behavior bear directly on the dimensions ofsocial concern? Is marihuana use more or less of a social problemthan heroin use? Than alcohol use? The data in Table 1-5 illustrate that over-the-counterpreparations are sometimes consumed for non-therapeutic reasons.Does the permissibility of this behavior suggest that it iswithout social consequence? Does the motivation for use make apublic policy difference? Scientifically acceptable incidence data, together withdemographic analysis, can tell us who uses various drugs and bowthey are used in terms of frequency and duration. Suchinformation cannot, however, answer the crucial social policyquestions: why and so what? Drug-using Behavior The initial step in understanding the meaning of drug use andits impact on the social order is to regard this phenomenon as wewould any other human behavior. In Chapter Two of the Report, theCommission will place these incidence figures in perspective,elaborating on the patterns of drug-using behavior and theindividual and social factors which seem to influence individualdecisions to initiate, continue orterminate the use of drugs. In short, we will try to answer the whyof drug use. Because drug-using behavior is not a unitaryphenomenon, the social consequences of this behavior are tieddirectly to the individual's reason for the drug use and in turnto the frequency, duration, intensity, dose, set and setting ofuse. The Commission has divided the entire spectrum of drug-usingbehavior into five patterns reflecting essentially distinctmeanings for the individual users. The most common type of drug-using behavior can be classifiedas experimental: a short-term, non-patterned trial of oneor more drugs, motivated primarily by curiosity or a desire toexperience an altered mood state. Experimental use most oftenoccurs among young persons in the company of one or moredrug-experimenting friends or acquaintances. Most non-experimental drug-using behavior can be classified asrecreational, which occurs in social settings amongfriends or acquaintances who desire to share an experience whichthey define as both acceptable and pleasurable. Generally,recreational use is both voluntary and patterned and tends not toescalate to more frequent or intense use patterns. This type ofbehavior is not sustained by virtue of the dependence of the useron the drug in any meaningful sense of that term. Reinforcementfor continued use is strengthened by non-drug factors. A pattern of drug-using behavior which has grown significantlyduring the last decade is circumstantial drug use. Thisbehavior is generally motivated by the user's perceived need ordesire to achieve a new and anticipated effect in order to copewith a specific problem, situation or condition of a personal orvocational nature. This classification would include students whoutilize stimulants during preparation for exams, long-distancetruckers who rely on similar substances to provide extendedendurance and alertness, military personnel who use drugs to copewith stress in combat situations, athletes who attempt to improvetheir performance and housewives who seek to relieve tension,anxiety, boredom or other stresses through the use of sedativesor stimulants. A much smaller group of drug users may be regarded as havingescalated from recreational or circumstantial use patterns intointensified drug-using behavior. Although this is the mostamorphous of the behavioral categories, the Commission refers ingeneral to drug use which occurs at least daily and is motivatedby an individual's perceived need to achieve relief from apersistent problem or stressful situation, or his desire tomaintain a certain self-prescribed level of performance. Thiscategory includes persons generally referred to as "problemdrinkers" or "heavy social drinkers," housewiveswho regularly consume barbiturates or other sedatives andbusiness executives who regularly consume tranquilizers. A verydifferent group of intensified users are those youths who haveturned to drugs as sources of excitement or meaning in otherwiseunsatisfying existences. The salient feature of this class ofbehavior is that the individual still remains integrated withinthe larger social and economic structure; however, the regularuse of one or more drugs may constitute dependence in a broadsense and may threaten to impair individual or socialfunctioning. The most disturbing pattern of drug-using behavior,encompassing the smallest number of drug users, is compulsive usewhich consists of a patterned behavior at a high frequency andhigh level of intensity, characterized by a high degree ofpsychological dependence and perhaps physical dependence as well.The distinguishing feature of this behavior is that drug usedominates the individual's existence, and preoccupation with drugtaking precludes other social functioning. Under current socialand legal conditions, compulsive drug use is most easilyrecognized as occurring among chronic alcoholics andheroin-dependent persons, although the incidence of compulsivebarbiturate use is probably significantly higher than theessentially episodic nature of street use would suggest. Drug-Related Risk An understanding of the different types of drug-using behavioris the starting point for problem definition. In these behavioralclassifications, the key element is the meaning of drug use tothe individual; the specific drug being used is subsumed withinthis framework. In reaching the next step in the problemdefinition process, we must focus on the individual and socialrisks attending drug use and those factors which distinguishdrug-using behavior from other forms of experimental andrecreational activities and other forms of coping behavior. As anaid to understanding, basic psychopharmacological principlesconcerning drug-related risk must be kept in mind. Drug-related risk, both individual and social, escalates withincreasing dose and higher frequency of administration. Drug-related risk varies with the mode of drug administration,generally being highest for intravenous administration and lowestfor oral ingestion. Drug-related risk varies according to the setting in which useoccurs, particularly when low doses are used. Drug-related risk varies according to the user's capacity tocontrol intake and detoxify the drug. The greatest risk occurswhen the rate of administration exceeds the capacity of the bodyto detoxify the drug and in consequence the brain is never drugfree. Drug-related risk varies according to the "set" ofthe user, including the expected and desired outcome of the drugexperience, the user's personality, his ability to compensate fordrug effects on the basis of prior experience, and his ability tolimit intake according to a predetermined capacity. Drug-related risk often increases significantly if more thanone drug is used concomitantly. Further, many risks associated with drug use are a function ofsocial policy rather than of the drugs themselves. Unintentionaldrug overdoses, whatever their precise pharmacologicalcharacteristics, occur most often among those who have secureddrugs outside the legitimate channels which control quality andpotency. For example, the incidence of alcohol-induced blindnesswas significantly higher during alcohol prohibition than it istoday mainly because users resorted to methyl alcohol. Inaddition, the unsupervised intravenous use of illicitly obtainedsubstances increases the likelihood of pulmonary and circulatorydisorders and diseases which may result from use of unsterilizedequipment or from injection of insoluble material used on thestreet to increase the bulk of the drug. Finally, muchdrug-related crime, particularly that associated with dependenceon opiates such as heroin, is a function of a prohibitory socialpolicy toward availability rather than of the drugs themselves. The above propositions apply to all drugs. However, anadditional axiom is crucial to formulation of social policy:specific drugs are qualitatively different in terms of individualand social risk. Drug using behavior is not a unitary phenomenon;nor are all drugs the same. At lower levels of use, when non-drugfactors predominate in determining drug effect, the differencesamong drugs in terms of relative risk may be relativelyunimportant. At other levels of use, particularly in large dosesor high frequencies, the characteristics of the drug may becomemost important in determining risk. With these psychopharmacological postulates in mind, we nowturn to an analysis of the type of risks which engender socialconcern. The Commission has categorized drug-related risksinto those affecting individual health, those involvingdrug-induced behavior as an acute consequence of the drugexperience, and those associated with the behavioral aspects ofchronic use or dependence. Risks to individual health The health risks arising from the acute effects of a drugexperience are related primarily to dose and the set and settingof use. When drugs are consumed in small doses orally or bysniffing, acute risks to health are usually slight; when they areadministered intravenously, however, even in small doses, theacute health risks are multiplied, and fatalities have occurred,often for obscure reasons. High doses, individualpredispositions, including those related to age, and uncertainexpectations increase the risk of overdoses and of physical andpsychological injury. Since the lethality and psychologicaleffects of individual drugs differ widely, the drug used is animportant determinant of health-related risks. The major concern from the standpoint of individualhealth is the effect of repeated administration of the drug overa long term, rather than the acute effect of the drug experience.The possibilities of organ damage as well as impairment ofpsychological function increase with the frequency and intensityof use; also, chronic use of tolerance producing drugs increasesthe risk of overdose as well as the likelihood of physical orpsychological damage. Individual drugs vary widely in toxicity,in tolerance and in psychological effect. As we noted earlier, the special public policy considerationsposed by psychoactive drug use arise not from risks to individualhealth per se but rather from the capacity of these drugs toaffect behavior. There is no correlation between the capacity ofa psychoactive drug to induce behavioral disorders and itscapacity to induce either brain or other somatic pathology. Drug-Induced Behavior Whether a person under the influence of a drug will becomeaggressive or passive, will have impaired psychomotor capacity orwill exhibit otherwise disordered behavior depends on the entirerange of variables determining drug effect. Set and setting playa most important role, particularly when low doses are consumed.However, drugs are qualitatively different in this connection andcan be compared. A regular user of psychoactive substances isgenerally able to compensate for some of the acute behavioraleffects. Over the long term, however, additional risks may beencountered; as a result of chronic use, a person may becomesignificantly more aggressive or passive, may becomesignificantly less adept at muscular control, or may deterioratementally, becoming incapable of engaging in voluntary learningefforts. Most important, the likelihood of adverse long termeffects on behavior is increased substantially if the personbecomes dependent upon the substance. It is for this reason thatwe have isolated the dependence liability of various substancesas a separate risk factor. Dependence Liability Whether a person who continues to use a psychoactive substancewill become dependent on the substance, escalating fromrecreational or circumstantial patterns to intensified orcompulsive patterns, is an issue where the characteristics of thedrug and the individual play equally important roles. As we willdiscuss in Chapter Three, drugs are qualitatively different interms of their potential for reinforcement. For example,marihuana is significantly less reinforcing than heroin orcocaine. The behavioral consequences of chronic use also differamong drugs, as does the potential for behavioral disruption whenthe dependent person's drug-taking is interrupted. From theseperspectives, chronic use of dependence-producing doses ofbarbiturates pose significantly different problems from chronicuse of cocaine. Because the health and behavioral risks of drug use increasewith frequency, intensity and duration of use, the likelihood ofdependence is a crucial determinant of social concern. Evaluating the Social Consequences of Drug Use In order to translate the analyses of drug-using behavior andrisk potential of specific drugs into a meaningful framework forpolicy making, a description and evaluation of the socialconsequences which flow from drug-induced behavior or drugdependence is necessary. Although these issues will be addressedin Chapter Three, some general observations regarding the socialimpact of various patterns of drug-using behavior and of the useof individual drugs is useful so that a definition of the drugproblem as it is understood to exist in American society todaycan be undertaken. As we wrote in our first Report on marihuana, the socialimpact of the use of a particular drug or of a specific patternof drug-using behavior involves three distinct considerations.First is the impact on public safety of drug-inducedbehavior or drug dependence. The major concerns from thestandpoint of drug-induced behavior are increased aggressivenessor violent behavior, loss of psychomotor control or alteration ofjudgment and perception which might result in dangerous conduct.With regard to drug dependence, the public safety may bethreatened by persons who are dependent upon a drug which is notlegitimately available and who may commit crimes to financepurchases in the illicit market. The second general area of social consequence is the impact onthe public health and public welfare arising from drug use.This is a quantitative concept pertaining to the health resourcesand social services necessary to prevent, treat and compensatefor the adverse effects of drug use as well as the social loss,in terms of productivity and social contribution, which occurswhenever drug use interferes with normal social and economicfunctioning. For example, unemployment, absenteeism, decreasedsocial performance levels and family disruption may all stem fromintensified or compulsive drug use, resulting in a measurablesocial loss. When drug use is approached from the public health and welfarestandpoint, it must be viewed as part of the larger health andwelfare system which deals with many related problems. Thissystem generally focuses on populations at risk, organizing thenecessary range of medical, human and social services fordelivery of services to the appropriate population. In the drugarea, health resources must be allocated and available todeal with acute reactions, overdoses and diseases, such ashepatitis, among predictable proportions of drug-usingpopulations. This may require a shift of limited medical servicesfrom one health area to another. More important, medical andsocial services must be organized for delivery to persons whoseintensified or compulsive drug use is correlated with impairmentof social functioning (treatment and rehabilitation), as well asto populations who might develop these patterns of use(prevention). Finally, an understanding of the social impact of drug usemust also include the impact on the normative social order. Althoughthis concept is entirely qualitative, dealing with the prevailingsocial values, it has always determined the manner in which thedrug problem has been defined and the nature of the socialresponse. In terms of establishing policy predicates, theCommission believes strongly that considerations of morality doinfluence the formulation of appropriate policy objectives.However, the Commission believes that such considerations oftenhave been overemphasized in the process of defining the problem.Only when the impact of drug use on the normative social order isplaced in proper perspective can we hope to dispel the climate ofcrisis in which drug policy is now made. Defining America's Drug Problem Theoretically, social concern about use of a particularsubstance relative to another should correlate with the verifiedsocial costs attending the use of each drug in that society. Asthe incidence of intensified and compulsive use increases, so tooshould the public's concern with the problem. However, thecurrent problem definition in the United States bears littlerelationship to actual social cost. The intense public concernregarding use of most drugs in large measure reflects anxiety forthe future rather than empirical considerations rooted in thepresent. The result has been an overestimation of the nature ofthe problem attending use of some drugs, such as marihuana, andan underestimation of the problem attending use of other drugs,such as barbiturates and alcohol. In the Commission's view, problem definition should take intoaccount the relationship between the maximum potential socialcost of use of a particular drug under given conditions ofavailability, compared with the verified social costs at aparticular point in time. In this context, the most seriousconcern in contemporary America should attach to the use ofalcohol and heroin. Moderate social concern should attach to theuse of amphetamines, barbiturates, hallucinogens, methaqualoneand cocaine, the use of which is relatively well-controlledwithin the present social policy framework. The use of marihuanaand the so-called minor tranquilizers appears to requirerelatively minimum social concern at the present time. Presenttrends do suggest, however, that the incidence of use of anddependence on barbiturates and cocaine may be increasing and maydemand increased social attention. It is in this context that weturn to a general overview of the means by which social controlshould be achieved. The Limits of Social Control The Commission believes that the contemporary American drugproblem has emerged in part from our institutional response todrug use. Since we have failed to appreciate the diverse natureof drug using behavior, we have failed to weave policy into thefabric of social institutions. Instead, policy has been imposedfrom the top, often without regard to possible impact on theinstitutional fabric itself, much less on drug use. It isworthwhile, then, to consider the general requirements of socialcontrol and the general guidelines upon which policy makingshould be based. Responsible observers agree that society has an interest incontrolling the individual's drug-taking behavior. Thepotentially disruptive behavioral effects of the drug experienceand the potentially adverse social consequences of the chronicuse of most psychoactive drugs are matters of appropriateconcern. The policy maker's task in this area is not to choosebetween social control or social disinterest; rather, it is todetermine if and when informal mechanisms of social control mustbe supplemented with formal ones. Drug use, in one form or another, has been a common feature ofmost cultures throughout history. To the Commission's knowledge,no society has successfully eliminated drug use altogether,although all have attempted to set limits, and most heterogeneoussocieties have contained distinct subgroups opposing all drug useamong their own members. The alcohol prohibition experience inthis country is best viewed as an attempt by one social group toimpose its abstentionist doctrine on the entire culture. Socialcontrol generally stops short of elimination. In its most basic sense, drug taking is socially controlledwhen it is routinized, ritualized and structured in ways whichreduce to a minimum the occurrence of drug-induced behavior whichthe culture considers undesirable. In small, primitive societies,the social control over drug use tends to be most successfulsince it is fully integrated with the overall institutionalcontrol structure, generally dominated by kinship and religiousinstitutions. The well-controlled, ritualized use ofhallucinogenic substances by a number of tribal cultures, such asthe Indians in Central and North America and theaborigines of Australia, has been amply demonstrated (deRios1973). In contemporary mass societies, however, responsibility forsocial control over increasing spheres of human conduct hastended to pass from the family and church to educational,economic and governmental institutions. This reliance on formalinstitutions, coupled with the impersonality and complexity ofindustrial and post-industrial societies, has made the task ofsocial control of drug-taking behavior all the more difficult.For this reason, together with the proliferation of availablesubstances, the problem appears far more pervasive in thesesocieties, especially when they are heterogeneous andindividualistic. Western societies have routinely utilized their publicinstitutions, particularly the legal ones, in an effort tocontain undesirable drug use within tolerable limits. The success of social control through law is always difficultto measure. First, "tolerable limits" is a relativeconcept. Many societies in the early stages of industrializationhave large populations of chronic drug users, but the importanceof enforcement of legal controls on drug taking behavior palesbeside the more pressing social needs of food, shelter, clothingand national survival. In this sense, the United States iscomparatively fortunate to be able to be concerned about its drugproblem, and to have a surplus of national resources to devote toits resolution. A second factor which complicates heavy reliance on socialcontrol through law are the values different societies place onthe rights of individuals. Application of criminal law mustconform to well-established limitations in the United States andGreat Britain, for example, and certain proscriptions thoughtnecessary to minimize a given drug using behavior may be moreintolerable to the general social fabric than the behavioritself. But this is not true in all societies. Japan, which is amore authoritarian society, was able to stem a large and growingamphetamine problem during the mid 1950's and an incipient heroinproblem during the early 1960's by mobilizing a broadly basedsocial response centered on effective use of the criminal law andan educational effort based in large measure on national pride.It is doubtful that similar exhortations and enforcementtechniques could be as readily employed in this country. These cross-cultural observations provide the backdrop againstwhich we must consider the current American response to its drugproblem. First, reliance on law is unlikely to be effective inAmerican society unless it is joined consciously and directlywith use of other institutions of social control. Second, drugpolicy should not be made in a vacuum. A proposed policy must beanalyzed both in terms of its likely impact on drug-takingbehavior as well as its likely impact on other social values andinstitutions. Third, the problems to which the society directsits formal response must be those which exceed the level ofsocially tolerable limits. For example, most drug use, even ofdisapproved substances, is socially controlled to some degree byinformal institutions such as peer groups and families. Formalsocial efforts should be directed to those behaviors which arenot adequately controlled by informal mechanisms of socialcontrol, aiming primarily to support the informal controlmechanisms and intervening directly only as a last resort. THE COMMISSION'S ROLE The Commission believes that the first step toward resolvingthe drug problem is to reconsider the present diagnosis of theailment. The social response is presently a large part of theproblem, one which is compounded with each unanticipated crisis.To break this cycle, it is necessary to refocus our attention onthat behavior which carries the most serious social consequence.Preoccupation with the drugs themselves must be replaced by anunderstanding of the behavioral impact of drug use. We must dealdirectly with the ambivalence of our attitudes with respect todrugs, conforming our beliefs to reality and our conduct to ourideals. Only then will a coherent policy emerge, one which canwithstand legitimate criticism, and one which will have abeneficial impact on the problem. Promises which cannot be kept must not be made. The publicmust be apprised that disapproved drug use is part of a largersocial pattern, and that all the money and effort that theAmerican society can muster will never be able to dealeffectively with this behavior if the problem continues to bedefined as it is now. Drug policy making must take into account awide range of social phenomena of which drug use is a small part,and institutional responses must be framed in the context ofbroader social roles. Unless present policy is redirected, wewill perpetuate the same problems, tolerate the same socialcosts, and find ourselves as we do now, no further along the roadto a more rational legal and social approach than we were in1914. The Commission has not attempted to devise utopian policyrecommendations. Instead we have attempted primarily to formulatea policy-making process, one which includes all of the importantvariables and which separates various crucial issues. We haveapplied this process in order to provide a plan of action to beimplemented immediately. But we would be remiss if we were onlyto propose recommendations for the present. The Commission feelsthat a coherent social policy requires a fundamental alterationof social attitudes toward drug use, and a willingness to embarkon new courses when previous actions have failed. Contents | Feedback | Search DRCNet Library | Schaffer Library | Major Studies | Drug Use in America, Problem inPerspective WT01-B25-8IA086-000614-B048-100http://206.61.184.43:80/schaffer/Library/studies/duapip/pip3.htm 206.61.184.43 19970122023106 text/html 234794HTTP/1.0 200 OKDate: Wednesday, 22-Jan-97 02:30:45 GMTServer: WebSitePro/1.1f (S/N wpo-0deb)Allow-ranges: bytesContent-type: text/htmlLast-modified: Saturday, 28-Dec-96 07:12:35 GMTContent-length: 234575 The Social Impact of Drug Dependence and Drug-InducedBehavior The Report of the National Commission on Marihuana and DrugAbuse Drug Use In America: Problem in Perspective Commissioned by President Richard M. Nixon, March, 1972 Chapter Three - The Social Impact of Drug Dependence andDrug-Induced Behavior Western man pays frequent homage to the freedom of his will.Although Western philosophy has always included strains ofpredestination in one form or another, the belief that mancontrols his fate runs deep, and even those who question thisfrom. the scientific standpoint are often quick to add that thestate should continue to act upon it. Whenever an individualchooses to act irresponsibly, as defined by his society, he isheld accountable to other men, to his state, or according toprevailing belief, to his Creator. But man does not will everything that happens to him, and theprecepts of free will and accountability have been tempered inrelation to many conditions of existence, Foremost of these, ofcourse, is the notion of sickness. Although the individual mayplace himself in a position which increases the risk of disease,he does not usually will to be sick; -accordingly, he isgenerally not held accountable either for his sickness or for itsbehavioral concomitants. Poverty is another area which hasrecently been separated from notions of free will and moralworth. There are some who shun worldly possessions in order toenhance their spirituality, but most men do not will to be poor.Since the late 19th Century Western society has actedincreasingly on the proposition that environmental factors maypredispose poverty and socioeconomic immobility. The emergence ofthe welfare state rests on the belief that man should not be heldaccountable for, or suffer for that which he cannot prevent. Disease and poverty are two broad qualifications of anormative order premised on considerations of free will. Inaddition, our normative system and our law are replete with otherexceptions which recognize that an individual may well beoverborne by others or by conditions for which he is notresponsible. Love, hypnosis, duress, "acts of God,"irresistible impulses, uncontrollable rages all may excuse theindividual for conduct which might otherwise be consideredfoolish, unwise, intemperate or even criminal. Of course, thereare also conditions which may predispose behavior although we donot excuse them, such as foolishness, immoderation and vanity. Drugs introduce a new dimension into this uneasy marriage offree will and human and social imperfection. The very phrase"being under the influence" of a drug manifests thefundamental proposition that drugs can alter or control humanbehavior. The drug may induce a socially desirable form of control inthe sense that the influence of a drug may restore control whichhas otherwise been lost. For example, sedative drugs may beadministered to a person whose anguish over the death of a lovedone is out of control, not to obliterate grief but to modify theperson's responses. Drugs may also be used to minimize theeffects of "unwilled" behaviors stemming from mentalillness or aberration. Some examples of the socially sanctioneduses of drugs for behavior control in the context of therapy are:the administration of drugs to mental patients to dampen theintensity of acute behavioral disruption and to enhance theircapacity for organized responses, the drug-based efforts toincrease concentration and reduce aimlessness of hyperkeneticchildren, and the maintenance of heroin-dependent persons onmethadone to stabilize their otherwise anti-social behavior.Drugs have also been used for punishment; that is to alter thebehavior of persons in detention, although this development, hasmet with substantial resistance. The common thread of these examples is that drugs may beemployed to restore the capacity for responsible, willedbehavior. However, public attitude and social policy toward druguse are focused primarily on the fact that drugs may alsodiminish the capacity of a person to control his conduct in themanner society expects of him. This perception has dominatedpolitical rhetoric, literary description, legal doctrine andpublic understanding about drugs for centuries. With someexceptions, the American normative system stipulates that suchloss of control is socially undesirable and in itself constitutesirresponsible behavior. On the other hand, American law has longbeen ambivalent about whether a person should be held entirely orpartially accountable for such behavior or its consequences,reflecting the basic tension between freedom of will and humanlimitations. Whatever the precise relationship between drug use and self-control, the very possibility of drug-influenced behavior iswhat distinguishes drug use from other forms of behavior,motivating all societies to regulate it. In American society,however, the extent to which drug use, by itself, can deprive theindividual of control over his behavior has been highlyexaggerated. Drugs are fixed in the collective consciousness as substanceswhich can rob man of his sentiency, morals and values. Each drug,whether it be LSD, heroin or marihuana, is widely believed tohave the capacity to destroy the will. For decades, the publichas held the view that the initial use of psychoactivesubstances, often tied to the exotic Eastern world, is theopening of Pandora's box: one taste of the forbidden fruit andcontrol will shortly be lost. The assumed paths from marihuana toheroin, from. LSD to insanity, from heroin to crime, and, inbygone days, from tobacco to alcohol, and from alcohol to skidrow, reflect concern not only about social cost but also aboutthe inevitable erosion of will. This presumed relationship between drugs and will is alsoreflected in the tendencies to ascribe a causal relationship todrugs and almost every type of unwanted behavior, and toattribute to drugs the undes1rable behavior of disapproved socialgroups. Whenever specific drugs are temporally related to sexualexcess, crime, traffic accidents or use of other drugs, theperson and his will tend to be forgotten, and the drug itselfbecomes the villain. Perhaps the unique expression of drug-induced loss ofself-control is the inability of the individual to stop using thedrug. The dread of becoming ensnared in the "clutches ofaddiction" has long dominated public antipathy toward theevils of drug use, reflecting a deep-seated belief that mental,physical and moral debilitation is the likely consequence ofhabitual drug use. Whatever its ancillary impact or subsequenthistory, the Harrison Narcotic Act of 1914 embodied above allelse a firm public policy judgment opposing the use of"addicting" or "habit-forming drugs."Further, the progression thesis, which has been propounded sincedrug policy began, although the drugs have changed, and the morerecent distinction between bard and soft drugs, suggests howstrongly concern about dependence dominates the entire drugissue. The notion of addiction is of relatively recent origin,emerging as a recognizable medical entity during the 18thCentury. Before that time, the focus of social control in thiscountry as in other societies, was on the disorderingconsequences of the drug experience. Aggressive behavior, loss ofpsychomotor control or other disordered behavior induced by thedrug experience must also be taken into account in theformulation of drug policy. TABLE 111-1. (Cont.) FOOTNOTES to TABLE 111-1. I In choosing substances to be included in this table, theCommission did not attempt to be comprehensive. Selections weremade in order to illustrate the full range of dependenceliability and capacity for influencing or inducing behavioralchange. 2 Capacity of drug to induce continued use on the basis ofpsychological reward. Relative judgments are based on use ofmaximum tolerated dose, as measured by laboratory studies andconfirmed by refined clinical experience. 3 The actual prevalence of chronic use among the usingpopulation. The relative prevalence of chronic use of specificsubstances is determined by a wide range of socioculturalvariables, including such factors as social custom, availabilityof the substance, susceptibility of particular populations topatterns of chronic use and availability of more potentsubstances. 4 Potential for disruption or impairment of socialfunctioning after a single dose. Relative judgments are based onconsumption of doses sufficient to produce marked pharmacologicaleffects. 5 Drug-induced behavioral response, as measured by potentialimpairment of social functioning, accompanying chronicadministration of dependence-producing doses. 6 Short-term behavioral responses, measured by disruption orimpairment of social functioning, accompanying interruption ofdrug taking after chronic administration of dependence producingdoses. 7 The relative judgments regarding methadone are based onparenteral administration and oral administration in naivesubjects. The Commission expressly notes that oral administrationto opiate-dependent persons in a maintenance setting has asignificantly different impact on behavior. 8 Includes related drugs such as psilocybin, DMT. 9 Inapplicable. Because of extremely low reinforcementpotential, chronic use patterns do not generally occur, and noabstinence syndrome has been described. 10 Includes drugs which are structurally related and roughlysimilar in effect to mescaline, such as DOM ("STP"). While drugs have a capacity to affect behavior, they do notdo so uniformly. Table 111-1 provides an overview of the relativecapacity of selected drugs to induce dependence and influencebehavior. However, drugs do not affect behavior independently.Non-drug factors play an equally crucial role in determining thebehavorial concomitants of drug use. The personal characteristicsof the user, his expectations about the drug experience and aboutsociety's attitudes and possible responses, the setting in whichthe drug is used, as well as broader sociocultural factors, areall major determinants of drug effect and of the individual'scapacity to control the effects of the drug through the exerciseof his will. We will now examine the social consequences of drug-usingbehavior. First, we will establish a framework by analyzing drugdependence and drug-induced behavior from a psychopharmacologicalstandpoint, providing detailed explanations for the conceptspresented in Table 111-1. Then we will consider the actual andpotential impact on the public safety and the public health andwelfare of the patterns of drug-using behavior discussed in theprevious Chapter. Finally, we will sketch the implications ofthis analysis for social policy. These guidelines will serve as abackdrop for the application of the policy-making process inChapter Four. I -- DRUG DEPENDENCE Since the psychoactive properties of naturally-occurringsubstances were first discovered and sought, the excessive,chronic or compulsive use of these substances has been anidentifiable and predictable human condition. Until the 19thCentury, however, this phenomenon was viewed primarily in moral,rather than medical or scientific terms. One 18th Centuryobserver likened the use of opium in Eastern countries to the useof "wine and spiritous liquors in civilized Europe (where itis) the support of the coward, the solace of the wretched and thedaily source of intoxication of the debauchee" (Crumpe1793). This is not to say that the physical consequences of chronicdrug use went unnoticed. As early as 1701, a London physician, inThe Mysteries of Opium Revealed, addressed "The Effects ofSudden Leaving Off the Use of Opium After a Long and Lavish UseThereof," where he described a withdrawal syndrome (Jones1701). However, neither Dr. Jones nor his contemporaries regardedthis condition as fundamentally different from that associatedwith excessive wine drinking or the excessive eating or chewingof other substances such as tobacco. The, physical concomitantsof the "opium habit", like those for tobacco and wine,were associated by some with a defect of individual will and byothers with some unknown property of the drugs. Isolation of morphine from opium and the subsequentdevelopment of the hypodermic syringe clarified the distinctionbetween the opium habit and the alcohol and tobacco habits. Twopreviously held theories were now discarded: first, that theopium habit was dependent on oral ingestion of the drug, andsecond, that the withdrawal effects arose. from resinoussubstances in the opium. Vivid literary descriptions, the,introduction of opium-smoking by Chinese immigrants, and thewidespread use of opium and morphine during and after the CivilWar soon stimulated the attention of medical professionals. The"army disease" or morphinisin was now recognized as adistinctive medical and social problem. During the last three decades of the 19th Century, medicalprofessionals strove to understand, describe and treat thissickness. Meanwhile, the public was becoming acquainted with thehabit-forming properties of the opiates, as the population ofopiate-dependent persons increased. State laws at once, began toreflect them popular fear of drug habits, as did the labellingrequirement of the Pure Food and Drug Act of 1906.Simultaneously, the social aspects of chronic opiate use arousedthe popular imagination. The stereotype of the "dopefiend" emerged, and with it a highly restrictive publicpolicy, one rooted in considerations apart from the pharmacologiceffects of the prohibited drugs. TEMINOLOGICAL CONFUSION In the United States, the public, the medical professions andpolicy makers all discovered the individual mid socialconsequences of chronic opium use at roughly the same time. Aconnection between popular vocabulary and scientific terminologywas established as the scientific community tended to appropriatelay terms, laden with emotional and imprecise meanings, and toimbue them with scientific meanings. The first of thesedescriptive terms to emerge was "addictions" Addiction The word addiction evolved from the Latin addicere which, inRoman law, meant the giving or binding over of a person to onething or another, such as a judge assigning a debtor to hiscreditor. By the late 16th Century, "to addict" hadapparently assumed a broader meaning: to devote, give up or applyhabitually to a practice. One writer suggests that the word wasgenerally identified with bad habits or vices (Sonnedecker 1959).With the emergence of public and scientific interest in the opiumproblem, "addiction"' and "mania" werecommonly used in the press to describe this ascendent vice. Within the American scientific community, the terms mostcommonly employed during the 19th and early 20th Centuries todescribe the condition were "opium (or morphine) habit"and "morphinism."' In 1903, for example, the, AmericanPharmaceutical Association established a "Committee of theAcquirement of Drug Habits." By 1920, however, thescientific community had given the term addiction its blessing, adevelopment paralleling the popularization of the word"narcotics" and the entry of government into the field."Narcotic addiction" became a household phrase. As we suggested in Chapter One, "narcotic" soonlost its pharmacologic meaning and came to encompass any drugassociated with the populations using the opiates or cocaine;similarly "addiction" came to be tied in the publicmind to the habitual use of any drug. In the press and councilsof government, marihuana users and cocaine users were frequentlycharacterized as addicts. Interestingly, the dangers of alcohol"addiction" were widely proclaimed during the intensePublic discussion surrounding the adoption of the 18th Amendmentalthough this terminology was strongly resisted by opponents ofProhibition. Many scientists remained uncomfortable with the imprecise useof the term addiction, and particularly with its strong moralover-tones. Yet, because the condition was so little understood,there was little agreement on a substitute. Throughout the 1920'sthere remained "considerable confusion ... as to thesignificance of various terms employed in consideration of drugaddiction in the broad sense of the word" (Seevers 1962).Terry and Pellens, in the introduction to their classic 1928 workaddressed this problem: One further matter requires consideration, namely, the terminology employed. As elsewhere, here also controversial subjects are involved, for different writers have used terms and definitions which in themselves have indicated particular attitudes toward the nature of the, problem. Thus habit, craving, appetite, mania, addiction, addiction disease, all may be interpreted significantly if desired by those using or reading them. We have tried to select some name for the condition of chronic opium-using that would not carry a partisan, restricted or incomplete implication as far as the nature of the condition is concerned. The phrase Chronic opium intoxication seems to fulfill this purpose better than any other but it has the disadvantage of length and is at times an awkward expression. We decided, therefore, not to restrict ourselves to any one term, but to employ whichever of those in common use today seemed best suited to the individual need (Terry and Pellens, 1928). Most scientific observers recognize that habitual users ofmany drugs did not experience the same degree of physicaldiscomfort upon abstinence as did chronic opiate, users.Consequently, the main goal was to establish a conceptualframework and a vocabulary which would distinguish the habitualuse of other drugs from the, chronic rise of opiates. By the late1920's, a general consensus had emerged that habit-forming drugscould be separated into those which produced"habituation," and those which produced"addiction." Habituation In broad terms, habituation usually characterized recurrentuse of those drugs which were not associated with the developmentof tolerance and an abstinence syndrome; for this reason, thecondition was closely linked with weakness of individual willrather than specific drug effects. Addiction, by contrast, wasassociated with physical dependence and -with serious individualand social consequences. This dichotomy, because of its publicpolicy implications, was not completely satisfactory from eitherthe scientific or legislative viewpoints. For example, thetendency to classify cannabis as an habituating substance wasgenerally resisted by those who sought to prohibit its use,mainly because public policy was so closely identified with theprohibition of drugs of addiction. Well into the past decade,there was still a strong tendency to classify marihuana as anaddictive drug. Many pharmacologists were uncomfortable with theaddiction-habituation dichotomy because many drugs would not fiteasily in these categories. They recognized that cocaine, forexample, did not produce the classic withdrawal symptoms ortolerance which were so closely intertwined with the notion ofaddiction; yet, it was clear to them that "cocainism"carried significant consequences for both the individual andsociety. In addition, the succeeding years witnessed thedevelopment for medical application of whole new families ofpsychoactive drugs. Often these new drugs could not easily bepigeon-holed within the simple dichotomy. Many pharmacologistswere concerned that classifying such new drugs as"addicting" would stigmatize them by associating themwith the opiates and with the perception of serious socialhazards. From this concern emerged a policy-based distinctionbetween the labelling and warning concepts tied to the Pure Foodand Drug Act and its successor statutes, and the addictionconcept associated with the Harrison Act. The Search for Precision For more than three decades, experts attempted to preservethe habituation/addition dichotomy, continually redefining andenlarging its scope in the hope that it would serve the needs notonly of science and medicine but also of law and sociology. In 1931, two experts, attempting to introduce some coherenceinto the subject, defined habitation as "a condition inwhich the habitue desires a drug but suffers no in effects on itsdiscontinuance." Addiction was defined as "a conditiondeveloped through the effects of repeated actions of a drug suchthat its use becomes necessary and cessation of its action causesmental or physical disturbances." Addiction was furthersubdivided into "true addiction" which involved the"physical disturbances" associated with the withdrawalsyndrome, and "psychic addiction, which was associated withthe "feeling of exhilaration and euphoria [constituting] analmost irresistible goad to its continued use" (Tatum andSeevers 1931). Six years later another expert redefined the basic terms asfollows: By habituation is meant the physical phenomenon of adaptation and mental conditioning to the repetition of an effect. Habituation to opiates is probably more intense than habituation to other substances. In a, sense habituation represents Psychical dependence. Addiction to opiates embraces three intimately related but distinct phenomena, namely tolerance, habituation, and dependence. These phenomena which make up the psychosomatic complex known as addiction are intricately interwoven and interdependent (Hirnmelsbach,1937). Over the years, successive definitions and redefinitionsbecame more and more elaborate. In 1957, the Expert Committee onAddictionProducing Drugs of the World Health Organization (WorldHealth Organization, 1957) attempted to specify the ways in whichaddiction differed from habituation: Drug addiction Drug addition is a state of periodic or chronic intoxicationproduced by the repeated consumption of a drug (natural orsynthetic). Its characteristics include: an overpowering desire or need (compulsion) to continue taking the drug and to obtain it by any means; a tendency to increase the dose; a psychic (psychological) and generally a physical dependence on the effects of the drug; detrimental effect on the individual and on society. Drug habituation Drug habituation (habit) is a condition resulting from therepeated consumption of a drug. Its characteristics include: a desire (but not a compulsion) to continue takin- the drug for the sense of improved well-being which it engenders; little or no tendency to increase the dose; some degree of psychic dependence on the effect of the drug, but absence of physical dependence and hence of an abstinence syndrome; detrimental effects, if any, primarily on the individual. Despite the loophole provided in subsection (3) to permit theclassification of cocaine as a drug of addiction, the WHOdefinitions continued to tie that term primarily to physicaldependence, thereby perpetuating the impression that the socialdetriments of chronic drug use arise primarily from physicaldependence or addiction. Despite a concerted effort within the expert community duringthe 1950's to rationalize the in-suited terms addiction andhabituation, the confusion remained. As the World HealthOrganization noted in 1965: Both terms are frequently used interchangeably and often inappropriately. It is not uncommon to apply the term addiction to any misuse of drugs outside of medical practice, with a connotation of serious harm to the individual and to society, and often with a demand that something be done about it. Such broad use can only create confusion and misunderstanding when abuse of drugs is discussed from different viewpoints. The difficulties in terminology become increasingly apparent with the continuous appearance of new agents with various and perhaps unique pharmacological profiles, and with changing patterns of use of drugs already well known. These developments must be considered in their relation to, but may not be adequately characterized by, current definitions of addiction. There is scarcely any agent which can be taken into the body to which some individuals will not get a reaction satisfactory or pleasurable to them, persuading, them to continue its use even to the point of abuse-that is, to excessive or persistent use beyond medical need. Probably the only exceptions are agents that have incidental or side effects that prevent such use-for example, cumulative or early toxic effects, to which the individual does not become tolerant (Eddy, et al., 1965). Two basic problems inhere in the concepts of addiction andhabituation. First, the nature of chronic drug-taking behavior,involving a range of individual-drug interactions, is entirelytoo complex to be compartmentalized into two mutually exclusivecategories. Determining the point where the lesser (habituation)becomes the greater (addiction) is bound to be arbitrary, since,as is true in all biological responses, there is a wide range ofvariation in the same individual and between individuals. Second, the terms, from their inception, were designed notonly to describe a form of drug-using behavior but also tocomprehend the relationship between that behavior and thesociety. The need to accommodate definitions to socialconsequence is reflected precisely in subsection (4) of the 1957WHO definitions quoted above. That the chronicity of drug-takingbehavior and social harm were not directly correlated becameparticularly obvious in the early 1960's when an anti-smokingcrusade was launched. In this connection, the word addiction wascommonly used to describe the tobacco habit despite the absenceof significant drug-induced behavior arising from its use. Drug Dependence In the early 1960's, the search for more suitable conceptsand terminology was intensified. In rapid-fire succession, mostexperts in the field and most professional organizationsdiscarded the terms addiction and habituation and substitutedinstead the concepts of physical and psychological (or psychic)dependence. After endorsement by two WHO expert groups and therelevant committee of the National Academy of Sciences-NationalResearch Counsel, the WHO officially adopted this position in1965, defining drug dependence as follows: Drug dependence is a state of psychic or physical dependence, or both, on a drug, arising in a person following administration of that drug on a periodic or continuous basis. The characteristics of such a state will vary with the agent involved, and these characteristics must always be made clear by designating the particular type of drug dependence in each specific case; for example, drug dependence of morphine type, of barbiturate type, of amphetamine type, etc. (Eddy, et al., 1965). In order to save the new notion of dependence from the fateof its predecessors, WHO added the following important caveat: The specification of the type of dependence is essential andshould form an integral part of the new terminology, since it isneither possible nor even desirable to delineate or define theterm drug dependence independently of the agent involved. Itshould also be remembered that it was the desire to achieve theimpossible and define a complex situation by a single term("addiction" or "habituation," respectively)which has given rise to confusion in many cases. Therefore, thedescription of drug dependence as a state is a concept forclarification and not, in any sense, a specific definition. However, the requirements of law and interdisciplinarycommunication have doomed this attempt to keep dependence as awide umbrella sheltering a series of more technical dependencetypes. All attempts to provide a more comprehensive definitionhave been faced with the fundamental truth that dependence is amatter of degree. For example, federal legislation and that of many states nowdefine a drug-dependent person as: A person who is using a controlled substance and who is in astate of psychic or physical dependence, or both, arising fromthe use of that substance on a continuous basis. Drug dependenceis characterized by behavioral and other responses which includea strong compulsion to take the substance on a continuing basisin order to experience its psychic effects or to avoid thediscomfort caused by its absence. *Many drugs with dependence liability, notably alcohol, arenot legally classified as "controlled substances." The problem of degree is submerged in this definition withinthe terms "continuous" and "strongcompulsion." From a legal standpoint, the umbrelladefinition and vague terms which cannot be applied to individualcases are inadequate, particularly when a finding that a personis drug dependent may result in coercive legal intervention. The Commission applauds the much-belated attempt by thescientific community to sever its conceptual apparatus from thevocabulary of politics and emotion. "Addiction," like"narcotics" and "drug abuse," has a generalconnotation of evil, suggesting illicit ecstasy, guilt and sin.Because the public image is conditioned more by culturalperceptions than by medical ones, medically-precise meaningssimply cannot be harmonized with common parlance. We believe that the concept of drug dependence offers auseful, objective way of describing a highly complex range ofdrug-using behavior. At the same time, the Commission recognizesthat the contrasting requirements of law and science may doom"dependence" to the fate of its predecessors. The onlyway to avoid this result is for the scientific community toengage in a concerted attempt to formulate a narrower umbrelladefinition which will meet the specificity requirements of law.For example, the broad concept of drug dependence must, for legalpurposes, be oriented toward the degree and types of dependencewhich impair the social functioning of the drug-dependent personand pose predictable adverse consequences for the society. In addition to this qualification regarding the requirementsof law, the Commission also emphasizes the responsibility of theexpert community to communicate an understanding of drugdependence to the public, and to modify the exaggeratedperceptions which have so long been tied to the concept ofaddiction. Excising "Addiction" The imprint of history on public attitudes is deep. Addictionstill provides the lightning rod for public concern about drugs,and is generally identified with "physically addicting"drugs, the prototype being heroin. The "narcotics,"morphine and cocaine, were the models for comparative socialdanger 50 years ago, and heroin is the model today."Narcotic" use was identified with depravity,immorality, uncontrolled drug use (addiction) and crime 50 yearsago, and the same is true today. Because addiction has been painted as the paramount socialand individual danger in drug use, these images and fears extendto some extent to the use of all drugs. Scientific emphasis onthe physical attributes of addiction has confirmed and supportedthe lay fears. As a general guide for public policy and personal conduct,the fear of addiction is a constant. When asked in the context ofthe National Survey which drugs are addictive in the sense that"anybody who uses it regularly becomes physically [and/or]psychologically dependent on it and can't get along withoutit," the public responded affirmatively in the followingproportions: When asked, in an open-ended question, to elaborate on thedangers of proprietary and prescription drugs, the most commonresponse was that they are habit forming. Roughly 50% of thepublic characterized this as the chief reason for not usingprescription drugs. For proprietary drugs, 35% mentioned thisconcerns a proportion exceeded only by the 40% which fearedoverdoses. Finally, slightly more than half of those withopinions on the subject have worried that if they took pills theymight become dependent on them (48% have worried and 44% have notworried). These responses bear comparison with the intensity of thefear of addiction. That is, all these drugs are perceived by alarge majority of people to be addicting; but specificperceptions about the nature of this phenomenon vary according todrug, often inaccurately. When asked whether they agreed ordisagreed with the statements that "you can use (heroin ormarihuana) occasionally without ever becoming addicted toit," only a small proportion of the public agreed. Alcohol and barbiturates are not viewed as addicting to thesame extent as heroin, and the alcoholic is not viewed with thesame fear as the "narcotics addict." For example, theCommission-sponsored National Survey in 1971 found that 66% ofthe adult public believe that "most people who use alcohollead a normal life;" only 23% thought the same was true ofmost marihuana users (Abelson et al., 1972). These differences in perception stem from social factorsrather than from failure to ascribe addiction potential to alldrugs. Paraphernalia is an important indicator of true addictionin the public imagination; the needle, the spoon andirregularly-shaped cigarettes stand as symbols of drug addiction.Further, the perception of addictiveness and its severity hasbeen tied to class and ethnic considerations since the creationof modern drug policy. The net result is that although most drugsare thought to be addictive, some are thought to be morecontrollable and less of a problem than others. Thesediscriminations are at odds with pharmacological truth. Toredress this situation, we now turn to an overview of the natureof drug dependence and its social impact. TOWARD A FUNCTIONAL UNDERSTANDING OF DRUGDEPENDENCE Research has established that repetitive drug use resultsfrom the interaction between a drug, the user and the surroundingenvironment. Understanding this behavior requires a conjunctionof psychological, pharmacological and sociological theory. Theconcept of drug dependence offers a useful framework for such ananalysis. This is not to say that it is without ambiguity, butrather that it is functional, and comports with social,psychological and pharmacological notions, rather thanoveremphasizing one aspect of this intricate drug-personsituation relationship. Psychological Dependence: The Primary Reinforcer To explore the concept of dependence, we must approachrepetitive, drug use from a broad psychological standpoint. Ulbehavior which is repeated more or less systematically, whetherit be dressing in a certain order, watching special televisionprograms, playing poker on Thursday, going to work in the,morning or coining !ionic from work in the evening, has beenreinforced. In a sense, a person can be said to be dependent onany of the innumerable liabits of life. The iniportant question,however, is how strongly the bebavior is reinforced and by whatfactors. Or, put the other way, what is the degree of dependence? Degree of dependence can only be measured by looking beyondthe behavior itself to its role in the individual's existence andto the nature of the adjustments which would be made if he couldnot beliave in the way he has come to depend upon. For example,the compulsive gambler is preoccupied with this particularbehavior, often to the, exclusion of his social obligations.Other persons may be, preoccupied with sexual behavior, sometimesto the point of dominating the person's existence and interferingwith the lives of others. For many Americans, TV viewing onSunday afternoon during football season has become a highlysignificant part of weekend life. This all suggests thatrecurrent behaviors will fall on a continuum from lesser togreater dependence in terms of their importance. to theindividual. The same is true for repetitive drug use, with one importantaddition. While other habits are only indirectly reinforcedthrough the central nervous system, psychoactive drug use isdirectly reinforced by its effect on the brain.2 This factor alsodistinguishes the, notion of vitamin-deficient, diabetic andcardiac-insufficient patients. Psychoactive drugs also modify thecapacity of the nervous system to react to, and to interpret thenature of the stimulus. 2 With pharmacologically inert substances dependence is basedsolely on the so-called placebo effect. It is strictlypsychogenic and a reasonable measure of the, existingpsychological state of the user or of the user's relationshipwith the giver. Many other substances which have no direct effecton the central nervous .system may, because of a strongperipheral action, reinforce psychologically and createdependence by drug-induced sensory input or by abolishingunpleasant sensations which arise from the the periphery. (Forexample, relief of burning sensation by counterirritants, intensecatharsis, relief of heartburn by antacids and the like.) Consideration of dependence on non-psychoactive drugs orplacebos is introduced here only to show why it should not beconfused, as it has been, with the principal issues as theyrelate to dependence on psychoactive drugs. Underlying the notion of psychological dependence is the sameconcept of positive reinforcement which describes behavioralresponses to many types of rewards such as food, drink, sex, andacclaim. In this instance, however, the specific reinforcer is adrug whose effects are sufficiently attractive and rewardingpsychologically at the first trial to motivate the user to repeatthe experience. The Pharmacological Component: Reinforcement Potential An individual who has had no experience with psychoactivesubstances will never become drug dependent. Having onceexperienced psychoactive effects, many persons will becomedependent to some degree. Some drugs are so weak that little harmresults. But many are such powerful reinforcers that if everyindividual in a given society were exposed to all suchpsychoactive drugs by intravenous administration and thenpermitted free access to them, a major social problem wouldensue. Lesser animals, such as monkeys or even rats, having onceexperienced a drug such as cocaine and after being givenunlimited access, will self-administer the drug until they die.It should be clearly understood by those who decry the depravityof the compulsive drug user that susceptibility is only relative,and under certain conditions, almost any individual can be madeto be drug dependent in the most extreme sense of the term.However, specific drugs are qualitatively different in thisrespect, and it is therefore important to consider thereinforcement potential of different substances. Some drugs offer, from a psychopharmacologic standpoint, highrewards and consequently great reinforcement for their continueduse. With drugs such as alcohol, heroin, amphetamines,barbiturates and cocaine, there is a significant likelihood thatrecurrent administration of large doses will result in a highdegree of involvement. However, this result is not inevitable.Many factors such as self-concept, peer orientation and religiousfeelings may mitigate against the use of large doses and frequentadministration, thereby reducing the likelihood of a high degreeof involvement. Substances such as amphetamines, when consumed orally, andthe minor tranquilizers" appear to have a moderatereinforcement potential. Others, such as marihuana and codeine,appear to have considerably less reinforcement potential.However, just as it is not inevitable that a high level ofdependence will occur with heroin and alcohol, it is possible fora person consuming sufficiently high doses to develop a highdegree of dependence upon substances such as marihuana andcodeine. In such cases, the dependence is reinforced primarily bynon-pharmacologic factors related to the individual and hisenvironment. Other drugs, such as LSD and mescaline, appear to possess aself limiting quality due to the temporary development of amoderate degree of tolerance to the psychic effects and to aphenomenon of psychological satiation arising from the intensityand duration of the drug experience. For these reasons, instancesof prolonged, frequent self-administration of these substancesare rare. Finally, some drugs, such as the phenothiazines (themajor tranquilizers) have a minimal reinforcement potential.' Psycho-Social Components Reinforcement for continued use may also stem fromnon-pharmacologic factors. As noted in Chapter Two, drug-usingbehavior may be influenced and reinforced by a wide range ofpsychological and sociological variables, and this is no lesstrue of continued use than of initial use. Various conditioningtheories have been advanced to illustrate how people learn to usedrugs, adapt them to their needs and seek the drug when needed.Drug dependence is a dynamic process composed of a sequence ofphrases during which the behavior may be reinforced by differentfactors at different times. On one extreme, drug-using behavior may be a function ofstatus definition in terms of class, group, ethnicity orgeography. Researchers have noted, for example, the antipathy ofmany marihuana-smoking youths for glue-sniffing groups (Blumer etal., 1967). Among other drug-using groups, there may be statusconnotations involved in selecting a particular brand of scotchwhiskey or in preferring scotch to bourbon. The cocktail partyepitomizes the manner in which drug using behavior may bereinforced by non-drug factors. In these examples, the recurrenceof drug use may reflect very little commitment by the user; inother words, repetitive drug-using behavior may not reflectdrug-seeking behavior .4 3 'Reinforcement potential" is an absolute laboratoryconcept, within which psychosocial factors are held constant. Inthis sense, the major tranquilizers are not reinforcing at allsince the "normal" population would not choose torepeat the drug experience because of its side effects. However,we should note that the use of any psychoactive drug can bereinforcing given the appropriate Psychological and socialreinforcements. Thus, it is meaningful to say that the majortranquilizers are reinforcing to the patients who agree to usethem because of their positive rewards as the individual and hisphysician define them. 4 These situations might be distinguished from the type ofbehavior involving elaborate, ritualistic preparation andadministration of a drug where the meaning of the behavior ratherthan the psychological experience (of the drug provide the entirereward. The selection and preparation of a bottle of wine and therolling of a marihuana joint are examples. There is also the"needle freak," a person who is enamored of the processof self-injecting any substance, including water. By contrast, drug use may be reinforced by less ephemeralvariables, as a person comes to rely upon the drug effect to getthings done or to avoid unpleasantness. For example, an anxious,unhappily married individual or an obsessional, overworkedexecutive may gradually drink more in quantity, frequency andintensity as he or she finds that this behavior blurs awarenessof problems and enhances the ability to avoid their resolution.By the same token, a lonely young person may turn to"speed" when it is popular and readily available,finding with more and more, predictability that he feels potent,alert and energetic and that he shares a common bond with hispeers who reinforce each others participation in the entire speedritual. At the other extreme, the recurring drug-using activity mayform the very definitional base of a person's life: "WhenI'm on the way home with the bag safely in my pocket, and Ihaven't been caught stealing all day, and I didn't get beat andthe cops didn't get me I feel like a working man coming home;he's worked hard, but he knows he's done something. . ."This person's life style is his repeated acquisition andconsumption of heroin; and each administration of the drugconfirms the success of his life style, representing his wagesand his sole reward. The Development of Dependence: Conditioning Many models have been proposed to describe the interactionswhich take place during the development of dependence. As yetresearch has not delineated or confirmed these models and theirimplications. However, at least three identifiable phases of theprocess of initiation and reinforcement have received attention.The initial phase of beginning and continuing drug use isreinforced primarily by social f actors. Pharmacological andpsychological factors become increasingly important in thedevelopment and maintenance of dependence. Finally, thepermanence of the phase following detoxification and"withdrawal" from the dependent state can be affectedby social as well as psychological factors. No one model or theory is uniformly accepted and manyquestions remain. However, it is instructive to examine some ofthe current thinking about these factors, and about theirinteraction in forming and sustaining dependence, withoutimplying thereby that these examples comprise a theory inthemselves. On the basis of participant observation of marihuana smokers,Becker identified a three-step process of social reinforcementleading to continued use: technical mastery of the process ofadministration, identification of the pharmacologic effects anddefinition of those effects as desirable. Becker's investigationsrevealed that novices generally reported their first exposure tothe drug as unrewarding. After being instructed by theircompanions regarding how to aerate the smoke (to take deepbreaths filling the recesses of the lungs and to hold theirbreath for maximal absorption of the drug), these novitiatesbegan to identify vague sensations as the drug experience.Finally, they were led to translate what in many cases had beenunpleasant responses into desirable ones and therefore intoreasons for continuing to use marihuana. The end product of thissequence of events was a confirmed marihuana user. Other factorswere delineated by Becker to explain the direction, frequency andintensity marihuana-using behavior might take (Becker, 1953). Social reinforcement alone, however, does not explainsubsequent and deep involvement: the weaving of drug use into thefabric of the user's life. One elaborate scheme assesses the roleof pharmacologic reinforcement in the context of conditioningtheory. Wikler (1970), for example, describes "primarypharmacologic reinforcement" as being either"direct" or "indirect." Direct reinforcementis related to receptors in the body which pre-exist the use ofthe drug. This corresponds to the concept of reinforcementresulting from stimulation of a reward center in the brain.Indirect reinforcement develops with drug administration and inessence is synonymous with "physical dependence." During repeated administrations a learning process occurs,which Wikler relates to "direct secondary pharmacologyreinforcement" or ("psychic dependence") (Wikler,1970). During the learning process, associations are made betweennonspecific environmental conditions or events and thereinforcements, including the central nervous system changescreated by the drug. For example, long abstinent persons can beprovoked into a mild withdrawal sickness simply by returning tothe community where their dependence occurred (Jaffee, 1970).Similarly, it is conceivable that relapse to drug use byabstinent former users may be influenced by non-drug factorswhich stimulate associated drug-taking responses. This kind of conditioning approach carries importantimplications for treatment. For example, a treatment regimenmight usefully associate with the drug certain influencesincompatible with its consumption. The therapist might create,verbally and otherwise, a dislike of the situation each time thedrug is administered. In a corollary model some researchers have suggested thatbehavioral responses may be learned while a person is under theinfluence of a drug and that these responses may be reduced instrength or be. entirely absent in the non-drug state. Such"state-dependent learning's has been demonstratedexperimentally in man using amphetamines, alcohol and amobarbitol(Overton, 1968). Many of the life style concomitants of dependent individualshave been learned while those persons were in the drugged state.It possible that certain relationships and activities necessaryfor copingor for effective life management have becomestate-dependent. If this is the case, then detoxification andabstinence, may create anxieties and frustrations, perhapsunrecognized, because the person is less able to cope than h ewas in the drugged state. Relapsing would then afford theindividual one option for regaining such capacity. Another optionis for the therapist to assist transferrence of these skills fromthe drugged to non-drugged state. The Dependence Continuum We emphasize that the only common denominator of all types ofdrug dependence is psychological reinforcement resulting fromreward associated with the first individual-drug-societyinteraction and the subsequent increasing desire for repeatedreinforcement. In the broad sense of dependence, a considerablesegment of the world's population can be said to be dependent ondrugs. This drug-using behavior is not necessarily harmful, andin most instances carries no social stigma. All repeated drug taking including that which is medicallysanctioned is conditioned by positive reinforcement provided bythe action of the drug and by the anticipated response of theuser's interpersonal referent, whether it be a physician or asocial group. In this respect medical and non-medical use sharemuch in common. All drug therapy, regardless of thepharmacological nature of the drug, or whether the substance isself-selected or prescribed, has a psychological component. Wereit not so, advertising to the public would lose much of itsforce, and physicians would lose a valuable aid in the treatmentof the sick, or those who believe they are sick. Consequently, psychological dependence must mean somethingmore than positive reinforcement through drug-based reward if itis to be a functional concept. At this point, then, it becomesnecessary to narrow the focus. As is true of non-drug habits, thefact of the recurrence of drug use is unimportant. The crucialquestion, for the individual, as well as for society, is thedegree of dependence and its consequences. For drug use as wellas any other behavior, the phase's of dependence actually form acontinuum from lesser to greater, from minimal to compulsive. Theadditional elements from the psychological standpoint are thedegree to which the individual is committed to or preoccupiedwith drug-seeking behavior as part of his life style, and thedegree of behavioral disruption which would attend theinterruption of his drug taking. From a pharmacologicalstandpoint, these elements are related to the frequency,duration, regularity and intensity of the reinforcements. Determining the existence of psychological dependence ondrugs by segmenting the broader dependence continuum requires anarbitrary decision. It will be recalled that the same kind ofjudgment was made in past years in order to distinguish addictionfrom habituation on grounds other than physical dependence. Thestrength of reinforcement is critical; yet, this judgment variesnot only with the chemical, physical and pharmacologicalcharacteristics of the drug, and with the dose, method, frequencyand duration of administration, but also with the personalcharacteristics of the user and the sociocultural context. Measuring the Degree of Dependence: PsychologicalComponents The most important factor to consider in describing thedegree of dependence is the extent to which drug use has becomeinterwoven in the fabric of the user's life. For some persons,interaction with or avoidance of the world are facilitated bydrugs. The more frequently the drug satisfies the person's needs,the greater the likelihood of his commitment to or preoccupationwith such use, with a consequent neglect of lower orderedpriorities and responsibilities, and a decrement in other socialfunctioning. Personal health, economic relationships and familyobligations may all suffer as the drug-seeking behavior increasesin frequency and intensity and dominates the individual's life. A parallel consideration in measuring the degree ofdependence is the likelihood of adjustment or disruption whichoccurs when the individual's drug-using behavior pattern isinterrupted. When faced with interruption, the individual mayrespond with some form of substitute behavior or may experience adisruption of his customary behavior patterns. Because the desireto continue the behavior also suggests a desire to avoid being ina position of abstinence, the notion of adaptation is closelyrelated to that of preoccupation. Some experience withinterruption may increase the priority assigned to the behavior. The disruption which can occur when an individual is deprivedof his drug or a substitute varies with the extent of hisdependence. Mild behavioral symptoms may be seen in a housewifedeprived of her diet pills, such as lethargy, irritability,reduced amount of housekeeping, or an unusual afternoon nap,while, more intense drug-seeking behavior, including aggression,may be seen among compulsive speed users. To a large extent,these symptoms can be exacerbated by the pharmacologic effects ofthe drug; in other cases they may be products of anxiety or theunmasking of behavior formerly under pharmacologic control. Many treatment programs for drug-dependent persons operate onthe premise that therapy must provide alternative supports forthe individual previously preoccupied with drug taking. In largemeasure, the potential for success is related to the intensitywith which the individual participates in the design of theprogram, and on the strength and numbers of supports within thealternative system. As an awareness of these interrelationships has increased, someprograms have made the system and the treatment synonymous.Alcoholics Anonymous was one of the first such systems. Duringthe last decade many therapeutic communities, relying on thepioneering experiences of Synanon, have emerged to deal withheroin, amphetamine and alcohol dependence. For many of theseprograms, particularly those dealing with severely dependentpersons, a prerequisite to participation is a drug-free status.This is partially in recognition of the disruption attendinginterruption of drug-using patterns. It might be useful at this point to relate this discussion ofpsychological dependence to the patterns of drug-using behaviordeveloped in the previous Chapter. By definition, experimentaluse is not a recurrent drug-use pattern. Recreational andcircumstantial use, if systematically repeated over a short orlong period of time, would reflect the positive reinforcementunderlying the notion of psychological dependence; but these,forms of drug-using behavior, as we have defined them, are notsufficiently interwoven in the fabric of the users' lives toimpair social functioning. The functionally important area of the dependence continuumincludes intensified and compulsive use. Intensified use may beof the regular long-term variety which involves continuousintoxication followed by periodic drug-free intervals of severaldays' duration-the intravenous amphetamine user, for example; orit may be of the regular daily use variety with long drug-freeintervals during the day-the heavy social drinker, for example;or it may be of the intense episodic or spree variety-thepatterned binge drinker, for example. The classic type of drugdependent person, of course, is the compulsive user who rarelyhas any drug-free intervals. The chronic alcoholic and heroindependent person are the most recognizable examples. Physical Dependence: The Secondary Reinforcer All drugs which induce rewarding subjective responses havethe capacity to become psychological reinforcers. Whereas this isthe primary force leading to intensified or compulsive usepatterns, certain drugs, when administered in sufficient dose andfrequency, are capable of producing physiological changesrequiring repetitive use in the, sense, that physical illnesswill ensue if the drug-taking behavior is not continued. Thishighly specific abstinence syndrome, which is what is generallymeant by "physical dependence," can be reversed byreadministration of the drug which causes it. Substitution ofanother drug or drugs from the same pharmacologic class can alsoaccomplish reversal. Of course the symptoms themselves can beameliorated by administration of substances from otherpharmacological classes although these substances will notreverse the patho-physiological process of withdrawal. Fear of drug-deprivation, with its attendant physical andpsychological agonies, serves as a powerful secondary reinforcerfor repeated and, in these cases, continuous drug use. In theabsence of the drug or a substitute, behavioral disruption willoccur. The intensity, length and nature of the disruption variesaccording to the drug, the method of administration, the dose andthe length of time the drug has been used. The rapidity withwhich the physiologic need develops varies similarly. Abrupt deprivation of use of certain stimulants, such ascocaine and amphetamines, following prolonged and continuous use,may precipitate a rebound withdrawal illness characterized bypsychological letdown and depression, and by extreme exhaustiongenerally compounded by previous lack of sleep. The array ofnon-specific symptoms and signs results from continuousagitation, absolute insomnia and acidosis from food and waterdeprivation. In contrast to the highly specific morphine andbarbiturate syndromes, this "withdrawal" illness cannot be prevented by continued readministration of the drug. Lastly, there exist a number of drugs, such as marihuana,betel and nicotine, with mixed depressant and stimulantproperties, which create strong anxiety when use of the drug isdiscontinued. Since no evidence has been adduced which implicatesa physical dependence, the basis for this anxiety is presumably afunction of psychological, social and cultural variables. Summary Drug dependence, in its broad sense, involves much of theworld's population. Conceptually, drug dependence should beviewed as a continuum starting from a low degree of dependence asmeasured by minimal individual preoccupation with drug-usingbehavior and minimal disruptive effects upon interruption of thebehavior, and escalating to compulsive dependence as measured bytotal preoccupation with drug-using behavior and seriousbehavioral disruption attending deprivation of the drug. Drugdependence exists in innumerable patterns and in all degrees ofintensity depending upon the nature of the drug, the route ofadministration, the dose and frequency of administration, otherpharmacological variables, the personality of the user and thenature of the environment. In this connection, it is important to discard theundimensional concept of individual loss of self-control whichhas long dominated scientific and lay concepts of"addiction." Most people who use psychoactive drugs donot succumb entirely to the pharmacologic. properties of thedrugs. All of the factors which we have noted interrelate indistinctly different fashions with different individuals underdifferent circumstances. For this reason, there can be no staticmodel of drug dependence within which finite values are assignedto these various factors. Drug dependence is a dynamicphenomenon, and the formulation of social policy must reflect itscomplexity and relativity. Further, the primary basis of dependence for all drug use ispsychological reinforcement based on reward. This reward iscomposed of two elements: it stems from whatever brain effectsoccur, some of which the user may experience subjectively, andfrom complicated sequences of psycho-social variables shaping theneeds satisfied by the drug experience, and drug-seekingbehavior. When physical dependence is a part of chronic drugadministration, the threat of the aversive effects of withdrawalserves as a powerful secondary reinforcer of the drug-usingbehavior. Drug dependence is not necessarily harmful either to theindividual or to society. The social cost of drug dependence isrelated directly to the intensity of user-preoccupation. Thecompulsive extreme of drug dependence may lead to disorders ordefects of behavior with serious implications for the publicsafety, health and welfare. However, many forms of drugdependence do not carry adverse social consequences, as isillustrated by the widespread chronic use of substances, such astobacco and coffee, with such weak psychoactive properties thatthey are measurable largely in subjective rather than objectiveterms. Heavy and prolonged chronic use of the substances maydamage organ systems and result in injury to individual health.But they do not induce physical dependence or result inanti-social behavior even upon prolonged or excessive use. Thisfactor distinguishes them from all other dependence-producingdrugs. WHO's appreciation of the need to separate social impactconsiderations from the simple description of drug dependence wasstated clearly in its 1965 statement: Further to clarify our meaning, the nature and significanceof drug abuse may be considered from two points of view: onerelates to the interaction between the drug and the individual,the other to the interaction between drug abuse and society. Thefirst viewpoint is concerned with drug dependence and the,interplay between the pharmacodynamic actions of the drug and thepsychological status of the individual. The second-theinteraction between drug abuse and society-is concerned with theinterplay of a wide range of conditions, environmental,sociological, and economic. The 1957 Committee tried to encompassboth points of view when, in its definition of addiction, itlisted characteristics of which some were pharmacodynamic andother psychological and socioeconomic, perhaps therebycompounding some of the existing confusion (Eddy et al., 1965). 'The 1957 WHO Committee statement quoted earlier in thischapter on page 124. EVALUATING THE SOCIAL IMPACT OF DRUGDEPENDENCE Any analysis of the social consequences of dependence, asthey relate to public safety, health and welfare depends on boththe degree of dependence and the characteristics of the drug,rather than on the fact of dependence itself. Dependence, Health and Behavior No rational social policy would aim to eliminate drugdependence per se. There are societies in which virtually anentire population is dependent on natural products of plantorigin. Many of these plants, like the betel morsel, are used bymillions of people and produce no striking effects on the centralnervous system. The only subjective sensations are those ofmildly pleasant stimulation. Psychological dependence is wellestablished; many of the users spend much of their income toacquire the substance, and even the more intelligent users suffera considerable mental letdown in its absence. When the risk associated with a type of drug dependence doesnot involve drug-influenced behavior, but is rather limited topossible danger to individual health, it is the Commission's viewthat private normative choices should prevail, and that thesocial policy decision is of an entirely different order thanthat required by behavior influencing drugs. As already noted inChapter One, the primary policy consideration here is thebehavioral impact on the public safety, health and welfare. With regard to stronger psychoactive drugs, however, repeateduse may lead to intensified and compulsive patterns of use withthe resultant neglect of other activities, to the point ofdecrement in or destruction of other social functioning. Whateverthe appropriate legal policy toward availability of any givensubstance, and whatever the relative impact on behavior ofchronic use of these substances, a crucial element of socialpolicy must be to minimize the proportion of the populationreaching high degrees of dependence on all such substances. The Vulnerability Factor The prevalence of high degrees of dependence seems to restmore in the nature of the soil than in the characteristics of theseed. The individual user, rather than the drug, is the core ofthe problem; compulsive drug use is generally thought to occurmost frequently in emotionally unstable persons who havedifficulty in coping with reality. Drug dependence is in this sense an attempt at adaptation;the drug-dependent person seeks to alter his personal situationnot by changing his environmental circumstances or his pattern ofbehavioral reaction but by modifying his affective reaction toand perception of those circumstances. Secondarily to this, hisentire pattern of interacting with his environment may change. The concept of psycho-social vulnerability rests on thenotion that as environmental stresses and frustrations becomestronger, an increasing proportion of the otherwise susceptiblepopulation will respond through self-changing responses such ascompulsive drug use. On the basis of this hypothesis, if anotherwise susceptible individual can either master theenvironment or remove himself from the adverse conditions, he maybroaden his options and reduce the likelihood of drug dependence. 'From this point, drug dependence will refer only to thecompulsive end of the dependence continuum; drug-seeking behaviorwith a high degree of user preoccupation. Although the data are inconclusive, many observers believethat American minorities, such as the Spanish-speaking, blacksand native Indians, have a higher risk potential to drugdependence in the sense that they are disproportionately poor andleave disproportionately higher percentages of drug-dependentpersons. Since social and economic forces continue to restrictthe upward mobility of these groups, particularly the youngmales, they remain at high risk to development of drugdependence. Whatever the accuracy of this hypothesis, it is clear thatcertain populations in any society at any given time are morevulnerable to intensified or compulsive drug use than others. Thechoice of drug varies within and across societies. Although thisphenomenon has not been studied carefully, the Commission'simpressionistic survey of consumption patterns in societiesthroughout the world indicates that the choice of substances hasan affective component and differs among those segments of thepopulation most susceptible to intensified or compulsivedrug-using behavior. In the United States, for example, the most vulnerable groupsappear to demonstrate a preference for the depressants,particularly alcohol and heroin, which are most likely toobliterate rather than intensify their awareness of their socialcondition and to reduce the anxiety which wells up in reaction tothis condition. In other societies however, the reverse may betrue. Vulnerable populations in Japan turned to the stimulantsafter World War II. We should note, however, that a persuasivecase can be made for the proposition that availability is thecrucial determinant of chronic drug-using patterns in anysociety. For this reason, a comparison of different drugs in terms ofrelative danger to society is impossible. In each society amultitude of factors will determine the levels of use ofdifferent drugs, and the price which society bears as a result.At best, we can speculate about the cumulative social costaccruing from widespread chronic use of a drug under conditionsof unrestrained availability. Comparisons between drugs would bebased on their relative potential for reinforcement and on theirrelative capacity to influence behavior. (See Table 111-1.) Available cross-cultural information does suggest that theremay be a maximum penetration level of drug dependence in anysociety. Even in Hong Kong where heroin is available andinexpensive, the prevalence of intensified and compulsive usedoes not exceed 4% of the entire population although thisproportion is higher (about 11%) among males over 20 years ofage. Similarly, heroin and opium are easily secured in Thailand,but the proportion of chronic smokers does not exceed 2% of theentire population or 10%, of the adult male population. In theUnited States, the proportions are roughly the same for chronicalcohol use: about 15% of the total population and about 15% ofthe middle-aged population. Available estimates also suggest thatthe level of chronic cannabis use in Egypt may be of the sameorder. Interestingly enough, the prevalence of chronic opium andmorphine dependence in the United States at the turn of thecentury when availability was relatively unrestricted probablynever exceeded 1% of the adult population. As availability of a substance becomes more restrictedthrough formal legal controls, the maximum penetration level ofdependence probably becomes lower. Thus, under any given socialpolicy in any given society there is probably a maximum socialcost. On the other hand, no matter how restricted the legalconditions of availability for a given substance, there is alsolikely to be a minimum penetration level. From this perspective,the best that a society can hope for is to reduce the level ofintensified and compulsive use to that minimum, and keep itcontained at that level. The Relevance of Social Response Finally, the adverse behavioral consequences of certain typesof dependence may be tied to social policy and to institutionalresponses to the drug-using behavior. Among those dependent onhighly reinforcing drugs, the level of dependence likely to bereached is increased by social policies which prohibitavailability of the substance to the drug-dependent person. Thisis because the "hustle" necessary to acquire the drugwill exaggerate the user's preoccupation with drug-seekingbehavior. Similarly, prohibitory policies also increase theadverse social impact of drug-abstinence behavior of thosephysically dependent on the prohibited drugs. Consequently,appraisal of the social cost of a given type of dependence mustalso take into account the potentially counterproductive effectsof the institutional response. Present Social Impact Turning now to the social impact of dependence on varioussubstances in the United States today, we find first that publicperception of the problem is not related either to the prevalenceof dependence or to the environmental and pharmacologic aspectsof the issue. Alcohol Alcohol dependence is without question the most serious drugproblem in this country today. Alcohol users far outnumber thoseof all other drugs and are found along the entire continuum ofdependence. The reinforcement potential of alcohol and itspotential for behavioral disruption are high. Use of the drug ispervasive within the general population, and its readyavailability facilitates the development of high degrees ofdependence among vulnerable populations. The prevalence ofintensified and compulsive use among the entire alcohol usingpopulation is roughly 10%, and a serious decrement in socialfunctioning is noticeable in half of this group. While there are many abstainers and the number ofnon-dependent users is large, alcohol use nonetheless carries asubstantial social cost. The risk of individual involvement isaccentuated also by the pervasive sentiment which tends toexclude alcohol from classification as a drug, therebyeliminating it from the concept of "drug abuse" and thesocial problems which go by that name. As noted in Chapter One,according to the National Survey, alcohol is regarded as a drugby only 39% of the adult population and 34% of the youthpopulation. Twice-daily use of the drug is viewed as drug abuseby only 36% of the adults and 37% of the youth in contrast to theuse of heroin "once in a while," which is regarded asdrug abuse by 82% and 80% of these populations. Finally, only 7%of the public mentioned alcoholism as a serious social problem,as compared with the 53% who mentioned drugs. Heroin Heroin is a highly reinforcing drug and, in the presentsocial context, demonstrates a selective attraction forhigh-risk, vulnerable populations, in particular those withminimal opportunities for a rewarding life style. The risks ofcompulsive use are exacerbated by the prevalence of intravenousadministration and the rapid development of tolerance. Thedependence continuum is compressed at the maximal end andmovement through the phases of dependence is rapid. Even thoughthe incidence of ever-use among the adult and youth populationsis less than that of any other drug, the prevalence of dependenceamong the exposed population is high, though not as high aspopular belief would suggest: available data suggest that 25% to50% of those in high risk populations who try heroin may becomedependent. Heroin dependence is disproportionately high among the mostvulnerable segment of the population; young males in the nation'surban centers. Because dependence tends to develop during theearly years of adulthood, social and economic integration isinhibited at the most crucial time, to the detriment of thesociety in general and to the users' immediate social group inparticular. For this reason, the social cost of heroin dependenceis substantial. Unfortunately, present social policy tends toexacerbate this cost even more. Because of enormous pressurescharacterizing the present social-legal-medical response, adisproportionate degree of behavioral disorganization anddisruption accompanies heroin dependence. Barbiturates Barbiturates are pharmacologically similar 'to alcohol,involving the same dependence liability and potential socialimpact. At the present time, however, no major social costarising from compulsive use has been specifically identified.This is largely because these substances were hithertodistributed primarily through medical channels, and their use hasbeen generally hidden. Recently, episodic barbiturate use hasappeared increasingly in the streets among youth populations,posing serious problems in certain urban areas. For the mostpart, however, high degrees of dependence have not been apparent. The Commission suspects that the prevalence of dependence maybe much higher than is generally estimated. The depressantproperties of the barbiturates have already attracted the samepopulations who are most vulnerable to alcohol and heroindependence, and these drugs are often used in combination or asalternatives. Even more important, however, the frustrations socommonly felt among housewives appears to be fertile soil for thedevelopment of sedative, anti-anxiety responses. Increasedbarbiturate use in the past decade parallels the increase inalcohol dependence during the late 1950's among this samepopulation. The Commission believes that barbiturate dependence may bethe modern equivalent of the hidden opiate dependence of the late19th Century. Therefore, even though a verified social costremains relatively low, the Commission attributes this fact lessto the pharmacologic qualities of the drug than to the presentmedical orientation of the distribution system. As shown in ourNational Survey figures in Chapter Two, the incidence ofbarbiturate use outside the medical system has increasedsignificantly in recent years and promises to result in moreserious problems of episodic and multi-drug use in the future,and perhaps an increased prevalence of intensified and compulsiveuse patterns. Even so, the appropriate social response must beformulated in the context of continuing therapeutic needs withinthe medical system. Amphetamines and Related Stimulants Amphetamines and related stimulants, when administeredintravenously, have a high reinforcement potential. Consequently,strong psychological dependence can develop, even though thesedrugs do not induce physical dependence. The potential socialcost of amphetamine use, as measured by the prevalence ofcompulsive use, is much lower than with any of the depressants,largely because continued use of increasing amounts beyond thestage of pleasant mental and physical exhilaration leadsgenerally to unpleasant and unbearable hyper-excitability throughpsychotic manifestations. For this reason, compulsive use israrely sustained on a chronic basis. This does not mean, however, that compulsive use ofamphetamines cannot present a significant social problem. Inpost-war Japan, thousands of persons, particularly adolescents,turned to readily available methamphetamine. Enormous problems insocial reconstruction were created. The establishment of specialpsychiatric hospitals and the formulation of stringent legalcontrols were necessary to curb the increased use. Fortunately,cultural homogeneity and national purpose facilitated effectivemeasures to deal with this problem. In the United States, compulsive use of amphetamines didoccur among a highly vulnerable segment of the adolescentpopulation during the middle and late 1960's, although the extentof this phenomenon was exaggerated at the time and has diminishedrapidly since then. On the other hand, there is mushroomingevidence that large numbers of middle class adults, particularlywomen, have developed chronic using patterns of orallyadministered low dose stimulant preparations. Although thisphenomenon may have been halted by modified prescriptionpractices, most of the dependence on these substances at thepresent time does appear within the context of the medicaldistribution system. In contrast to the barbiturates, medicalindications for the amphetamines and related stimulants arehighly limited. Cocaine Laboratory experiments with animals have demonstrated beyonddispute that cocaine is the most powerful reinforcer of allpsychoactive substances. Although neither tolerance nor physicaldependence develop, this drug has a higher potential social costthan the amphetamines. Little social cost has actually been verified in thiscountry. Although increasing, the incidence of use and theprevalence of chronic use remain relatively low. The route ofadministration normally employed, sniffing or"snorting," is less likely to induce high degrees ofdependence than intravenous use. At the same time, cocaine hasdemonstrated its attraction to the same populations vulnerable toheroin dependence and to intensified amphetamine use, althoughthis factor may be in part attributable to multi-drug use and anoverlap in the acquisition ritual. Prudent policy planningdemands that the nature of cocaine-using behavior be kept underclose scrutiny, and that the currently inadequate data-base oncocaine and the behavioral concomitants of its use besignificantly improved. Hallucinogens The dependence liability of hallucinogens is relatively low.Although indiscriminate, sometimes daily use was not uncommon afew years ago, the combination of rapid tolerance, aversiveside-effects and psychological satiation minimize the likelihoodof intensified or compulsive use. For this reason, these drugsare generally utilized only for "spree" circumstantialor recreational use, generally with the goal of self-explorationor enhanced awareness. Consequently, dependence is not asignificant social concern, and attention should instead befocused on the behavior potentially influenced by the drugexperience itself. Cannabis Particularly in the doses commonly used in this country,cannabis is not a highly reinforcing drug. This drug does notinduce physical dependence and no significant degree of toleranceis developed. Although compulsive use of the more potent forms ofcannabis does occur in cannabis-origin countries, there is noevidence that such a use pattern is developing in this countrywhere use is generally experimental or intermittent and isconfined primarily to the less potent forms. Although there issome evidence that the availability of hashish is increasing, theusers generally titrate their doses to reach the desired effect.Finally, most persons using cannabis heavily in the United Statescan be classified as intensified rather than compulsive users.Consequently, dependence on marihuana is but a minor problem inthe United States today. We should note, in this connection thatwhatever tranquilizing effect marihuana has may be sought inalcohol and other sedative, anti-anxiety drugs. For this reason,the likely penetration level of cannabis dependence is fairlylow. II -- DRUG INDUCED BEHAVIOR A variety of social forces mold and reinforce desirableindividual behavior. Can the momentary influence of a drug loosenthe socialized restraints, inducing the individual to behave inways he would not otherwise choose? The history of psychopharmacology is replete with examples ofbehavior changes associated with the acute administration ofdrugs. A traditional, widely shared assumption of currentthinking in biological science is that there are an infinitenumber of interactions between behavioral and pharmacologicalsystems. The description of these interactions requiresinformation about concomitant variations between thecharacteristics of the behaviors and of the drugs. Informationabout the behaviors should be specific with respect to factorssuch as intraindividual and interindividual variability, type ofbehavior and past behavioral history. Information about the drugsshould be specific with respect to such items as dose-responserelations, time-response relations, dose-order relations,localization of the site of drug action, dosage forms, routes ofadministration, absorption and distribution in the body andbiological fate. Such drug and behavioral variables can be further modified byenvironmental variables such as set and setting. The resultantmyriad of drug-induced changes in behavior cannot be fullyunderstood unless all these underlying variables are sospecified. Furthermore, recent advances in neurochemical researchsuggest that many drug effects on behavior are mediated byneurochemical events and that these relationships are reciprocalin the sense that changes in one may affect the state of theother. If all of these possible combinations and permutations appearhopelessly confounded, it should simply caution us in making anypremature generalizations about drug-behavior interactions. Whileit is true that a full understanding of these interactions isrestricted by the limits of present empirical data, the presenceof such intricacies should temper an initial desire to simplifythe drug-behavior story and encapsulate it in succinct clich6ssuitable for mass media. Such attempts in the past have probablycontributed to the need for this Commission in the first placeand to do so again would be to ignore that information which theCommission has marshalled. Nonetheless, there is a certain utility in discussing severalimportant ways in which drugs may affect behavior. Although theinteraction among all of the drug-person-environment variableswill not be fully explored in this discussion, the Commissionbelieves it important to sketch certain categories which aredirectly relevant to man's conduct. Since behavior has beendefined by some as activity of an organism which is observable bythe organism itself or by other organisms, drug-induced change inperception is a suitable place to begin. IMPACT ON PERCEPTION Perception is defined as those processes by which manreceives or extracts information about the environment throughsensory apparatus (for example, vision and audition). Drugs canalter the sensitivity of these systems and thereby alterperception. Space and time relationships are examples of perceptionscommonly affected by drugs. Marihuana, alcohol, hallucinogens andother drugs have been noted to expand or contract estimates ofelapsed time or distance. For example, in simulated driving testsinvolving use of moderate doses of marihuana, some subjectsperceived themselves to be driving at a speed faster than thatactually being simulated. Similarly, some user-perceptionsrelating to enhanced sexual performance under the influence ofmarihuana are thought to relate to temporal distortions as wellas to abolition of negative perceptions. Temporal distortionshave also been described by amphetamine users who perceivethemselves to be performing more activity in shorter time spans. Drug effect may simply be a facilitating factor in manyalterations of perceptions; the effect of setting, for example,cannot be overlooked. However, the occurrence of illusions andhallucinations seem less influenced than other perceptual changesby non-drug factors. Hallucinogens such as LSD increase thevisual threshold in man, cause arousal of the central nervoussystem and allow for hyperexcitation to visual and auditoryevents. Colors may seem more saturated and sounds may seemlouder. Similarly the delirium tremens associated with alcoholuse is a state involving visual hallucinations and spatiotemporaldistortions. Drugs may also produce changes in specific anatomic areas ofsensory organs. For example, several phenothiazines (used fortranquilizing and sedative effects) have produced pigmentarydegeneration of the retina, and, occasionally, blindness. Somedrugs, such as the anti-depressant imipramine, have evenprecipitated glaucoma in susceptible individuals. Drugs may also interfere with the user's perception of hisown abilities. Some studies have noted that student amphetamineusers tended to overestimate their capacity to make soundjudgments and solve mathematical -problems, and amphetamine-usingsoldiers tended to overestimate their performance in certainroutine monotonous tasks. The important implication of any of these perceptual changesis that behavior may be altered from the expected to theunexpected unless the user is able to compensate for theseeffects as do some sophisticated users of marihuana and alcohol.The degree to which the altered behavior is of concern to societyrelates to the type of conduct which may be affected by theperceptual change. This could range from being late for anappointment to foolishly undertaking hazardous tasks. IMPACT ON MEMORY Man's behavior is dependent in part on what he has learned,either directly from experience or from others. To the extentthat drug use or any other event affects man's ability to acquireknowledge or recall it, it may influence his ability toanticipate the consequences of his behavior. A full discussion oflearning and memory processes is beyond the scope of this Report;indeed, these processes are currently the subject of intensiveresearch, covering an entire range of variables from genetic onesto biochemical ones. The controversial nature of theseinvestigations into learning and the inadequacy of the data onthe impact of drug use on man's learning process precludedetailed consideration here. However, some general observationsmay be made regarding the influence of drugs on memory(short-term and long term storage and retrieval). Retention of acquired learning is hindered by amnesia orforgetfulness. Amnesia is a state of decreased retrieval producedby trauma or by chemicals; forgetfulness is a state of decreasedretrieval produced by passage of time or by preoccupation withsensory input during time. Among the precipitators of amnesia areelectro-convulsive shock, anoxia, anesthesia (barbiturate andether), carbon dioxide and certain antibiotics. With regard topsychoactive drugs in particular, anesthesia produced by eitherultra-short-acting barbiturates or by ether can precipitateamnesia. Similarly, "blackouts" are commonly reportedafter drug-taking episodes, constituting a form of drug inducedamnesia. Drugs may also induce forgetfulness. It is common knowledgethat moderate doses of barbiturates and alcohol can reduce orablate newly acquired knowledge; in recognition of thisphenomenon, a recently proposed highway safety device wouldrequire the driver to recall a randomly displayed series ofnumbers before being able to engage an automobile ignitionsystem. Occasionally recall may be facilitated by drugs. Marihuana,LSD, and ketamine act vicariously to retrieve stored images and"project" them into some sensory modality-vision,audition, smell. The use of short-acting and intermediate-actingbarbiturates to facilitate recall of long-term memory inpsychoanalysis or espionage (truth serum) is well documented.Finally, nitrous oxide has been shown in some circumstances toreduce forgetfulness. ALTERATION OF MENTAL STATES Profound mental changes, both transient and permanent, havebeen attributed to psychoactive drugs. These include some drasticchanges in mood and psychological status. Humans are normallyconstrained by sets of socially-induced inhibitions from engagingin certain behaviors. Drugs such as alcohol and other sedativehypnotics tend to relieve these socially-inculcated anxietiesthereby increasing the likelihood of the usually restrainedbehavior. The garrulousness and amorous behavior associated withcocktail parties and the unabashed laughter following marihuanause are examples of this disinhibition. Indeed such actions areso common as to form a battery of socially recognized excuses fornormally embarrassing behavior. With prolonged use of high dosesof some drugs, notably alcohol, and the barbiturates, generalirritability increases and aggressive threatening acts may occur.The challenging conduct frequently encountered in barsconstitutes a recognizable example. Some drugs, notably amphetamines, cocaine and alcohol, canproduce a sense of bravado and have reportedly been usedintentionally to support the performance of daring acts. Euphoriaassociated with initial opiate experiences may promotethoughtless or indiscriminate actions. Amphetamines may inducegarrulousness, hyperactivity, rash promises and the like. At theopposite pole, depressive states and suicidal acts are associatedwith drug taking, particularly with the sedative-hypnoticsubstances. This fact was overlooked when some sedative-hypnotic,drugs were incorrectly promoter as tranquilizers appropriate forthe treatment of depression. Almost all psychoactive drugs can produce transientconfusional and delusional states. The use of hallucinogens,particularly by naive, control-oriented individuals, can producetransient panic reactions, as the. user apparently loses controlof his environment. Phencyclidine has been associated with panicstates involving fear of suffocation arising from the drug'spowerful action on the muscles of respiration; hydrocarboninhalants have been associated with similar states of feararising from displacement of oxygen in the inspired air. Acuteconfusional states occur with overdoses of alcohol, barbituratesand other sedative-hypnotic drugs. Alcohol and marihuana among'other drugs have been known to produce depersonalization. Subacute and chronic psychotic episodes, particularlyparanoid reactions of a persecutory nature, are associated withthe major stimulant drugs--cocaine, amphetamines andamphetamine-like substances. A prolonged "spree" use ofstimulants may induce a psychosis similar to that induced by thehallucinogens (LSD, psilocybin, mescaline and others). Thesedrugs also have the specific capacity to induce an acutepsychosis with a single effective dose even in so-called"normal" individuals. As with all of the drugsmentioned above, emotionally unstable individuals are especiallysusceptible to drug-induced behaviors of this type. 'This is probably due in part to sleep-deprivation which maylast 5-10 days. It is well established scientifically thatprolonged sleep-deprivation alone can induce an acute psychosis. The exact relation between the drugs and these reactions isunclear. Although the acute reactions mentioned above are quitegenerally accepted as being at least partially drug related, theorigins of the chronic psychoses, either drug-precipitated orresiduals after termination of use, are much more debatable.Perhaps the most confusion and misinformation devolves aboutdrug-induced "brain damage" and its relation to mentaldysfunction. With but few exceptions, disorders of behavior cannot berelated specifically to detectable morphological change in thebrain, either at the gross or microscopic level. Whereas grossand cellular changes have been associated with chronicalcoholism, and with very heavy intake of barbiturates and thehydrocarbons, profound behavioral and marked mental changes mayalso be observed following long-term, chronic use of most otherpotent psychoctive drugs without any detectable cellularalterations whatsoever. In fact, this is usually the case. Thus,any statement that no mental dysfunction occurs because no braindamage can be demonstrated is in error. The social significance of these drug-induced mental changesis manifested in several ways. Those disruptions of mentalfunction associated with illusions and hallucinations,confusional states, and the like, cause the individual tomisinterpret his environmental impressions and react in anabnormal manner. This may take the form either of completewithdrawal and negativism, or at the other extreme, of violentand aggressive responses to situations which otherwise would nothave been considered to be threatening. In either type ofresponse, regard for welfare of self or others may be impaired orentirely lost leading to violent behavior and even to suicide andhomicide. IMPAIRMENT OF PSYCHOMOTOR FUNCTION Depressant drugs as a class-alcohol, barbiturates, volatilehydrocarbons and a multitude of lesser drugs-with the commonproperties of inducing unconsciousness and anesthesia in largequantities, produce varying degrees of motor incoordination as adose-related response. This phenomenon is so much a matter ofcommon experience with the alcohol-consuming public that ithardly warrants description. These drugs impair the function of all of the highlyintegrated response mechanisms in the nervous system whichcontrol all coordinated acts such as ambulation, operation ofmotor vehicles and the like.' Depressant drugs by impairinghigher brain functions and distorting or rendering inactivesensory input, or by rendering the user inattentive to thesecontrolling signals, may make him completely incapable ofperforming complex voluntary actions. Unfortunately, suchimpairment may occur with quantities of drugs much smaller thanthose required to prevent the muscular response itself. Thus, thedriver of a motor vehicle under the influence of relatively smallquantities of alcohol may lose control, not because he is unableto perform the mechanical act of driving, but because hisattention span is reduced, his vision is impaired, his memory ofa turn in the road is obliterated or he fails to hear the horn ofa passing vehicle. In other words, simply because a drug user can"walk a straight line" after drinking does notnecessarily qualify him to drive a motor vehicle. " Less complicated psychomotor tasks do not require allof this biological machinery to be In action. For example, ablind person may feed and dress himself without the sensory inputfrom vision and a deaf person can even operate a motor vehiclewithout auditory input, providing other sensory input is notimpaired or distorted. Stimulant drugs, notably the amphetamines, have been widelyused to permit truck drivers to endure long trips and athletes tocarry on beyond their ordinary limits of endurance. Whereas suchdrugs may mask the subjective effects of fatigue, they do notcorrect the adverse effects of fatigue on attention, visualdiscrimination and other factors which control proper psychomotorfunctioning. Amphetamines were used by all belligerents in WorldWar II to prolong psychomotor performance. It was common practicefor Allied pilots to take these drugs after a bombing mission inGermany to permit them to get back to their home bases inEngland. A surprisingly large number made the return flight toEngland safely but crashed their planes on landing. The subtleeffects of fatigue on psychomotor and other sensory components ofproper psychomotor functioning are not corrected by this classor, for that matter, by any other class of drug. SUMMARY In summary, drug taking has the potential for affecting man'sbehavior in a number of overt as well as subtle ways. Drugs canaffect perception, thereby influencing the way man regards hisenvironment. Drugs can affect memory, thereby influencing man'scapacity to anticipate the consequences of his actions. Drugs canalter mental states, thereby affecting his capacity to interpretand order his environment. Drugs can alter psychomotor function,thereby affecting man's capacity to respond appropriately to hisenvironment. These effects are neither uniformly negative nor uniformlypredictable. The number of variables affecting the interactionbetween a drug, a person and his environment is perhapslimitless. We can state with assurance only that drug-inducedbehavior is as multi-faceted as all other human behavior. III -- IMPACT ON PUBLIC SAFETY All other ends of government are secondary to itsresponsibility to ensure the public safety; and the cornerstoneof any viable social organization must be that each individualhave due regard for the life, limb and property of others. Fearthat the drug user will violate this precept has been a commonfeature of the periodic cycles of public concern about drugs. We have indicated that drugs can affect behavior in amultitude of ways, some subtle such as decrement in short-termmemory, and others more overt such as aggressiveness andpsychotic disorders. Naturally, public concern has always beengreatest for drug-induced violence or assaultive behavior. Butthe public safety may also be endangered by drug-influencedrecklessness or negligence. In this section, we will assess theimpact of drug use in the two areas of the most concreteinterest: crime and driving. DRUGS AND CRIME Fifty-three percent of all adults surveyed in the NationalSurvey spontaneously mentioned drugs as one of the most seriousproblems facing our nation and in need of attention. As noted inChapter One, the "drug problem" conjures up many imagesand conveys many things to many people; but for 13% of all thosewho mentioned this problem, the primary concern was therelationship between drugs and crime. When the National Survey queried the respondents directly onthis question, it found that more than half of all adults andabout two thirds of our youth believe that marihuana users oftencommit crime to buy more of the drug and that they "oftencommit crimes that they would not otherwise commit." TheAmerican public is even more convinced of heroin's directrelationship to crime; more than 90% of both youth and adultsbelieve that "heroin users often commit crimes to get themoney to buy more heroin" and that they often commit crimesthat they would not have otherwise committed. The extent ofagreement with these statements, however, was found to differsignificantly according to both the age and drug experience ofthe respondent. (See Table III-4.) In order to probe some of the factors responsible for thisset of beliefs, respondents were also asked to indicate theirexperience with what they perceived to be drug-related crime. Thedata show that about one-third of the adults reported havingexperience at some time with someone breaking into their home orplace of work to steal some property. Fifteen percent stated thatthe theft occurred at work, 19% indicated that it took place athome and 67% had no recollection of .such an incident. Thenrespondents were asked if they, personally, had ever beenattacked, mugged or robbed or if another member of theirhousehold ever had such an experience, or if this bad happened tosomeone "they knew well." Again, about one-third (31%)responded affirmatively; that is, if they themselves did not havesuch an experience, they at least knew someone who had beenvictimized in this manner. These individuals were then asked ifthey had reason to believe that the attacker was a drug user orwas under the influence of alcohol at the time of the offense.The data reveal that just under onefourth of those with suchpersonal experience or knowledge believed that the criminal mayhave been a drug user. Specifically, 77o believed the attacker orrobber was a drug user, 2% thought he was under the influence ofalcohol, and 22% said they did not know. In general, those who reported either being a victim orknowing a victim of personal crime were disproportionately young,college educated, and from a large metropolitan area, usuallylocated in the Northeast. Users of marihuana and alcohol(behaviors which also correlate with age and education) were alsodisproportionately likely to have been a victim or to havefirst-hand knowledge of one. Thus it appears that the generalizedbelief in the existence of a direct relationship between drug useand crime derives considerable reinforcement from the public'sexperience with both personal and property crime. As the Commission noted in its first Report on marihuana, therelationship of drug use to criminal behavior is difficult tounravel. Its investigation requires more than an examination ofthe pharmacological properties of a particular substance andtheir effects upon the individual user. Rather, additionalfactors to be considered include dosage level; the immediate andlong-term physiological and psychological effects on theindividual; frequency, intensity and duration of use; the purity,potency or type of drug used; the potentiating effects of drugsused in combination; personal expectations; motivations for use;set and setting; and the general impact and influence of thelarger society upon the individual. In order to assess the nature, direction and strength of thealleged relationship between drug use and antisocial behavior,particularly violent and non-violent criminal and delinquentbehavior, the Commission examined several hundred documents inthe professional and research literature and conducted a numberof its own studies. Review of the professional and researchliterature, including a number of studies conducted either by orfor the federal government, have led the Commission to concludethat it is difficult, if not impossible, to establish a directrelationship between crime and the use of various drugs; but ifone cannot say that the use of any drug in and of itself isdirectly responsible for the commission of a criminal act, it ispossible to demonstrate that drug use in combination with anumber of physiological, psychological and social factors mayassume an important role in the exacerbation of criminal,delinquent or other antisocial behavior. In the pages which follow, we will briefly survey 11 selectedclasses of drugs ranging from alcohol to heroin relative to theirpharmacologic potential for inducing criminogenic behavior, andto the empirical relationship of their use to crime anddelinquency in selected populations. Then we will attempt toidentify the major psychological, social and demographiccharacteristics of drug users, both criminal and noncriminal, andcompare these with similar characteristics of non-drug users,both criminal and non-criminal. Next we will grapple with tl.eproblems associated with inferring causation in the relationshipbetween drug use and criminal behavior, regarding the impact ofeach on the other. Finally, we will address the larger issue ofthe impact of drug treatment and rehabilitation on that criminalconduct assumed to be related to drug use. Drugs and Their Criminogenic Effects All potent psychoactive drugs have been associated withcrime, delinquency, heightened aggression, mental illness,reckless or negligent operation of a motor vehicle or otherdangerous machinery and other forms of antisocial behavior. In apaper prepared specifically for the Commission, 'Enklenberg(1973) has examined the pharmacological properties of severaldrug classes, has analyzed the degree to which they may beconsidered criminogenic, and has completed an exhaustive reviewof the research literature regarding the empirical relationshipbetween drug use and the generation of criminal and delinquentbehavior. This section draws substantially upon this specialreport to the Commission. Alcohol The major behavioral effects of alcohol derive from itsdepressant action on the central nervous system, also affectingthe function of peripheral nerves, skeletal, smooth and cardiacmuscle and other body tissues. Any behavioral stimulation whichis observed is probably attributable to the suppression ofinhibitory control mechanisms in various parts of the brain.Among the commonly observed acute effects of alcohol use are areduction of anxiety, mild euphoria, some lack of muscularcoordination, slurred speech, enhanced conviviality andassertiveness. Low doses of alcohol, although said to improve functioningwith regard to some simple motor or cognitive tasks, reduce thelevel of performance of such complex tasks as driving. When takenin moderate doses, alcohol has been found to reduce substantiallymotor skills as well as orderly thought processes and speechpatterns. Higher doses of this substance may cause the user tobecome highly irritable and emotional and displays of anger andcrying are not uncommon. Exceptionally high doses are known tocause stupor, unconsciousness and sometimes death. The standard setting, dose-response function and personalexpectations of the individual with regard to alcohol are, inpart, responsible for his behavior while under its influence.When loss of control, whether physical or emotional, is anexpected and recurrent reaction to alcohol use, the individualoften feels justified in his belief that it was the drug whichwas responsible for his behavior. Some researchers have advanced the theory that alcoholreduces anxiety related to sexual behavior and enhances sexualaggression; in fact, however, scientific opinion is split on thevalidity of this proposition. Various empirical studies on the relationship between the useof alcohol and the commission of violent crime have shown that,in the case of homicide and other assaultive offenses, alcoholwas used by at least half of the offenders directly prior to thecrime (Shupe, 1964; Wolfgang, 1958; MacDonald, 1961; Voss andHepburn, 1968). These studies also show that in alcohol-relatedviolent crime, the violence is most often directed at relativesor friends who were drinking together. Sex crimes have also been attributed to the use of alcohol.In a survey of sex offenders conducted by the Kinsey Institutefor Sex Research, alcohol was reported as a factor in 67% of thesexual crimes against children and 39% of sexually aggressiveacts against women (Gebhard, et al., 1967). Molof (1967) found that youth who used alcohol wereresponsible for significantly more crimes of assault than theirnon-drinking counterparts, and Goodwin and his colleagues (1971)reported that the use of alcohol was significantly associatedwith other forms of antisocial behavior including poor schoolattendance, an unfavorable work record and excessive fighting. Finally, some researchers have stated that a criminal may beprone to excessive drinking in order to increase courage inpreparation for the commission of a crime. Marihuana The initial effects of marihuana on the body can be comparedwith some of those attendant to alcohol use; mild euphoria,stimulation of the central nervous system and increasedconviviality. The user experiences a pleasant heightening of thesenses and relaxed passivity. In moderate doses the substance cancause short lapses of attention and slightly impaired memory andmotor functioning. Heavy users have been known to become sociallywithdrawn and depersonalized and have experienced distortions ofthe senses. Marihuana use is believed to reduce the inclination of theindividual toward physical tasks, particularly those requiringsustained effort. The combination of aversion to sustained effortas well as the disruption of the thought processes and alterationof sensory perception occurring from high doses of marihuana isbelieved to act as a deterrent to those criminal acts whichrequire, continuing physical effort and concentration. Only onvery rare occasions have individuals under the influence of thissubstance been shown to become agitated and even aggressive, andmany of these persons had long histories of acting out behaviorwell prior to their marihuana use. Motivations for use, personal expectations, along with setand setting exert a strong influence upon the individual'sbehavioral responses to marihuana use. A person who believes thatmarihuana use does not culminate in loss of control can beexpected to remain nonassertive while under its influence. 'The Commission has already provided a detailed report of theresearch findings regarding the impact of marihuana on publicsafety (see Marihuana: A Signal of Misunderstanding, Appendix,Vol. 1, 1972, pp. 424-477). Presented here is a brief updatedoverview of these findings. Because marihuana does not have high dependence liability,the cessation of use, regardless of frequency and intensity ofprior consumption, does not induce the physical discomfortattendant to abstinence from other, more reinforcing substancessuch as heroin, barbiturates or amphetamines. Therefore, it isunlikely that even the heavy marihuana user will resort to crimesto sustain his level of use. It should be noted, however, thatsome individuals who sustain particularly heavy levels of use maybecome psychologically dependent upon the substance and maybecome somewhat more likely to engage in socially disapprovedbehavior and to become involved in multidrug use. As with alcohol, marihuana is not an aphrodisiac and does notchemically induce sexual arousal. Although some observers believethat the sexual experience is enhanced by marihuana use, an equalnumber disagree with this theory. In its review of the availabledata, the Commission found no evidence to indicate that marihuanause results in heightened sexual aggressiveness. From the facts stated above one can conclude that marihuanause is not ordinarily accompanied by or productive of aggressivebehavior, thus contradicting the theory that it induces acts ofviolence. Indeed, the only crimes which can be directlyattributed to marihuana-using behavior are those resulting fromthe use, possession or transfer of an illegal substance. Barbiturates Like alcohol, barbiturates cause depressant reactions andaffect nerve, skeletal, smooth and cardiac muscle as well asother body tissues. Depending on the barbiturate used, the dosageadministered and the emotional state of the individual, reactionsto these drugs can range from mild sedation to coma and death. Ingeneral, individual reactions to these substances are closelyparallel to those of alcohol. Barbiturate use in low to moderate doses is generallyunlikely to result in assaultive behavior, although high dose useof these drugs has been known to cause irritability andunpredictably violent behavior in some individuals (Bell andFraser, 1950; DiMascio, 1968; McGrath, 1970; Eckerman, et al.,1971; Malmquist, 1971; Blum et al., 1972; Tinklenberg, 1973). Forthe individual accustomed to maintaining a high level ofbarbiturate use, cessation of that use may result in delirium,convulsions and other transient toxic disturbances which isusually life-threatening. The increasingly common simultaneous use of alcohol andbarbiturates must be considered when examining the relationshipbetween barbiturate use and crime. In a study by Devens andWilson (1971), it was discovered that 70% of the population (N =129) of multiple drug users were known users of barbiturates aswell as alcohol. As mentioned previously, many of the effects ofthese substances on the individual are similar. It is notsurprising, then, that persons who are regular users ofbarbiturates may also be or have been regular users of alcohol.Since a strong association between the use of alcohol and violentcrime undoubtedly exists, it is not difficult to surmise thathigh level barbiturate use may also be linked to violent crime. Amphetamines The group of drugs known as amphetamines consists ofsynthetic chemicals causing stimulation of the central nervoussystem. They are commonly referred to as "uppers" or"speed." Some of the acute reactions produced by thesesubstances include increased alertness, vigor, suppression ofboredom and sometimes paranoia, assertive or assaultive behavior.Because of their reputation for increasing physical endurance,amphetamines have been used by athletes, truckers and otherindividuals who have found it necessary to sustain high levels ofalertness and vigor. Some individuals, however, experienceheadache, palpitation, dizziness, confusion and sometimesdelirium and fatigue. The cessation of repeated use of high doses of amphetaminesgenerally causes the user to feel irritable, fatigued anddepressed; and a type of withdrawal occurs, although it isqualitatively different from and not as uniquely characteristicas the withdrawal syndrome associated with cessation of heroinuse. The influence of amphetamines on sexual behavior is largelydependent upon dosage, setting and predisposing personality (Belland Trethowan, 1961; Ellinwood, 1967). Use of these drugs over ashort period of time, however, appears to induce no appreciablechange in performance although some increase in the enjoyment ofthe sex act (accompanying the delay of orgasm) has been reported.Anqrist and Grershon (1969) found that "increasedpromiscuity, compulsive masturbation, prostitution andintensification of sado-masochistic fantasies were all reportedas consistent sequelae of [high level and high intensity]amphetamine use." Similar findings were also reported byGeerlings (1972). In sum, the research findings indicate that thedirect effects of amphetamines on sexual behavior are complex andmultidetermined. Only a limited number of studies have focused on therelationship of amphetamine use to crime (Blum, 1967b. 1969;Eckernian, et al., 1971; Ellinwood, 1971, 1973; Malmquist, 1971;Smith, 1972; Tinklenberg, 1978). The majority of researchconducted on this subject, however, shows that amphetamine userswere disproportionately involved in crimes of violence (assaultsand robberies, for example). It has not been definitelydetermined, in this country however, that these crimes weredirectly attributable to the acute reactions of the drug,although it would appear likely that the paranoid states inducedby this drug may be linked to dangerous conduct. This isconfirmed by the close association between methamphetamine useand violent crime which occurred in Japan during the mid 1950's.This development was particularly striking because violentbehavior is relatively rare among the Japanese and the incidenceof this conduct decreased markedly when the use of amphetaminesreceded (Nagahama, 1968). Opiates Taken in small to moderate doses, the opiates can diminishpain, anxiety and tension and induce mild euphoria. Sustainedhigh intensity use, unlike that of alcohol or barbiturates, doesnot cause slurring of speech or lack of muscular coordination,nor do these drugs induce the paranoid behavior generallyresultant from the use of amphetamines. The effect of aparticular dose of any of these substances is largely dependenton the means of administration. Injection of these substancesreacts on the body more quickly than oral administration.",however, the latter often causes a more prolonged although lessintense "high." All drugs included in this class havethe potential for inducing dependence, and tolerance is built uprapidly. " Heroin is not consumed orally. The relationship of opiates to crime has been extensivelyinvestigated. The research conducted in this area has beenlimited primarily to: review of criminal records of knowndependents in an effort to determine whether dependence predatedor postdated criminal behavior; or a determination of the ratesof dependence among criminal or mental hospital populations; orcomparisons of criminal activity among dependents andnon-dependents or among users and nonusers; or comparisons ofpre- and post treatment criminal activity; or comparisons ofcriminal behavior between dependents who remained in orsuccessfully completed treatment and those who dropped out oftreatment or relapsed. Regardless of the type of study, some common conclusions wereapparent. First, the available data indicate that most knownopiate (primarily heroin) dependent persons had long histories ofdelinquent or criminal behavior prior to their being identifiedas drug users, that opiate use becomes a further expression ofdelinquent tendencies, and that most heroin-dependent personscontinue to be arrested subsequent to release from prisons,hospitals or treatment programs (Kolb, 1925, 1962; Anslinger,1951; Anslinger and Tompkins, 1953; Morgan, 1965; Blum, 1967b;Winick, 1967; O'Donnell, 1969; Chambers, et al., 1970a; Friedmanand Peer, 1970; Cuskey, et al., 1973; Friedman and Friedman,1973; Jacoby, et al., 1973; Tinklenberg, 1973). Tn fact,opiatedependent persons tended to escalate the seriousness oftheir offenses and to experience increased arrests over theirpre-dependence rates, mostly for drug arrests and secondarily forcrimes against property (Blum, 1967a; Friedman and Friedman,1973; Jacoby, et al., 1973). As Blum (1967a) has noted,"there is no doubt that among addicts with a delinquentlife-style, drug use is part and parcel of their otheractivities, crime included." Other observers have focused their attention on thecriminogenic effects of opiate use, per se, and especially on thenecessity to resort to crime in order to support a habit (Dal,1937; Pescor, 1943; Haines and McLaughlin, 1952; Mever, 1952;Tappan, 1960; Maurer and Vogel, 1962; Schur, 1962,1965; Duvall,et al., 1963; Lindesmith, 1965; Vaillant and Rasor, 1966;Cushman, 1971), and most note that the crimes committed for thispurpose generally tend to be non-violent. money-making crimes(Bromberg and Thompson. 1937; Finestone, 1966, Kolb, 1962; Chein,et al., 1964; Schur, 1965; O'Donnell, 1966; Preble and Casey,1969; Amsel, et al., 1971; Canadian Commission. 1972; Friedmanand Friedman, 1973). Indirect evidence linking the opiate (heroin) user tocriminal behavior is provided by a number of personsadministering treatment programs. Research findings indicate thatwhen the drug users are active in a therapeutic program andpresumably not using heroin, criminal activity decreases. Thatis, when heroin use, decreases either by treatment or othermeans, criminal behavior is also said to decrease (see, forexample, Joseph and Dole, 1970; DuPont and Katon, 1971;McGlothlin, et al., 1972). This proposition and the supportingdata. however, will be scrutinized carefully in a later section. Since drug-behavior interactions are complex processesinvolving the operation of multiple variables, the identificationof a single factor as causal is bound to be incorrect andmisleading. The number of nondrug influences on the opiate user'sbehavior is large, involving not only the immediatecircumstantial or situational variables but what preceded them(personality, socioeconomic factors, etc.). Some observers focustheir attention on the contagious features of opiate use, thatis, the spread of use is seen as largely attributable to drugavailability, modeling behavior, peer group pressures,conditioning and reinforcement (Chein, et al., 1964; Hughes,1971; Goode, 1972b; Friedman and Friedman, 1973). Despitesignificant and numerous attempts by skilled investigators todiscover which of the many non-pharmacological f actors assume,the greatest relative importance, generalization,, at this timeare still premature. In sum, the use of opiates in the United States, particularlyheroin use, increases the probabilities that all individual willengage in acquisitive crimes or other criminal behaviors. most ofwhich are directly related to supporting the drug habit. However,the available evidence indicates that users of opiates aresignificantly less likely to commit homicide, rape and assaultthan are users of alcohol, amphetamines and barbiturates. Whilethere are no data directly comparing the criminal proclivities ofopiate users with those of the general population, the evidenceindicates that a disproportionate number of heroin dependentpersons have had long histories of deviance which began wellprior to their use of and their official identification as usersof heroin. Cocaine Cocaine is obtained from the leaves of Erythroxylon shrubswhich grow in the Andes. It is a powerful stimulant to thecentral nervous system and its acute effects resemble thosecaused by the amphetamines, increased alertness and vigor andsuppression of hunger, fatigue and boredom. Unlike the effects ofamphetamines, the effects of cocaine last only a short time dueto rapid detoxification, and no tolerance occurs. Chronic use,when and if it occurs, is attributable to psychological ratherthan physical dependence. Since cocaine produces many of the same reactions asamphetamines (e.g., paranoid reactions, impulsiveness andhostility), one would expect the user to be prone to aggressiveaction. Although there have been crimes against personsperpetrated by cocaine users, documentation of the drug'sspecific effect is often absent. Like the opiate user, the userof cocaine is more prone to commit crimes against property (Kolb,1962; Lewin, 1964; Eckerman, et al., 1971; Woods and Downs,1973). Hallucinogens The hallucinogens or "psychotomimetic" drugs cancause marked alterations in normal thought processes, perceptionsand moods. Usually produced synthetically, this class of drugsincludes lysergic acid diethylamide (LSD),dimethoxymethylamphetamine (STP), dimethyltryptamine (DMT),mescaline, phencyclidine and psilocybin. Of this family of drugs,LSD is the most potent and differs little from the other drugsexcept for intensity of induced reactions and side effects. Amongthe acute reactions of these drugs are dizziness, nausea,dilation of the pupils of the eyes, visual ,aberrations andheightened auditory acuity. According to Holister (1968) theindividual first experiences somatic changes then perceptualalterations and finally psychic changes. The effects of any ofthese drugs on the, individual are largely dependent upon hisexpectations. his emotional outlook and the social actionoccurring around him. Although dependence does not develop withcontinued use, the individual may be prone to flashbacks andpsychotic reactions even after use is discontinued. Presently, there are no convenient methods for determiningthe tissue level of most hallucinogens; consequently, informationregarding the association between use of these drugs and crime islimited toverbal reports and general observations. What little isavailable, however, suggests that aggressive outbursts can occurduring panic reactions, especially if such reactions includeparanoid delusions and hallucinations. A small number ofhomicides attendant to LSD induced psychoses have been documented(Williams, 1969, Glickman, 1970; Malmquist, 1971; Reich andHepps, 1972; Snyder, 1973). In his review of drugs and violence, Blum (1969) assertedthat emotionally stable individuals, even under the influence ofthese, drugs, do not generally act in ways qualitativelydifferent from their normal patterns of behavior. As such, it isimportant for investigators of the LSD-crime relationship toexamine the LSD user's previous psychosocial history and behaviorpatterns before attributing any criminogenic potential orproperties to the drug itself. Blum did note, however, that apoor judgment syndrome may develop in association with chronicuse, and that this syndrome could be a contributory factor tosome non-violent crimes such as perjury or theft. Nonetheless, heconcluded that hallucinogens probably have little effect uponboth the induction and prevention of violence. Other Psychoactive Substances Reactions attendant to the, use of the non-barbituratesedatives include excitation of the central nervous system andfeelings of anxiety. Very few data exist regarding therelationship of these substances to crime. However, it isbelieved that crime attendant to their use is probably minimaland not of a violent nature. Glue and noxious vapors may cause impairment of brain function in the individual as well as delirium and toxicpsychoses. At present, however, there is a general absence ofinformation regarding the relationship between these substancesand the commission of crime, although a few isolated cases ofassaultive behavior by persons in a delirious state have beenreported. The delinquent behavior generally attributable to thesesubstances, however, tends to be of a petty and nonviolentnature, although Friedman and Friedman (1973) have notedincreasing violence among glue sniffers. Summary In conclusion, the research findings concerning theassociations between drug use and crime have been complicated bythe interplay between the pharmacologic properties of the drugsand the psychosocial characteristics of the individuals who usethem. Inferences which might have been drawn from laboratoryresearch have suffered primarily from the difficulties attendingreplication of non-pharmacological. variables; and whilenaturalistic studies are appropriate to this area ofinvestigation, they have been plagued for the most part bydeficiencies in research design and sampling procedures.Nonetheless, the following tentative conclusions appearjustifiable from the data available: Alcohol, the most commonly used drug, is strongly associatedwith violent crime and with reckless and negligent operation ofmotor vehicles. Research findings linking barbiturate and amphetamine, userswith criminal behavior, especially assaultive offenses, areincreasing, but no definitive association has yet beenestablished in this country; However-, a strong association hasbeen demonstrated between amphetamine use and violence, in Swedenand Japan. Research data are generally lacking regarding the actualrelationship between cocaine use and criminal behavior; however,the pharmocologic effects of the drug would seem to suggest apotential for drug-induced violent behavior similar to that shownfor amphetamine and barbiturate users. Marihuana use, in and of itself, is neither causative of, nordirectly associated with crime, either violent or non-violent. Infact, marihuana tends to be underrepresentcd among assaultiveoffenders, especially when compared with users of alcohol,amphetamines and barbiturates. Use of opiates, especially heroin, is associated withacquisitive crimes such as burglary and shoplifting, ordinarilycommitted for the purpose of securing money to supportdependence,. Assaultive offenses are significantly less likely tobe committed by these opiate users, especially in comparison withusers of alcohol, amphetamines and barbiturates. Except in relatively rare instances generally related todrug-induced panic and toxic reactions, users of hallucinogens,non-barbiturate sedative-hypnotics, glue and similar volatileinhalants are not inclined toward assaultive criminal behavior.It should be noted, however, that some of the non-barbituratesedatives, notably methaqualone, and the hydrocarbon solventshave a potential for inducing violent behavior although theincidence, of such behavior is currently low. Psychosocial Characteristics of Drug-Dependent Persons: Implications for Public Safety The research literature is replete with descriptions of thepsychological, social and behavioral characteristics of drugusers, indicating that the characteristics and attributes ofdifferent drug-using populations are varied and tend to changeover time. The research findings regard-ing the characteristicsand attributes of drug-using offenders, however, tend to revealmore similarities than differences. In general, this can beexplained by their usual reference to a very narrowly definedsub-population of drug users: the arrested, convicted,incarcerated, hospitalized or in-treatment populations of drug-(primarily heroin-) dependent persons. Before describing the characteristics of this sub-population,however, we emphasize again that the largest proportion of drugusers never comes to the attention of official authorities. Mostof those who experiment with drugs do so while they are young andterminate use without escalating to dependence, or incurring ,anyadverse effects upon their behavior or their psychological orsocial development. The same official invisibility and generalabsence of untoward effects also obtain for the majority ofrecreational and circumstantial drug users. These segments of the drug-using population share thecharacteristics of the population-at-large; to the extent thatthey do come to the attention of law enforcement authorities ormedical and psychiatric personnel, such contact is almostexclusively limited to apprehension for drug law violations(possession, transfer and sale offenses or alcohol-relatedtraffic violations) or temporary treatment for an acute toxicreaction to a drug. Such persons are generally neither more norless criminal than their non-drug-using counterparts.11 Compulsive drug users,12 especially heroin-dependent persons,on the other hand, are considerably more visible to officialagencies and frequently differ considerably in theircharacteristics and behavior patterns front thepopulation-at-large, particularly with respect to their historiesof psychopathology tied social de6alice. For the most, part,heroin-dependent persons can be said to belong to a subculturewhose dominant characteristic is the presence of a variety ofpathologies and illegal activities, only one of which is the useof illicit drugs (see Kozel, et al., 1969; Cuskey, et al., 1973@.The probability is high that such individuals will, in therelatively lengthy course of their dependence, come, to theattention of the police, the courts, the prisons, the generalhospital, the mental hospital, the treatment program or themorgue. 11 To the extent that they do become more deviant, it may bea function of the manner in which they are officially handled(contamination through incarceration, for example) or theoperation of the self-fulfilling prophecy (Consequent to labelingthem as deviant for their drug activities (see Weitzner andFiglio, 1973). 12 Under present social conditions, the segment of thedrug-using population which we have classified as intensifiedusers is composed primarily of "problem drinkers" ofalcohol, and heavy barbiturate or amphetamine users in themainstream population. These persons do not tend to commit crimesand are not arrested for their drug-using behavior. Although compulsive drug users constitute the smallestnumerical segment of the drug-using population, they, like thechronic offender generally, are seen to pose the greater threatto the public safety. For this reason, the following discussionwill focus on this particular group. Although a few of the more recent studies deal withdrug-dependent persons drawn from the various cohorts of thegeneral population, most research has been specifically andexclusively concerned with drug-Involved male offenderpopulations (arrestees, prison inmates, parolees), persons indrug treatment programs or residents of psychiatric hospitals. Assuch, the descriptions to follow can be viewed as limited tothose drug-dependent individuals already officially recognizedand labeled by society as emotionally unstable, criminal orantisocial. Social and Demographic Characteristics Age: 13 Most drug-dependent (primarily heroin-dependent) personsknown to some official agency or authority are young, themajority being under 30 years of age. Despite their youth,however, their drug-using behavior has endured for many years;substantial segments of this population report onset of drug useto have occurred by the mid-teens, heroin use, to have occurredby about 18 to 20 years of age, the stage of drug dependence tohave been reached within a few years thereafter, and publicnotice of their heroin-related activities to have followed withinabout five years from the onset of dependence (Ellinwood, 1967 ;Robins and Murphy, 1967 ; Kozel, et al., 1969; Roebuck, 1970;Taylor, et al., 1970; Bass, et al., 1971 Cushman, 197 I ; Heckeland Mandell, 1971, Inclardi and Chambers, 1971a; Joseph, 1972;Cuskey, et al., 1973; Friedman and Friedman, 1973; Jacoby, etal., 1973). Taylor and his colleagues (1970), for example, indicated that56% of their sample of heroin-dependent persons in a Philadelphiamethadone treatment program were under 35 years of age, but 58%of the sample had histories of over ten years of drug use. Themedian age of a sample of heroin dependent persons entering theNew York Narcotic Control Commission for treatment was 20 years;the median age of their initial drug experience was 13 years formales and 15 years for females (Inciardi and Chambers, 1971b).The ages of 81 patients in a hospital methadone clinic studied byCushman (1971) ranged from 20 to 62 years; the mean age was 37years. The length of dependence in this group ranged from two to47 years with a mean of 14.2 years. 13 Research findings are inconsistent regarding sex andracial distributions, a function perhaps of inherent samplingbiases. Only seven of the 81 patients reported having beenheroin-dependent for five years or less. Bass, et al., (1971) interviewed 150 admissions to theDistrict of Columbia Jail during January of 1971. Forty-sevenpercent were found to be dependent on heroin and an additional21% were reported to be "chipping" heroin. Eightypercent of the dependent offenders were under 30 years of age(mean age,: 24.1 years) ; 94%, of the "chippers" wereunder 30 (mean age 22.3 years). A comparison with the non-heroinusing admissions revealed that the latter were, on the average,five years older than the heroin-dependent offenders and sevenyears older than the chippers (mean age 29.2 years). The meanages of onset of drug use for the two heroin using groups were20.5 years for heroin dependents and 19.7 years for the chippers,though use of other types of drugs had occurred considerablyearlier for both groups. About one-fifth of the dependentoffenders (21170 reported using heroin on a daily basis for oneyear or more with 3% indicating that their daily use of heroincontinued over a period of at least five years. Two years earlier, Kozel and his colleagues (1969) hadsimilarly interviewed a random sample of 225 inmates at the D.C.Jail and identified 45% as dependent on heroin and 2% as chippingthe drug. Two-thirds of the dependents in this institutionalpopulation were under 30 years of age with the greatestconcentration being under 21. Half had used heroin before the ageof 20, and 26% reported using heroin by the time they were 17years of age. Educational Status: Very few of the heroin-dependent persons included in thevarious studies completed high school, and many dropped outbefore reaching the 9th grade. The majority, however, dropped outbetween the 10th and 11th grades or as soon as they reached theage at which they could legally do so (Griffith, 1966; Babst, etal., 1969; Kozel, et al., 1969; Chambers, et al., 1970a, 1970b;Roebuck, 1970; Stanton, 1970a; Taylor, et al., 1970; Amsel, etal., 1971; Bass, et al., 1971; Cushman, 1971; Cuskey, et al,1973; Friedman and Friedman, 1973). Even while they were in school, however, and despite normalintelligence, most exhibited behavioral problems in the classroomsituation (Bender, 1963; Griffith, 1966; Robins and Murphy, 1967;Babst, et al., 1969; Kozel, et al., 1969; Milman, 1969; Joseph,1972; Cuskey, et al., 1973; Friedman and Friedman, 1973). Income, Occupation and Employment Status: Because of their rather low educational achievement and theirgeneral absence of occupational skills, most heroin-dependentindividuals remain at the bottom of the socioeconomic hierarchy.Substantial, though varying, segments of this population havebeen unemployed either totally or intermittently for considerablelengths of time and many researchers have noted their financialdependence, either upon public welfare or the support of others.Among the 41-66% of the various study populations found to beemployed immediately prior to arrest, incarceration or treatment,most described their jobs as unskilled labor with low earningcapacity and admitted to supplementing their income, in order tosupport their habits, through illegal activities (Griffith, 1966;Angrist and Gershon, 1969; Babst, et al., 1969; Kozel, et al.,1969; Chambers, et al., 1970a, 1970b; Taylor, et al., 1970; Bass,et al., 1971; Cushman, 1971; Inciardi and Babst, 1971; Joseph,1972; Cuskey, et al., 1973; Greenleigh, 1973). Because of the generally high relapse rate, employmentsubsequent to release from prison or treatment tended to followthese general patterns. The proportion actually employed,however, tended to rise after incarceration or treatment (Josephand Dole, 1970; Cushman, 1971; DuPont, 1972; Cuskey, et al.,1973). Home Environment and Marital Status: For the most part, heroin-dependent persons known to officialagencies were raised and still resided in the inner city coreareas close to their drug sources, in an environmentcharacterized by economic deprivation and family instability.Excessive drinking and criminal involvement among both familymembers and friends were not uncommon. Many of these conditionscontinued into the marital situations of these subjects. Althoughmost remained single, possibly as a function of their youth, asubstantial segment of those who married had already terminatedtheir marital relationships through separation or divorce. Inessence, the preoccupation with drug use, the self imposedisolation from stable social relationships (both to avoiddetection and preclude the possibility of family disapproval orefforts at reform) and the general inability to assume, personaland economic responsibilities collectively contributed tounstable home and family situations (Ellinwood, 1967; Babst, etal., 1969; Kozel, et al., 1969; Chambers, et al., 1970b; Roebuck,1970; Taylor, et al., 1970; Amsel, et al., 1971; Bass, et al.,1971; Cuskey, et al., 1973; Friedman and Friedman, 1973). Psychological Characteristics The heroin-dependent individual has been variously describedas immature, resentful of authority, passive-aggressive,emotionally labile, sexually inadequate, anxiety-ridden,rebellious, withdrawn, socially isolated, depressed and suicidal.According to the available evidence, he also tends to repressaggressive and hostile feelings, to require immediategratification, to have low frustration and anxiety tolerance, topossess generally low self-esteem and to be manipulative, (Hill,et al., 1962; Bender, 1963, Alessinger and Zitrin, 1965,Schonfeld, 1967; Milman, 1969; Chambers, et al., 1970a; Roebuck,1970; Friedman and Friedman 1973). The heroin dependent person can be viewed as an individualtotally uncomfortable with and alienated from himself and hissurroundings, who must constantly maintain control over thefrustrations, anxieties, hostility and aggression. At the sametime, because his dependence requires his preoccupation withdrug-using and drug-seeking behavior, he has neither the, timenor the inclination to form stable social relationships. His lowself-esteem and perceived inadequacies push him further intoisolation from friends and relatives. It is not, surprising given this variety of psychological andsocial characteristics, that so many of these individuals havehistories of psychopathology and antisocial behavior which dateto childhood and continue,, exacerbated by drug dependence, wellinto adulthood. Problems in Inferring Causation Research interest has recently increased in the relationshipbetween dr-ug use and antisocial behavior. Regardless of itsquality or method, most of this research is intended to answerthe following, basic questions: Does drug use predate or postdate criminal or delinquent behavior? What is the nature of the relationship between drug use and crime? How strong is it? Under what conditions is it present? Is criminal behavior caused by drug use? Does involvement in criminal behavior increase the likelihood that a given individual will use drugs, either generally or of a specific type? Is criminal or delinquent behavior aggravated by drug use? Is drug use, increased or aggravated as a consequence of involvement in criminal or delinquent behavior and its psychological, social and behavioral correlates? Is the alleged association between crime and drug use direct and identifiable or is it largely, if not wholly, attributable to the presence, of external intervening factors or simultaneously operating variables (that is, is it "real" or spurious) ? The research thus far conducted falls into several majorcategories. One category involves the interviewing of selected offenderpopulations (arrestees, adjudicated delinquents, prisoninitiates) relative to their drug-using behavior in relation tothe offense for which they were last arrested, convicted orincarcerated. A second type involves comparisons between thedrug-using behaviors of selected groups of offenders and matchedgroups of either non-offenders or different types of offenders. Athird type involves comparison of the criminal records of drugusers and non-drug users. The fourth major type involves abefore-after design relative to the temporal sequence of drug useand criminal behavior; the arrest records of individuals arecompared both before and subsequent to the onset of drug use ordrug dependence. Few studies either use prospective (following one or a,number of cohorts through time) rather than retrospectiveanalysis, or take into consideration multi-drug use patterns, oradequately investigate the individual's past psychological,social and behavioral history. As such, untested assumptions areaccepted as given and invalid conclusions are presented asdefinitive. Two illustrations should suffice to make this point. First,it has been assumed that if drug use is found to predate arrest,then it was in some measure responsible for the criminalbehavior. Often unrecognized, however, is that a considerableamount of undetected criminal behavior may have existed prior toapprehension and prior to the onset of drug use (see Inciardi andChambers, 1971a; Jacoby, et aL, 1973; Friedman and Friedman,1973; Tinklenberg, 1973). Second, if the offender indicated that he has taken a drug ofsome type (including alcohol) prior to the commission of a crime,or his use of drugs is identified in some, other manner, anassumption made is that the drug was responsible for (caused) thecrime. This is difficult to prove because the arrest may occurmany hours, days, weeks or months after the crime and the fewtests that exist are not systematically used to determine thetype or amount of the drug in the body. Despite these problems,the simple assertion or determination of drug use is often deemedsufficient to establish a causal link between that drug use andcrime. Despite the methodological limitations of specific studies,however, comparative analysis of self-reported delinquency orcriminality and of arrest or court records presents at least one,challenge to the hypothesis that drug use causes crime. If a druguser or drug-dependent person commits criminal or delinquent actsbefore he begins using drugs, then his criminality cannot besolely attributable to his drug use. Further, an examination ofthe types and amount of crime committed subsequent to the onsetof drug use or dependence is useful in analyzing the oft-statedassumption that many drugs, especially heroin, have criminogeniceffects on the personality and behavior of the user. Relative to the first point, considerable data exist to showthat the majority of drug-dependent, especially heroin-dependent,persons are involved with criminality or delinquency prior totheir drug use and dependence (Morgan, 1965; Vaillant and Brill,1965; Finestone, 1966, Smith, et al., 1968; Bluni, 1969; James,1969; Stanton, 1969; Plair and Jackson, 1970; Inciardi andChambers, 1971b; Cuskey, et al., 1973; Ellinwopd, 1973; Friedmanand Friedman, 1973; Jacoby, et al., 1973; Research Concepts,Inc., 1973; Tinklenberg, 1973). Most of the researchers who have found that the majority oftheir sample populations were arrested before the onset ofdependence agree that criminal behavior is not a by-product ofdependence but results, as does the, drug dependence, itself,from psychological and social deviance which predates dependenceand is ordinarily apparent by adolescence. This conclusionchallenges the theory that drugs cause crime and stresses thatdrug dependence and criminality are two forms of social deviance,neither producing the other. It is generally agreed that drugs have the ability toexacerbate, existing psychopathology, delinquency andcriminality. However, such ability is conditional upon thepre-existence of psychological and social maladjustment prior tothe onset of drug use or dependence (Bender, 1963; Hekimian andGershon, 1968; Milman, 1969, Stanton, 1969; Jacoby, et al., 1973;Friedman and Friedman, 1973; Jones, 1973). Stanton (1969) notes,for example, that: Offenders do not originally become unstable or commit crimes because of drug use but drug use does contribute to and exacerbate both instability and anti-social behavior (p. 16). In examining post-dependence arrests, the increases werehighest for drug law violations and to a lesser extentacquisitive crimes against property (Jacoby, et al., 1973;Weitzner and Figlio, 1973). Even smaller was the increase inarrests for crimes against the person; several researchers foundno increases in violent or personal crime (Chein, et al., 1964;Finestone, 1966). To the extent that increased criminal activity involves drugoffenses and acquisitive crimes, some observers have suggestedthat the illegal status of heroin is the primary factor in thecriminal behavior of heroin-dependent persons. By law, societyhas defined the drug-related behavior (possession, sale) of thedependent person as criminal, and has necessitated continuouscriminal contacts. The property crimes often resorted to byheroin-dependent persons to support their habits are seen as adirect consequence of these conditions. Of course, this view isalso compatible with the argument that this previously delinquentpopulation would probably have engaged in another criminal lifestyle even if it had not been the heroin life style. Whatever the merits of this argument, it does highlightseveral important issues. First, what are the social costs ofheroin dependence under circumstances of prohibited availability?What price is society paying in order to avoid the socialconsequences of loosened availability? Second, to what extent aretreatment programs for heroin dependent persons able to reducethese costs? The Costs of Heroin Dependence In order to accurately estimate the social costs of heroindependence, several factors must be taken into account, includingthe crime-related costs as well as the public health and welfarecosts. In this section we will cover only the crime-relatedcosts. In the next, we will deal with factors such as theeconomic loss to the community of productive citizens and thestrain on the community caused by social and economic dependence,family disruption, and the like. With regard to crime relatedcosts, we will cover: The cost to the drug-dependent person to support his habit. The cost incurred to the community from crimes against both person and property committed by the opiate-dependent person. The cost to the community for arrest, detention, trial, probation, incarceration, parole, aftercare, treatment and rehabilitation. Cost to the Heroin-Dependent Person A figure recently released by the Bureau of Narcotics andDangerous Drugs sets the number of "active addicts"nationwide at 559,224. It has been estimated that between halfand three-fifths of the nation's opiate-dependent persons residein New York. That State's Narcotic Control Commission estimatedthat at the end of 1967, there were approximately 65,000 activeopiate-dependent persons in New York City alone, and by the endof 1971, approximately 150,000 heroin users were known to theNarcotics Register maintained by the Department of Health in NewYork City. The problems involved in accurately estimating thenumber of heroin-dependent persons, however, are myriad, and pastestimates have all suffered from invalid assumptions orinappropriate measurement techniques. 14 It is not surprising,therefore, to find critics of these estimates who are willing,however, to substitute equally questionable ones in their place.One such critic has set the 1971 New York City estimate atbetween 70,000 and 100,000. Regardless of the exact number ofheroin-dependent persons or even heroin users, however, a basicfact remains: a substantial illicit heroin market exists in thiscountry and the demand apparently remains larger than the supply. 14 The Commission has specifically addressed the problems ofheroin estimation and has attempted to identify the majorfallacies and deficiencies of past work in this area. It has alsoprovided some suggestions for future research. This study can befound in its entirety in the Appendix to the Report (Blumstein,et al., 1973). Undoubtedly, the price of heroin and its quality vary withboth the supply of and demand for the drug. Between World Wars Iand II, heroin use was confined primarily to artisans,entertainers and marginal social groups who congregated in urbanareas. Use of the drug also became fairly widespread among theblack and Puerto Rican males in the inner cities. After World War II, heroin trade ,and distribution routes,which had been interrupted during the War, reopened. New YorkCity and to a lesser extent Chicago, witnessed a great upsurge inheroin use among young minority group males. As victims ofunemployment and discrimination, frustration and alienation, theyformed a ready market for the new influx of heroin. At this time,heroin was in ample supply and of good quality; it was rarelybeyond the financial reach of anyone who cared to escape therealities of his existence. During the 1950's, heroin use spread with increasingpopularity to the younger people of the cities, children ofimmigrants and Southern blacks who were unsolved in the life andlife style of the street gangs. Although the available evidenceis somewhat contradictory, many observers have related theincrease in heroin use to the disorganization of gang activitiesand the disintegration of many street gangs. as their membersgrew ineffective in their own terms and incapable of protectinggang interests (Chein, et al., 1964; Hughes, 1971). Late in 1961, a critical shortage of heroin, an event whichcame to be known as the "panic", occurred in New York.According to some, this panic" is largely responsible forthe inflated cost of maintaining a habit today. Because thesubstance was in such short supply, dealers cut the quality ofthe, dose many times and therefore increased the amount of thedrug needed and the amount of money necessary to buy it. Yet,even with the inflated price and deflated quality, dealersexperienced little difficulty in disposing of their supplies. Twoobservers have noted that during this period, the cost ofmaintaining a habit was said to have increased to ten times whatit had been only twenty years before (Preble and Casey, 1969). The inflationary cost of heroin, however, did not disappearwith the passing of the panic, and recent estimates of the dailycost of supporting a habit have ranged from $20 to $100,fluctuating according to availability and location (Hekimian andGershon, 1968; Babst, et al., 1969; Kozel, et al., 1969; Prebleand Casey. 1969, Holahan, 1970; Joseph and Dole, 1970; Rogers,1970; Tinklenberg and Stillman, 1970; Cushman, 1971 ; DuPont andKaton, 1971; DuPont, 1972). Costs to Society From Criminal Activity According to Preble and Casey (1969), at least 80% of NewYork's heroin-dependent population reside in urban slum areas.Figures culled from the Bureau of the Census reveal that at theclose of the 1970 census, the median family income of New YorkCity residents was $9,692. while, the mean income of familiesreporting public assistance in that city was $2,114. If we assume that a heroin-dependent person has a daily habitof $20 (the lowest daily estimate found but amounting to $7,300per year), we can also assume that it would be relativelyimpossible for him to support his habit without supplementing hisincome through illegal means. F or the most part, this illegal activity manifests itself incrimes against property, principally burglary and shoplifting(Finestone, 1966; Kozel, et al., 1969; Preble and Casey, 1969,Jacoby, et 11., 1973). Less commonly, heroin-dependent personsresort to offenses against the person (assault, mugging, robbery)in a similar desperate effort to obtain the money required topurchase the drug (Anisel, et al, 1971; Friedman and Friedman,1973; Jacobv, et al, 1973; Tinklenberg. 1973). Researchers haveestimated that for a heroin-dependent person to support hishabits he must steal property amounting to between two andone-half to five times the actual cost of his habit (Cushman,1971) and that he may be expected to steal in property an amountranging from $25,000 to $50,000 per year (Joseph and Dole, 1970;DuPont, 1.972). The estimated daily tolls in stolen property haveranged from $25 to $375. At least one researcher (Singer, 1971),however, has been highly critical of these, estimates, all ofwhich he deems to be grossly exaggerated. Heroin-dependent persons are also known to raise funds tosupport their habits by pimping and prostitution. Although theseactivities do not represent a direct financial burden to society,they do, nevertheless, constitute socially and legallydisapproved behavior" (Cushman. 1971 , 1972; see also Amsel,et al., 1971). A heroin-dependent person may also become involved in thecomplicated hierarchy of individuals who are responsible for theimportation and distribution of heroin. In this way, he isassured of a supply of the drug for his own needs and very oftenrealizes a profit large enough to induce him to go into thedrug-dealing business for himself. Criminal Justice Costs: Processing the Drug-DependentPerson In addition to the costs of crime incurred by drug-dependentpersons, the community must also assume the cost ofinvestigating. identifying, arresting, detaining, trying,sentencing, treating and rehabilitating the drug-dependentoffender. In 1969, the New York State Department of Correctionsestimated that it cost the State $12.75 per day for incarcerationof one person (Cushman, 1971), a figure including the separatecosts of overhead, custodial personnel, maintenance and otherlimited services.15 A similar figure of $12 per day was quoted asthe cost of (retention, while arrest procedures were estimated tototal $25 per arrest (Cushman, 1971).16 15 One 1969 study (Babst, et al., 1969) estimated that thecost of keeping all individual on parole or in aftercare came toapproximately one-tenth of that required to maintain him in acorrectional facility. This suggests all a(Witional cost to thecommunity of approximately $1.25 per day once the individual isreleased from prison (if. of course. the estimated cost ofincarceration is reasonably accurate). 16 This estimate was derived hy multiplying the hourlywag", of an average policeman by five, the absolute minimalestimated time deemed necessary to complete the initialadministrative procedures attendant to arrest. In a more recent study of heroin use in Washington, D.C.(DuPont, 1972), the daily cost per user for incarceration was setat $14, compared with an approximate cost of $5.50 per patientfor outpatient care. The Corrections Department in that same citylisted the daily cost per offender on parole at $0.97, a figuresomewhat lower than that noted for New York a few years ago. If the costs of arrest, trial, incarceration, treatment andthe like are multiplied by the alleged number ofheroin-dependent, persons in this country today, society is facedwith another potentially astronomic bill directly related toheroin and other drug use and dependence. To this figure must beadded additional amounts which reflect the, rate of recidivismamong drug offenders and the costs incurred from crimes committedto support their habits. Yet another adjustment must be made forthose who, during the course of their drug dependence willprobably be arrested several times on a variety of charges and beprocessed through the criminal justice system many times over. The Effect of Drug Treatment on Crime During the past eight years, methadone maintenance hasevolved from an experimental program with 22 patients into themost widely used treatment mortality in the nation. Itssupporters havee claimed that participation in one methadoneprogram reduces heroin-related crime, a direct function of thepatient's reduced need for and use of heroin. In addition,individuals participating in methadone maintenance programs arereported to be able to function, perhaps for the first time intheir adult lives, as socially responsible and economicallyindependent and productive members of society. The Commission has carefully scrutinized these claims. Ingeneral, they have been based on the reported findings of alimited number of quasi-experimental studies (mostly before-aftercomparisons); the deficiencies in research design, samplingtechniques, analysis and interpretation of the data significantlylimit the reliability and validity of the conclusions and theinferences drawn therefrom. In fact, we have not foundsufficiently responsible research to conclude that any of thevarious treatment modalities, regardless of type, actually reducecrime. When methadone maintenance was first devised, itscrime-reducing potential was regarded as ancillary to achievementof the primary program goal, the elimination of drug use. Withthe passage of time, however, heightened public fear and dramaticincreases in what is frequently reported to he heroin-relatedacquisitive crime have distorted the public's view of the purposeof methadone maintenance. Funding agencies, program officials andpublic leaders have continually touted this treatment modality asa law enforcement strategy designed primarily to reducedrug-related crime.17 17 The Canadian LeDain Commission recently noted in its,report on treatment "The success of methadone programs isgenerally measured in terms of social or cultural criteria ratherthan psychological ones. A return to a normal life cycle basedupon employment, marriage and stability of social interaction isthe prime criterion of success. However, the expectation of anormal life style characterized by emotional maturity andcomplete abstinence in addition to a law-abiding. productiveexistence is an ideal which in practice is seldom achieved.Because of this, some methadone programs arrange their goalshierarchically. The foremost expectation is that all patients whoare treated will become law-abiding citizens. although they mightnot become productive. mature or drug-free. The next level is toachieve a status in which patients are law-abiding and gainfullyemployed." (1972. 1). 24.) Current Research Findings The degree to which patients in treatment, have made gainstoward crime-free lifestyles is generally measured by comparingpatients' arrest records prior to program entry and duringtreatment. In a few studies, however, attempts at control havebeen made by comparing arrest records of methadone maintenancepatients with those of reportedly matched groups of individualsin other treatment modalities (detoxification or abstinence,programs) or with those of individuals who dropped out of the,maintenance program at, some stage. Several before-after comparison studies have attempted toestablish a direct relationship between methadone maintenance anda reduction in crime. Although the data available stronglysuggest a reduction in the criminal behavior of patients intreatment, differences in the basis of measurement precludeprecise comparison of their results. Joseph and Dole (1970), forexample, utilized data on convictions whereas Gearing (1971)studied arrests; Cushman (1971) reported on data derived frompolice records and interviews while DuPont (1972) drew on crimesknown to the police, arrests and incarceration figures. Theperiods of time before and after treatment which were measuredalso differ considerably and thereby affect the crime ratesreported. Examination of studies incorporating control groups havegenerally come to conclusions similar to those reflected in thebefore-after designs. Researchers who have compared individualsin treatment with those who have dropped out, at some stageuniformly show significant differences in arrest or convictionrates between the two groups and therefore conclude that it wasthe treatment which was largely responsible for the resultantcrime reduction (Joseph and Dole, 1970, Williams, et, al, 1970;Moffett, et al, 1971: Clines, 1972, DuPont, 1972). Studies designed to compare the arrest or conviction rates ofindividuals in different treatment modalities are intended todeal more specifically with the degree of crime reductionproduced by a particular type of treatment. In general, theirfindings have shown that methadone maintenance has beensignificantly more successful than other modalities(detoxification, and abstinence, for example) In achieving crimereduction, although the absolute amount of reduction and theprogram differentials have varied considerably (Asher, 1970:Joseph and Dole, 1970; Wieland and Chambers, 1970; DuPont, 1972;Cuskey et al., 1973). Although the statistics presented are generally impressive(crime reduction estimates range from 14% to 94%) untested basicassumptions and other methodological deficiencies preclude theirgeneralization and signal careful interpretation. In one before-after study, for example, the researcher'smajor hypothesis was that a recent annual rise in serious crimewas largely attributable to a heroin "epidemic," andwas manifest in significant increases in commitment rates ofopiate offenders and parallel increases in index offenses forthat period. A second hypothesis was that a subsequent unexpectedand abrupt decline in serious crime was largely attributable tothe treatment (primarily methadone maintenance) of thousands ofheroin-dependent persons. Although the researcher did give somecredit for this "pronounced and progressive" reductionin crime to the doubling of the police force during the timeperiod under investigation, the major conclusion of the study wasthat if the rise in crime was correctly attributable to a heroinepidemic, then it was also true that heroin treatment was largelyresponsible for- the subsequent crime reduction (DuPont, 1971). The researcher failed to demonstrate, however, that thesignificant increase in reported crime was indeed attributable tothe alleged rise in heroin dependence. Although the proportion ofincarcerated heroin dependent persons did increase, the reportednumber of index crimes increased by an even greater margin. Someof this increase was undoubtedly related to the growth of heroindependence, but the very large and general increase in the crimerate suggest that most of the increase was probably attributableto the majority of criminals who are not heroin -dependent.Another fallacy in the researcher's reasoning lies in the factthat the study was based on increases in arrests andincarceration and on the records of those persons who were intreatment. Those arrested, however, represent only a smallfraction of the universe of offenders, even drug offenders;persons incarcerated constitute only a tiny fraction of thosearrested; and persons in treatment represent only a smallproportion of known heroin-dependent persons (many more are onwaiting lists) which, in turn, represents some unknown fractionof all heroin-dependent persons. Thus, what is perceived as atriumph of a particular treatment modality may be for the mostpart a simple statistical artifacts Numerous other methodological obstacles precludegeneralization from research findings regarding, treatment andcrime. In only one study, for example, did the researcher attemptto control for dosage level of the methadone administered (thosewith lower dosages were found to have higher crime rates). Noneof the studies examined takes into account the monitoring andsupervision of the drug's administration nor is there anystandardization of the point in treatment at which themeasurements are. made. Finally, some studies use a man-yearfigure as a measurement of success although the conclusions drawntherefrom are especially likely to be distorted and misleading,(Joseph and Dole, 1970; Gearing, 1971, Joseph, 1972). To illustrate this final point, let us assume for a moment,that we are interested in 20 individuals in treatment program X.Of these 20, 15 had dropped out at exactly two months afterentering, two more dropped out after five months in the program,one stayed for a year before leaving and one confirmed intreatment for three years. Multiplying the number of individuals(20) by the number of months each spent in the program and addingthose figures yields the total member of man-months spent intreatment. This number, divided by 12, equals the total number ofman-years in treatment. (See Table III-5) Dividing the man-month or man-year figure by the number ofindividuals who had participated in treatment yields the average(mean) number of man-months or man-years of treatment perindividual. In this case, the average number of man-months oftreatment per individual totals 5 (or an equivalent of .4man-years of treatment per individual, on the average). Both the total. and the average man-month or man-yearfigures, however, provide for varying interpretation, dependingupon motive and requirements. In the case above, for example, anindividuals average time, in treatment was calculated to be fivemonths; yet the actual situation shows that 15 out of the 20(75%) of these individuals dropped out of the program after twomonths, the latter being the modal length of stay. The ways in which programs record admission and dropout datafurther complicate this matter. In some instances, persons whodrop out during the early high risk period (0-5 months afterentry into program) are simply not counted and therefore remaininvisible for dropout or failure statistics. These same persons,however, are frequently counted as program participants forbudgetary and accounting purposes. Similarly, dropouts who returnto the program after a specific, unusually short, period of time,are frequently counted as new program entrants rather thanreadmissions, again primarily for budgetary and programaccounting reasons (Research Concepts, Inc., 1973). Clearly, the manner in which data are presented cansignificantly alter and distort the perception of the reader ifnot the actual facts themselves. Aside from any basicmethodological deficiencies, this kind of statisticalmisrepresentation constitutes perhaps the most serious defect inthe available research literature on the effect of treatment inreducing crime among drug-dependent persons. A Realistic Appraisal We have already noted that most opiate-dependent personsleave long histories of psychopathology and social pathologywhich are manifest in delinquent, criminal, suicidal and otherdeviant, behavior prior to the onset of drug use. Psychiatric andother studies have also confirmed the hypothesis that thepre-existence of these problems significantly increased theindividual's initial susceptibility to opiate dependence as wellas his high vulnerability to relapse into drug use and crime, 18(Bender, 1963; Milman, 1969, Stanton, 1970a: Taylor, et al.,1970; Chambers and Taylor, 1971 Cushman, 1971; Gearing, 1971;Inciardi and Chambers, 1971b; Joseph, 1972; Laugrod and Lowinson,1972; Cuskey, et al., 1973). 18 A partial explanation for the increase in rearrest may liein police practice. By virtue of the police practice of increasedsurveillance of known drug-dependent persons the once-identifieddrug-dependent person, one with a history of arrest andhospitalization, stands a greater chance of being apprehendedthan does one who is not yet known to the police. The simpleaddition of opiate-dependence to delinquency automaticallyincreases the likelihood that the drug-dependent offender willcome to the attention of the police (see Bridges, 1965: Roberts,1967: Cuskey, et al., 1973; Jacoby, et al., 1973). Additional research findings have indicated that mostopiate-dependent persons come from unstable home and familysituations where social deviance was evident in other familymembers, and drop out of school at a fairly early time (generallyabout 10th grade). They generally possess no marketable skills;have non-existent or at best unstable employment histories; haveunstable personal and social relations; reside in the inner-cityghettos and suffer the psychological, social and economicstresses so often concommitant with that type of existence.19 19 Several researchers have attempted to describe the"addict subculture" and to document its importance andits implications for the treatment of drug-dependent individuals.See, for example, Finestone, 1964; Sutter, 1966; Feldman, 1968;Preble and Casey, 1969; Stephens and Levine, 1971. Taken together, these findings suggest that chances forrehabilitative success, however defined, are not high for suchindividuals. The psychological ambivalence which mostopiate-dependent persons feel toward the drug coupled with theindication from research findings that these persons had not yetbeen "habilitated" suggests a poor prognosis for their"rehabilitation," defined in terms of a "normallife style based on gainful employment, marriage and socialstability." Notwithstanding the fact that social,psychiatric, psychological, counseling and other ancillaryservices are provided to those in treatment, this society mustface the fact that even the best of the services have inherentlimitations in the degree to which such programs can alter thebehavior of individuals who for so long have been subject tononsupportive social and emotional circumstances. While evidencedoes exist to show that some qualitative and quantitative changesin behavior with respect to crime and employment are associatedwith treatment, the precise nature or amount of change which canbe directly attributable to programmatic inputs is difficult tomeasure and has not yet been documented substantially. DRUGS AND DRIVING Adult Americans spend an average of 5% of their waking hoursevery day behind the wheel of their cars.20 Although"driving under the influence" of drugs is universallycondemned by public opinion and public law, far too manyAmericans appear unwilling to structure their activities in sucha way that drug use and driving do not coincide. In an idealsociety in which all individuals behaved responsibly, the effectsof drugs on driving would not be of major concern. In thiscountry, however, our citizens are more dependent on motorvehicles than they are on drugs. For this reason, the full impactof drug-using behavior on the public safety cannot be fullyassessed without reference to the effect of psychoactive drugs onthe user's ability to drive a motor vehicle. 20 Each licensed driver drives an average of 10,000 milesevery year, spending 255 hours on the road. Research Limitations Data are generally lacking on drug use and its effect uponthe user's driving ability and motor vehicle accidents. The majorresearch obstacle is that effective devices are, not available todetect some psychoactive drugs within the body fluids of personswho are involved in accidents or traffic violations. In addition,these, tests, where available, are inconvenient and are notsystematically administered. Since it took several years ofresearch to develop functional alcohol detection devices, it isreasonable to predict that it will take some time to develop themore complex detection devices for these drugs. Further, even ifblood or urine samples are taken in an effort to test for thepresence of drugs other than alcohol, laboratories are generallynot available or equipped to determine the identity or quantityof drugs present. Even when such tests are feasible and available, research isfurther inhibited by the complexity of the drug-personinteraction. The relationship between the risk of automobileaccidents and use of psychoactive drugs is difficult to establishfor many reasons, among which are: the wide variety of such drugswhich are available; the, substantial quantitative andqualitative variation in drug-effect, the differences in durationof drug effect; the cumulative and/or interaction effects due toprolonged or combined drug usage, and individual differences inreaction to drug-effect. One of the major shortcomings of priorresearch is its emphasis on the dosage per se rather than onblood concentration levels which more accurately reflect thedosage effect according to individual characteristics, such asweight. Moreover, the studies conducted leave suffered from seriousmethodological defects which undermine their findings (Nichols.1971). Laboratory Investigations can determine the effects of use ofparticular drugs on driving-related performance. However, it isdifficult to generalize such results to real driving situations,and previous studies have failed to relate performance decrementto drug concentration levels. Anecdotal reports and case histories may suggest areaswhere controlled research is needed, but are, in themselvesinsufficient to establish relationships. Comparison of crash records of drug users and non-users comprisesan alternative method for assessing the impact of drug use onhighway accidents. However, even if the frequency of accidents ishigher among drug users, these findings do not establish anycausal relationship between the variables. For example, there isno way of determining from this method alone whether the highwayaccidents in which drug users are involved occurred while suchusers were "under the influence" of a drug. Systematic analysis of body fluids taken from crashvictims can determine the correlation between drug use andaccidents but can only presume causal relationships. As we notedearlier, such data are presently inadequate because some drugsare not detectable in human body fluid samples. In addition,testing procedures are plagued by unstandardized sampling andscreening techniques. Comparison of drug concentration levels of crash victimsand of non-involved drivers operating vehicles under similarcircumstances is perhaps the. soundest way of determining theimpact which drug use per se may be having on highwaycrashes. However, this procedure has not generally been used inconnection with drugs other than alcohol. In addition, it ishampered by the difficulty of matching comparison groups and bythe inconvenience of stopping and testing drivers not involved inaccidents. Research Findings Prior to describing the available data regarding specificdrugs and their effects on driving, we should note thatinsufficient attention has been paid to the impact of"medical" drugs on driving performance. At any one time, perhaps 3-5% of the driving population (age16 and over) are taking psychoactive medication prescribed by aphysician (Kibrick and Smart, 1970).21 21 In addition, psychoactive preparations soldover-the-counter may affect driving performance. So may someprescription drugs not normally taken for their psychoactiveproperties, such as antihistamines, which may have sedative sideeffects in some individuals. Alcohol Alcohol is the one drug which has been studied extensively todetermine its effect on driving ability. Not surprisingly, thedata confirm popular opinion that its use is a major contributorto accidents, especially fatal ones. The evidence consistslargely of postmortems of fatally injured drivers, conducted in amultitude of locations , which consistently show that 60% ofthese victims had more than a 0.05% blood/alcohol concentrationand that at least 30% of these drivers had more than a 0.15%blood/alcohol concentration (Arthur D. Little, Inc. 1966; MidwestResearch Institute, 1972). Complete assessment of the role ofalcohol in accidents requires a controlled investigationcomparing the incidence of drinking by accident and non-accidentdriving populations exposed to the same risks. Such studies arenot conclusive, but they do indicate that the incidence ofdrinking in the non-accident group is far less, and among theaccident group, drinkers are more prevalent than nondrinkers. Present data, though still inadequate, are sufficient tosuggest for purposes of policy making that drinking itself is acontributory factor in a major fraction of all traffic accidentsand fatalities. In addition, several researchers have estimatedthat heavy drinking may be a factor in perhaps one, quarter ofall automobile fatalities. Although infrequent heavy drinking andchronic alcoholism naive not been sufficiently distinguished inthe, literature, one study does indicate that alcoholics, whensober, do not appear to have an accident rate significantlyhigher than average. These points could stand furtherexamination, but additional studies are quite unlikely to refutethe present evidence which implicates chronic drinking as a veryimportant factor in fatal automobile accidents (Arthur D. Little,1966). Marihuana In our first Report on marihuana, we concluded that researchhad not proven that use of this drug significantly impairsdriving ability or performance; we cautioned, however, thatdriving under the influence of any potent psychoactive drug is aserious risk to public safety and that acute effects of marihuanaintoxication, such as spatial and time distortion and slowedreflexes, could be expected to impair driving performance. Wealso urged further research in this area. In the period between our first Report and the present oneseveral studies have been performed to determine whether or notautomobile driving performance may be adversely affected by useof marihuana. Generally, the studies indicate that marihuana use,even at dose levels normally consumed in social settings, doesimpair to a significant degree visual perceptual performance aswell as temporally controlled responses (National Institute ofMental Health, 1973). In actual and simulated driving tests, poorer automobilehandling was found among subjects under the influence ofmarihuana, including slowed reaction times and increasedfrequency of incorrect or inadequate driver-responses (Dott,1972, Kielholz, et a]., 1972. Miller, et al, 1972) In experiments designed to study the effects of marihuana ondriving-related visual functions, it was found that marihuanainterfered with peripheral vision as well as central vision. Thisdeficit was interpreted as a result of momentary lapses ofattention during marihuana intoxication (Moskovitz, 1972). Other Psychoactive Substances In contrast to the vast literature on alcohol and the growingmarihuana research, very few studies have been conductedregarding the relationship between use of other psychoactivedrugs and motor vehicle accidents. Virtually no research hasappeared on hallucinogens and cocaine, and the studies onopiates, amphetamines, barbiturates and tranquilizers are quitelimited. On the basis of pharmacologic effects, however, somegeneralizations can be made. The information presented earlier inthis Chapter regarding the influence of psychoactive drugs onperception and psychomotor function have important implicationsfor driving performance. The, amphetamines present a case inpoint. Although the stimulant properties of amphetamines andamphetamine-like drugs may appear to improve alertness andendurance, a significant highway hazard is presented by theextreme fatigue and mental depression which occur when theeffects of stimulant drugs have worn off and by the unpredictableappearance of these, effects after extended use. In sum, depending on dose, most psychoactive drugs arecapable of impairing driving performance. It can be predictedthat widespread use of any of these drugs would have a directimpact on highway safety. IV -- IMPACT ON PUBLIC HEALTH AND WELFARE It has become increasingly common in recent years tocharacterize drug use as a public health issue, as opposed to acriminal justice. issue, or alternatively as a medical problem asopposed to a legal problem. Before analyzing the impact of druguse on the public health and welfare, this classification of druguse as a public health problem must be clarified and placed inproper perspective. A public health problem is neither synonymous with medicinenor antonymous with law. The distinguishing feature of the publichealth approach is the recognition that prevention of a definablephysical or psychological condition is beyond the competence ofthe traditional medical system. Lead poisoning, cigarettesmoking, and air pollution are public health problems preciselybecause, their prevention requires social resources and legalmeasures beyond the services of individual physicians. Publichealth is essentially a socio-medical concept, and legal actionsare generally ail integral part of the public health response toa problem, as is illustrated by enforced quarantine of Carriersof communicable diseases, compulsory vaccination, prohibition ofuse, of lead in house paint. and fluoridation of water.Prevention of certain social conditions having ail impact on thehealth and welfare of the population is the hallmark of a publichealth approach .22 22 The oft-stated distinction between the"criminal" and "medical" approaches refersprimarily to the individual drug user, rather than to the publicimpact of drug-using behavior. Many of those who characterizedrug use as a "medical problem" would prefer that theindividual be left alone and be permitted to risk his own healthif he so chooses. On the other hand, those who insist that druguse he viewed as a criminal justice problem are emphasizingeither that the person should be punished for his behavior orthat the criminal law is a necessary deterrent to drug use orboth. Persons insisting on criminal intervention may actually bedoing so on public health grounds on the theory that the criminallaw will contain drug use and minimize its potentially adverseconsequences on the public health and welfare. PUBLIC HEALTH AND WELFARE: A PREVENTIVE CONCEPT In the Commission's view, all public health problems sharetwo common features. First, the society is confronted with asignificant incidence of a disabling medical condition or a clearpotential for development of such a situation. For example, a fewunrelated cases of pneumonia do not constitute a public healthconcern; only when a particular condition becomes or threatens tobecome of consequence to the collective well-being does it becomea public health matter. Second, the prevention and control,including perhaps even treatment of this condition is generallybeyond the capacity of the individual medical practitioner. Thesetwo elements define the existence of a public health problem. Thecontours of the public health response will be determined by the,nature of any operating),' assumption with regard to the cause orcauses of the undesirable condition, or in the absence of such ahypothesis, will be limited to research alone. The classic illustration of a public health problem is thecommunicable disease such as typhoid. Prevention (or"primary treatment" in the lexicon of public healthofficials) would include sewage systems, water purification,regulations for dish and food handling and immunizationprocedures. Strategies of control ("secondarytreatment") would be instituted upon the appearance of asingle, case of typhoid, including isolation of the carriers andother techniques for reducing the spread of the epidemic.Obviously such measures are beyond the capacity of individualphysicians and require an integrated public response. 23 In thissituation the potential impact on the public, health and welfareis substantial, the relationship between an individual carrierand the undesirable social consequences is immediate and direct,and the necessary preventive and control measures are apparent. 23 Treatment ("tertiary treatment") could beperformed by the physician, such as by administering antibiotics,etc. On the fringes of the public health concept are matters suchas disabling automobile accidents. Here we have situations wherethere is a significant incidence of a disabling medicalcondition, one which is predictable and proportionate to thenumber of drivers. In addition, the condition can presumably beprevented by eliminating automobiles or controlled by varioustraffic safety regulations. Finally, the population at-risk isdefinable and becomes larger as participants in this activitycommunicate its advantages to others. Thus, analyticallyspeaking, automobile accidents are a public health concern. Thecrucial question, of course, relates to the implications of soclassifying them, and the relevance of countervailing socialneeds and values, such as the utility of individualtransportation and the personal conveniences of relativelyunencumbered driving. This brings us to the important question. In what ways is ituseful to think of drug use as a public health problem? Theearlier discussions of drug dependence and drug-induced behaviordemonstrate that the adverse social impact of drug use arisesfrom the special capacity of psychoactive drugs to influencebehavior by direct action on the brain. The acute or chronic useof any drug, whether or not it is psychoactive, carries risk forthe physical health of the user, depending on dose, frequency andother variables; but this fact is not the one which defines thespecial public health dimension of psychoactive drug use. Themajor component of the public health concern with drugs is mentalhealth, broadly defined: the decrement in individual's social andpsychological functioning attending certain patterns of drug use.Consequently, the public "health" aspect actuallyencompasses the less tangible impact on the total welfare of theindividual and the community in terms of social and economicfunctioning. In short, the public health and welfare issuesoverlap, as do the consequences to the individual and thesociety. In terms of public health analysis, the use of psychoactivedrugs falls somewhere in between the prototypical communicablediseases on the one hand and car accidents on the other. It ispossible to predict and measure in very gross terms incidence ofdisabling physical and psychological conditions among apopulation of drug users. It is also possible to predict under agiven set of social conditions that the population at-risk willbe increased as drug users introduce their friends andacquaintances to this behavior. Finally, the harm to the socialorganism accruing from compulsive drug use is clear andsubstantial, its is apparent from the incidence and consequencesof chronic alcoholism. In this sense, then, the use, ofpsychoactive drugs particularly in intensified or compulsive usepatterns, has an adverse impact on the public health and welfare,and may legitimately be classified as a public health problem. The next question is whether and in what ways theinstitutional apparatus we call the public health system can bebrought to bear in order to prevent, control and minimize theseaspects of the problem. As preventive measures, legalprohibitions or restrictions on availability may be viewed aselements of a public health approach. Of course, the publichealth considerations may be outweighed by advantages offered bythe specific drug, whether therapeutic, recreational orsacramental, and by the impracticality of restrictingavailability under certain social conditions, as in the case ofalcohol. As we pointed out in Chapter Two, legal restrictions ondistribution can only reduce availability, not eliminate it. Given the availability of psychoactive drugs and theinevitability of their use, the public health approach must beoriented toward the amelioration of the, acute health hazards ofuse and the prevention of intensified and compulsive use, thosepatterns with direct impact on the public health and welfare. Asour earlier observations on drug dependence illustrate, thesebehavior patterns are initiated and reinforced by interrelatingfactors involving the effects of the drug, the characteristics ofthe user and the nature of the environment. Consequently,institutional efforts to prevent drug dependence are inseparablefrom the emerging concept of "total health" whichembraces the individual and his relationship with hisenvironment. It is crucial to recognize in this connection thatall intensified or compulsive drug user almost always has otherproblems as well: emotional, social, familial, medical and underour present system, legal. For this reason, the requirements of apublic health and welfare strategy is the need and ability toprovide a wide range of services to the individuals andcommunities at-risk. Before dealing with the appropriate public health response todrug use, more specificity as to the adverse impact of thisbehavior on the public health and welfare is needed.Unfortunately, however, this impact has not been measured withany degree of precision. As we pointed out earlier, the incidenceof drug use which has been measured does not define the problem.The threshold question is to determine the conditions upon whichthe psychological and behavioral concomitants of drug use are ofconsequence to the public health and welfare. ASSESSING THE PUBLIC HEALTH AND WELFAREIMPACT OF DRUG USE The, forms of drug dependence with which society is mostfamiliar are that of the chronic alcoholic or "skidrow" drunk and the street heroin-dependent person. Somewhatless visible than these compulsive users, however, is an evenlarger group of intensified alcohol users who can be classifiedas marginal with respect to their social functioning and economiccapability. Further, a substantial number of drug dependentindividuals generally remain "hidden" from publicnotice. The opiate-dependent physician, the barbiturate-dependenthousewife and the functional alcoholic, for example, allpresumably suffer from some impairment of functioning which mightbe manifested in absenteeism, reduced performance level orneglect of family responsibility. However, since no concreteinformation is available on these matters and the social impactis not easily ascertainable, our primary focus here will be uponthat more visible group of drug-dependent individuals (generallyon heroin or alcohol), who cannot maintain an adequate level ofeconomic, social and psychological functioning and who thereforepose more, immediate consequences for the public health andwelfare. A very substantial proportion of such individuals is drawnfrom what might be called a pre-dependent or high-risk group;that is, persons who have been raised in an atmosphere rife withsocial and psychological pathology: poverty, illiteracy,malnutrition, delinquency, violence. emotional deprivation,mental illness and alcohol or other drug dependence. Thesepersons are especially at-risk because they frequently lack boththe inner strengths and the institutional supports necessary tocope successfully with the problems of living in such anenvironment. Because the environment in which heroin-dependent personsdwell is frequently and characteristically the same as that inwhich they resided prior to becoming heroin dependent, it is notsurprising to find substantial proportions of these individualswith histories of psychiatric disorders, delinquent and criminalbehavior which long preceded their heroin involvement. In suchcases, the same unhealthy conditions which existed in the pastare simply carried over into the present but are now exacerbatedby the additional problems concomitant with drug dependence. The Commission has noted an absence of reliable data withrespect t the social and economic costs of alcohol dependence,and data regarding heroin dependence are virtually nonexistent.Further, available data in specific jurisdictions are generallynot maintained in a manner which permits comparison with theexperiences of other jurisdictions. Therefore, the following information regarding the impact ofdrug dependence on the public health and welfare will be drawnprincipally from the research on alcoholism. The Population of Heavy Alcohol Users The problems associated with drinking and alcoholism havebeen demonstrated by many researchers. In a national surveyconducted by Cahalan, et al., (1969), for example, 31% of thesample indicated some problem with drinking within the last threeyears. Forty percent of the men and 15% of the women claimed somepsychological dependence on alcohol while 12% of the men and 8%of the women reportedly experienced some health problemassociated with drinking during the three years preceding thesurvey. The Cahalan, et al., 1969 survey of drinking practices foundthat 28% of the male drinkers and 8% of the female drinkers wereheavy drinkers and that half of the heavy drinkers (6% of thegeneral population) were heavy-escape drinkers who drankexcessively in an effort to avoid social pressures and personalproblems. Although such heavy-escape drinkers included most ofthose termed "alcoholics," they may also includeexcessive drinkers who have avoided much of the long-termpsychological and physical effects of alcoholism. In any case, Cahalan, et al., (1969) found that mostimportant predictors of heavy drinking to be sex, age, city sizeand social position. The proportion of male heavy drinkers, forexample, was found to be about three and one-half times higherthan the proportion of female heavy drinker (28% VS. 8%).24 Amongdrinkers, the highest proportion of heavy drinkers (30%) are menin the 30-34 and 45-49 year age groups; in women the highestproportions (10%) are found in the 45-49 and 21-24 year agegroups. For both sexes the prevalence of heavy drinking declinedrapidly after age 50. Residents of large urban areas consistentlyevidenced higher rates of heavy drinking than did residents ofsmaller towns. 24 The U.S. Department of Health. Education and Welfare foundin 1965 that at least five times as many men as women were"alcoholics." Economic Loss The available data indicate that most heroin-dependentpersons are males, under 26 years of age with a tenth-gradeeducation or less, whose age at first arrest for heroin use wasgenet-ally between 16 and 19 years. To a great extent, theheroin-dependent individual suffers the loss of his youth, hismost formative and important years for healthy growth anddevelopment, which can never be regained or recouped. And thecommunity simultaneously suffers the loss of its most valuablenatural resource. Because alcohol dependence develops gradually, economiclosses do not generally occur among younger populations, inmarked contrast to those associated with heroin use. However,once alcohol dependence develops, its impact on economicfunctioning is devastating. Gillespie (1967) found that between 27 and 81% (median 52%)of alcoholics are unemployed. Fifty-two percent of thehospitalized alcoholics in Glatt's sample (1967) lost their jobsbecause of drinking, while Robbins, et al. (1969) discovered that56% of alcoholics had job difficulties directly attributable todrinking. Among alcohol-dependent persons who remained employed,the decrement in job performance is substantial. For example, theAmerican Society for Personnel Administration (1972) hasestimated that "there are 4.4 million employed people in thecountry who are alcoholics; 90% of them have been on the job10-20 years; they're costing employers $8-10 billion peryear." Although the precise amount of absenteeism, accidents andeconomic losses attendant to alcohol use is difficult to assess,its impact is clearly considerable. Zentner (1969) found that thecost to industry primarily in absenteeism and inefficientjob performance among employed alcoholics is nearly $2 billionper year. Trice (1965) found that alcoholics use two to fivetimes more sick time than non-alcoholics and receive three timesthe, amount of disability payments. Trice and Roman (1972) notethat sickness payments for problem drinkers was three timesgreater than those for the normal worker. A review of the existing literature indicates that mostobservers generally agree that drug and alcohol dependencecontribute to increased insurance rates, industrial accidents,increased absenteeism, theft, problems of morale and discipline,impaired job performance, security risks, retraining costs andother associated problems. Death Death is a particularly finite measure of the social cost ofdrug dependence. The correlation between unnatural or prematuredeath and drug dependence is an astounding one. Because the dataregarding alcohol-related death is national in scope andreliable, while that regarding other drugs is regional andsketchy, we will have to present this information separately. Itdoes appear in general, however, that drug-dependentpersons and heavy non-dependent users are more likely than therest of the population to die by their own hand, eitherintentionally or accidentally , or by the hand of others. Alcohol Robbins, et al. (1959) reported that 26% of suicide victimswere reported to be chronic alcoholics. On the basis of a studymade one year later, 31% of the suicides were found to bealcoholics (Palola, et al., 1962). The suicide rate forhospitalized male alcoholics was reported by Kessel and Walton(1965) to be 86 times the rate expected for the generalpopulation; and 75% of the suicide victims studied by Murphy andRobins (1967) were found to suffer from either alcoholism ordepression. In addition to suicide, the excessive drinker of alcoholrisks death and injury in various other ways. Alcoholics are 2.5to 3 times as likely to die during any given time period as the,general population (Tashiro and Lipscomb, 1963; Brenner, 1967).The most frequent causes of death are violence 24% (9% in generalpopulation), heart disease 23% (40% in general population), andcirrhosis of the liver 14% (3% in general population). Alcoholicsare seven times as likely to die in fatal accidents asnon-alcoholics (Tashiro and Lipscomb, 1963). Waller (1968) found that 71% of persons who died ofaccidental poisoning had a blood alcohol content of .10% orhigher. The same was true of 58% of those killed by fire and 46%of those who drowned. In contrast, only 7% of the victims ofdeath by natural causes had significant levels of blood alcohol. Accidents in the home, on the job or on the road show veryfew factors in common other than human carelessness. It isstriking, therefore, to note how closely alcohol use iscorrelated with accidental injury. By subjecting non-fatalaccident victims to the breathalyzer test, Wechsler et al.,(1969) found that 22% of home accident victims, 30% oftransportation accident victims, and 15.5% of thosewith occupational injuries had positive blood alcoholreadings. Victims of fights or assaults showed significantlyhigher alcohol involvement, with 56% showing positive bloodalcohol readings. As we noted earlier in this chapter, a drinkeris less likely to survive than a non-drinker even when both areinvolved in the same two vehicle automobile accident. In a studyof such crashes in which one driver survived, it was thenon-drinking driver who survived in 59 of 67 cases (U.S.Department of Transportation, 1970b). The Commission's review of presently available data indicatesthat property damage, insurance costs and medical servicesconsequent to alcohol-related motor vehicle accidents ran to $1billion in 1971 (National Clearinghouse for Alcohol Information,1972). A review of highway fatalities since 1966 shows that eachyear approximately one-half are related to accidents involvingalcohol. From a public welfare standpoint, the impact isconsiderable when one considers the lost earning power of thoseinjured or killed, the social security payments to dependents ofthe deceased as well as public assistance and aid to dependentchildren-expenditures which must be maintained as the result ofsuch accidents. These data demonstrate, that the excessive drinker is subjectto significantly greater physical and social stress leading tohigher injury and fatality rates than the general population. Thegreater vulnerability appears to be due to the general stressinvolved in the alcoholic's living conditions, the presence of aninadequate diet, the diseases connected with alcohol consumptionitself, and the increased (Chance of death after injury withlarge quantities of alcohol in the blood (Brenner, 1967). Heroin National data concerning the incidence of heroin-relateddeath do not exist. The Office of the Chief Medical Examiner inNew York City, however, maintains what are undoubtedly the beststatistics on heroin-related morbidity and mortality. In 1968, heestimated that bacterial endocarditis caused about 2% of thedeaths among heroin dependent persons in New York City, a figurewhich represented about one-third of all deaths from endocarditisin that city. In that same year it was noted that more thanone-half of the patients admitted to Bellevue Hospital forhepatitis were heroin-dependent persons who injected the drugintravenously (Baden, 1970). In 1972, heroin-related deaths in New York City rose slightlyin comparison with the previous year (916 in 1971 to 924 in1972). These, statistics account for deaths due to acute heroinreaction and overdose, and deaths from hepatitis, endocarditisand other infections. lf we add to these data otherheroin-related deaths such as homicides, suicides and fatalaccidents, the total figure for 1972 climbs to 1,409 as comparedwith the composite 1971 figure of 1,268. New York City reported324 opiate-dependent persons were homicide victims in 1972, ascompared with 208 in 1971 (Markham, 197 3). Far too little is known at the present time about thesyndrome of acute fatal reaction following the intravenousinjection of heroin. Acute reaction which constitutes the majorcause of death among heroin users is commonly referred to as"overdose." Baden points out that this is an inaccuratejudgment and states that: A pharmacologic overdose can sometimes be demonstrated, butthe precise mechanism of death is not clear in most cases. Thereare probably many mechanisms for death, which may include anallergic type reaction to heroin, quinine, or other dilutents; areaction to injected bacteria or other foreign materials; or atrue pharmacologic overdose of heroin or quinine or other drugs(Baden, 1972a: 837). Presently available data point to the fact that in NewYork City, the heroin-related deaths account for the largestproportion of deaths of persons between the ages of 15 and 35years. In 1960, New York City reported 199 opiate deaths.This figure rose almost five times by 1972 when 924 deaths wereattributable to opiate drugs. Further, during the decade of the1960's, as the number of deaths from opiates significantlyincreased, the median age of such deaths decreased from 31 yearsin 1960 to 23 years in 1972. As Baden (1972b) points out: [There has been a] change in pattern of drugs abused from heroin alone to multiple drugs, most recently methadone; more than 30% of narcotic deaths in New York City this year [1972] have been associated with methadone use, licit and illicit. The majority of younger addicts now have other drugs in their tissues at autopsy in addition to heroin: alcohol, methadone, barbiturates, and others hypnotics, amphetamines, tranquilizers, analgesics, etc. (P. 1). Barbiturates Barbiturates appear to be related to death in two ways:consumption of lethal doses is a common means by which personscommit suicide; and their combined effects with alcohol sometimesresult in death even in cases where suicide is not apparent. Ithas been estimated that 400 barbiturate-induced suicides occureach year in New York City alone (Baden, 1972c). NIMH (1968)indicates that there were 1,602 suicides involving barbituratesnationwide in 1968. Many accidental deaths involving barbiturates appear toinvolve alcohol. For example, a report prepared for theCommission by the Assistant Medical Examiner of Dade County,Florida, indicates that 151 persons died from barbiturate-relatedcauses during 1970 and 1971, 133 of which were classified assuicides on the basis of other factors. Of the 132 casestested for the presence of alcohol, 35% were positive, and 40% ofthe accidental overdoses had blood alcohol levels of 0.05% ormore as compared with 23% of the suicides (Blackbourne, 1972). Medical Complications of Chronic Drug Use Disease which is related either to the life style of the druguser or to the method by which be administered the drug isespecially common among skid row alcoholics and heroin-dependentpersons. In these populations susceptibility to various ailmentsis significantly increased by virtue of life style; theseindividuals commonly live in rather poor circumstances underfrequently unsanitary conditions. Consequent to their generalinability to maintain proper nutrition and health habits, thesepersons frequently contract tuberculosis and other communicablediseases or illnesses .25 25 A substantial public health concern in this regard is thetransmission of disease, especially hepatitis, through medicallyrequired blood transfusion. It has been a longstanding and commonpractice for hospitals to purchase whole blood from proprietaryblood banks because voluntary sources, especially RedCross-sponsored programs, are frequently unable to provide it insufficient amounts. It has likewise been a common practice forpersons who are drug dependent (especially heroin andalcohol-dependent persons) to sell their blood. Cohen andDougherty (1968) found that the risk of contracting hepatitisfrom transfusion of blood from a proprietary blood bank was sixtimes greater than from a bank where blood was given free. Theydiscovered as well that the chance of contracting hepatitis fromblood donated by known or suspected heroin dependent persons was70 times greater than that of non-parenteral drug users. In addition to diseases which may be related to life style, anumber of prevalent conditions or diseases are immediatelyrelated to the method by which a drug is administered. Amongpersons who are parenteral drug users, the use of unsterileneedles and contaminated drug solutions contributes to a seriousdisease problem. Hepatitis, infectious endocarditis and tetanusare particularly common among heroin users. In New York City, tetanus is almost exclusively found amongheroin users. The Deputy Chief Medical Examiner of New York Cityestimates that between 10 and 20% of deaths amongheroin-dependent persons are due directly to medicalcomplications, particularly hepatitis, infective endocarditis andreturns. Heart damage related to endocarditis is not uncommonamong persons engaged in parenteral drug use. Baden estimatesthat 80% of the infective endocarditis cases are bacterial andinvolve the aortic and mitral valves (Baden, 1972b). Similarpatterns of disease have been noted among persons who inject"speed" or barbiturates (Canadian Commission . . .,1972). Disease and other medical complications associated withalcohol use, are both common and serious. The incidence of heartdisease and cirrhosis of the liver is disproportionately highamong alcohol users (Tashiro and Lipscomb, 1963). Statistics fromNew York City also point to the association of tuberculosis withboth alcohol and heroin dependence. It is estimated that 10% ofthose admitted to the Chest Service at Bellevue Hospital areheroin-dependent persons suffering from tuberculosis; 30-40% arechronic alcoholics also afflicted with tuberculosis. Cahalan, et al. (1969) found that 12% of all male drinkersand 8% of all female drinkers experience health problems relatedto alcohol use. Other researchers have noted that if a21-year-old male in good physical health starts drinking, he hasa .9% chance of deeveloping gastritis, a 1% chance of developingLaennec's cirrhosis, a 0.02% chance of developing primary livercell carcinoma, and a 0.01% chance of developing delirium tremens(Malzberg, 1960; Sundby, 1967; Victor and Adams, 1970; Brunt,1971; Goodman and Gilman, 1971). It should be noted that contrary to popular belief,alcoholism is rather common among heroin-dependent persons. A1968 report emanating from the Office of the Chief MedicalExaminer in New York City indicates that at least 20% ofthe heroin-dependent population. demonstrate heavy drinkingproblems, and many show fatty livers and alcoholic-type cirrhosisat autopsy (Baden, 1970). Impact on the Family Structure The family unit is particularly susceptible to the impact ofdrug dependence; it not only reflects but magnifies the effectsof crime, suicide, accidents, economic problems, illness anddeath. The influence of excessive drinking is deleterious to allaspects of family life and often reduces the ability of familymembers to function within them accepted limits of our society. The alcoholic marriage is generally unstable and disturbed.Chafetz, et al. (1971) found marital instability in 41% of thefamilies of alcoholics. Intense conflict appeared in 60% ofalcoholic homes (27% of the homes of non-drinkers) in a study byMcCord and McCord (1960). The Robins (1966) study revealed that55% of previously married alcoholics bad been divorced.Separations or divorces were found in 60% of the alcoholics'family units by Lemert (1960). In fact, the higher thedegree of alcoholic involvement, the lower the likelihood of anintact marriage (U.S. Department of Transportation, 1970a). In areview of 22 studies conducted between 1944 and 1965, forexample, Gillespie (1967) found that 18-55% (median 32%) ofalcoholics are divorced or separated. Pittman and Gordon (1967)noted that among their sample of chronic drinkers, 19% weredivorced and 32% were separated. The effect on children of alcoholic parents has beenespecially remarkable; between 22% and 55% of the children ofalcoholics have been reported to become alcoholics themselves(Ellerman, 1948; Prout, et al., 1950; Selzer and Holloway,1957; McCord and McCord, 1960; Moore and Ramseur, 1960; Block,1964; Bailey, et al., 1965). Goodwin, et al. (1971) reported that 67% of male felonsstudied were alcoholics or problem drinkers. Studies of thebackgrounds of alcoholic criminals seem to indicate not only thattheir family history and experiences are related to alcoholismitself, but that a significantly high incidence of violence ispart of their home environment. Social deviance found in thefamily may well be learned and passed on by parents to theirchildren, so that a pattern of deviance develops. Of all the social institutions, the family is perhaps themost crucially affected by drug dependence. Compensatory Social Costs The Commission has found that very fewjurisdictions maintain any data on public assistance payments todrug-dependent persons. However, it has been estimated thatone-third of all persons receiving welfare payments use alcoholexcessively (Rubington, 1969). Regarding heroin dependence, dataobtained from the City and State of New York in early 1973indicate that there are about 30,000 heroin dependent personsreceiving public assistance in the State of New York.Twenty-seven thousand of these are in New York City. Heroindependent persons thus comprise 1.5% of the total public welfarecaseload of New York State, estimated at 1.8 million persons. InNew York City, these persons comprise 2.1% of the publicwelfare rolls in a total caseload of 1.2 million. Of course these data represent only the tip ofthe iceberg. Social support for the families of compulsive drugusers runs into hundreds of millions of dollars, and the massiveinvestment in treatment and rehabilitation services constitutes amajor social cost of drug dependence. The federal and stategovernments spend approximately $380 million annually in connectionwith alcohol treatment and yearly expenditures for"drug" treatment have now reached $650 million. Tothese costs should be added the $100 million annually spentprocessing chronic alcoholics through the criminal justice system(President's Commission, Task Force on Drunkenness, 1967) as wellas the $475 million devoted to processing heroin-dependentpersons (McGlothlin, 1972). FRAMING A PUBLIC HEALTH RESPONSE The psychosocial, medical and economicproblems produced by and associated with drug dependence aresubstantial. Whether the drug dependence is of the"hidden"' variety in which the individual isfunctional, albeit at a reduced level, or is totallyincapacitating and visible, it is a costly proposition for thepublic health and welfare. Individuals who are sociallyincapacitated as a consequence of alcohol, heroin, or other druguse deprive the community of their participation and constitute adrain on public resources. Unfortunately, they often appearimmune to many of the traditional methods of intervention, mostof which are directed at the symptoms rather than the causes ofdependence. The Commission has observed that in order to deal effectivelywith this kind of drug dependence, reliable and valid informationabout the epidemiology of that condition is essential. Atpresent, however, few reliable or valid data exist in this area.We simply do not know the number of persons who can becharacterized as either pre-dependent individuals especiallyvulnerable to full-scale dependence, or even the number who are,already incapacitated by drug dependence. Consequently, most of the "public health" responseto drug dependence, whether labeled "control,""prevention," "treatment" or"rehabilitation," has occurred after the fact.Imperfect knowledge has been one reason for society's failure to"rehearse" the problem and formulate an effectivepreventive strategy. But, there is another reason for thisfailure: the inadequacy of the public health structure itself. In this nation's pluralistic medical and human servicessystem, the functions of health and social service agencies arelargely undefined and overlapping. The fact that a particularsituation has been defined as a public health problem does notassure that all of these resources will be harnessed in acoordinated way to deal with the problem; instead it is entirelylikely that a series of initial ad hoc responses will befollowed by attempts on the part of each of the diversecomponents of the system to define its own role independently ofthe others. This is precisely the situation that nowcharacterizes the "public health response" to theproblem of drug use. In this as in other public, health areas, a multitude ofpublic and private service agencies are involved: family andchild-care agencies, welfare organizations, business resources,law enforcement agencies, the medical profession, communitymental health centers, the schools, social service agencies andso on. There is no cohesive response as each institution dealswith a. small component of the total problem. Confusion offunding, lack of training, inadequate accessibility of servicesand insufficient assignment of priorities now characterize thissociety's response to many public health problems ranging fromnutrition to drug dependence .26 At the present time, a "public health approach" ismore a way of looking at a problem than of dealing with it.Consequently, to state that drug use is a public health andwelfare problem is only to confirm the actual and potentialimpact of certain drug-using behaviors on the public health andwelfare. Beyond this point, the determination of the appropriatepublic health strategy is plagued by the amorphous character ofthis nation's public health system, if in fact we have adefinable "system", and uncertainty about, the utilityof different responses to the problem. The Commission notes that the community mental health systemis designed to overcome these problems although administrativeand financial obstacles have continued to inhibit itsdevelopment. We would suggest that an appropriate strategy for preventingthe adverse public health and welfare consequences of drug usecan be formulated only after the following questions areanswered. What, as a practical matter, can be, done in order toprevent medical complications from drug use, to prevent chronicuse in general and to restore the health and social functioningof those who have engaged in such use? Which of the components ofthe public health and welfare system can perform those functionswhich are achievable? In what ways should the various publichealth and welfare resources be structured for delivery to theclient populations? Finally, if the existing resources areinsufficient, how should they be allocated and what new healthand welfare services should be developed? In the next chapter we will address specifically threeparticular elements of the public health response; prevention,treatment and rehabilitation and emergency intervention. As aprelude to these discussions, however, we think it important tooutline some general principles for formulating these strategies. First, the response to drug use must be part of the generalsociomedical strategy, focusing on the total person as a part ofthe total environment, including the interrelationship betweenfamily members, peers and other community influences on socialintegration and mental health. Second, the community-based response apparatus must be gearedto early detection of problems, and must have the capacity todeal with them at all stages, primary through chronic. Byfocusing on acute problems, early intervention techniques andongoing care, many drug related problems can be prevented amongthe individuals being "treated," and, most importantly,among those influenced by them. For example, early concern aboutthe, families of those who are alcohol or heroin dependent mightbe the most effective strategy for minimizing the incidence ofdependence among offspring. Third, within this overall framework, services must begeographically and economically accessible to target populations,who must be aware of their existence. These services must beadequate in terms of the training and experience of allprofessional and paraprofessional personnel '27 and in terms offacilities and equipment. Finally, the, services must becoordinated in terms of lines of communication, authorityand responsibility. 27 In this connection, the Commission notes with favor thedevelopment of regional training and resource centers dealingexplicitly with community-oriented skills and services. Thesecenters will he discussed in the following Chapter. CliffSchaffer's Home Page WT01-B25-9IA031-000651-B019-67http://206.61.184.43:80/schaffer/LIBRARY/studies/inhemp/ihmenu.htm 206.61.184.43 19970122122545 text/html 2923HTTP/1.0 200 OKDate: Wednesday, 22-Jan-97 12:25:36 GMTServer: WebSitePro/1.1f (S/N wpo-0deb)Allow-ranges: bytesContent-type: text/htmlLast-modified: Saturday, 28-Dec-96 07:03:42 GMTContent-length: 2706 Indian Hemp Drugs Commission Report - Table of Contents Contents | Feedback | Search DRCNet Library | Schaffer Library | Major Studies The Indian Hemp Drugs Commission Report Summary of the Indian Hemp DrugsCommission Report by Tod Mikuriya Introduction, by Tod Mikuriya Centennial Thoughts on the IndianHemp Drugs Commission, by Tod Mikuriya Indian Hemp and the Dope Fiends of OldEngland - A sociopolitical history of cannabis and theBritish Empire 1840-1928, by Sean Blanchard & Matthew J. AthaMSc Chapter IX. Social and Religious Customs Chapter XIV. The Policy of Hemp DrugAdministration Note by Mr. G. A. Grierson, C.I.E.,Magistrate and Collector, Howrah, on references to the hemp plantoccurring in Sanskrit and Hindi literature. Note by Mr. J. M. Campbell, C.I.E.,Collector of Land Revenue and Customs and Opium, Bombay, on thereligion of hemp. Contents | Feedback | Search DRCNet Library | Schaffer Library | Major StudiesWT01-B25-10IA031-000651-B019-97http://206.61.184.43:80/schaffer/LIBRARY/studies/op/opmenu.htm 206.61.184.43 19970122122601 text/html 16468HTTP/1.0 200 OKDate: Wednesday, 22-Jan-97 12:25:52 GMTServer: WebSitePro/1.1f (S/N wpo-0deb)Allow-ranges: bytesContent-type: text/htmlLast-modified: Saturday, 28-Dec-96 06:52:37 GMTContent-length: 16250 The Opium Problem -- Table of Contents Contents | Feedback | Search DRCNet Library | Schaffer Library | Major Studies | TheOpium Problem THE OPIUM PROBLEM BY CHARLES E. TERRY AND MILDRED PELLENS 1928 TABLE OF CONTENTS PREFACE TO THE ORIGINAL EDITION Personnel of committee-Objects-Scope of work-Procedure. INTRODUCTION The problem-In the United States-Controversial aspects-Methodof study-Terminology. CHAPTER I-EXTENT Numbers involved-Difficulties of determination-Currentstatements- Estimates from importations-Estimates fromsurveys-Early statements, 1867-1871-Michigan survey, 1878-Chicagostudy, 1880-lowa study, 1885-Massachusetts study, 1888--Vermontstudy, 1900-Jacksonville Survey, 1913--Tennessee survey,1915--Treasury Committee, 1918-New York City Clinic,1919-Narcotic Drug Control Commission, 1920-Los Angeles Clinic,1920-Shreveport Clinic, 1919-1923-Summary survey and estimatetable-Recent analysis of certain surveys, Kolb and DuMez-Analysis and discussions. CHAPTER II-DEVELOPMENT OF THE PROBLEM Historical review of use of opium-Use by Sumerians andAssyrians, Mention in Eber's Papyri-Homer's Iliad-Known toHippocrates, Theophrastus, Virgil-Virtues described byGalen-Discovery of alkaloids--Therapeutic uses-Appreciation ofeuphoric effect-De Quincey -The hypodermic syringe-Influence ofCivil and other wars-Influence of opium smoking-Patent medicineindustry as factor-Secret addiction remedies--Medicaleducation-Professional indifference-Production of heroin-Views onsafety and dangers of heroin-Early warnings -Effect ofprohibitory laws-Underworld traffic-Effect of professionalattitude and training. CHAPTER III-ETIOLOGY Incompleteness of studies-Faulty generalizations-Racial andindividual tendencies-Effect of climate-Influences of medicaluse-Use in infancy and childhood-Use of hypodermic-Painfulillnesses--Use for pain and for euphoria-Massachusetts study asto causes-Pichon's studies-Psychical influence-Patent medicinesand self-medication Evilassociations-Dissipation-Chinatown-"Contagion'--Influence ofpersonality make-up -Curiosity-Craving for stimulants andsedatives-Report of British Departmental Committee on Morphineand Heroin Addiction-Table, replies to questionnaires, Treasurycommittee reports Replies to questionnaires of Committee on DrugAddictions-Criminal tendencies and associations. CHAPTER IV-GENERAL NATURE Definitions, effect on control measures-Early opinions andterms-Psychical and ethical effect-Like alcoholism-Morphinism notmorphinomania-A vice, habit, appetite-Mental and physicaldisease-An uncontrollable craving-A real disease-Apsycho-physical disorder-A psychosomatic affection-A truedisease-A drug, auto- and intestinal intoxication-A true organicdisease-A Psychical disturbance-A functional poisoning-A neurosisor psychosis--A pernicious habit-A definite physical disease-Apathologic entity. CHAPTER V-PATHOLOGY-SOMATIC AND PSYCHIC CHANGES Reports of findings scanty-Incompleteness ofstudies-Functional disturbances-Individual tolerance andintolerance-Fatty degeneration of heart and liver-Morphin inliver-Mental deterioration-Ethical changes -Crystals inblood-Effect on leukocytes--Epithelial changes-Lowering ofresistance-Arrest of phagocytosis,-Characterchanges-Hallucinations and delusions-Brain cell changes-Effect onendocrine system Pleasure and deterioration-Generative functionsdepressed-Changes in cortical cells--Changes entirelyfunctional-The blood in morphinists andheroinists-Coagulability-Number of red cells-Number and changesin white cells--White cell resistance The blood duringwithdrawal-Number and varieties of red cells-Hemoglobinpercentage Red cell resistance-Leukocytosis--Differentialfindings--Leukocytic resistance-Similarity to infectiousprocesses-Changes in liver morphologic and functional-Digestivetract-Albuminuria and sediment findings Nature ofalbuminuria-Abscesses--The skin and teeth-Sexualapparatus-Eliminatory crises-Stages of psychic changes--Pulse intolerance ,and withdrawal-Relapse due to psychic changes--Othercauses of psychic changes than the drug-Effect of opium on dog'sintestine-Effect on respiration in dogs--Lipoidchanges-Constitutional make-up of users Excretion ofmorphin-Mental effects-Inhibitory effect of opiumAuto-intoxication-Allergic reaction-Changes in viscosity of bloodWithdrawal phenomena due to organic causes-Digestive hemoclasticreaction-Morphin delirium-Effect of chronic poisoning on growthof rats-Effect on vegetative nervous system-Resulting Psychicalchanges -Lowered biotonus-Resemblance to manic-depressivestates-Relationship to hyper- and hypothyroidism-Selectiveabsorption by nervous system-Effect on basal metabolism-Effect onnutrition-Review of mechanism of tolerance-Conditioned salivaryreflex-Somatic and psychic habituation-Specificity ofhabituation-Evidence of diphasic poisoning-Vagus-sympatheticbalance of vegetative nervous system Relationship of tolerance touremic changes-Effect on unstriped muscle -Sensitiveness ofintestinal muscles not lost-Brain cell changes Calcium andpotassium blood concentration-blood changes in dogs. CHAPTER VI - PATHOLOGY (continued) - TOLERANCE -DEPENDENCE-WITHDRAWAL Tolerance-formation admitted-Dependence questioned-CodeintoIerance, committee report-Elimination of codein--Codein notaddiction forming-Codein addiction-forming-Contradictoryopinions-Case reports, codein addiction-Dual action of opiumalkaloids-Tolerance to eukodal-Effect of eukodal and parakodin onanimals--Questionnaire study on codein addiction--Oxidimorphintheory-Hyperacidity in morphinism-Tolerance similar to trueimmunity-Specific antitoxin formed Morphin storage in brain andliver-Inhibition of glandular function Release ofinhibition-Hypersecretion and glandular engorgement-Enithelialdesquamation-Eliminatory crises-Increased power of organism todestroy morphin as explanation of tolerance-Denial of antitoxinformation-Increased ability of body cells to withstandmorphin-Brain extract of morphinized animals,properties-Precipitation reaction of morphin serum-Increasedability of organism to destroy and cell immunity both reasons fortolerance-Complement fixation tests and anticomplementary actionin morphin serum-Ability of liver to destroy morphin-Withdrawalsymptoms due to retained excrementitious matter-Aggressinsproduced by morphin-Progressive cell adaptivity Effect oncirculation of injections of morphinized serum-Loss of cellsensitiveness in chronic poisoning-Specificity of morphinpoisoning Effect on vegetative nervous system of chronicpoisoning and of withdrawal-Tolerance and withdrawal due toantitoxic substance in blood Chemical changes in nerve cellcomposition cause of withdrawal-Personality changes and sensationobtunding with reactions-Metabolic changes in rats caused bythyroid, thyroidectorny and morphinism-Psychiatricaspects-Lowering of threshold of resistance-Effect on brainlipoids--Relationship to permeability of cell membrane-Reactionto intradermic injections-Congenital addiction-Effect ofwithdrawal on pregnancy-Withdrawal symptoms in new-born-Casereports-Prolongation of pregnancy-Morphin in placentalcirculation-Transmission to fcetus--Questionnaire studies ofCommittee on Drug Addictions-Tables CHAPTER VII-SYMPTOMATOLOGY Detection of chronic use-Classification of symptomsunsatisfactory Abstinence symptoms diagnostic-Symptoms insmokers-Symptoms in chronic poisoning and in withdrawal-Mentalsymptoms-The skin and mucous membranes--Pupils-Kidneys &organs-Nervous system- Vasomotor symptoms---Reflexirritability-Lachrymation-Coryza-Neuralgicpains--Insomnia-Vomiting and purging-Constipation-Pulseirregularity-Collapse-Effects vary in individual salivation indogs-Nutrition in dogs--Withdrawal symptoms in dogs-Withdrawallike an infectious disease-The "vital need'--Mental state inwithdrawalRespiration-Circulatory symptoms---Syncope-Oliguria andanuria-Albuminuria-Glycosuria--Casts--Memory damaged-Characterchanges-Effect on volition-Interference with secretion andexcretion-Fever Circulatory disturbances in dogs--Vegetativenervous system and endocrine disturbances-Addiction andwithdrawal symptoms in dogs. CHAPTER VIII-TYPES OF USERS Classification desirable--Factors to beconsidered-Incompleteness of data-Dangers of generalizing fromavailable material-Sex Distribution-Michigan survey-Chicagostudy-Iowa study-Jacksonville survey-Tennesseesurvey-Philadelphia series--Treasury committee-New York Cityprison cases--New York City clinic series--Discussion-AgeDistribution-Chicago cases--Iowa case Jacksonvilleseries-Tennessee series--Philadelphia hospital cases--BellevueHospital cases, New York New York City clinic cases--Lambert'scases - -Court cases, New York Teachers College questionnairestudy, New York-School children--Juvenile court studies--Use bychildren exaggerated or unfounded-Age of convicted addicts incertain prisons--Form of Drug Used-Therapeutic choice-Individualselection-Influence of illicit traffic, reasons--Heroin amongyoung males--Effect of prohibitory laws on use of heroin-Table bydrugs used-Other Classifications-Conditions in England,1871-Individual opinions of types involved by authors from 1871to 1922-Contradictory views due to studies of selectedcases--Effects of other drugs, "mixed addiction'--Effect ofenvironmental factors on "type" determination-Dangersof conclusions based on insufficient data-No one type of user-Allgroups susceptible-Relation to crime CHAPTER IX-TREATMENT Early efforts-Influence on treatment of current views onnature-Prophylactic considerations--Gradual reduction-Abruptwithdrawal-Rapid reduction--Substitution-Levinstein'smethod-Rapid withdrawal with bromideg--Erinmeyer'smethod-Jennings' method-Rapid detoxication, Sollier-Hyoscinetreatment, Lott-Pettey's treatment-Use of heroin,Morel-Lavall6e-Lambert-Towns treatment-Bishop's principles,interval of dosage, elimination, rational therapeuticconsiderations, individual adaptation of procedures-Comparativevalues of certain methods Sceleth's method-Dercurn'smethod-Riverside Hospital method-Effect of albumen andvenesection in detoxicating dogs-Wholey's method Methods ofDupouy, Wuth, Mignard, Itemer, David, Krauss, Rojas andBelbe-Narcosan treatment-British Departmental Committee onMorphine and Heroin Addiction-Narcosan compared with abruptwithdrawal, Johnson-Kolb-Vegetable protein treatment. CHAPTER X-CONTROL-INTERNATIONAL Slizoighai Conference-Countries represented-Early treatieswith Siam and China-Treaty with Japan-Philippines OpiumCommission-Wright's letter to the President-Resolutions ofcommission-Response to U. S. Circular-Report of Americandelegates-Comment on Hague Opium Convention of 1912-Powerssigning the convention-Resolution presented-Countries not signingthe convention-Final Protocol of Second Opium Conference-Exportsfrom U. S. prohibited-Third International OpiumConference-Instruction to American delegates--Report of Americandelegates-Final Protocol of Third International OpiumConference--Peace Conference articles on OpiumConventions-Article 23 of the covenant of the League ofNations-Resolution of League- Advisory Committee on Traffic inOpium-Resolutions of Council-Requirements; of countries-Reportsand resolutions of Council and various committees-Action of ThirdAssembly on import and export certificate system-Fourth sessionof Advisory Committee-Abuse defined-Causes of abuse-Determinationof abuse-Amounts required for medical and scientificpurposes-Prevention of abuse-Hearings and Resolutions ofCommittee on Foreign Affairs--Resolution as passed by Senate andHouse of Representatives-American Delegation to Fifth Session ofAdvisory Committee 1923-American proposals-Resolutions ofAdvisory Committee-Reservations of Indian Government-Resolutionsof Fourth Assembly, Sept. 1923-Extracts from minutes ofAssembly-Resolutions of Council Dec. 1923-Sixth Session Aug.1924-Recommendations of Conference-Resolutions of meetings ofMixed Sub-Committee-Second International Opium Conference Nov.1924. CHAPTER XI-CONTROL (continued)-NATIONAL Act of 1909-Treaty of 1880--Tariff laws-Results of Act of1909-Bills presented but not passed-Harrison Act andAmendments----Regulations of Secretary of the Treasury-Treasurydecisions-Court decisions -Discussion of law andregulations-Jones-Miller Act-Federal Narcotics ControlBoard-Amendment of June 7, 1924-Creation of Bureau andCommissioner of Prohibition-Control of narcotics vested inProhibition Bureau-Estimates for medical needs, discussion-Propermethod for determining needs,-Maryland study-Studies of Committeeon Drug Addictions-Discussions-Needs based on sales bymanufacturers, discussion. CHAPTER XII-CONTROL (continued)-STATE Historical-Drugs included-Exceptions-Channels ofdistribution-Records required-Smoking opium-First anti-opiumlaws--Special provisions-Provision for addicts-Registration ofaddicts-Definition of addicts-Enforcingagency-Penalties--Legislation in New York State -WhitneyHearings-Department of narcotic drug control-Provisions ofWhitney Law-Regulations under law-Annual report of commissioner-New Orleans clinic-Objects of dispensary-Treatment-Legal statusof clinic. CHAPTER XIII-CONTROL (continued)-MUNICIPAL Jacksonville clinic-New York City clinic-Hospitaltreatment-Health department regulations New York City-Comments ofJudge Collins- Court cases of addiction-Ages-Numberscommitted-Sex distribution of court cases-Report to New YorkState Association of Magistrates- Present conditions-Shreveportclinic-Historical sketch-The dispensary-Results-Resolutions ofmedical society-Los Angeles clinic-Reports of director-List ofclinics. CHAPTER XIV-CONTROL (continued)-MISCELLANEOUS SUGGESTIONS Opinions of committees and individuals taken from currentliterature from 1915 to 1927- APPENDICES BIBLIOGRAPHY INDEX Contents | Feedback | Search DRCNet Library | Schaffer Library | Major Studies | TheOpium ProblemWT01-B25-11IA031-000651-B019-114http://206.61.184.43:80/schaffer/LIBRARY/studies/lag/lagmenu.htm 206.61.184.43 19970122122620 text/html 4157HTTP/1.0 200 OKDate: Wednesday, 22-Jan-97 12:26:09 GMTServer: WebSitePro/1.1f (S/N wpo-0deb)Allow-ranges: bytesContent-type: text/htmlLast-modified: Saturday, 28-Dec-96 07:03:03 GMTContent-length: 3940 La Guardia Committee Report - Table of Contents Contents | Feedback | Search DRCNet Library | Schaffer Library | Major Studies The La Guardia Committee Report The Marihuana Problem in the City of New York Mayor's Committee on Marihuana, by the New York Academy ofMedicine City of New York , 1944. SOCIOLOGICAL, MEDICAL, PSYCHOLOGICAL AND PHARMACOLOGICAL STUDIES Foreword, by Mayor Fiorello LaGuardia Introduction - E. H. L. Corwin, PhD, Secretary THE SOCIOLOGICAL STUDY Introduction - Dudley D. Shoenfeld, MD Organization of Staff The Mental Attitude of the Marihuana Smoker Toward Society and Marihuana Marihuana and School Children Conclusions THE CLINICAL STUDY Plan and Scope Subjects Selected for the Study Medical Aspects Symptoms and Behavior The Cigarette (Note the use of the Jack Benny radio show in the research) Psychotic Episodes Organic and Systemic Functions Intellectual Functions Findings Summary and Discussion Comparison Between Users and Non-Users from the Standpoint of Mental and Physical Deterioration With special thanks to Peter Webster for his work inscanning this document for the library. Contents | Feedback | Search DRCNet Library | Schaffer Library | Major StudiesWT01-B25-12IA031-000651-B019-143http://206.61.184.43:80/schaffer/LIBRARY/studies/wootton/wootmenu.htm 206.61.184.43 19970122122635 text/html 2631HTTP/1.0 200 OKDate: Wednesday, 22-Jan-97 12:26:25 GMTServer: WebSitePro/1.1f (S/N wpo-0deb)Allow-ranges: bytesContent-type: text/htmlLast-modified: Saturday, 28-Dec-96 06:45:26 GMTContent-length: 2414 The Wootton Report - Main Menu Contents | Feedback | Search DRCNet Library | Schaffer Library | Major Studies The Wootton Report Thanks to Steven Abrams, the full text of the Wootton Reportwill soon be coming to these pages. We invite you to read hismost interesting history of this report, listed below. Hashish Fudge - The Times Advertisementand the Wootton Report, by Steve Abrams Extract from 'The Strange Case of Pot'by Michael Schofield (Penguin, 1971). Schofield was a social psychologist who sat on the Wootton Committee and, dismayed by its reception, which led to the introduction of the Misuse of Drugs Act, he subsequently published this book. Contents | Feedback | Search DRCNet Library | Schaffer Library | Major StudiesWT01-B25-13IA031-000651-B019-173http://206.61.184.43:80/schaffer/LIBRARY/studies/ledain/NONMED1.HTM 206.61.184.43 19970122122646 text/html 8025HTTP/1.0 200 OKDate: Wednesday, 22-Jan-97 12:26:36 GMTServer: WebSitePro/1.1f (S/N wpo-0deb)Allow-ranges: bytesContent-type: text/htmlLast-modified: Saturday, 28-Dec-96 07:01:12 GMTContent-length: 7808 Canadian Government Commission of Inquiry - Table ofContents Contents | Feedback | Search DRCNet Library | Schaffer Library | Major Studies THE NON-MEDICAL USE OF DRUGS Interim Report of the Canadian Government Commission ofInquiry CONTENTS Chapter 1. THE COMMISSION'SINTERPRETATION OF ITS TASK The Commission's Terms of References The Implications of the Terms of Reference Methods of Inquiry The Role of the Interim Report Staff and Research Chapter 2. THE DRUGS AND THEIREFFECTS 29 Introduction The Role of Science The Classification of Drugs Psychological Considerations Pharmacological Considerations Tolerance and Dependence Scientific Methods A Review of Selected Drugs Barbiturates Medical Use Administration, Absorption, Distribution and PhysiologicalFate Psychological Effects Physiological Effects Tolerance and Dependence Barbiturates and Other Drugs Alcohol Medical Use Administration, Absorption, Distribution and PhysiologicalFate Short-Term Effects Long-Term Effects Tolerance and Dependence Alcohol and Other Drugs Minor Tranquillizers Medical Use Administration, Absorption, Distribution, and PhysiologicalFate Psychological Effects Physiological Effects Tolerance and Dependence Minor Tranquillizers and Other Drugs Amphetamines Medical Use Administration, Absorption, Distribution and PhysiologicalFate Effects Moderate-Dose Effects Tolerance and Dependence with Moderate Doses High-Dose Effects High-Dose Dependency 'Speed Kills' Amphetamines and Other Drugs LSD Medical Use Administration, Absorption, Distribution and PhysiologicalFate Psychological Effects Physiological Effects Tolerance and Dependence LSD and Other Drugs Cannabis Medical Use Administration, Absorption, Distribution and PhysiologicalFate Effects of Cannabis Overview of Effects Physiological Effects Psychological Effects Tolerance and Dependence Cannabis and Other Drugs Initiation of Cannabis Use Some Cannabis Studies of Current Significance I. The 'La Guardia Report' (1944) II. Isbell et al (1967) III. Weil, Zinberg and Nelsen (1969) IV. Jones and Stone (1969) V. Clark and Nakashima (1968) VI. Crancer et al (1969) VII. Robins et al (1969) VIII. ARF's Marijuana Users Study (1970) IX. Report of the Indian Hemp Drugs Commission (1894) Opiate Narcotics Medical Use Administration, Absorption, Distribution and PhysiologicalFate Physiological Effects Psychological Effects Tolerance and Dependence Opiate Narcotics and Crime The Development of Dependence Opiate Narcotics and Other Drugs Volatile Solvents Medical Use Administration, Absorption, Distribution and PhysiologicalFate Effects Tolerance and Dependence Solvents and Other Drugs References and Selected Bibliography Chapter 3. THE EXTENT AND PATTERNS OF NON-MEDICAL DRUG USE INCANADA Introduction Alcohol Barbiturates and Tranquillizers The Barbiturates The Minor Tranquillizers The Amphetamines The 'Speed' Phenomenon LSD and Other Strong Hallucinogens Cannabis Opiate Narcotics Solvents References Chapter 4. SOME CAUSES OFNON-MEDICAL DRUG USE References Chapter 5. PRESENT CANADIAN POLICY - THE LAW Introduction Law and Law Enforcement Some Historical Background International Framework Constitutional Framework Federal Legislation and its Enforcement The Statutes and Administrative Regulations The Role of Possession and Possessional Offences Burden of Proof The Definition of Trafficking Methods of Enforcement Sentencing Policy Empirical Study of Law Enforcement and Correctional System References Chapter 6. THE ISSUES - SOME INTERIM RECOMMENDATIONS Introduction The Effects of the Drugs General Cannabis LSD Amphetamines Multiple Drug Use Drugs and Crime Extent and Patterns of Non-Medical Drug Use Causes of Non-Medical Drug Use Social Response Research, Information and Education The Law Treatment and Supportive Services Prescribing Practices and Controls Disagreement by M.-A. Bertrand References Appendices: APPENDIX A. Submissions to the Commission APPENDIX B. Letters from Private Citizens APPENDIX C. Commissioners and Staff APPENDIX D. Some Surveys of Drug Use Among CanadianHigh School and University Students APPENDIX E. Current Research on Cannabis and OtherDrugs APPENDIX F. Innovative Services GLOSSARY OF SCIENTIFIC AND TECHNICAL TERMS Contents | Feedback | Search DRCNet Library | Schaffer Library | Major Studies WT01-B25-14IA086-000614-B044-188http://206.61.184.43:80/schaffer/History/whiteb1.htm 206.61.184.43 19970122021344 text/html 73436HTTP/1.0 200 OKDate: Wednesday, 22-Jan-97 02:13:36 GMTServer: WebSitePro/1.1f (S/N wpo-0deb)Allow-ranges: bytesContent-type: text/htmlLast-modified: Saturday, 28-Dec-96 05:39:40 GMTContent-length: 73218 History of the Non-Medical Use of Drugs in the UnitedStates Contents | Feedback | Search DRCNet Library | Schaffer Library | Historical Research The History of the Non-Medical Use of Drugs in the UnitedStates by Charles Whitebread, Professor of Law, USC Law School A Speech to the California Judges Association 1995 annualconference Links to Related Documents This speech is derived from The Forbidden Fruit andthe Tree of Knowledge: An Inquiry into the Legal History ofAmerican Marijuana Prohibition by Professor Richard J. Bonnie& Professor Charles H. Whitebread, II In this speech, Professor Whitebread refers to the followingdocuments which are online in this library, either in whole or inpart. The Hearings of theMarihuana Tax Act and related documents. Marihuana, A Signalof Misunderstanding, by the National Commission on Marihuanaand Drug Abuse. Introduction This session is going to be about the history of thenon-medical use of drugs. Let me say that, because this is goingto be a story, that I think it will interest you quite a bit. Thetopic is the history of the non-medical use of drugs and I thinkyou ought to know what my credentials are for talking about thistopic. As you may know, before I taught at the University ofSouthern California, I taught at the University of Virginia forfifteen years, from 1968 to 1981. In that time period, the veryfirst major piece that I wrote was a piece entitled, "TheForbidden Fruit and the Tree of Knowledge - The Legal History ofMarihuana in the United States". I wrote it with ProfessorRichard Bonnie, still of the faculty of the University ofVirginia. It was published in the Virginia Law Review in Octoberof 1970 and I must say that our piece was the Virginia Law Reviewin October of 1970. The piece was 450 pages long. It got a ton ofnational attention because no one had ever done the legal historyof marijuana before. As a result of that, Professor Bonnie wasnamed the Deputy Director of the National Commission on Marihuanaand Drug Abuse and I was a consultant to that commission. As a result of Richard's two year executive directorship ofthe National Commission in 1971 and 1972 he and I were givenaccess to both the open and the closed files of what was thencalled the Bureau of Narcotics and Dangerous Drugs, what hadhistorically been called the Federal Bureau of Narcotics and whattoday is called the Drug Enforcement Agency. Based upon ouraccess to those files, both open and closed, we wrote a bookcalled "The Marihuana Conviction- The Legal History of Drugsin the United States" and that book went through sixprintings at the University of Virginia press before being soldout primarily in sales to my friends at the FBI over the years.It is based upon that work that I bring you this story. The Situation in 1900 If you are interested in the non-medical use of drugs in thiscountry, the time to go back to is 1900, and in some ways themost important thing I am going to say to you guys I will sayfirst. That is, that in 1900 there were far more people addictedto drugs in this country than there are today. Depending uponwhose judgment, or whose assessment, you accept there werebetween two and five percent of the entire adult population ofthe United States addicted to drugs in 1900. Now, there were two principal causes of this dramatic level ofdrug addiction at the turn of the century. The first cause wasthe use of morphine and its various derivatives in legitimatemedical operations. You know as late as 1900, particularly inareas where medical resources were scarce it was not at alluncommon for you to say, let's say you would have appendicitis,you would go into the hospital, and you would get morphine as apain killer during the operation, you would be given morphinefurther after the operation and you would come out of thehospital with no appendix but addicted to morphine. The use of morphine in battlefield operations during the CivilWar was so extensive that, by 1880, so many Union veterans wereaddicted to morphine that the popular press referred tomorphinism as the "soldier's disease". Now I will say,being from Virginia as I am, that the Confederate veterans didn'thave any problems about being addicted to morphine because theSouth was too poor to have any, and therefore battlefieldoperations on the Confederate Army were simply done by choppingoff the relevant limb while they drank a little whiskey. But theNorthern troops heavily found themselves, as the result ofbattlefield operations and the use of morphine, addicted tomorphine. Now, the other fact that I think that is so interesting aboutdrug addiction at the turn of the century, as opposed to today iswho the addicts were, because they were the exact opposite of whoyou would think most likely to be an addict today. If I were toask you in terms of statistical groups who is most likely to beinvolved with drugs today, you would say a young person, a male,who lives in the city and who may be a minority group member.That is the exact opposite of who was most likely to be addictedto drugs at the turn of the century. In terms of statistical groups, who was most likely to beaddicted to drugs at the turn of the century? A rural living,middle-aged white woman. The use of morphine in medicaloperations does not explain the much higher incidence of drugaddiction among women. What does is the second cause of the highlevel of addiction at the turn of the century -- the growth anddevelopment of what we now call the "patent medicine"industry. I think some of you, maybe from watching Westerns on TV ifnothing else are aware that, again, as late as 1900, in areas,particularly rural areas where medical resources were scarce, itwas typical for itinerant salesmen, not themselves doctors, tocruise around the countryside offering potions and elixirs of allsorts advertised in the most flamboyant kinds of terms."Doctor Smith's Oil, Good for What Ails You", or"Doctor Smith's Oil, Good for Man or Beast." Well, what the purveyors of these medicines did not tell theirpurchasers, was that later, when these patent medicines weretested, many of them proved to be up to fifty percent morphine byvolume. Now, what that meant, as I have always thought, was the mostsignificant thing about the high morphine content in patentmedicines was it meant they tended to live up to theiradvertising. Because no matter what is wrong with you, or yourbeast, you are going to feel a whole lot better after a couple ofslugs of an elixir that is fifty percent morphine. So there wasthis tendency to think "Wow! This stuff works." Downyou could go to the general store and get more of it and it couldbe sold to you directly over the counter. Now, for reasons that we weren't able to full research, butfor reasons, I think, probably associated with the role of womenrural societies then patent medicines were much more appealing towomen than to men and account for the much higher incidence ofdrug addiction in 1900 among women than among men. If you want to see a relatively current portrayal of a womanaddicted to patent medicine you might think of Eugene O'Neil'splay "A Long Day's Journey Into Night". The motherfigure there, the one that was played by Katherine Hepburn in themovies was addicted to patent medicines. In any event, the use of morphine in medical operations andthe sale of patent medicines accounted for a dramatic level ofaddiction. Again, between two and five percent of the entireadult population of the United States was addicted to drugs aslate as 1900. Now if my first point is that there was a lot more addictionin 1900 than there is today and that the people who were addictedare quite a different group than the group we would be thinkingof today, my next point would be that if you look at drugaddiction in 1900, what's the number one way in which it isdifferent than drug addiction today? Answer: Almost all addictionat the turn of the century was accidental. People became involved with drugs they did not know that theywere taking, that they did not know the impact of. The firstpoint, then, is that there was more drug addiction than there isnow and most of it was accidental. The Pure Food and Drug Act Then the single law which has done the most in this country toreduce the level of drug addiction is none of the criminal lawswe have ever passed. The single law that reduced drug addictionthe most was the 1906 Pure Food and Drug Act. The Pure Food and Drug Act of 1906 did three things: 1). It created the Food and Drug Administration in Washingtonthat must approve all foods and drugs meant for humanconsumption. The very first impact of that was that the patentmedicines were not approved for human consumption once they weretested. 2) The Pure Food and Drug Act said that certain drugs couldonly be sold on prescription. 3) The Pure Food and Drug Act, (and you know, this is stilltrue today, go look in your medicine chest) requires that anydrug that can be potentially habit-forming say so on it's label."Warning -- May be habit forming." The labeling requirements, the prescription requirements, andthe refusal to approve the patent medicines basically put thepatent medicine business out of business and reduced thatdramatic source of accidental addiction. The Pure Food and DrugAct of 1906, not a criminal law, did more to reduce the level ofaddiction than any other single statute we have passed in all ofthe times from then to now. The Harrison Act The very first criminal law at the Federal level in thiscountry to criminalize the non-medical use of drugs came in 1914.It was called the Harrison Act and there are only three thingsabout the Harrison Act that we need to focus on today. Number one is the date. Did you hear the date, 1914? Some ofyou may have come this morning thinking that we have used thecriminal law to deal with the non-medical use of drugs since thebeginning of the Republic or something. That is not true. Theentire experiment of using the criminal sanction to deal with thenon-medical use of drugs really began in this country in 1914with the Harrison Act. The second interesting thing about the Harrison Act was thedrugs to which it applied, because it applied to almost none ofthe drugs we would be concerned about today. The Harrison Actapplied to opium, morphine and its various derivatives, and thederivatives of the coca leaf like cocaine. No mention anywherethere of amphetamines, barbiturates, marijuana, hashish,hallucinogenic drugs of any kind. The Harrison Act applied onlyto opium, morphine and its various derivatives and derivatives ofthe coca leaf like cocaine. The third and most interesting thing for you all as judgesabout the Harrison Act was its structure, because the structureof this law was very peculiar and became the model for everysingle piece of Federal legislation from 1914 right straightthrough 1969. And what was that model? It was called the Harrison Tax Act. You know, the drafters ofthe Harrison Act said very clearly on the floor of Congress whatit was they wanted to achieve. They had two goals. They wanted toregulate the medical use of these drugs and they wanted tocriminalize the non-medical use of these drugs. They had oneproblem. Look at the date -- 1914. 1914 was probably the highwater mark of the constitutional doctrine we today call"states' rights" and, therefore, it was widely thoughtCongress did not have the power, number one, to regulate aparticular profession, and number two, that Congress did not havethe power to pass what was, and is still known, as a generalcriminal law. That's why there were so few Federal Crimes untilvery recently. In the face of possible Constitutional opposition to what theywanted to do, the people in Congress who supported the HarrisonAct came up with a novel idea. That is, they would masqueradethis whole thing as though it were a tax. To show you how itworked, can I use some hypothetical figures to show you how thisalleged tax worked? There were two taxes. The first (and again, these figuresaren't accurate but they will do to show the idea) tax was paidby doctors. It was a dollar a year and the doctors, in exchangefor paying that one dollar tax, got a stamp from the Governmentthat allowed them to prescribe these drugs for their patients solong as they followed the regulations in the statute. Do you seethat by the payment of that one dollar tax, we have the doctorsregulated? The doctors have to follow the regulations in thestatute. And there was a second tax. (and again, these are hypotheticalfigures but they will show you how it worked.) was a tax of athousand dollars of every single non-medical exchange of everyone of these drugs. Well, since nobody was going to pay athousand dollars in tax to exchange something which, in 1914,even in large quantities was worth about five dollars, the secondtax wasn't a tax either, it was a criminal prohibition. Now justto be sure you guys understand this, and I am sure you do, butjust to make sure, let's say that in 1915 somebody was found,let's say, in possession of an ounce of cocaine out here on thestreet. What would be the Federal crime? Not possession ofcocaine, or possession of a controlled substance. What was thecrime? Tax evasion. And do you see what a wicked web that is going to be? As aquick preview, where then are we going to put the law enforcementarm for the criminalization of drugs for over forty years -- inwhat department? The Treasury Department. Why, we are just outthere collecting taxes and I will show you how that works in aminute. If you understand that taxing scheme then you understand whythe national marijuana prohibition of 1937 was called theMarihuana Tax Act. The Early State Marijuana Laws But before we get to that next big piece of Federallegislation, the marihuana prohibition of 1937, I would like totake a little detour, if I may, into an analysis of the earlystate marijuana laws passed in this country from 1915 to 1937. Let me pause to tell you this. When Professor Bonnie and I setout to try to track the legal history of marijuana in thiscountry, we were shocked that nobody had ever done that workbefore. And, secondly, the few people who had even conjecturedabout it went back to the 1937 Federal Act and said "Well,there's the beginning of it." No. If you go back to 1937,that fails to take account of the fact that, in the period from1915 to 1937, some 27 states passed criminal laws against the useof marijuana. What Professor Bonnie and I did was, unique to ourwork, to go back to the legislative records in those states andback to the newspapers in the state capitols at the time theselaws were passed to try to find out what motivated these 27states to enact criminal laws against the use of marijuana. Whatwe found was that the 27 states divided into three groups byexplanation. The first group of states to have marijuana laws in that partof the century were Rocky Mountain and southwestern states. Bythat, I mean Texas, New Mexico, Colorado, Montana. You didn'thave to go anywhere but to the legislative records to find outwhat had motivated those marijuana laws. The only thing you needto know to understand the early marijuana laws in the southwestand Rocky Mountain areas of this country is to know, that in theperiod just after 1914, into all of those areas was a substantialmigration of Mexicans. They had come across the border in searchof better economic conditions, they worked heavily as rurallaborers, beet field workers, cotton pickers, things of thatsort. And with them, they had brought marijuana. Basically, none of the white people in these states knewanything about marijuana, and I make a distinction between whitepeople and Mexicans to reflect a distinction that any legislatorin one of these states at the time would have made. And all youhad to do to find out what motivated the marijuana laws in theRocky mountain and southwestern states was to go to thelegislative records themselves. Probably the best singlestatement was the statement of a proponent of Texas firstmarijuana law. He said on the floor of the Texas Senate, and Iquote, "All Mexicans are crazy, and this stuff (referring tomarijuana) is what makes them crazy." Or, as the proponentof Montana's first marijuana law said, (and imagine this on thefloor of the state legislature) and I quote, "Give one ofthese Mexican beet field workers a couple of puffs on a marijuanacigarette and he thinks he is in the bullring at Barcelona." Well, there it was, you didn't have to look another foot asyou went from state to state right on the floor of the statelegislature. And so what was the genesis for the early statemarijuana laws in the Rocky Mountain and southwestern areas ofthis country? It wasn't hostility to the drug, it was hostilityto the newly arrived Mexican community that used it. A second group of states that had criminal laws against theuse of marijuana were in the Northeast, Connecticut, RhodeIsland, New York -- had one and then repealed it and then had oneagain -- New Jersey. Well, clearly no hypothesis about Mexicanimmigration will explain the genesis of those laws because, asyou know, the Northeast has never had, still doesn't really, anysubstantial Mexican-American population. So we had to dig alittle deeper to find the genesis of those laws. We had to go notonly to the legislative records but to the newspapers in thestate capitols at the time these laws were passed and what wefound, in the early marijuana laws in the Northeast, we labeledthe "fear of substitution." If I may, let me paraphrasean editorial from the New York Times in 1919 so we will getexactly the flavor of this fear of substitution. The New York Times in an editorial in 1919 said, "No onehere in New York uses this drug marijuana. We have only justheard about it from down in the Southwest," and here comesthe substitution. "But," said the New York Times,"we had better prohibit its use before it gets here.Otherwise" -- here's the substitution concept -- "allthe heroin and hard narcotics addicts cut off from their drug bythe Harrison Act and all the alcohol drinkers cut off from theirdrug by 1919 alcohol Prohibition will substitute this new andunknown drug marijuana for the drugs they used to use." Well, from state to state, on the theory that this newlyencountered drug marijuana would be substituted by the hardnarcotics addicts or by the alcohol drinkers for their previousdrug that had been prohibited, state to state this fear ofsubstitution carried, and that accounted for 26 of the 27 states-- that is, either the anti-Mexican sentiment in the Southwestand Rocky Mountain areas or fear of substitution in theNortheast. That accounted for 26 of the 27 states, and there wasonly one state left over. It was the most important state for usbecause it was the first state ever to enact a criminal lawagainst the use of marijuana and it was the state of Utah. Now, if you have been hearing this story and you have beenplaying along with me, you think "Oh, wait a minute,Whitebread, Utah fits exactly with Colorado, Montana, -- it musthave been the Mexicans." Well, that's what I thought at first. But we went and did acareful study of the actual immigration pattern and found, to oursurprise, that Utah didn't have then, and doesn't have now, areally substantial Mexican-American population. So it had to besomething else. Come on folks, if it had to be something else, what do youthink it might have been? Are you thinking what I was thinking --that it must have had something to do with the single thing whichmakes Utah unique in American history -- its association with theMormon church. With help from some people in Salt Lake City, associated withthe Mormon Church and the Mormon National Tabernacle inWashington -- with their help and a lot of work we found out whatthe genesis was of the first marihuana law in this country. Yes,it was directly connected to the history of Utah and Mormonismand it went like this. I think that a lot of you know that, in its earliest days, theMormon church permitted its male members to have more than onewife -- polygamy. Do you all know that in 1876, in a case calledReynolds against the United States, the United States SupremeCourt said that Mormons were free to believe what they wanted,but they were not free to practice polygamy in this country.Well, who do you think enforced that ruling of the Supreme Courtin 1876? At the end of the line, who enforces all rulings of theSupreme Court? Answer: the state and local police. And who werethey in Utah then? All Mormons, and so nothing happened for manyyears. Those who wanted to live polygamously continued to do so. In 1910, the Mormon Church in synod in Salt Lake City decreedpolygamy to be a religious mistake and it was banned as a matterof the Mormon religion. Once that happened, there was a crackdownon people who wanted to live in what they called "thetraditional way". So, just after 1910, a fairly large numberof Mormons left the state of Utah, and indeed left the UnitedStates altogether and moved into northwest Mexico. They wrote alot about what they wanted to accomplish in Mexico. They wantedto set up communities where they were basically going to convertthe Indians, the Mexicans, and what they referred to as "theheathen" in the neighborhood to Mormonism. By 1914, they had had very little luck with the heathen, butour research shows now beyond question that the heathen had alittle luck with them. What happened apparently -- now some ofyou who may be members of the church, you know that there arestill substantial Mormon communities in northwest Mexico -- wasthat, by and large most of the Mormons were not happy there, thereligion had not done well there, they didn't feel comfortablethere, they wanted to go back to Utah where there friends wereand after 1914 did. And with them, the Indians had given them marijuana. Now onceyou get somebody back in Utah with the marijuana it all becomesvery easy, doesn't it? You know that the Mormon Church has alwaysbeen opposed to the use of euphoriants of any kind. So, somebodysaw them with the marijuana, and in August of 1915 the Church,meeting again in synod in Salt Lake City decreed the use ofmarijuana contrary to the Mormon religion and then -- and this ishow things were in Utah in those days -- in October of 1915, thestate legislature met and enacted every religious prohibition asa criminal law and we had the first criminal law in thiscountry's history against the use of marijuana. That digression into the early state marijuana laws aside, wewill now get back on the Federal track, the year is 1937 and weget the national marijuana prohibition -- the Marihuana Tax Act The Marihuana Tax Act of 1937 Now, first again, does everybody see the date, 1937? You mayhave thought that we have had a national marijuana prohibitionfor a very long time. Frankly, we haven't. The marijuana prohibition is part and parcel of that era whichis now being rejected rather generally -- the New Deal era inWashington in the late 30s. Number two, you know, don't you, that whenever Congress isgoing to pass a law, they hold hearings. And you have seen thesehearings. The hearings can be extremely voluminous, they go onand on, they have days and days of hearings. Well, may I say,that the hearings on the national marijuana prohibition were verybrief indeed. The hearings on the national marijuana prohibitionlasted one hour, on each of two mornings and since the hearingswere so brief I can tell you almost exactly what was said tosupport the national marijuana prohibition. Now, in doing this one at the FBI Academy, I didn't tell themthis story, but I am going to tell you this story. You want toknow how brief the hearings were on the national marijuanaprohibition? When we asked at the Library of Congress for a copy of thehearings, to the shock of the Library of Congress, none could befound. We went "What?" It took them four months tofinally honor our request because -- are you ready for this? --the hearings were so brief that the volume had slid down insidethe side shelf of the bookcase and was so thin it had slid rightdown to the bottom inside the bookshelf. That's how brief theywere. Are you ready for this? They had to break the bookshelfopen because it had slid down inside. There were three bodies of testimony at the hearings on thenational marijuana prohibition. The first testimony came from Commissioner Harry Anslinger,the newly named Commissioner of the Federal Bureau of Narcotics.Now, I think some of you know that in the late 20s and early 30sin this country there were two Federal police agencies created,the FBI and the FBN -- the Federal Bureau of Investigation, andthe Federal Bureau of Narcotics. In our book, I talk at great length about how different thehistory of these two organizations really are. But, the twoorganizations, the FBI and the FBN had some surface similaritiesand one of them was that a single individual headed each of themfor a very long time. In the case of the FBI, it was J. EdgarHoover, and in the case of the FBN it was Harry Anslinger, whowas the Commissioner of the Federal Bureau of Narcotics from 1930until 1962. Commissioner Anslinger gave the Government testimony and Iwill quote him directly. By the way, he was not working from atext that he had written. He was working from a text that hadbeen written for him by a District Attorney in New Orleans, a guynamed Stanley. Reading directly from Mr. Stanley's work,Commissioner Anslinger told the Congressmen at the hearings, andI quote, "Marihuana is an addictive drug which produces inits users insanity, criminality, and death." That was theGovernment testimony to support the marijuana prohibition fromthe Commissioner. The next body of testimony -- remember all of this took atotal of two hours -- uh .. You understand what the idea was,don't you? The idea was to prohibit the cultivation of hemp inAmerica. You all know, because there has been some initiativehere in California, that hemp has other uses than its euphoriantuse. For one, hemp has always been used to make rope. Number two,the resins of the hemp plant are used as bases for paints andvarnishes. And, finally, the seeds of the hemp plant are widelyused in bird seed. Since these industries were going to beaffected the next body of testimony came from the industrialspokesmen who represented these industries. The first person was the rope guy. The rope guy told afascinating story -- it really is fascinating -- the growth of ahemp to make rope was a principle cash crop right where I amfrom, Northern Virginia and Southern Maryland at the time of theRevolutionary War. But, said the rope guy, by about 1820 it gotcheaper to import the hemp we needed to make rope from the FarEast and so now in 1937 we don't grow any more hemp to make ropein this country -- it isn't needed anymore. If you heard that story, there are two things about it that Ifound fascinating. Number one, it explains the long-standingrumor that our forefathers had something to do with marijuana.Yes, they did -- they grew it. Hemp was the principal crop atMount Vernon. It was a secondary crop at Monticello. Now, ofcourse, in our research we did not find any evidence that any ofour forefathers had used the hemp plant for euphoriant purposes,but they did grow it. The second part of that story that, to me is even moreinteresting is -- did you see the date again - 1937? What did therope guy say? We can get all the hemp we need to make rope fromthe Far East, we don't grow it hear anymore because we don't needto. Five years later, 1942, we are cut off from our sources ofhemp in the Far East. We need a lot of hemp to outfit our shipsfor World War II, rope for the ships, and therefore, the FederalGovernment, as some of you know, went into the business ofgrowing hemp on gigantic farms throughout the Midwest and theSouth to make rope to outfit the ships for World War II. So, even to this day, if you are from the Midwest you willalways meet the people who say, "Gosh, hemp grows all alongthe railroad tracks." Well, it does. Why? Because these hugefarms existed all during World War II. But, the rope people didn't care. The paint and varnish peoplesaid "We can use something else." And, of theindustrial spokesmen, only the birdseed people balked. Thebirdseed people were the ones who balked and the birdseed personwas asked, "Couldn't you use some other seed?" These are all, by the way, direct quotes from the hearings.The answer the birdseed guy gave was, "No, Congressman, wecouldn't. We have never found another seed that makes a birdscoat so lustrous or makes them sing so much." So, on the ground that the birdseed people needed it -- didyou know that the birdseed people both got and kept an exemptionfrom the Marihuana Tax Act right through this very day forso-called "denatured seeds"? In any event, there was Anslinger's testimony, there was theindustrial testimony -- there was only one body of testimony leftat these brief hearings and it was medical. There were two piecesof medical evidence introduced with regard to the marijuanaprohibition. The first came from a pharmacologist at Temple University whoclaimed that he had injected the active ingredient in marihuanainto the brains of 300 dogs, and two of those dogs had died. Whenasked by the Congressmen, and I quote, "Doctor, did youchoose dogs for the similarity of their reactions to that ofhumans?" The answer of the pharmacologist was, "Iwouldn't know, I am not a dog psychologist." Well, the active ingredient in marijuana was first synthesizedin a laboratory in Holland after World War II. So what it wasthis pharmacologist injected into these dogs we will never know,but it almost certainly was not the active ingredient inmarijuana. The other piece of medical testimony came from a man named Dr.William C. Woodward. Dr. Woodward was both a lawyer and a doctorand he was Chief Counsel to the American Medical Association. Dr.Woodward came to testify at the behest of the American MedicalAssociation saying, and I quote, "The American MedicalAssociation knows of no evidence that marihuana is a dangerousdrug." What's amazing is not whether that's true or not. What'samazing is what the Congressmen then said to him. Immediatelyupon his saying, and I quote again, "The American MedicalAssociation knows of no evidence that marihuana is a dangerousdrug.", one of the Congressmen said, "Doctor, if youcan't say something good about what we are trying to do, whydon't you go home?" That's an exact quote. The next Congressman said,"Doctor, if you haven't got something better to say thanthat, we are sick of hearing you." Now, the interesting question for us is not about the medicalevidence. The most fascinating question is: why was this legalcounsel to the most prestigious group of doctors in the UnitedStates treated in such a high-handed way? And the answer makes aprinciple thesis of my work -- and that is -- you've seen it,you've been living it the last ten years. The history of drugs inthis country perfectly mirrors the history of this country. So look at the date -- 1937 -- what's going on in thiscountry? Well, a lot of things, but the number one thing wasthat, in 1936, President Franklin Roosevelt was reelected in thelargest landslide election in this country's history till then.He brought with him two Democrats for every Republican, all, oralmost all of them pledged to that package of economic and socialreform legislation we today call the New Deal. And, did you know that the American Medical Association, from1932, straight through 1937, had systematically opposed everysingle piece of New Deal legislation. So that, by 1937, thiscommittee, heavily made up of New Deal Democrats is simply sickof hearing them: "Doctor, if you can't say something goodabout what we are trying to do, why don't you go home?" So, over the objection of the American Medical Association,the bill passed out of committee and on to the floor of Congress.Now, some of you may think that the debate on the floor ofCongress was more extensive on the marijuana prohibition. Itwasn't. It lasted one minute and thirty-two seconds by my countand, as such, I will give it to you verbatim. The entire debate on the national marijuana prohibition was asfollows -- and, by the way, if you had grown up in Washington, DCas I had you would appreciate this date. Are you ready? The billwas brought on to the floor of the House of Representatives --there never was any Senate debate on it not one word -- 5:45Friday afternoon, August 20. Now, in pre-air-conditioningWashington, who was on the floor of the House? Who was on thefloor of the House? Not very many people. Speaker Sam Rayburn called for the bill to be passed on"tellers". Does everyone know "tellers"? Didyou know that for the vast bulk of legislation in this country,there is not a recorded vote. It is simply, more people walk pastthis point than walk past that point and it passes -- it's called"tellers". They were getting ready to pass this thingon tellers without discussion and without a recorded vote whenone of the few Republicans left in Congress, a guy from upstateNew York, stood up and asked two questions, which constituted theentire debate on the national marijuana prohibition. "Mr. Speaker, what is this bill about?" To which Speaker Rayburn replied, "I don't know. It hassomething to do with a thing called marihuana. I think it's anarcotic of some kind." Undaunted, the guy from Upstate New York asked a secondquestion, which was as important to the Republicans as it wasunimportant to the Democrats. "Mr. Speaker, does theAmerican Medical Association support this bill?" In one of the most remarkable things I have ever found in anyresearch, a guy who was on the committee, and who later went onto become a Supreme Court Justice, stood up and -- do youremember? The AMA guy was named William C. Woodward -- a memberof the committee who had supported the bill leaped to his feetand he said, "Their Doctor Wentworth came down here. Theysupport this bill 100 percent." It wasn't true, but it wasgood enough for the Republicans. They sat down and the billpassed on tellers, without a recorded vote. In the Senate there never was any debate or a recorded vote,and the bill went to President Roosevelt's desk and he signed itand we had the national marijuana prohibition. 1938 to 1951 Now, the next step in our story is the period from 1938 to1951. I have three stories to tell you about 1938 to 1951. The first of them. Immediately after the passage of thenational marijuana prohibition, Commissioner Anslinger decided tohold a conference of all the people who knew something aboutmarijuana -- a big national conference. He invited forty-twopeople to this conference. As part our research for the book, wefound the exact transcript of this conference. Ready? The first morning of the conference of the forty-two peoplethat Commissioner Anslinger invited to talk about marijuana, 39of them got up and said some version of "Gee, CommissionerAnslinger, I don't know why you asked me to this conference, Idon't know anything about marijuana." That left three people. Dr. Woodward and his assistant -- youknow what they thought. That left one person -- the pharmacologist from TempleUniversity -- the guy with the dogs. And what do you think happened as a result of that conference?Commissioner Anslinger named the pharmacologist from TempleUniversity the Official Expert of the Federal Bureau of Narcoticsabout marijuana, a position the guy held until 1962. Now, theirony of trying to find out what the drug did after it had beenprohibited -- finding out that only one person agrees with you --and naming him the Official Expert, speaks for itself. The next story from this time period was a particular favoriteof the police groups to whom I spoke at the FBI Academy, becauseit is a law enforcement story. After national marijuana prohibition was passed, CommissionerAnslinger found out, or got reports, that certain people wereviolating the national marijuana prohibition and using marijuanaand, unfortunately for them, they fell into an identifiableoccupational group. Who were flouting the marijuana prohibition?Jazz musicians. And so, in 1947, Commissioner Anslinger sent outa letter, I quote it verbatim, "Dear Agent So-and-so, Pleaseprepare all cases in your jurisdiction involving musicians inviolation of the marijuana laws. We will have a great nationalround-up arrest of all such persons on a single day. I will letyou know what day." That letter went out on, I think, October 24, 1947. Theresponses by the resident agents were all in the file. Myfavorite -- at the bottom line, there wasn't a single residentagent who didn't have reservations about this idea -- came fromthe Hollywood agent. This is the exact letter of the FBN agent incharge in Hollywood. "Dear Commissioner Anslinger, I have your letter of October 24. Please be advised that themusical community here in Hollywood are unionized and very tightwe have been unable to get an informant inside it. So, at thepresent time, we have no cases involving musicians in violationof the marihuana laws." For the next year and a half, Commissioner Anslinger got thosekinds of letters. He never acknowledged any of the problems thatthe agents said they were having with this idea and always wrotethem back the same letter. "Dear Agent so-and-so, Glad to hear you are working hard to give effect to mydirective of October 24, 1947. We will (and he always underlinedthe word 'will') have a great national round-up arrest ofmusicians in violation of the marijuana laws all on a single day.Don't worry, I will let you know what day." This went on -- and, of course, you know that some jazzmusicians were, in fact, arrested in the late 40's -- this allwent on until it ended just the way it began -- with somethingthat Anslinger said. I don't see anybody in here really oldenough to appreciate this point, but Commissioner Anslinger wastestifying before a Senate Committee in 1948. He was saying,"I need more agents." And, of course, the Senatorsasked him why. "Because there are people out there violating themarijuana laws." Well, you know what the Senators asked -- "Who?" And in a moment that every Government employee should avoidlike the plague, Anslinger first said, "Musicians." Butthen he looked up at that Senate committee and he gave them alittle piece of his heart and said the single line which provokedthe most response in this country's history about the non-medicaluse of drugs. Anslinger said, "And I don't mean goodmusicians, I mean jazz musicians." Friends, there is no way to tell you what a torrent ensued.Within 24 hours, 76 newspaper editorials slammed him, includingspecial editions the then booming trade press of the jazz musicindustry. With three days, the Department of the Treasury hadreceived fifteen thousand letters. bunches of them were still inbags when I got there -- never been opened at all. I opened afew. Here was a typical one, and it was darling. "Dear Commissioner Anslinger, I applaud your efforts to rid America of the scourge ofnarcotics addiction. If you are as ill-informed about that as youare about music, however, you will never succeed." One of the things that we had access to that really was funwas the Commissioner's own appointment book for all of his years.And, five days after he says "I don't mean good musicians, Imean jazz musicians." there is a notation: 10 AM --appointment with the Secretary of the Treasury." Well, Idon't know what happened at that appointment, but from thatappointment on, no mention is ever made again of the greatnational round-up arrest of musicians in violation of themarijuana laws all on a single day, much to the delight of theagents who never had any heart for it in the first place. The final story from this period is my favorite story fromthis period, by far, and, again, there is simply nobody here whois really old enough to appreciate this story. You know, if youtalk to your parents -- that's the generation we really need totalk to -- people who were adults during the late 30's and 40's.And you talk to them about marijuana in particular you would beamazed at the amazing reputation that marijuana has among thegeneration ahead of you as to what it does to its users. In the late 30's and early 40's marihuana was routinelyreferred to as "the killer drug", "the assassin ofyouth". You all know "reefer madness", right?Where did these extraordinary stories that circulated in thiscountry about what marijuana would do to its users come from? The conventional wisdom is that Anslinger put them over onAmericans in his effort to compete with Hoover forempire-building, etc. I have to say, in some fairness, that oneof the things that our research did, in some sense, was torehabilitate Commissioner Anslinger. Yes, there was some of thatbut, basically, it wasn't just that Anslinger was trying to dupepeople. The terrific reputation that marijuana got in the late 30s andearly 40s stemmed from something Anslinger had said. Doeseverybody remember what Anslinger said about the drug?"Marihuana is an addictive drug which produces in its usersinsanity, criminality, and death." Well, this time the magic word -- come along lawyers outthere, where's the magic word? -- Insanity. Marihuana use, saidthe Government, would produce insanity. And, sure enough, in the late 30s and early 40s, in fivereally flamboyant murder trials, the defendant's sole defense wasthat he -- or, in the most famous of them, she -- was not guiltyby reason of insanity for having used marijuana prior to thecommission of the crime. All right, it's time to take you guys back to class here. Ifyou are going to put on an insanity defense, what do you need?You need two things, don't you? Number one, you need an ExpertWitness. Where, oh where, in this story, are we going to find an expertwitness? Here it comes -- sure enough -- the guy from TempleUniversity -- the guy with the dogs. I promise you, you are notgoing to believe this. In the most famous of these trials, what happened was twowomen jumped on a Newark, New Jersey bus and shot and killed androbbed the bus driver. They put on the marijuana insanitydefense. The defense called the pharmacologist, and of course,you know how to do this now, you put the expert on, you say"Doctor, did you do all of this experimentation and soon?" You qualify your expert. "Did you write all aboutit?" "Yes, and I did the dogs" and now he is anexpert. Now you ask him what? You ask the doctor "What haveyou done with the drug?" And he said, and I quote,"I've experimented with the dogs, I have written somethingabout it and" -- are you ready -- "I have used the drugmyself." What do you ask him next? "Doctor, when you used thedrug, what happened?" With all the press present at this flamboyant murder trial inNewark New Jersey, in 1938, the pharmacologist said, and I quote,in response to the question "When you used the drug, whathappened?", his exact response was: "After two puffs ona marijuana cigarette, I was turned into a bat." He wasn't done yet. He testified that he flew around the roomfor fifteen minutes and then found himself at the bottom of atwo-hundred-foot high ink well Well, friends, that sells a lot of papers. What do you thinkthe Newark Star Ledger headlines the next day, October 12, 1938?"Killer Drug Turns Doctor to Bat!" What else do we need to put on an insanity defense? We needthe defendant's testimony -- himself or herself. OK, you putdefendant on the stand, what do you ask? "What happened onthe night of . ." "Oh, I used marijuana." "And then what happened?" And, if the defendant wants to get off, what is he or shegoing to say? "It made me crazy." You know what the women testified? In Newark they testified,and I quote, "After two puffs on a marijuana cigarette myincisor teeth grew six inches long and dripped with blood." This was the craziest business you ever saw. Every one ofthese so-called marijuana insanity defenses were successful. The one in New York was just outlandish. Two police officerswere shot and killed in cold blood. The defendant puts on themarijuana insanity defense and, in that case, there was nevereven any testimony that the defendant had even used marijuana.The testimony in the New York case was that, from the time thebag of marijuana came into his room it gave off "homicidalvibrations", so he started killing dogs, cats, andultimately two police officers. Commissioner Anslinger, sitting in Washington, seeing thesemarijuana insanity defenses, one after another successful, hewrites to the pharmacologist from Temple University and says,"If you don't stop testifying for the defense in thesematters, we are going to revoke your status as the OfficialExpert of the Federal Bureau of Narcotics." He didn't wantto lose his status, so he stopped testifying, nobody else wouldtestify that marijuana had turned them into a bat, and so theseinsanity defenses were over but not before marijuana had gottenquite a reputation, indeed. The next step -- and now we are going to move very quicklyhere -- in 1951. We get a whole new drug law called the Boggs Actand it is important to us for only two reasons. Number one, it reflects what I am going to call the formulafor drug legislation in this country. Here is the formula. Theformula really is always the same, think about it in ourlifetime. The formula is that someone, and by the way, that someone isusually the media, perceive an increase in drug use. What's theanswer? The answer in the history of this country is always thesame -- a new criminal law with harsher penalties in every singleoffense category. Where did the perception come from this time? Well, if youhave ever seen movies from this time period like High SchoolConfidential, the perception was that kids in high school werestarting to use drugs. What's the answer? The answer is alwaysthe same. The Boggs Act of 1951 quadrupled the penalties in everysingle offense category and, by the way, the Boggs Act had awhole new rationale for the marijuana prohibition. Do you remember the old rationale -- that marijuana was anaddictive drug which caused in its users insanity, criminality,and death? Just before Anslinger was to testify on the Boggs Act,the doctor who ran for the Government the Lexington, Kentuckynarcotics rehabilitation clinic testified ahead of Anslinger andtestified that the medical community knew that marijuana wasn'tan addictive drug,. It doesn't produce death, or insanity, andinstead of producing criminality, it probably produces passivity,said the doctor. Who was the next witness? Anslinger. And, if you see, that therug had been pulled out from under everything he had said in the1937 hearings to support the marijuana prohibition. In what Icall a really slick Federal shuffle -- Anslinger, you know, hadbeen bitten bad enough by what he said, he didn't want that again-- he said, the doctor is right, marijuana -- he always believed,by the way, that there was something in marijuana which producedcriminality -- is not an addictive drug, it doesn't produceinsanity or death but it is "the certain first step on theroad to heroin addiction." And the notion that marijuana wasthe stepping stone to heroin became, in 1951, the sole rationalefor the national marijuana prohibition. It was the first timethat marijuana was lumped with all the other drugs and nottreated separately, and we multiply the penalties in everyoffense category. By the way, I told you that the history of drug legislationreflects the history of the country. 1951, what's going on? TheKorean War, the Cold War. It didn't take the press a minute tosee this perceived use in drug use among high school kids as our"foreign enemies", using drugs to subvert the Americanyoung. In our book, we have ten or fifteen great politicalcartoons. My favorite is a guy with a big Fu Man Chu (mustache)labeled "Oriental Communism." He has a big needlemarked "Dope" and he has the American kids lying down-- "Free World" it is marked. There it was -- that ourforeign enemies were going to use drugs to subvert the Americanyoung. What did we do? We passed a new law that increased thepenalties in every offense category by a factor of four. Well, now once you buy it, the ball is going to roll likecrazy. 1956 and the Daniel Act 1956, we get another new drug law, called the Daniel Act,named for Senator Price Daniel of Texas. It is important to usfor only two reasons. One, it perfectly reflects the formulaagain. What is the formula? Somebody perceives an increase indrug use in this country and the answer is always a new criminallaw with harsher penalties in every offense category. Where did the perception in 1956 come from that there was anincrease in drug use? Answer: Anybody remember 1956? In 1956, wehad the first set ever of televised Senate hearings. And whosehearings were they? They were the hearings of Senator EstesKefauver of Tennessee about organized crime in America. These hearings, which everybody watched on their little setsshowed two things that we all know today, but it sure made theirsocks roll up and down then. Number one, there is organized crimein America and number two, it makes all its money selling drugs.There it was, that was all the perception we needed. We passedthe Daniel Act which increased the penalties in every offensecategory, that had just been increased times four -- times eight. With the passage of each of these acts, the states passedlittle Boggs acts, and little Daniel acts, so that in the period1958 to 1969, in the Commonwealth of Virginia, and Virginia wastypical, the most heavily penalized crime in the Commonwealth waspossession of marijuana, or any other drug. It led to a mandatory minimum sentence of twenty years, nopart of which you were eligible for parole or probation, and asto no part of it were you eligible for a suspended sentence. Just to show you where it was, in the same time period firstdegree murder in Virginia had a mandatory minimum sentence offifteen years. Rape, a mandatory minimum sentence of ten years.Possession of marijuana -- not to mention sales of marijuana withits mandatory minimum of forty years -- mandatory minimum oftwenty years. That is the situation in 1969 when we have a new drug law, thefirst one in this country's history that does not follow theformula. It is the 1969 Dangerous Substances Act. For he firsttime in this country's history, we have a perception of anincrease in drug use during the Sixties, but instead of raisingthe penalties, we lower them. And, further, in the DangerousSubstances Act of 1969, for the first time we finally abandon theso-called "taxing" mythology. In the 1969 Act, what the Federal law does is, it takes allthe drugs we know -- if you can't fill in this next blank, youare in trouble -- except two -- which two? Which two are nevergoing to be mentioned? Nicotine and alcohol. But, other thannicotine and alcohol -- every other drug. By the way, I tried this with the FBI for twenty years andthey wouldn't listen, and you won't listen either but, I am goingto try. If you are going to go out and talk about drugs andwhatever you are going to do with drugs, will you please discardthe entirely antiquated and erroneous word "narcotics."Narcotics are drugs that put people to sleep. Almost all of thedrugs that we are interested in today don't do that. So, in 1969, the Dangerous Substances Act gave up the effortto define what are narcotic drugs. What the 1969 act did, andwhat most state laws still do, is to classify all drugs exceptnicotine and alcohol by two criteria. What is the drug's medicaluse? And, what is the drug's potential for abuse? We put all the drugs, by those two criteria, in schedules, andthen we tie the penalties for possession, possession with intentto sell, sale, and sale to a minor to the schedule of the drug inquestion. Now, again, I am no good at this anymore, I have notkept up with the drug laws, I don't know who is in what schedule,and many states have abandoned the schedule but, to give you aflavor of it: The first schedule, Schedule One Drugs were drugsthat had little or no medical use and a high potential for abuse.What's going to go in there? LSD, marijuana, hashish, they areall in Schedule One -- little or no medical use and a highpotential for abuse. Then you get some medical use, high potential for abuse --what do you want there? Barbiturates, amphetamines,. Then we are going to get what? High medical use and highpotential for abuse. Morphine, codeine. Codeine is the best onebecause codeine is in almost every single prescription coughmedicine and it is addictive as can be. Then you go on down and get the antibiotics -- high medicaluse, almost no potential for abuse, and there you are. Once you schedule your drugs, you then tie the penalties forthe drugs to the schedule and then, because in 1969 they wantedto reduce the marijuana penalties they had to deal with marijuanaseparately and did so. But the 1969 act important for two reasons again: One, weabandoned the taxing mythology and; two, it was the first law inthis country's history that, instead of raising the penalties inevery offense category, lowered them. Well, then you know what happened. We get the War on Drugs.You know how it all went down. We got perceptions in the 80s thatthere was an increase in drug use, a great dramatic decision todeclare war on drugs and, predominantly, war on drug users. What I want to say to you is this, and this is where I thinksome of you are going to be a little surprised. You know as muchabout that process as I do. You watched it. You saw how we hadone law after another, raising the penalties so that as late as1990, thirty percent of the minority group population of the Cityof Baltimore who are male and between 20 and 29 are under courtsupervision for drugs. Thirty percent, that's the number you arelooking for. The War on Drugs, a very interesting war, because why? It wascheap to fight. It was cheap to fight at first -- why? You heardme in the "Recent Decisions" talk. What was last year'sbig moment, and the year before? The change in cheap and easyforfeiture. Criminal forfeiture was used to make this a costlesswar. That is, easy forfeiture from those who were caught allowedus to pay for the war in that way. I think we are going to havesome real questions about whether people want to pay for the waron drugs through their taxes because now the Court has madeforfeiture much, much more difficult in their overall concern forproperty rights. But here is what I think may surprise some of you. You guysknow as much about the War on Drugs as I do. I didn't come hearto talk, or to harangue, or to give you any opinions on thatpoint. I think it speaks for itself. It is a failure and I thinkit will be judged as a failure. What I wanted to bring youinstead was, instead of talking about that that everybody istalking about -- and you guys will ultimately resolve it and youguys are the ones who are seeing all the drug cases, day in andday out, and always will, until this changes. But, what I thoughtI could bring you was the part of the story you hadn't heard --how we got to where we were when the War on Drugs was declared. Conclusion - The Issue of Prohibition And one other thing I want to do with you this morning, andthat's this -- I want to say one thing. To tell you the realtruth, my interest isn't in drugs, or in the criminalization ofdrugs although I think we should abolish the criminal penaltiesfor drugs, and deal with it as the Europeans do in a medical way,but who cares? That's an opinion. What interests me though, isn't drugs. What interests me isthat larger issue, and the reason that I wrote the piece, and thereason they were my tenure pieces, I am interested in a muchlarger issue, and that is the idea of Prohibition -- the use ofcriminal law to criminalize conduct that a large number of usseem to want to engage in. And, for my purposes, -- now, Professor Bonnie went on to beassociated with NIDA and with all kinds of drug-relatedorganizations and continues to be interested in the drug laws --I am not. My interest is in criminal prohibitions and, for mypurposes, as a criminal law scholar, we could have used anyprohibition -- alcohol prohibition, the prohibition againstgambling that exists still in many states. How about theprohibition in England from 1840 to 1880 against the drinking ofgin? Not drinking, just gin -- got it? We could have used any ofthese prohibitions. We didn't. We chose the marijuana prohibitionbecause the story had never been told -- and it is an amazingstory. We could have used any of these prohibitions. We could haveused the alcohol prohibition. The reason we didn't is because somuch good stuff has been written about it. And are you aware ofthis? That every single -- you know how fashionable it is tothink that scholars can never agree? -- Don't you believe that --Every single person who has ever written seriously about thenational alcohol prohibition agrees on why it collapsed. Why? Because it violated that iron law of Prohibitions. What is theiron law of Prohibitions? Prohibitions are always enacted by US,to govern the conduct of THEM. Do you have me? Take the alcoholprohibition. Every single person who has ever written about itagrees on why it collapsed. Large numbers of people supported the idea of prohibition whowere not themselves, opposed to drinking. Do you have me? What?The right answer to that one is Huh? Want to hear it again? Large numbers of people supported the idea of prohibition whowere not themselves, opposed to drinking. Want to see it? Let me give you an example, 1919. You are a Republican inupstate New York. Whether you drink, or you don't, you are forthe alcohol prohibition because it will close the licensedsaloons in the City of New York which you view to be the corruptpatronage and power base of the Democratic Party in New York. Soalmost every Republican in New York was in favor of nationalalcohol prohibition. And, as soon as it passed, what do you thinkthey said? "Well, what do you know? Success. Let's have adrink." That's what they thought, "let's have adrink." "Let's drink to this." A great success,you see. Do you understand me? Huge numbers of people in this countrywere in favor of national alcohol prohibition who were notthemselves opposed to drinking. I just want to go back to the prohibition against the drinkingof gin. How could a country prohibit just the drinking of gin,not the drinking of anything else for forty years? Answer: Therich people drank whiskey and the poor people drank what? -- gin.Do you see it? Let's try the gambling prohibition. You know when I came toVirginia, this was a very lively issue, the gambling prohibition.By the way, I think it's a lively issue in California. Are youready for it? Have you ever seen the rhetoric that goes around the gamblingprohibition? You know what it is. Look, we have had a good time.We have been together yesterday, we have been together today, Ihave known a lot of you guys for ages. How about after the talk,we have a minute or two, let's go on up to your room and we willplay a little nickel, dime, quarter poker. Want to play somepoker this afternoon? Why not? It's a nice thing to do. Would we be outraged if the California State Police camebarreling through the door and arrested us for violation ofCalifornia's prohibition on gambling? Of course we would.Because, who is not supposed to gamble? Oh, you know who is notsupposed to gamble -- them poor people, that's who. My God, theywill spend the milk money. They don't know how to control it.They can't handle it. But us? We know what we are doing. That's it. Every criminal prohibition has that same touch toit, doesn't it? It is enacted by US and it always regulates theconduct of THEM. And so, if you understand that is the name ofthe game, you don't have to ask me, or any of the other peoplewhich prohibitions will be abolished and which ones won't becauseyou will always know. The iron law of prohibitions -- all of them-- is that they are passed by an identifiable US to control theconduct of an identifiable THEM. And a prohibition is absolutely done for when it does what?Comes back and bothers US. If, at any time, in any way, thatprohibition comes back and bothers us, we will get rid of it forsure, every doggone time. Look at the alcohol prohibition if youwant a quick example. As long as it is only THEM --- you know,them criminals, them crazy people, them young people, themminority group members --- we are fine. But any prohibition thatcomes back and bothers US is done for. Let's just try the marijuana prohibition as a quick one. Whodo you think was arrested 650,000 strong two years ago forviolation of the marijuana laws? Do you think it was all minoritygroup members? Nope. It was not. It was some very identifiablechildren of US -- children of the middle class. You don't have toanswer my opinion. No prohibition will stand -- ever-- when itcomes back and penalizes our children -- the children of US whoenacted it. And in fact, do you have any real doubt about that?Do you know what a fabulous sociological study we will be if webecome the first society in the history of the world to penalizethe sons and daughters of the wealthy class? Unheard of. And so, yeah, we will continue the War on Drugs for a whileuntil everybody sees its patent bankruptcy. But, let me say thatI am not confident that good sense will prevail. Why? Because welove this idea of prohibition. We really do. We love it in thiscountry. And so I will tell you what I predict. You will alwaysknow which ones are going out and which ones are coming in. And,can't you see the one coming right over the hill? Well, folks, weare going to have a new prohibition because we love this ideathat we can solve difficult medical, economic, and socialproblems by the simple enactment of a criminal law. We adorethis, and of course, you judges work it out, we have solved ourproblem. Do you have it? Our problem is over with the enactmentof the law. You and the cops work it out, but we have solved ourproblem. Here comes the new one? What's it going to be? No, it won't beguns, this one starts easy. This one is the Surgeon General haswhat? --Determined -- not "we want a little more checking itout", not "we need a few more studies", not"reasonable people disagree" -- "The SurgeonGeneral has determined that the smoking of cigarettes will killyou." Now, all you need, and here is my formula, for a newprohibition every time is what? We need an intractable,difficult, social, economic, or medical problem. But that is notenough. There has to be another thing. It has to divide by class--- by social or economic class, between US and THEM. And so, here it comes. ' You know the Federal Government has been spending a lot ofmoney since 1968 trying to persuade us not to smoke. And, indeed,the absolute numbers on smoking have declined very little. But,you know who has quit smoking, don't you? In gigantic numbers?The college-educated, that's who. The college-educated, that'swho doesn't smoke. Who are they? Tomorrow's what? Movers andkickers, that's who. Tomorrow's movers and kickers don't smoke.Who does smoke? Oh, you know who smokes out of all proportion totheir numbers in the society -- it is the people standing in yourcriminal courtrooms, that's who. Who are they? Tomorrow's movedand kicked, that's who. And, there it is friends, once it divides between the moversand kickers and the moved and kicked it is all over and it willbe all over very shortly. It starts with "You know, they shouldn't smoke, they arekilling themselves." Then it turns, as it has -- you see theads out here -- "They shouldn't smoke, they are killingus." And pretty soon, that class division will happen, wewill have the legislatures full of tomorrow's movers and kickersand they are going to say just what they are going to say anytime now. "You know, this has just gotta stop, and we got ananswer for it." We are going to have a criminal statute thatforbids the manufacture, sale, or possession of tobaccocigarettes, or tobacco products period. You know that the cigarette companies are expecting it. Whathave they been doing? They have been shifting all of theiroperations out of the United States and diversifying like crazy.Where are they going to sell their cigarettes? In China, that'swhere. And they are already moving, because they see it and I seeit. Ready? What are we going to have? You know what we are goingto have. One day -- when's it gonna happen, ten years, fifteen?-- some legislator will get up and, just as though it had neverbeen said before, "You know we gotta solve this smokingproblem and I got a solution -- a criminal prohibition againstthe manufacture, sale, or possession of tobacco cigarettes."And then you know what happens. Then everybody who did want acigarette here today, if there is anyone here who smokes, you aregoing to have to hide in the bathroom. And cigarettes are nolonger going to be three dollars a pack, they are going to bethree dollars a piece. And who's going to sell them to you? Whowill always sell them to you? The people who will sell youanything -- organized crime. You got the concept, we will gothrough the whole darn thing again because I am telling you thiscountry is hooked on the notion of prohibition. Let me conclude, and again this is my prediction -- I willtell you I don't think it is subject to opinion. Just look at it.Just take a look at what has happened now and what will happen. Iwill tell you how inexorable it is. If we get together here inthe year 2005, I will bet you that it is as likely as not thatthe possession of marijuana may not be criminal in this state.But the manufacture, sale, and possession of tobacco will be, andwhy? Because we love this idea of prohibitions, we can't livewithout them. They are our very favorite thing because we knowhow to solve difficult, social, economic, and medical problems --a new criminal law with harsher penalties in every category foreverybody. Contents | Feedback | Search DRCNet Library | Schaffer Library | Historical Research WT01-B25-15IA031-000651-B019-248http://206.61.184.43:80/schaffer/LIBRARY/studies/cu/cumenu.htm 206.61.184.43 19970122122728 text/html 2596HTTP/1.0 200 OKDate: Wednesday, 22-Jan-97 12:27:12 GMTServer: WebSitePro/1.1f (S/N wpo-0deb)Allow-ranges: bytesContent-type: text/htmlLast-modified: Wednesday, 01-Jan-97 22:45:01 GMTContent-length: 2378 Consumers Union Report on Licit and Illicit Drugs - Tableof Contents Contents | Feedback | Search DRCNet Library | Schaffer Library | Major Studies The Consumers Union Report on Licit and Illicit Drugs by Edward M. Brecher and the Editors of ConsumerReports Magazine, 1972 Table of Contents Chapter 6 - Opium smoking is outlawed Chapter 7 - The Pure Food and Drugs Act of1906 Chapter 12 - The heroin"overdose" mystery and other occupational hazardsof heroin addiction Chapter 44 - How to Launch aNationwide Drug Menace Contents | Feedback | Search DRCNet Library | Schaffer Library | Major StudiesWT01-B25-16IA031-000651-B019-276http://206.61.184.43:80/schaffer/LIBRARY/studies/dwda/dwdamenu.htm 206.61.184.43 19970122122739 text/html 3396HTTP/1.0 200 OKDate: Wednesday, 22-Jan-97 12:27:32 GMTServer: WebSitePro/1.1f (S/N wpo-0deb)Allow-ranges: bytesContent-type: text/htmlLast-modified: Saturday, 28-Dec-96 07:11:14 GMTContent-length: 3179 Dealing with Drug Abuse -- Table of Contents Contents | Feedback | Search DRCNet Library | Schaffer Library | Major Studies Dealing with Drug Abuse A Report to the Ford Foundation THE DRUG ABUSE SURVEY PROJECT Patricia M. Wald, Co-chairman, Peter Barton Hutt, Co-chairman James V. DeLong, Executive Director Edgar May, Annette Abrams, Peter A. Wilson, Peter B. Goldberg,John F. Holahan, Paul A. Hermingsen, Andrew T. Weil, M.D. Contents Foreword, by McGeorge Bundy Preface, by Patricia M. Wald andPeter Barton Hutt The Drug Abuse Survey Project: Summary of Findings, Conclusions, andRecommendations, by Patricia M. Wald and Peter Barton Hutt Staff Papers 1. The Drugs and Their Effects, byJames V. DeLong 2. Drug Education, by Patricia M.Wald and Annette Abrams 3. Treatment and Rehabilitation, byJames V. DeLong 4. The Economics of Heroin, by JohnF. Holahan, with the assistance of Paul A. Henningsen 5. Federal Expenditures on Drug-AbuseControl, by Peter B. Goldberg and James V. DeLong 6. Altered States of Consciousness,by Andrew T. Weil, M.D. 7. Narcotics Addiction and Control inGreat Britain, by Edgar May The Contributors Contents | Feedback | Search DRCNet Library | Schaffer Library | Major StudiesWT01-B25-17IA031-000651-B019-306http://206.61.184.43:80/schaffer/LIBRARY/studies/duapip/pipmenu.htm 206.61.184.43 19970122122749 text/html 23916HTTP/1.0 200 OKDate: Wednesday, 22-Jan-97 12:27:39 GMTServer: WebSitePro/1.1f (S/N wpo-0deb)Allow-ranges: bytesContent-type: text/htmlLast-modified: Saturday, 28-Dec-96 07:12:42 GMTContent-length: 23698 Drug Use In America: Problem in Perspective - Table ofContents Contents | Feedback | Search DRCNet Library | Schaffer Library | Major Studies Marihuana, A Signal ofMisunderstanding The Report of the National Commission on Marihuana and DrugAbuse Drug Use In America: Problem in Perspective Commissioned by President Richard M. Nixon, March, 1972 Table of Contents Letter of Transmittal Introduction Chapter One -- Defining the Issues Definitional Confusion: What is Drug Abuse? "Drug"-The All-Purpose Concept Drug Abuse: Synonym for Social Disapproval The Roots of a "Problem" The Social Response: False Premises and the Perpetuation of a Problem The Assumptions and Premises of Present Policy Elimination of Non-Medical Drug Use Risk-Taking and Health Motivation for Mood Alteration Drugs and Individual Responsibility An Overview of the Present Response Risk-Education Coercion Sickness Perpetuating the Problem Defining the Problem The Meaning of Drug Use The Incidence of Drug Use Drug Using Behavior Drug-Related Risk Risks to Individual Health Drug-Induced Behavior Dependence Liability Evaluating the Social Consequences of Drug Use Defining America's Drug Problem The Limits of Social Control The Commission's Role Chapter Two Drug Using Behavior in the United States I. Drug Use in the General Population Tobacco and Alcohol Use of Proprietary and Ethical Psychoactive Substances Incidence and Prevalance Demographic Characteristics Motivations for Use Multi-Drug Use Alcohol, Ethical and Proprietary Psychoactive Drugs Marihuana and Ethical and Proprietary Psychoactive Drugs Concurrent Drug Usage Illicit Drug Use in the General Population Marihuana LSD, Other Hallucinogens Glue, Other Inhalants Cocaine Heroin Multi-Drug Use II. Drug Use Among Students Survey Methodology Comparative National Survey Student Data Incidence of Student Drug Use Alcohol Marihuana Inhalants Hallucinogens Stimulants Depressants Opiates Patterns of Student Drug Use Present and Future Drug Involvement Frequency and Intensity of Drug Use Duration of Student Drug Use Multi-Drug Use III. A Typology of Drug-Using Behavior Experimental Use Social-Recreational Use Circumstantial-Situational Use Intensified Drug Use Compulsive Drug Use IV. Psychosocial and Institutional Influences on Drug-Using Behavior Broad Cultural Influences Drugs and Youth Experimentation, Availability and Need Personal Dissatisfaction and the Search for "Something of Value" Age and Responsibility The Impact of Extended Education Institutional Sources of Identity Mood Alteration in America Factors Bearing on Drug Dependence A Final Note Chapter Three The Social Impact of Drug Dependence andDrug-Induced Behavior I. Drug Dependence Terminological Confusion Addiction Habituation The Search for Precision Drug Dependence Excising "Addiction" Toward a Functional Understanding of Drug Dependence Psychological Dependence: The Primary Reinforcer The Pharmacological Component: Reinforcement Potential Psycho-Social Components The Development of Dependence: Conditioning The Dependence Continuum Measuring the Degree of Dependence: Psychological Components Physical Dependence: The Secondary Reinforcer Summary Evaluating the Social Impact of Drug Dependence Dependence, Health and Behavior The Vulnerability Factor The Relevance of Social Response Present Social Impact Alcohol Heroin Barbiturates Amphetamines and Related Stimulants Cocaine Hallucinogens Cannabis II. Drug Induced Behavior Impact on Perception Impact on Memory Alteration of Mental States Impairment of Psychomotor Function Summary III.Impact on Public Safety Drugs and Crime Drugs and Their Criminogenic Effects Alcohol Marihuana Barbiturates Amphetamines Opiates Cocaine Hallucinogens Other Psychoactive Substances Summary Psychosocial Characteristics of Drug-Dependent Persons: Implications for Public Safety Social and Demographic Characteristics Age Educational Status Income, Occupation and Employment Status Home Environment and Marital Status Psychological Characteristics Problems in Inferring Causation The Costs of Heroin Dependence Cost to the Heroin-Dependent Person Cost to Society from Criminal Activity Criminal Justice Costs: Processing the Drug-Dependent Person The Effect of Drug Treatment on Crime Current Research Findings A Realistic Appraisal Drugs and Driving Research Limitations Research Findings Alcohol Marihuana Other Psychoactive Substances IV. Impact on Public Health and Welfare Public Health and Welfare: A Preventive Concept Assessing the Public Health and Welfare Impact of Drug Use The Population of Heavy Alcohol Users Economic Loss Death Alcohol Heroin Barbiturates Medical Complications of Chronic Drug Use Impact on the Family Structure Compensatory Social Costs Framing a Public Health Response Chapter Four Toward a Coherent Social Policy The Process Goals and Premises Drugs and Social Responsibility Irresponsible Use Discouragement and Social Tolerance Responsible Decision Making Risks and Perceived Advantages Designing a Differential Response to Drug Use I. The Availability Decision Models of Availability The Calculus: An Overview Relative Social Cost Efficacy of Controls Cost of Controls The Social Context of the Availability Decision The Present System Availability Not Limited As To Purpose of Consumption Availability Limited As To Purpose of Consumption Substances Not Available For Consumption Specific Recommendations Opiates Cocaine Amphetamines Barbiturates Non-Barbiturate Sedatives Minor Tranquilizers Hallucinogens Marihuana Alcohol Implementing Restrictions on Availability The Role of International Agreements Federal Enforcement Policy State Enforcement Policy II. The Consumption-Intervention Decision An Overview of the Possession Offense Deviance, Deterrence and Symbolism Philosophical Conflict Constitutionality Functional Overview Deterrence Social Costs of Enforcement Possession and Supply Symbolism Sickness and Treatment Origins of the Cult of Curability Addiction and Treatment: The Early Days The Therapeutic Premise Takes Hold Therapeutic Intervention Comes Under Attack Harnessing the Therapeutic Response Involuntary "Civil" Commitment: The Problems of a Therapeutic Response Therapy and the Criminal Process Dangerousness and Prevention Crime and the Public Safety Contagion and the Public Health and Welfare The Appropriate Role of Preventive Intervention Conclusion: The Possession Offense and Its Enforcement Functional Enforcement Role of the Police III. Defining the Government's Role Governmental Competence General Guidelines Analyzing the Government Response An Overview of the Government Response The Special Action Office: A Stopgap Failures of the Present System Identification of the Nature and Extent of Drug Use Definition of goals and objectives for drug-related functions Effective planning Affective control of resource allocation Coordination among federal agencies Drug-related functions within agencies whose primary mission is not solving drug problems Evaluation of programs in terms of their effectiveness Evaluation of programs in terms of efficiency Separation of drug and alcohol activities Reorganizing the Governmental Response Bringing the Drug Effort Under Control The Structure of the Unified Approach Organization of Response at the Community Level IV. Treatment and Rehabilitation An Overview of the Present Response Uncertainty About the Illness Uncertainty About the Objective of Treatment Diversity of Method History of the Treatment of Opiate Dependence 1870-1900: The Early Years 1900-1915: Years of Optimism 1915-1930: Confidence Wanes 1930-1960: The Dry Years The Sixties: Society Turns to Therapy Again Present Methods and Models of Treatment Hospitalization Ambulatory Drug-Free Treatment Therapeutic Communities Methadone Maintenance Antagonist Treatment Multi-Modality Programs Treatment for Non-Opiate Drug Dependence The Role of the Law in Treatment Legal Controls as Therapy Civil Procedures Criminal Procedures Legal Control of the Treatment Process Heroin Maintenance Conclusions and Recommendations on Treatment of Dependence Federal Funding and Services Federal Evaluation State Treatment Programs The Role of the Legal System in State Programs Uniformity of State Law Emergency Treatment of Drug Users V. Prevention The Information-Education Explosion Goals of Information-Education Prevention Information Policy Education Training The Media and Drug Use Prevention Other Prevention Strategies and Techniques Summary and Conclusion VI. Research A New Interest in Research The Need for a Directed Research Plan Incidence, Frequency and Intensity of Drug Use Etiology and Consequences of Drug Use The Role of the Criminal Justice System Efficacy of Treatment Other Areas VII. The Private Response The Health Professions Pharmaceutical Industry Alcohol Industry Legal Profession Industry Colleges and Universities Mass Media The Religious Community The Family Chapter Five Looking Ahead The Immediate Future: The Goal of the Commission's Recommendations Changing Attitudes Filling the Informational Gaps Unifying the Government Response Developing the Private Response Improving Controls on Availability Rationalizing Consumption Controls Expanding Treatment, Rehabilitation and Prevention Services The Immediate Future Policy Making Over the Long Term Confronting the Basic Question Reappraisal: The Need for Evaluation Sources Bibliography Consultants Contractors and Contributors Research Papers Prepared for Commission Recommendations Index of First Year Recommendations Index of Second Year Recommendations Contents | Feedback | Search DRCNet Library | Schaffer Library | Major Studies Marihuana, A Signal ofMisunderstanding WT01-B25-18IA031-000651-B019-332http://206.61.184.43:80/schaffer/LIBRARY/studies/fada/fadamenu.htm 206.61.184.43 19970122122757 text/html 3249HTTP/1.0 200 OKDate: Wednesday, 22-Jan-97 12:27:50 GMTServer: WebSitePro/1.1f (S/N wpo-0deb)Allow-ranges: bytesContent-type: text/htmlLast-modified: Saturday, 28-Dec-96 07:07:19 GMTContent-length: 3032 The Facts About Drug Abuse Contents | Feedback | Search DRCNet Library | Schaffer Library | Major Studies | TheFacts About Drug Abuse The Facts About Drug Abuse The Drug Abuse Council, 1980 Contents Foreword by Bethuel M. Webster Board of Directors of the Drug AbuseCouncil Acknowledgments The Contributors Final Report of the Drug Abuse Council Staff Chapters: 1. The Federal Government's Response toIllicit Drugs, 1969-1978 by Peter Goldberg 2. Drug-Law Enforcement Efforts byJohn R.Pekkanen 3. Heroin Treatment: Development, Status, Outlook by David C.Lewis and John Sessler 4. The Influence of Public Attitudes and Understanding on DrugEducation and Prevention by Peter Goldberg and Erik J. Meyers 5. Marijuana and Cocaine: The Process of Change in Drug Policyby Robert R. Carr and Erik J. Meyers 6. American Heroin Policy: Some Alternatives by Erik J. Meyers Appendix: Activities of the Drug Abuse Council Notes Contents | Feedback | Search DRCNet Library | Schaffer Library | Major Studies | TheFacts About Drug Abuse WT01-B25-19IA088-000636-B014-48http://206.61.184.43:80/schaffer/LIBRARY/forum.htm 206.61.184.43 19970122101519 text/html 19547HTTP/1.0 200 OKDate: Wednesday, 22-Jan-97 10:15:10 GMTServer: WebSitePro/1.1f (S/N wpo-0deb)Allow-ranges: bytesContent-type: text/htmlLast-modified: Saturday, 28-Dec-96 06:42:39 GMTContent-length: 19329 The Report of the California Research Advisory Panel Contents | Feedback | Search DRCNet Library | Schaffer Library | Miscellaneous Statementson Drug Policy The Report of the California Research Advisory Panel The Drug Policy Foundation's LEGISLATIVE FORUM ON DRUG POLICY State Capitol, January 27, 1992 FREDERICK H. MEYERS, M.D. Professor of Pharmacology, University of California, SanFrancisco, CA Note from Cliff Schaffer: This was sent to me personally byDr. Meyers, with a few of his own hand written notes. He was thehead of the Research Advisory Panel for the State of Californiaand states that this speech paraphrases the conclusions of theResearch Advisory Panel. The premise of this meeting--- that the legislature must atthis time accept the suggestions of the nominal experts inproblems of drug abuse here assembled and begin thedecriminalization of drug use-- appears at first glance to bepresumptuous. It is not, however, if one considers ourdeteriorating social and economic state and the forbiddingprospect of the adjustments that must be made by thelegislature at this session. I think that no area of informed, disinterested thinking willchallenge the conclusion that whatever we have attempted bylegislation to regulate the use of the emotionally loaded streetdrugs --- that is, excluding the laudable alcohol---has beenpalpably damaging. The prohibition or legal approach has not beenmerely ineffective but that approach, rather than the effects ofthe drugs themselves, is responsible for the individual andsocietal damage that so appropriately concerns us. Heroin, indeedthe non-medical use of narcotics in general, cannot be inherentlytoo dangerous or harmful or the legislature would not havemandated the provision of methadone, a pharmacologicallyequivalent narcotic, to some of our heroin habituated citizens. It is, then, the reaction of society to the use of certaindrugs rather than the drug effects themselves that cause theproblems and damage that concern us. I react to these problems as I see them in individual patientsand am most concerned about the damage imposed on the individualby social drug use less dangerous to society than the use ofalcohol and by compulsive drug use that is not that differentfrom cigarette smoking. The physical damage and consequent costto society in medical care is much less with heroin, but,cigarettes being legal and relatively inexpensive, the smoker isnot subject to the risk of prosecution or of being driven tocriminal activity. A California legislator in 1992 would, I should think, be moreinterested in the expense involved to the state and recognize anarea where budgetary relief can be achieved with a social andhumanitarian gain rather than the curtailment of a program ofsome value. The financial burden at each governmental level ofenforcing laws whose violation cannot be managed by ordinarypolice tactics is significant. Even greater is the expense anddisorganization imposed by the associated criminal activity onpolice, jail, court, prison, probation and parole activities. Now in deciding whether to accept my thesis, be influenced byyour own observations and common sense, which will establish theclinching argument: all of the enforcement activity of the pastfifty years has been wasted in that the use of more and morevaried drugs has grown progressively to its present level. Before discussing what changes should be made and in whatorder, I will acknowledge and meet the fear of legislators that ashow of rationality will be interpreted as being "soft ondrugs". This idea will be imposed, and the conclusionspresented here today will be challenged only by agents of what Icall the enforcement industry. (Or at least the administratorsof those agencies. I have not recently met an agent orinvestigator working at the street level who thinks that the waron drugs has been or can be won, and I do work with peaceofficers.) Workers in the enforcement area are given to protecting aspecial position within police work. They are not disinterestedinformants just as I am not a disinterested informant in mattersof pay and privilege for U.C. professors. They have greatinfluence on those citizens who depend on the daily media, pressor TV, or who confuse TV dramas with reality. The daily press isnot required to be accurate or comprehensive or to providefollow-up; it is required only to report more or less accuratelywhatever information, misleading or otherwise, is provided by aninformant who may not even be identified. Thus we have had a longseries of largest ever seizures, biggest dealer ever, etc, but itis street level users who resorted to crime to"maintain" who congest our system of criminal justice,and we see no relief in the face of more and more money forenforcement. I insist that if you examine more deliberate, qualityjournalism from as liberal as one dares to be today, for example,The Nation , across the spectrum to Buckley's conservativejournal; if you examine the technical literature of medicine,sociology and even economics and if you note the names andpositions of people supportive of organizations such as the DrugPolicy Foundation, you will agree with my statement above that noarea of informed, disinterested thought disagrees with theconclusions of this meeting. Their agreement is often expressedin terms of legalization of drugs, but, except for radicals likeBuckley and Greenspan, decriminalization is meant. The time for academic discussion has passed. Now it is time tothink tactically, no longer asking if the drug laws should bechanged to achieve decriminalization but looking at what changesshould be made and in what order. My discussion from here on, that is, the changes and tacticssuggested to the legislature, is almost entirely quotes orparaphrases from a report to the legislature by the ResearchAdvisory Panel. I do not appear as a representative of thatgroup, but I see no reason why I should not exploit thecompetence and effort reflected in the report. The panel first established three prior cautions or bases forderiving the changes: 1. Differentiate different drugs and different routes ofadministration. Do not discuss the drug problem. 2. Separate drug effects from associated criminal activity. 3. Consider the risk/benefit ratio for any change. The goal isto reduce the damage done by a drug without significant increase in its use. Nounregulated (legalized) drug nor any industry comparable tocigarette or alcohol industry proselytizing for drug use. The panel then suggests a stepwise approach by thelegislature. The three changes suggested for the first year woulddemonstrate that change could be safely accomplished and preparethe public for more comprehensive revisions. The suggested legislative changes are: Allow Cultivation of Marihuana for Personal Use Insofar as damage to the individual and society is concerned,the quantitatively most important drugs are alcohol and nicotinein the form of cigarettes. There remains, then, as the otherquantitatively important drug, marijuana, which has become, for alarge fraction of the population, a social drug comparable toalcohol in pattern of use and approaching alcohol in extent ofusage. Marijuana is a disinhibiting drug used socially to relieveanxiety and as such has many liabilities in common with alcohol.I acknowledge that marijuana is not without its effect on theindividual user and would not suggest any change that carried therisk of a great increase in the use of marijuana. I resist theuse of the word "legalization" in relation to any drug,including marijuana. On the other hand, an objectiveconsideration of marijuana shows that it is responsible for farless damage to the individual and to society than are alcohol andcigarettes. A further consideration in forming a reaction to thewide use of marijuana is that is a source of conflict betweengenerations and of disrespect for the law. The huge cost ofattempting to enforce these disrespected laws and to punish theirinfraction by people who do not feel guilty is, in my opinion,entirely wasteful and damaging and the monies should be appliedin areas of greater need. Also important is the economic and, to some extent, criminalactivity associated with the marketplace of marijuana. At themoment, we are adding millions to our trade deficit, off of thebooks to be sure, by our purchases of marijuana in Colombia,Mexico, Thailand, and elsewhere. Yet, thanks to a previous actionof the California Legislature, the product of this illegalactivity may be possessed and used by the citizen with thepossibility of only minor sanctions. This change has not lead toany disastrous consequences. On the contrary, it has reduced thetension between generations and decriminalized to some extent thegenerally sanctioned use of this new social drug by large numbersof people. This new situation, for which we applaud the Legislature, ishowever, not stable, in the sense that the failure to act inrelation to the supply of the drug leaves unmet the question ofthe still illegal market and the economic problem that thatentails. If this disparity could be resolved there would beeconomic gain and a great simplification of law enforcement whichnow devotes a considerable effort to seizing a small fraction ofthe illegal importations or cultivations. I therefore suggest that the law be changed to permitcultivation for personal use. Such cultivation would be permittedonly on property serving as the residence for the individual,this is, it would not authorize the cultivation of fifty plantson a National forest and it would not permit the possessionoutside of the home of more than the present one ounce, nor wouldit sanction the provision to others in or out of the residencewhether by sale or in the form "parties". Any change regulating the provision of this drug mustbe made in such a way that we do not see the development ofanother industry comparable to the alcohol or cigarette industry.Permitting the restricted cultivation would avoid that evil butachieve an of the gains promised above. There are people, including I am sure some legislators, who,out of genuine concern rather than mere timidity, will wonderwhether such a change, however, warranted by social and economicgains, would not also result in increased use. I do not dismissthis justifiable concern out of hand. the Panel insisted, and Iagree, that no attitude of approval of marijuana, or alcohol, ortobacco be projected. I would be a prohibitionist if prohibitionwould work. To the extent that prohibition creates a marketplaceor social conflict, we suggest more flexible, practical, andhumane policies. It does ,however, appear that the supply andexperience with marihuana is such that a plateau has been reached and that usage over foreseeablecircumstances will remain about at its present level, as is thecase with alcohol. Remove Penalties for Possession of Needles and Syringes The statement that heroin is inherently not a dangerous drughas been weakened by the appearance in the community of the AIDSvirus. This virus is transmitted, among other ways, by the use byone persons of paraphernalia for injection contaminated with theblood of an infected person. The AIDS virus has already spreadthrough the, drug-using community to an extent that varies withthe sanitary practices of the local population. The prevalence ofinfection is much higher, for example, in New York City than inSan Francisco and lower throughout the balance of California thanin San Francisco. There is thus some urgency and advantage ininstituting control methods. There are two suggested methods of controlling the spread ofthis relatively new virus. The first, demonstrably ineffective,is to adopt a moralizing attitude, continue our current practicesand simple add the individual tragedy and economic burden to thecommunity of more AIDS patients. Such an attitude is consistentwith the feeling that heroin users (and gays and psychotics) arebetter dead and is genocidal. The other method of controlling the spread of the AIDS viruswould be to encourage sanitary practices at the time of injectionby making it possible for each heroin user to use his own"outfit", that is, syringe and needle, rather thanaccept the risk of using one contaminated with another addict'sblood. This would become permissible as well as possible if theintravenous (IV) drug user were permitted to legally possess hisown syringe and needle. Heroin users understandably try to avoid carrying supplies oftheir drug and their injecting paraphernalia any more than isabsolutely necessary since the mere possession of the substanceand the equipment is a punishable crime. The possession ofparaphernalia is defined as a misdemeanor. The availability ofthe charge becomes a convenient mean of harassing the addict andof subjecting him, in effect, to a three-day jail sentencewithout trial. A person with a prior drug related conviction mustbe especially careful since, in such a situation, even thepossession of an ordinary spoon can be construed, according tothe statute, as possession of paraphernalia. As a result, usersare reluctant to carry their own outfits and, their compulsionbeing upon them, are quite likely to use whatever equipment isavailable at the site of drug purchase. People driven by thecompulsion that the heroin user feels, and given their choicebetween using someone else's outfit and being without their drugwill use the possibly contaminated equipment. Laudable as the"needle" exchange programs are and admirable as I findtheir practitioners, they (and the impending legislative respond)are inadequate. The situation is too urgent for an"experimental" program in one city and statutory changeis the definitive change needed to permit education in proper practices by the junkie. Prohibit (legal or illegal) Drug Use in Special StateEstablishments At the same time that we carry out what will be seen as aliberalization of some drug regulations we should demonstratethat our ultimate goal is the reduction of all drug use. Theeffectiveness of education in reducing drug abuse is obviouslydisappointing. Not even the success in controlling cigarettesmoking extends to the youthful population. However, it is fromthe successful imposition and acceptance of restrictions onsmoking by the adult population that we must learn. Drugeducation efforts have focused largely on the populations that weconsider to be deviant and at risk, that is, young people andminority groups. Our efforts to limit the use of quantitativelyimportant drugs should act to influence the entire population sothat an unambiguous attitude of disapproval is projected. The amazing progress in dissuading people from the use oftobacco, suggests additional action in relation to alcohol,already a regulated drug. That prohibition is not feasible hascertainly been adequately demonstrated, but restricted use ofalcohol in inappropriate places is justifiable and would be anessential step in projecting the attitudinal change desired. The Panel applauds the establishment of tobacco free areas inState institutions. As a condition of their funding theLegislature should now insist that certain agencies within theState system not sell or provide alcoholic beverages within theconfines of their campus or building. This should be immediatelyapplied to any medical center campus or hospital. Doctors andother care-givers have a generally favored status and acquirewith that a special responsibility to project an attitude ofdisapproval about the use of any disabling drug while they areaccepting responsibility for a dependent patient. Certainly theState acquires a liability in providing alcohol to individualswho are then going to drive or see patients. More importantly,such use then projects an attitude totally at odds with thatwhich we claim throughout our discussions as desirable. Similarly, it is impossible to rationalize the use of adepressant drug, clearly shown to impair performance after smalldoses, on a University or State University campus dedicated tointellectual activity. Conclusion These changes are minor indeed. However, they would achievesome real progress and, equally important, would demonstrate tothe alarmed citizenry that constructive change is possible andpermit a freer discussion next year. I hope that the Legislaturesenses the urgency in the situation in our state. I close bythreatening you with the aphorism of Francis Bacon of 400 hundredyears ago, "He that will not apply new remedies must acceptnew evils; for time is the great innovator." Contents | Feedback | Search DRCNet Library | Schaffer Library | Miscellaneous Statementson Drug PolicyWT01-B25-20IA031-000651-B019-374http://206.61.184.43:80/schaffer/LIBRARY/nylawyer.htm 206.61.184.43 19970122122827 text/html 98555HTTP/1.0 200 OKDate: Wednesday, 22-Jan-97 12:28:02 GMTServer: WebSitePro/1.1f (S/N wpo-0deb)Allow-ranges: bytesContent-type: text/htmlLast-modified: Saturday, 28-Dec-96 06:42:20 GMTContent-length: 98337 A Wiser Course: Ending Drug Prohibition Contents | Feedback | Search DRCNet Library | Schaffer Library | Major Studies | A Wiser Course, Ending DrugProhibition A WISER COURSE: ENDING DRUG PROHIBITION by the Association of the Bar of the City of New York June, 1994 The June 1994 issue of "The Record," the officialpublication of the Association of the Bar of the City of NewYork, will include a recently released report by theAssociation's Special Committee on Drugs and the Law. The reportis entitled "A Wiser Course: Ending Drug Prohibition"(the "Report"). In typewritten form, the Report is 83pages long and has 203 footnotes of sources and authorities. On June 15, 1994, the New York Law Journal (the dailynewspaper for lawyers in New York) printed on page one a newsarticle about the Report. Unfortunately, the rest of the"media" (e.g., the New York Times, The Daily News,Newsday, ABC, CBS, NBC, C-SPAN, TBS) have failed, at least sofar, to take any notice of this Report. To get the word out about this Report, the Association hasgiven permission for the Report to be distributed on theInternet. A full-length copy of the Report (about 96,388 bytesbut without the 203 footnotes) is posted here for your readingenjoyment. The dissent is also reproduced at the end. If anyone is interested in purchasing a hardcopy of "TheRecord" issue containing the footnoted version of theReport, please use the following information: The Association of the Bar of the City of New York 42 West 44th Street New York, New York 10036 (212) 382-6600 If you agree with opinions expressed in the Report, pleasetell the media, your state and federal representatives, yourfriends, and your family about the Report. Let's get the debateon the "War On Drugs" rolling!!!! A WISER COURSE: ENDING DRUG PROHIBITION TABLE OF CONTENTS I. INTRODUCTION II. THE COSTS OF PROHIBITION A. DISTORTION OF THE JUDICIAL SYSTEM 1. New York State 2. Other States 3. Federal Courts 4. The Judiciary is Impatient with the Present System 5. Efforts to Handle Court Congestion B. THE PRISON STATE C. EROSION OF THE RULE OF LAW AND CIVIL LIBERTIES 1. Perception of Ineffectiveness 2. Perception of a Self-Perpetuating System 3. Police Corruption 4. Poor Children are Victims of the "War on Drugs" 5. Selective Prosecution 6. Erosion of Constitutional Rights 7. Forfeiture's Heavy Hand 8. Erosion of Privacy Rights D. PROHIBITION-INDUCED VIOLENCE E. PROHIBITION'S FAILURE TO LIMIT DRUG USE F. PROHIBITION THREATENS PUBLIC HEALTH 1. Spread of Disease a. Sharing Needles b. Trading Sex for Drugs c. Neglect of Health d. Avoidance of the Health-Care System 2. Lack of Information and Quality Control a. Adulterated Drugs, Designer Drugs, and Drugs of Unknown Potency b. Lack of Knowledge About Safer Use c. Using Alcohol and Tobacco Instead of "Soft Drugs" 3. Injuries Due to Violence 4. Diversion of Resources from Treatment and Prevention 5. The Sense of Treating Drugs as a Public Health Problem a. Treatment Works b. Self-Help Groups c. Therapeutic Communities d. Other Inpatient Drug-Free Treatment Programs e. Outpatient Methadone Maintenance Programs f. Outpatient Drug-Free Therapy 6. Empirical Research on Effective Drug Treatment a. Studies Examining the Effects of Treatment on Substance Abuse b. Studies Examining the Effects of Drug Treatment on the Consequences of Drug Abuse 7. Education Works a. Life Skills Training Program b. Students Taught Awareness and Resistance c. Project Healthy Choices d. Student Assistance Program e. Smart Moves f. Seattle Social Development Project g. Programs for Children of Addicts III. TOWARD A NEW DRUG POLICY IV. CONCLUSION A WISER COURSE: ENDING DRUG PROHIBITION I. INTRODUCTION In 1986, the Association of the Bar of the City of New York,responding to a general perception that criminal and civil sanctions against the manufacture, distribution, or possessionof drugs were not "solving," or even ameliorating, theproblems associated with drug use in our society, formed aSpecial Committee on Drugs and the Law (the"Committee") to study our current drug laws and toreport its recommendations on the wisdom of such laws. The Committee has considered the complex legal, social,medical, economic, and political issues raised by our nation'scurrent drug control policies. Despite billions of dollars spenton law enforcement, criminal prosecution, and incarcerationduring the past 80 years, the United States has made little or noprogress toward reducing drug use or solving its "drugproblem." On the contrary, illegal drug use remains apervasive and powerful influence in our cities and in the nationat large. Beyond the continuing availability and consumption ofdrugs, the unintended consequences of our current prohibitionpolicy are ubiquitous: our courts, both state and federal, arejammed; our prison populations are burgeoning; urban and ghettochildren, as well as adults, are frequent victims of violent"turf wars"; our civil liberties are being eroded,along with our society's respect for the rule of law generally;our public health is threatened; the enjoyment of urban life hasdeclined; and our nation's institutions, as well as those of ourSouth and Central American neighbors, are undermined by theimmense wealth accumulated illegally under the currentprohibition policies. The Committee has concluded, in some cases reluctantly, thatthe costs of drug prohibition are simply too high and itsbenefits too dubious. The Committee recognizes that calling for an end to drugprohibition cannot be either the end of our inquiry or the sum ofour recommendations. There are several difficult questions thatremain to be answered: What forms of governmental regulation, ifany, are appropriate instead of prohibition? To what degree, ifany, should private distribution of drugs be permitted? Is aregulatory regime similar to one now used to control alcoholicbeverages appropriate for some, if not all, drugs? How should anew regulatory regime treat children, adolescents, or pregnantwomen? What kinds of prevention and treatment programs shouldthere be and how should they be funded? These and other issues demand both the urgent attention andhonest judgment of our Committee and, more broadly, our society. The Committee believes the necessary inquiry cannot begin inearnest so long as our nation remains committed to the illusionthat drug use can be prohibited at an acceptable cost. Only byrecognizing that this is no longer true can we fashion a methodof controlling drugs other than the current coercive drug laws,which have been largely ineffective and which are sapping thevitality of our cities, our legal system, and our society as awhole. It is the Committee's hope that this report will advancethe discussion of this important issue. II. THE COSTS OF PROHIBITION A. DISTORTION OF THE JUDICIAL SYSTEM At a time of ever-increasing competition for scarce publicfunds, the volume of drug prosecutions and convictions continuesto increase, as does the strain on judicial budgets, personnel,and facilities in the federal and state systems. The addedburdens on the judiciary due to drug prosecutions havesubstantially diminished the courts' capacity to manage the civildocket. Criminal cases take priority, with civil jury trialsrelegated to the bottom of an increasing waiting list. Somecourts, for purely budgetary reasons, have been forced to suspendall civil jury trials for periods of time. 1. New York State The majority of drug cases are handled by state and localcourts. Consequently, it is instructive to review first theimpact of these increased caseloads and costs on New York State. In 1991, New York State spent a total of $8,641,418,000 forall judicial and legal services (including police protection,$3,662,389,000; courts, $932,314,000; prosecution and legalservices, $461,790,000; and public defense, 197,194,000). It isdifficult to obtain specific dollar figures for the cost of drugarrests and prosecutions in New York State, but by combining theavailable data on caseloads and judicial costs it is possible tomake some rough estimates. In 1987, total arrests in New YorkState were 481,676, whereas in 1991 the total was 506,710, anincrease of 5.2%. During the same period, felony drug arrestsrose from 42,655 (approximately 9% of total arrests) in 1987 to54,184 in 1991 (11% of all arrests), a 27% increase. By contrast,between 1987 and 1991, misdemeanor drug arrests dropped from53,621 to 36,489, a decrease of 32%. In 1991 a tremendous volumeof caseload activity confronted the Judiciary's judges andnonjudicial personnel. Nearly 79,000 felony indictments andsuperior court informations were filed in Supreme and CountyCourts throughout New York. That number represents a 54% increasecompared with 1985. Most of the statewide increase was the resultof phenomenal caseload increases in New York City. This year, theSupreme Court Criminal Term in New York City received over 52,000felony filings, an astonishing 70% increase since 1985. Theremarkable level in felony filings is primarily caused byincreases in drug-related filings. . . . Unquestionably, these caseload increases are the productof the drug crisis which, perhaps for the first time in ourState's history, threatens to test our ability to administerjustice on the local level, not just in New York City, butstatewide. The increasing number of drug prosecutions in New York'scourts has taken its toll on the judicial system. One New YorkState Supreme Court Justice has summarized the impact of theso-called "war on drugs" on New York's criminal justicesystem as follows: Our court calendars groan under the burden of ever-increasingnew drug cases. New York City's Corrections Department estimatesthat 70 percent of its inmates are charged with drug-relatedcrimes. Yet these ever-growing prosecutions and incarcerationsare having little or no impact on drug crimes. In 1980 only 11percent of the total inmate population was incarcerated for drugoffenses, yet by 1992 this figure rose to 44 percent. At a costof $30,000 per year to maintain each prisoner, our state spentover $195 million in 1992 to confine drug offenders alone. Lastyear the state's Office of Court Administration requested anadditional $40 million just to cover the expense of drug cases.Since the advent of crack a decade ago, the city has hired 9,000new police, 700 additional assistant district attorneys, and hasadded 18,000 new cells on Rikers Island. The total cost: $591million a year. 2. Other States State court convictions for drug law violations have increaseddramatically nationwide since the mid-1980s. Between 1986 and1988, there was a nearly 70% increase in the number of personsconvicted of felony drug trafficking or possession charges (from135,000 to 225,000). The number of persons convicted who receivedstate prison sentences rose from 49,900 to 92,500. In 1988, drugoffenses accounted for approximately one-third of all felonyconvictions in all state courts. 3. Federal Courts The case loads and concomitant costs of managing drug cases infederal courts also have increased substantially over the pastdecade. In 1982, the budget for prosecution of all federal drugcases in the United States was $78.9 million; in 1993, the budgetwas ten times as much -- $795.9 million. In federal districtcourts in 1989, a total of 54,643 criminal cases were prosecuted;of those 16,834 (approximately 30%) were for drug offenses. In1990, 19,271 defendants were prosecuted for drug offenses; ofthose 3,083 were not convicted, and 16,188 were convicted: 13,036by guilty plea (81%), and 3,121 after trial (19%). Between July1992 and June 1993, 50,366 defendants were convicted in thefederal courts, and 27% of these (18,576) were convicted offederal drug offenses. Expenses associated with appeals offederal drug cases rose from $8.2 million in 1982 to $104.2million budgeted in 1993. A significant portion of this increaseresulted from appeals filings in drug-related cases, whichtotalled 1,583 in 1981, 4,386 in 1989, and 5,658 in 1990 (a 29%increase from the previous year alone and, overall, a 383%increase in ten years). In 1991, there were 5,570 federaldrug-related appeals filed. 4. The Judiciary is Impatient with the Present System Federal and state judges throughout the United States havepublicly expressed frustration with the present laws prohibitingdrugs, and some senior federal judges have even refused to sit ondrug cases. In the Southern District of New York and in theEastern District of New York, Judges Whitman Knapp, Robert Sweet,and Jack Weinstein have spoken out publicly against the presentlaws and their associated draconian penalties, and Judges Knappand Weinstein have refused, as is their right as senior judges,to preside over drug trials and sentences. State judges in NewYork have also protested the increasing time on their calendarsthat drug cases take and the Second Offender sentencing rule thatcompels them to give lengthy prison sentences to second-time drugoffenders. These judges seek a solution to the "war ondrugs" before the whole judicial system breaks down underthe strain. 5. Efforts to Handle Court Congestion Because of the enormous increase in drug cases, especially inlarge urban areas, several stop-gap solutions are being pursuedto balance limited court resources against the burgeoningcaseloads. In New York City and New Orleans, for instance,special narcotics divisions have been established to expediteprocessing of drug felonies. These experimental programs aredesigned to hear cases just prior to grand jury proceedings withthe goal of inducing defendants to accept plea bargains that arebetter than would be expected if the case proceeded through thegrand jury process. Also, special court parts -- staffed bypersonnel with expertise in drug cases, addiction, and communitytreatment centers -- have been established in New York City todeal exclusively with drug cases. Unfortunately, none of theseshort-term solutions will correct the fundamental distortion ofthe priorities of the state and federal judicial systems causedby the "war on drugs." B. THE PRISON STATE One of the most tangible, measurable effects of the "waron drugs," has been the creation of a "prisonstate". According to the Federal Bureau of Investigation'sstatistics, one million arrests are made annually for violationsof the federal and state drug laws. As a result of these massivenumbers of arrests each year, "the United States has ahigher proportion of its population incarcerated than any othercountry in the world for which reliable statistics areavailable." Incarceration in America is now at an all-time high. From 1925through 1973, the American prison population fluctuated between90 and 120 people in prison per 100,000 of the population; in1973 the rate was 98 per 100,000, a ten-year low. Between 1973 and 1980, however, there was a 40% increase, to135 people in prison per 100,000; and by 1986, following thestart of the modern "war on drugs," the incarcerationrate had jumped to 200 per 100,000. In 1993, the rate ofAmericans serving prison time stood at 325 per 100,000. In 1993,the number of inmates in federal and state prisons in New Yorkincreased by 4.6%, to 64,600. On average, it costs $20,000 per year to maintain oneprisoner, $100,000 to build a single prison cell, and $20,000 peryear to staff a prison cell. More than one in forty American males between the ages 14 and34 are locked up. Between 1980 and 1990, the total prison population in theUnited States increased by 133% to over 771,000 prisoners. In 1993, the total prison population reached 949,000, nearlythree times as many as in 1980. During the 1980s, newimprisonments on drug charges increased over 1,000%. Drug offenders have accounted for an increasing percentage ofthe population in State and Federal correctional facilities. Drug offenders constituted an estimated 22% of the Stateprison population in 1991, up from 6% of the population in 1979.In Federal correctional facilities, drug offenders accounted for61% of the population, up from 16% in 1970, 25% in 1980, and 52%in 1990. The vast majority of the prison population increase during the1980s, which doubled the number of persons under custody for allcharges, involved drug law violations. Due to the great increasein drug-related incarcerations, the federal and state prisonsystems are overwhelmed, as reported almost daily in thenewspapers. Prison overcrowding persists despite an unprecedentedboom in prison construction. For example, between 1983 and 1992,New York State built 29 prisons, increasing the number of prisonsin the state to 68 and the inmate capacity from 29,253 to 57,862. No one wants overcrowding. It riles inmates, strains prisonguards, encourages the spread of illness and generally makesprisons more volatile places. In the past, when there was moneyto spend, the solution to overcrowding would have been clear --create more space. Not any more. With money scarce and a sensethat more prison beds have not resulted in less crime, manylawmakers are being forced to conclude they can no longer buildtheir way out of the problem. According to the United States Department of Justice,"drug offenders" are becoming a larger share of theprison population for two reasons: first, the likelihood that aconviction will result in incarceration is increasing; andsecond, those convicted on drug charges are receiving longerprison sentences. Mandatory sentencing laws, such as the federal sentencingguidelines, exacerbate the problem by forcing judges to imposelengthy sentences for simple possession of small amounts ofdrugs. These laws, first passed in the 1970s but increasinglyrelied on as a weapon in the "drug war" in recentyears, have in large measure been responsible for today's severeovercrowding. Mandatory minimum sentences require judges toimpose a statutorily-defined minimum period of incarcerationwithout the possibility of parole, with no consideration of thespecific facts of the crime or any mitigating circumstances.Faced with mandatory sentences laws, there has been at a growingmovement at the state level to minimize their draconian effects.In New York, for example, the courts had been cooperating withprosecutors and defense attorneys to avoid the harsh effects onsecond-time drug offenders. New York's Governor, Mario Cuomo, inhis 1994 budget message has asked the Legislature to restorediscretion to judges meting out second-time drug felony sentences"to relieve overcrowding in state prisons." For all of the extra burden on the prison and judicial systemsand on the taxpayer caused by the "war on drugs,"American society has little to show for it. "If suchtoughness had much to do with crime, you'd think we'd have seensome results by now. But . . . overall crime has decreased only6% since 1973; violent crimes are up 24%. The National ResearchCouncil of the National Academy of Sciences recently concludedthat a tripling of time served by violent offenders since 1975had `apparently very little' impact on violent crime." With61% of today's federal inmates incarcerated on drug lawconvictions, judiciary and corrections overcrowding and escalatedcosts would necessarily be reduced were the current drug policyaltered toward a less punitive, more humane approach whichremoves the profit motive fueling the black market in illegaldrugs. C. EROSION OF THE RULE OF LAW AND CIVIL LIBERTIES One of the more insidious effects of the "war ondrugs" has been the gradual erosion of the rule of law andthe public's civil liberties. Several interrelated elementscontribute to this particularly destructive consequence of thecurrent drug laws. 1. Perception of Ineffectiveness Politicians from the President of the United States to mayorsrunning in local elections are importuned by the people for theassurance that increasing crime and the criminal element becontained in our society. Our country, with the highest rate ofdrug abuse of any industrial country in the world, also has thelargest budget in the world to enforce its laws prohibitingdrugs. Despite huge increases in the federal government's budgetfor the "war on drugs," the so-called "drugproblem" with all of its ramifications, has notsignificantly abated. The public's perception of its politicalleaders' ineffectiveness in alleviating drug-related violenceadds to the general atmosphere of lawlessness and breeds cynicismand disrespect for the law. Instead of progress since the firstfederal anti-drug law was passed in 1914, nearly 80 years of drugprohibition have yielded few inroads against the sale or use ofdrugs. This, understandably, suggests to the public that the lawitself is an ineffectual tool for dealing with the issue. 2. Perception of a Self-Perpetuating System The large sums of money appropriated for law-enforcementcreate enormous, self-perpetuating bureaucratic agencies, such asthe United States Drug Enforcement Agency ("DEA"),which fight for independence and scarce public resources whilemaking little headway against the "drug problem." Theseagencies have ample motivation to exaggerate or distort theextent and danger of "drug abuse" so as to justify (andthereby insure) their continued existence. Being inherentlybiased, they have great potential to ignore the public's truewelfare. 3. Police Corruption The fact that drug prohibition breeds corruption has beenknown for decades. Every day there are news stories of lawenforcement officers being arrested for their involvement withdrug dealers. The sums of money involved in the drug business aretoo great and too inviting for the law enforcers not to seektheir share. Corrupt police behavior creates a furtherdisillusioned public. In addition, just as organized crime becameentrenched during Prohibition, the current prohibitionist regimeis currently subsidizing the mafia and other organized crimegroups because of the highly inflated prices on the black market. 4. Poor Children are Victims of the "War on Drugs" There is no reason to believe that recognized market forcescease to apply where the drug business is concerned. There ispublic recognition that youths and unemployed adults often cannotjust say "no" to drugs when saying "yes" as adealer or a dealer's helper is much more profitable than are thealternatives. Children living in poor, urban neighborhoods areparticularly susceptible to being drawn into illegal drug-relatedactivities by visions of status and easy money. Laws againstdrugs thus discourage many youths and adults from productivelegitimate employment that would benefit society. 5. Selective Prosecution Criminal prosecutions for violations of the federal and statedrug laws appear to be disproportionately directed againstminorities. Understandably, there is widespread public concernthat the drug laws are selectively enforced with vigor againstthe poor and disenfranchised, while rich and middle class drugusers are permitted to indulge without serious fear of legalconsequences. 6. Erosion of Constitutional Rights The pursuit of a "drug-free" society has resulted ina panoply of intrusions into the lives of United States citizens:The Bill of Rights is in danger of becoming meaningless in casesinvolving drugs. Tenants charged with no crime are evicted fromhomes where police believe drugs are being sold. Public housingprojects are sealed for house-to-house inspections. The SupremeCourt has permitted warrantless searches of automobiles, the useof anonymous tips and drug-courier profiles as the basis forpolice searches, and the seizure of lawyers' fees in drug cases.Property on which marijuana plants are found can be forfeitedeven if the owner is charged with no crime. Prosecutors have beenallowed to try the same person at the state and federal levelsfor the same drug-related crime. A few examples will illustrate the erosion in individual civilliberties occasioned by the "war on drugs." In 1991,the United States Supreme Court in Florida v. Bostick, upheld theconstitutionality of a police tactic of boarding long- distancebuses and asking permission to search passengers' baggage,overruling the Florida Supreme Court's ruling that such anencounter with the police is so inherently coercive that noconsent given for such a search could be truly voluntary. TheFlorida v. Bostick decision was merely one of a number of rulingssince the early 1980s which authorized police stops andquestioning of airline, train, and bus passengers without thelevel of suspicion generally required for Fourth Amendment searchand seizure purposes. The search for tell-tale evidence of drug use has evendescended to the level of compelling federal employees to giveurine samples for analysis, without regard to whether such aprivacy intrusion is related to job performance. The public --led by the government -- appears to be willing to jump on thebandwagon "to restrict civil liberties, and even acceptwarrantless searches of homes and cars, in order to reduce theuse of illicit drugs." 7. Forfeiture's Heavy Hand Forfeiture has become one of the most publicized andcontroversial weapons in the government's anti-drug arsenal. Anyassumption, however, that the law would be deployed only against"drug kingpins" and major players has provedunwarranted as small time dealers and marginal users are moreoften targeted: Under Zero Tolerance, which targets casual drugusers, the government has seized thousands of cars, boats, andhomes because occupants or guests allegedly carried drugs. In1990, seizures exceeded $527 million, and they are expected toexceed $700 million in 1991. The U.S. Marshalls Services now hasa $1.4 billion inventory of seized assets including more than30,000 homes, cars, businesses and other property. In the fiscal year 1993, "the DEA made 14,430 domesticseizures of nondrug property, valued at approximately $669million." Moreover, forfeitures have become a popular way togenerate additional revenue. The in rem nature of a civil forfeiture proceeding, repletewith its many procedural pitfalls, rests on the legal fictionthat the property itself is guilty of wrongdoing. The unevenburdens of proof assigned the parties reveals the imbalance inthe system. To prevail, the government need only have reasonablegrounds to believe the property is subject to forfeiture. Itfalls to the claimant to prove by a preponderance of the evidencethe negative proposition that the property was"innocent." As a result of the over-zealous applicationof the forfeiture statutes, the judiciary has attempted to curbsome of the more visible excesses. For instance, absent exigentcircumstances, pre-hearing seizures of homes, where the tenantswere either evicted outright or were permitted to stay at thesufferance of the United States Marshall, are no longertolerated. And the forfeiture of real property is now expresslysubject to the limitations of Eighth Amendment proportionalityanalysis. A claimant's ability to defend against a forfeiture has longbeen compromised by the maze of rules allowing for the freezingof assets, which alone often discourages private counsel fromtaking on a case. Too often, the failure to secure experiencedcounsel results in the loss of the property. Finally, with newsaccounts of law enforcement personnel driving around in expensivecars seized during drug operations, reports of police helicopterswith sophisticated detection equipment hovering over homes, andthe intrusive subpoenaing of records from bona fide businesses(such as those offering hydroponic gardening equipment), it isclear that forfeiture laws require an overhaul. 8. Erosion of Privacy Rights Although the Ninth Amendment guarantees that "[t]heenumeration in the Constitution of rights shall not be construedto deny or disparage others retained by the people," oursociety has struggled to find a balance between individualliberty and privacy and governmental intrusion. Although theUnited States Supreme Court has recognized certain activities asbeing beyond the reach of most state or federal governmentalintrusion (e.g., birth control, abortion during the firsttrimester, and the possession of adult pornography in the home),drug use has never been found to be within the "right ofprivacy" that the Court has forged. Because the law, as itstands today, does not recognize the right to use drugs, the"war on drugs" has become "in effect, if not inintention, a war on drug users." Year after year, state andfederal laws that prohibit the possession of drugs, demonize andcriminalize the users of drugs, estimated to be at least 20million in the United States alone. Yet, "[d]rugs have beenused to alter consciousness in most societies throughout history,and different drugs have been considered acceptable at differenttimes and places." As Lester Grinspoon and James B. Bakalarhave stated: Of all the Prohibition era mistakes we are now repeating, themost serious is trying to free society of drugs by the use offorce. There is no reason to believe that the inclination toingest substances that alter consciousness can be eradicated. Adrug-free society is an impossible and probably an undesirabledream. . . . Our present drug policies are immoral because theyrequire a war of annihilation against a wrongly chosen enemy. Wewill never be able to regulate the use of consciousness-alteringdrugs effectively until our ends are changed along with the meansthat serve them. Ending drug prohibition would enable the Court and our societyto recognize the right of individuals to alter theirconsciousness (the most private of matters), so long as they donot harm the persons or property of others. D. PROHIBITION-INDUCED VIOLENCE In New York and elsewhere in the United States, wild shootoutsin urban areas are frequently publicized. These reports revealthat innocent bystanders in these areas are often caught in thecross-fire. It is, however, far from clear that the use of orneed for prohibited drugs causes this sort of violent crime.Rather, the available evidence tends to support the conclusionthat it is the prohibitionist laws against drugs that cause theviolent crimes that people generally deplore. So-called "drug-related crime" is often related onlyindirectly to the drugs themselves, resulting instead from theillegal black market in drugs that is, in turn, spawned by lawsprohibiting the legal sale of drugs. For example, the Los Angelespolice have long known that the lucrative black market in cocainehas provided the incentive (as well as the financing) for thebloody gang turf wars in that city. Similarly, it is estimatedthat 40% of the homicides in a study of 414 homicides in New YorkCity precincts were indirectly attributable to black markettrafficking in drugs. Further supporting the fact that it is drugprohibition rather than drug use which is causing the alarming"drug-related" violence saturating our culture is thehistorical precedent of alcohol Prohibition which was accompaniedby the same type of violence. There is no reason to believe that black markets would notdisappear with the ending of drug prohibition. Common senseindicates that without the immense profits guaranteed by thenecessarily restricted nature of the outlets, there would belittle advantage to maintaining such black markets. The currentpatterns of drug-sale related turf violence would besubstantially, if not wholly, undermined. E. PROHIBITION'S FAILURE TO LIMIT DRUG USE Proponents of the "war on drugs" often eagerlydeclare that the draconian prohibitionist laws of the state andfederal government are causing a decline in drug use. Theevidence, however, tends to show that "the number of heavydrug users in the United States is undiminished." Inaddition, recent surveys show an increasing number of high schoolstudents using marijuana and lysergic acid diethylamide("LSD"). Even proponents of the "war ondrugs" candidly admit that "drug abuse cannot beentirely eliminated." Some experts have estimated that thegovernment has spent close to $500 billion dollars over the past20 years to enforce the prohibitionist laws against drugs, whileduring the same period use levels rose and the number of arrestsand the amounts of drugs seized increased unabated annually.750,000 people were incarcerated for violating the prohibitionistdrug laws during a twenty-year period, costing an average of $25billion annually and $61 billion for 1991 alone. Although the vast majority of Americans polled stated thatthey would not take now-prohibited drugs if they were legalized,many people voice the concern that use would escalate sharplyupon legalization. Implicit in the idea that use of drugs wouldrise upon legalization is the assumption that the currentprohibitionist laws discourage many people from using them. Theavailable evidence tends to show that Americans can and dovoluntarily control their use of drugs. The recent decline in middle class use of drugs as well asrecent declines in alcohol and tobacco consumption have beenattributed by many experts to factors (such as education, healthand fitness awareness, and social pressures) other than theprohibitionist laws against drugs. Experts have recognized theseother factors as the basis for the current levels of use of drugs(including alcohol and tobacco) rather than the existence ofprohibitionist laws. Indeed some observers have cited theprohibitionist laws against drugs as a significant factor leadingto increased use and greater numbers of addicts than we wouldotherwise have: [T]he growth of addiction over the last fourdecades in the US had little to do with price reductions or, forthat matter, with the growth of real income. The crucial factorin the spread of the drug habit has been the unrelenting pressureexerted by legions of street pushers in the continuing endeavorto widen the circle of the customers. In other words, the crucialfactor in spreading the drug habit has been the super profitsmade possible only by governments' illegalization of thetrade." It is impossible to prove the levels of post- legalization useof now-prohibited drugs, but reasonable extrapolations may bemade by referring to similar experiences in this country andabroad. Prohibition of alcohol in the United States earlier in thiscentury is a basis for comparison, albeit an imperfect one. Areview of alcohol consumption patterns during and afterProhibition shows that during most of the Prohibition era percapita alcohol consumption actually increased. After"Prohibition's repeal in 1933, consumption remained fairlystable until after the Second World War when, without any changein public policy, it began increasing." The prohibitionistlaws, therefore, seem to have little impact on an individual'sdecision whether to use drugs. Another useful example is theexperience of the ten states that decriminalized the possessionof small amounts of marijuana for personal consumption in the1970s. There was no increase in the level of marijuana use inthose states. Indeed marijuana consumption declined in thosestates just as it did in states that retained criminal sanctionsagainst marijuana. In 1976, the Dutch decriminalized marijuanaconsumption, although possession and small sales technicallyremained illegal. The level of use actually declined afterdecriminalization. Indeed marijuana use in the Netherlands issubstantially lower than in countries waging a "war ondrugs," including the United States and, at least untilrecently, Germany. Among Dutch youths aged 17-18, only 17.7% usedmarijuana at least once in their lifetimes, as opposed to 43.7%of Americans. Only 4.6% of the Dutch had used marijuana at leastonce in the past month, as opposed to 16.7% of the Americans. While indicating clearly that prohibitionist laws do notprevent the use of drugs, these statistics also tend to show thatlegalizing now-prohibited drugs, at least marijuana, does notinevitably cause an increase in use. Under an exception to theBritish prohibitionist system, doctors may provide prohibiteddrugs to addicts. Dr. John Marks of Liverpool commenced such aprogram in 1982, and, to his astonishment, he noted that thenumber of new addicts decreased in Liverpool while in a nearbytown operating under prohibition the rate of new addicts wastwelve-fold higher. Dr. Marks attributed the decline in thenumber of new addicts to the fact that addicts received theirneeded drugs from his program for pennies, thus there was nolonger any need for addicts to bring in new customers to raiseenough money to support their habits. Others addressing the issueof whether the levels of use of now prohibited drugs wouldescalate to overwhelming proportions after legalization (as manyprohibitionists have predicted) have likened possible patterns ofillegal drug use to patterns of alcohol use, with which we have asolid familiarity. They point out that Western cultures havehandled alcohol consumption with tolerable skill for centuriesand point out that most of the American population that drinksoccasionally, or even every day, exercises moderation. Indeed the available data indicate that the vast majority ofthe American population that uses now-prohibited drugs does sowith moderation. According to United States governmentstatistics, more than 75 million persons in the United Stateshousehold population have used prohibited drugs. The NationalInstitute on Drug Abuse estimates that close to 40 millionAmericans continue to consume these substances. Yet, only acomparatively minuscule number of deaths due to drug overdoses,4,242, occurred in 1991 according to medical examiner datacompiled by the Drug Abuse Warning Network. Once the distinctionbetween use of prohibited drugs and abuse is acknowledged, theavailable statistics show that the vast majority of Americans whouse drugs do not abuse them. Based on our experience with American states' and foreigndecriminalization of marijuana, it appears that decriminalizationdoes not lead to greater levels of use nor to abuse. Likewisethere is evidence to support the proposition that thedecriminalization of the so-called "hard drugs" doesnot lead to increased rates of addiction. Perhaps mostimportantly, data analysis strongly indicates that social factorswholly apart from the criminalization of drugs account in thegreatest measure for reduced rates of use. Based on the evidence,it would not be unfair to say that the predicted,post-legalization explosion in the use of drugs has been greatlyoverstated and that use in continued moderation would be the muchmore likely result. European countries, such as the Netherlands,have benefitted from an approach to drugs that focuses on"harm reduction" rather than draconian measures toenforce prohibition. F. PROHIBITION THREATENS PUBLIC HEALTH 1. Spread of Disease a. Sharing Needles Because the possession of hypodermic needles is generallyillegal, users of injectable drugs routinely share needles andsyringes with one another, often in "shootinggalleries" where dozens of addicts may line up to use asingle needle rented out by the dealers and not sterilizedbetween uses. This sharing of needles has become a major sourceof transmission of blood-borne diseases such as acquired immunedeficiency syndrome ("AIDS") and hepatitis. Accordingto a recent national review, "more than 33% of new AIDScases occur among injecting drug users or people having sexualcontact with them." In New York State, the majority of newAIDS cases since 1988 have been reported among users ofinjectable drugs and their sexual partners. Both the Centers forDisease Control and the New York State Department of Health haveestimated that more than 75% of pediatric AIDS cases are childrenwhose mothers either injected drugs or were the sexual partnersof persons who injected drugs. The data suggest, at the veryleast, that sterile hypodermic needles should be readily andfreely available to drug users. So long as drug use remainsunlawful, however, free needle distribution is not likely toattract a substantial portion of the user population. Inresponse, some courts have circumscribed laws dealing with theunlawful possession of hypodermic needles by applying defenses ofmedical necessity. b. Trading Sex for Drugs Because illicit drugs are expensive, many addicts turn toprostitution to make money to support their habits, or exchangesexual services directly for drugs. Prostitute drug addicts oftendo not protect themselves from contracting sexually transmitteddiseases carried by their customers, and they pass such diseaseson to other customers, their lovers, and their children. Thecrack epidemic, in particular, has been blamed for the recentlynoted resurgence of syphilis and other sexually transmitteddiseases. Dr. Robert Rolfs of the Centers for Disease Control placed theblame squarely on cocaine and its high cost: People -- especiallywomen -- have high-risk sex and practice prostitution to supporttheir habits. And it is occurring in a relatively poor populationwhere people have a lot of things that prevent their access totreatment. Therefore, they stay infected longer and are morelikely to pass their infections on to others. Fewer addicts wouldbe forced to resort to prostitution if the current prohibitionsagainst drugs were lifted. c. Neglect of Health Because of addicts' preoccupation with obtaining and usingdrugs, and the debilitating effects of some of the drugsthemselves, many addicts are in very poor health. Malnutrition isa frequent problem and, in turn, contributes to many others.Addicts' poor health makes them especially susceptible todiseases ranging from scurvy and shingles to tuberculosis and theflu. Addicts are also more likely to contract communicablediseases and therefore more likely to spread them. Theinterrelated urban problems of homelessness and illegal drugabuse have contributed to the development of multi-drug-resistantstrains of diseases such as tuberculosis, which was once thoughtto be on the verge of eradication. These more virulent diseasesknow few geographical limitations and pose risks to the generalpopulation. d. Avoidance of the Health-Care System Individuals who use illegal drugs often put off addressingtheir health problems for fear of prosecution or other adverseconsequences (e.g., rebuffs by doctors, loss of job). Thisreluctance to seek medical care is compounded by the fact thatmany drug addicts have no private physicians and rely instead onpublic hospitals or clinics for any care they might get.Prohibition, therefore, has perverse results on health; drugabusers tend to enter the health-care system only if and whentheir need for care is acute, which is also when care is mostcostly to deliver. If, for example, a woman avoids pre-natalcare, she may give birth to a baby with low birth weight andother medical difficulties. If a drug abuser puts off seekingtreatment for illnesses and injuries, he or she may end up in theemergency room and the intensive care ward. Mothers and pregnantwomen face the additional and justifiable fear that anydetectable drug use may be reported as a possible indication ofchild abuse or neglect. In many large city hospitals, the urineof newborn babies is tested for prohibited drugs, and motherswhose babies test positive for pre-natal exposure are reported tothe child abuse authorities. Until recently, in New York City, such babies were routinelykept from their mothers pending investigations that often lastedmany months, interfering with normal bonding and necessarilyadversely affecting the infant's development and relationshipwith the parent. Moreover, these women have, in somejurisdictions, been prosecuted for pre-partum distribution ofprohibited drugs. In addition to the obvious costs to the individuals who becomeinfected with catastrophic illnesses directly through drug use,and the high costs to the health care system of treating them,prohibition contributes to the spread of such diseases throughoutsociety, particularly to the sexual partners and children ofinfected drug users. Left untreated, users and addicts are morelikely to give birth to unhealthy children, to abuse or neglecttheir children after they are born, or to have their childrenplaced in foster care. 2. Lack of Information and Quality Control a. Adulterated Drugs, Designer Drugs, and Drugs of UnknownPotency Because drugs are manufactured and distributed in secret, itis impossible for users to guard against adulteration or todetermine the purity and potency of the drugs they use. Theproblem is compounded by drug growers, manufacturers, anddistributors who, to minimize the risks of apprehension, developand purvey the drug varieties that pack the most intoxicatingeffect into the smallest package. According to an experienced NewYork City researcher, The fact that cocaine, heroin and relateddrugs are illegal encourages the use of injection. Severestatutory restrictions greatly increase the cost of illicitsubstances to nonmedical users. Injecting provides a way toeconomize. Injectable forms of opiates and coca are much moreconcentrated than traditional forms, such as opium or coca tea.Injection provides an intense and economical effect by maximizingthe amount of drug that reaches the brain. People who sniff orsmoke drugs say that if they inject they need only one third ofthe amount of the drug to maintain a habit. Because the injection forms of illicit drugs are concentrated,they are [also] relatively easier to ship. It has beendemonstrated that, as law enforcement and criminal penaltiesintensify, dealers also find other ways to economize by inventingnew drugs -- so-called "designer drugs" -- that are notyet prohibited. This places the ill-informed consumers of suchdrugs at greater risk of overdose and other health problems.Illnesses and deaths have resulted from (1) the introduction ofdangerous substances into drugs that could otherwise have beenused with greater safety, (2) inadvertent overdoses due tovariations in potency, and (3) the development of "designerdrugs" intended to give the effect of familiar intoxicantswith new chemical compositions that put them beyond the reach ofcurrent laws. Just as the prohibition against alcohol led tosales of poisonous wood alcohol and the prohibition againstabortion led to coat-hanger abortions, the prohibition againstdrug manufacture, sale, and possession results in unnecessarydeaths due to adulteration, variable purity, and "designerdrugs." This contrasts sharply with the government's currentregulation of alcoholic beverages, which ensures that thebeverages are pure and that buyers know how strong they are andwhat some of their health effects may be. Experts have noted that heightened efforts to enforce druglaws and amend them to encompass new formulations or banprecursor substances may only push dealers to take greater risks,selling ever more potentially dangerous substances. b. Lack of Knowledge About Safer Use Because many drugs are outlawed, individuals considering druguse rarely have access to accurate information about the effectsof drugs. While a cautious user may err on the side of avoidingcertain activities while under the use of drugs, he or she mayhave no way of knowing, beyond trial and error, the possibleadverse health consequences of certain combinations of drugs andhis or her individual tolerance for particular substances.Because of its penchant for exaggeration and cartoonish treatmentof the issues, most current education about drugs is not takenseriously by young people. As a result, it is far less effectivethan other health education (e.g., about nutrition, fitness, andsmoking cigarettes). c. Using Alcohol and Tobacco Instead of "SoftDrugs" Alcohol and tobacco are completely legal yet do much moreharm, statistically speaking, than illegal drug use. It is alsogenerally recognized that alcohol, at least when used to excess,can cause aggressive, anti-social behavior. The currentprohibitionist laws against marijuana, generally considered an"a-motivational" drug, and other so-called "softdrugs" have the effect of influencing some people to choosealcohol over these "soft drugs." Peter Reuter, aneconomist at the Rand Corporation, concludes that "Ifmarijuana is a substitute for alcohol . . . , alcohol is, bydefinition, a substitute for marijuana. Thus tough marijuanaenforcement must increase drinking." Similarly, FrankChaloupka, an economist at the University of Illinois, foundthrough statistical analysis "that states without criminalsanctions against marijuana possession suffered fewer autofatalities." Finally, Karen Model, a Ph.D. candidate atHarvard, found that "states decriminalizing marijuanareported lower overall rates of drug- and alcohol-relatedemergencies." To the extent that users are choosing alcoholrather than marijuana or other "soft drugs," theoverall public health effects are probably worse than they wouldbe otherwise. 3. Injuries Due to Violence The high prices commanded by prohibited drugs createcompetition among groups and individuals willing to break the lawto supply drugs to consumers. Their competition often becomesviolent and has contributed to the build-up of arms and thepervasiveness of violence in many areas. Gunshot wounds and othertraumas due to the illegal drug business have become commonplacein big-city hospital emergency rooms. Not only traffickers, butalso law enforcement officers and innocent bystanders are oftenthe victims. Mayor Rudolph Giuliani recently noted: The victims of the[] gun battles [of street-level drugdealers] are innocent bystanders -- and often young children.Last year alone, about 500 New York City children were shot; ofthese, 89 were innocent bystanders hit by crossfire. The cost ofprohibiting drugs must be measured in terms of lost lives andexpensive medical care and include the hidden costs of lostproductivity and the psychological damage to individuals andentire communities living in fear, helpless and hopeless. With the possible exceptions of cocaine and PCP, drugsthemselves do not generally cause violent behavior. It is,instead, turf wars for the control of black markets and the drugusers' need for money to purchase such substances that leads toviolence. Indeed, marijuana and heroin have been shown to rendertheir users disinclined to violence or incapable of violencewhile under the influence. These substances are much lessdangerous in this regard than alcohol. 4. Diversion of Resources from Treatment and Prevention Prohibition diverts money that could otherwise be used forpreventing and treating drug abuse. Federal anti-drug legislationprovides a single budget for "supply reduction" and"demand reduction" efforts. Law enforcement agencieshave always received much more than prevention, treatment, andresearch programs combined. The ABA recently reported that"[s]ince the early 1980s, treatment has been a decliningpriority. In 1991, treatment received 14% of the $10.5 billionfederal drug budget compared to 25% ten years earlier."During the same period, "federal spending on law enforcementincreased 737%, with interdiction efforts leading theincrease." Ending drug prohibition would, by definition,eliminate the need for any special law enforcement funds for druginterdiction. It would also allow for the redirection of lawenforcement resources to concentrate on violent crime and qualityof life issues. 5. The Sense of Treating Drugs as a Public Health Problem a. Treatment Works The vast majority of resources in the United States availableto meet this country's "drug problem" have beenutilized for interdiction rather than education and treatment.This allocation of resources has skewed the public's perceptionof the problem, which is seen largely as one of law enforcement.However, drug abuse and drug addiction are fundamentally a publichealth problem. Reallocation of resources away from interdiction and intoeducation and treatment is essential to the successful managementof this problem. Drug abuse and drug addiction are healthproblems that can be treated. Dr. Herbert D. Kleber, formerDeputy Director of the Office of National Drug Control Policy,now Medical Director of the Center on Addiction and SubstanceAbuse and lecturer in psychiatry at Columbia University Collegeof Physicians and Surgeons, has identified a basic fallacyresponsible for the predominant pessimistic outlook: Drug dependence has been viewed as a chronic relapsing illnesswith an unfavorable prognosis. However, there are thousands offormerly dependent individuals in the United States and elsewherewho have remained off both illicit drugs and excess use of licitdrugs like alcohol for decades, functioning as productivecitizens . . . . [T]here are already effective methods oftreatment if the right approach [and] the right person can bebrought together. No one should conclude that treatment is not effective justbecause drug abuse, like alcohol abuse and cigarette smoking,often cannot be "cured" with a single treatment effort.Most people who do conquer drug addiction succeed only aftermultiple efforts and relapses. Because effective treatmentdepends on finding the best method of helping a particular personat a particular time, several attempts may be needed to discoverwhat will work. b. Self-Help Groups Some substance abusers manage their problem with the help ofAlcoholics Anonymous ("AA"), Narcotics Anonymous("NA") or similar groups. These voluntary self-helpassociations offer the structure of a program following"twelve steps" to sobriety and the support of fellowabusers in different stages of recovery. Since these groupsmaintain members' confidentiality and do not keep records ofattendance at meetings, their success has not been measuredstatistically; however, anecdotal evidence of their effectivenessis strong. Additionally, many respected treatment programs relyon methods developed by the self-help groups and prescribeattendance at AA and NA meetings for their patients. c. Therapeutic Communities One of the best-known methods of professional treatment fordrug abuse is a highly structured, long-term residentialinpatient program known as a therapeutic community. The Committeevisited three therapeutic community facilities in New York City-- programs operated by Daytop Village, Project Return andPhoenix House. Patients in therapeutic communities generallyspend one to two years, sometimes more, living and working in thefacility. Through individual counseling and group therapy, thepatients address the causes and effects of their substance abuseand other problems and attempt to rebuild their lives free ofdrugs. Education, vocational training and work experience areimportant components of the treatment, because therapeuticcommunity patients frequently lack necessary skills for makingtheir own way in society. Successful patients gradually re-enterthe outside world, first obtaining jobs and ultimately moving tohomes outside the program. While many patients drop out of thesechallenging and restrictive programs, research has shown thatthree-quarters of the patients who stay for the prescribed courseof treatment remained drug-free seven years later. One studyfound that 56% of the individuals entering residential treatment(including those who dropped out) no longer used heroin orcocaine one year later. By the end of the study, more than 80% ofthe patients no longer used any prohibited drug other thanmarijuana. Another different national study that focused onopiate addicts revealed that nearly three quarters (74%) of theaddicts who entered therapeutic communities were not usingopiates regularly (i.e., on a daily basis) three years later. d. Other Inpatient Drug-Free Treatment Programs Substance abusers with health insurance or other means ofpayment often seek residential treatment in less restrictivesettings and for shorter periods of time. Two of the best-knownprograms providing this sort of inpatient treatment are the BettyFord Center in Palm Springs, California, and the Hazelden programin Minnesota. Patients usually participate in intensiveindividual counseling, group therapy, and AA or NA meetings.Patients most commonly stay for four weeks and are thendischarged to "aftercare" programs for continuingoutpatient treatment or are advised to seek AA or NA meetings inthe community. Many prominent citizens have testified publicly tothe efficacy and value of these sorts of treatment programs. e. Outpatient Methadone Maintenance Programs Methadone maintenance is the most widely used treatment fornarcotics addiction in the United States. Drs. Vincent P. Doleand Marie Nyswander developed the treatment at RockefellerUniversity in the early 1960s. Heroin addicts who are medicatedwith an appropriate daily dose of methadone, a long-actingsynthetic opiate, lose the desire to use heroin but do notexperience either withdrawal symptoms or the euphoric orimpairing effects of narcotic use. Methadone patients canfunction normally and perform successfully in the workplace injobs ranging from attorney to architect to bus driver. In the early stages of treatment, methadone patients visit theprogram daily to receive their doses. They are granted moreflexible schedules as they show progress in treatment byremaining free of other drugs, maintaining steady employment, andmaking progress in other areas. Methadone programs also providecounseling and other health care and usually arrange forvocational rehabilitation, education, and other services. Successful methadone patients may remain in treatment for manyyears, often at reduced doses; and some eventually leavetreatment entirely. A high proportion of methadone patients stay in treatment(more than two-thirds, by many reports), and more than 85% ofthose remaining in treatment for a year never use heroin again. Asubstantial proportion also stop using alcohol and other drugs.The results of research assessing the effectiveness of methadonemaintenance have been strikingly consistent. One major studyfound that, within a year of beginning treatment, 70% of thosewho had entered methadone treatment were no longer using heroin.After three years, use by patients who had remained with theprogram for at least three months had declined by almost 85%.Another study examining AIDS infection among injection drug usersfound that methadone maintenance treatment effectively reducedintravenous drug use by 71%. An earlier study had found that morethan three quarters of the patients who entered methadonemaintenance treatment were still not regularly using opiatesthree years later. f. Outpatient Drug-Free Therapy Substance abusers who cannot commit themselves to inpatienttreatment and do not want methadone treatment (or would notbenefit from it because their primary drug of abuse is notheroin) can participate in a variety of outpatient drug-freetherapies, including the full range of "talk"therapies, supervised twelve-step programs, and programs that useacupuncture to reduce the craving for drugs. Outpatient programsoften are recommended as follow-ups to short-term hospital-based"detoxification" programs, which generally areeffective only for short-term crisis intervention purposes. The Committee visited the Lincoln Hospital Substance AbuseDivision in New York City, which has been treating drug abusepatients with acupuncture for more than 15 years. Acupuncture treatment, which involves the insertion of fiveneedles in the outer ear while the patients sit quietly in acommon room for 30 to 45 minutes, is meant to control withdrawalsymptoms and the craving for drugs and to have a general calmingeffect. At Lincoln Hospital it is used in combination with groupcounseling on the Narcotics Anonymous model, as well asurinalysis monitoring. Like methadone treatment, acupuncturebegins as a daily treatment, with successful patients"graduating" to less frequent schedules. Outpatientdrug-free treatment programs, whether they employ acupuncture ornot, differ in the nature, length and frequency of treatmentsessions. The usefulness of acupuncture treatment for substance abusehas been demonstrated in several studies. Outpatient programs,generally, have demonstrated a fair amount of success in treatingsubstance abusers. One national study found that nearlythree-quarters of the patients who entered outpatient drug-freeprograms for opiate abuse were not using opiates regularly threeyears later. A later study of similar scope revealed that, aftera year in treatment, 42% of the regular cocaine users who stayedin outpatient drug-free treatment for at least three months hadstopped using cocaine completely. Over three to five years,regular heroin use by patients who had received treatment for atleast three months fell by half, and fewer than 20% of thepatients who stayed in treatment for at least three months wereregular users of any prohibited drug except marijuana. 6. Empirical Research on Effective Drug Treatment Virtually all studies conducted over the last 20 years showthat the most commonly practiced methods of treatment do work.Treatment has been shown to reduce substance abuse and ameliorateits consequences. The outcome of treatment has not been found todiffer significantly with the type of treatment received.Methadone programs, inpatient residential programs, andoutpatient drug-free programs all show dramatic results. a. Studies Examining the Effects of Treatment on SubstanceUse The most comprehensive study of the effectiveness of drugtreatment, the Treatment Outcomes Prospective Survey("TOPS") funded by the National Institute on Drug Abuse("NIDA"), strongly confirmed the efficacy of treatmentin reducing drug use. For up to five years after their treatment,TOPS followed 10,000 substance abusers who had been admitted to37 different treatment programs across the country. The programsincluded residential and outpatient drug-free programs andoutpatient methadone maintenance programs. Heroin and cocaine usedeclined significantly for patients in all treatment modalities.After a year in treatment, heroin use by patients in methadonemaintenance programs declined by 70%, while 75% of outpatientdrug-free patients and 56% of residential treatment patients hadstopped using heroin or cocaine. By the end of the study, fewerthan 20% of the patients regularly used any illegal drug exceptmarijuana, and 40% to 50% of the patients abstained altogether. Other studies have reached virtually identical conclusions. Astudy sponsored by NIDA to address the risk of AIDS infection forinjection drug users found that methadone maintenance treatmenteffectively reduced intravenous drug use by 71% among those whoremained in the program for one year. An earlier NIDA study basedon the Drug Abuse Report Program ("DARP") tracked thedrug use of 44,000 opiate addicts admitted to treatment between1969 and 1974. The study found that most patients stopped usingopiates daily and had not resumed daily use three years afterthey were discharged from treatment. More than three quarters ofthe patients who entered methadone maintenance treatment (76%)and nearly three quarters of the patients who entered therapeuticcommunities (74%) or outpatient drug-free programs (72%) werestill not using opiates regularly three years later. A recentfollow-up study of 405 of the original 44,000 addicts found that74% were not using heroin regularly twelve years after theirtreatment ended. Researchers have uniformly concluded that the three mostcommon forms of treatment are effective despite "the varietyof problems suffered by clients, their long histories of deviantand debilitating lifestyles, and a lack of support in thecommunity" that lead so many addicts not to completetreatment programs at all. Researchers also agree that the longeraddicts remain in treatment, the better their chances of success.National studies of the behavior of thousands of addicts haveshown that, while one-third of the patients who stay in treatmentfor more than three months are still not using drugs a yearlater, two-thirds of those who stay in treatment for a year ormore stay off drugs. b. Studies Examining the Effects of Drug Treatment on the Consequences of Drug Abuse Researchers have studied the impact of drug treatment on manyof the health and social problems that drug abuse contributes to-- the spread of AIDS and other diseases, premature death, crime,unemployment, costly medical care -- as one way of assessing thesuccess of drug treatment. Their studies have shown thattreatment reduces these associated consequences of drug abuse.Treatment prevents the transmission of HIV and other blood-bornediseases that spread when addicts share needles or sell sex fordrugs. Two studies have shown that the rate of HIV infectionamong heroin addicts in New York City not in treatment (46%-47%)is twice the rate of infection among addicts in methadonetreatment programs (23%-27%), and a recent study found that noneof a group of methadone patients with ten or more years intreatment tested positive for HIV. Research has shown that treatment also prevents crime. TheTOPS survey found that, in the six months following treatment,97% of the residential therapeutic community clients and 70% ofthe outpatient clients who had admitted committing predatorycrimes in the year before they entered treatment engaged in nocriminal activity at all. Three to five years after treatment,the proportion of addicts involved in predatory crimes had fallenby one half to two-thirds. The DARP study found that arrest ratesfell by 74% after treatment, for all treatment modalities.Research reveals that treatment helps recovering addicts work, aswell. Only 33% of the 44,000 patients in the DARP study worked inthe year before admission to treatment, but 57% were employed inthe year following their discharge. Two- thirds of therapeuticcommunity patients were gainfully employed after discharge. Theemployment rate of clients tracked in the TOPS study also surged.Three to five years after patients entered treatment, theemployment of patients admitted to residential programs haddoubled over pre-treatment levels, while the employment ofaddicts receiving outpatient treatment rose by more than half. The costs of medical treatment for all sorts of healthproblems decline when addicts receive treatment. As noted earlierin this report, addicts themselves suffer many costly illnessesas a result of drug use, ranging from hepatitis, syphilis andtuberculosis to shingles, malnutrition and psychiatric problems.In 1989, general hospital stays in which drugs or alcohol wereidentified as a major factor accounted for 1.9 million days ofhospitalization in New York State alone. Using a conservativelyestimated average cost of $500 a day, that amounts to $9.5billion worth of medical care. Successful drug treatment starts addicts on their way tophysical recovery and therefore reduces these medical costs.Successful drug treatment also prevents the spread of diseases toothers, such as children born to addicted mothers, and stems thecost of medical care for them, as well as the cost of foster carefor children whose addicted parents cannot care for them. Otherbenefits of treatment flow from its effects on criminal behaviorand employment. Treated addicts are much more likely to beemployed and therefore to contribute to the public coffers ratherthan receive welfare. They make more productive employees and areless likely to have accidents at work. Treated addicts are farless likely to commit crimes and therefore will save society thecost of property loss and prosecuting criminal activity. Onestudy that calculated the cost of crime, poor employmentactivity, and medical treatment attributable to drug addictionfound that the total of these costs was ten to twenty-five timesthe cost of treating drug addiction, depending on the cost of thetreatment chosen. The cost of treating an addict in a long-termresidential drug-free program, for example, was found to amountto only four percent of the cost to society of not treating theaddict. A comparison of costs also shows that treatment is much morecost-effective than incarceration. In New York City, residentialdrug treatment costs approximately $17,000 a year per treatmentbed, and outpatient treatment costs only $2,300-$4,000 a year pertreatment slot; the annual operating cost of a prison bed isabout $40,000, and the cost of building new prison cells exceeds$100,000 each. Diverting drug abusers from prison to treatmenttherefore saves New York State or City half the operating costsof incarceration. It also alleviates the need to build expensivenew prisons. If the proven effect of treatment on criminalrecidivism is included, the savings to the criminal justicesystem in the future would be even more substantial. Treatmentworks and is, in fact, a much more cost-effective way of dealingwith substance abuse than arresting drug offenders and lockingthem in prison. Successfully treated drug addicts give up crime,become productive and more healthy citizens, and ultimately makefewer demands on the public for social and medical servicesthroughout their lives. Their cure also reduces the overalldemand for drugs. 7. Education Works One way to reduce the demand for illegal drugs is to preventindividuals at an early and impressionable age from initiatingdrug use. Using the school system and community programs toeducate children about drug use and its destructive consequencesis an idea that would undoubtedly be supported by many segmentsof society. Logic suggests that education programs should beeffective in diverting young people from experimenting withdrugs. Mathea Falco, in her book The Making of a Drug Free America,details both school-based and community-based educationalprograms which have proven results in preventing drug, alcoholand tobacco use. Education has been shown to be effective inpreventing and reducing drug as well as tobacco and alcohol useamong children and teenagers. Simply to advocate"education," however, may not be enough; the assumptionthat "education," and any type of education program,will be effective may be erroneous. Studies of the effectivenessof drug education and prevention strategies seem to suggest thatlong- term programs geared towards examining the "socialinfluences" leading to drug, alcohol, and tobacco use aremore successful in diverting and reducing subsequent use ofdrugs, alcohol, and tobacco. These successful educationalprograms are generally coupled with community and home preventionand education programs. In contrast, certain short-term educationprograms, which lack the corresponding community programs, havenot proven effective in actually reducing drug use. a. Life Skills Training Program This 15 session curriculum, which is geared towards juniorhigh school students, is designed to teach students personalcoping skills so that they may be better able to make decisionsand feel more confident in social situations. Evaluations of thisprogram, which has been taught in 150 junior high schools in NewYork and New Jersey for the past ten years, show that rates ofsmoking and marijuana use are one-half to three-quarters loweramong students who have participated in this program than thosewho have not. b. Students Taught Awareness and Resistance This program, taught to first-year high school students,combines a thirteen session classroom curriculum withcoordinating community, media, and family programs in an effortto teach resistance skills to teenagers and reinforce the socialdesirability of not using drugs. The program is followed-up witha five-session booster course the following school year. Thisprogram, in a five-year follow-up study, has been proveneffective in reducing the rate of tobacco, marijuana, and alcoholuse by 20% to 40% and cocaine use by 50%. c. Project Healthy Choices This program, geared towards sixth and seventh graders,integrates discussions about drugs and alcohol into the everydaycurriculum by training teachers to incorporate the discussion ofdrugs and alcohol into their teaching of academic subjects. Thisprogram is currently implemented in approximately one hundred NewYork City schools. It is believed that this approach willreinforce prevention messages as the students will hear thisdiscussion as part of their learning on a wide variety ofsubjects. The long-range effectiveness of this approach has notyet been determined. d. Student Assistance Program This program, which has been implemented in junior and seniorhigh schools in twenty states, offers counseling during theschool day on a voluntary, confidential basis. A study of theWestchester County, New York school system where the program wasoriginally implemented showed a significant reduction in alcoholand marijuana use. More significantly, studies showed that therates of drinking and drug use were 30% lower among students atschools which implemented the SAP program. e. Smart Moves "Smart Moves" is a program operated out of Boys andGirls Clubs in the inner-cities where children live in high crimeneighborhoods. By offering after-school prevention programs andrecreational, educational, and vocational activities, thisprogram attempts to teach children to recognize the pressures touse drugs and how to develop the verbal and social skills toresist these pressures. Again, studies have shown that this typeof program can reduce cocaine and crack use and improve schoolbehavior and parental involvement. f. Seattle Social Development Project This comprehensive program seeks to strengthen the bondbetween children from high crime neighborhoods and their familiesand schools. The program provides to parents techniques tomonitor their children better; teachers get better training tomaintain order and resolve conflicts; and children, as in theother programs, are taught skills to resist peer pressure.Interestingly, while the program has shown results in deterringgirls from alcohol, tobacco, and drug use, it has not shownsimilar effectiveness with boys. g. Programs for Children of Addicts Finally, a number of cities are attempting to developprevention programs geared towards the children of drug addicts.These programs attempt to teach parents communication andparenting skills and provide children with support and socialskills. Two such programs are "Strengthening Families,"which has been implemented in Salt Lake City, Detroit, and Selma,Alabama, and the "Safe Haven" program in Detroit.Evaluations of the "Strengthening Families" programsuggest it strengthens family and school relationships andaffects attitudes towards alcohol and tobacco use. This provides a summary of the types of successful programsalready available in the communities. Their success depends upona school and community commitment to implementing comprehensiveprograms geared towards preventing drug use by children. Thediversity of the structure of the programs illustrates thecomplexity of the problem. In addition to reaching out to the"average" school age youth and warning them about thedangers of substance abuse, there are children in high-risk homesand crime-ridden neighborhoods who need additional supportstructures to resist the pressures of drug use. III. TOWARD A NEW DRUG POLICY Joycelyn Elders, the United States Surgeon General, hassuggested that a study be made of our current drug policies andperhaps a new drug policy adopted. Despite the Administration'srejection of her suggestion, public perception is that she may beright. Our government tried to prohibit alcohol consumption andfound it did not work. As demonstrated in this report, drugprohibition is also a failure that causes more harm than the druguse it is purportedly intended to control. The obvious answer isthat we must take the necessary steps towards a new approach todrug policy. Several different alternatives to drug prohibition are beingdiscussed. Federal District Judge Whitman Knapp suggests thatCongress should repeal all federal laws banning drug sales orpossession and permit states to devise alternatives toprohibition. This is the present approach to alcohol in theUnited States since the repeal of the 18th Amendment and theVolstead Act. Federal District Judge Jack Weinstein suggests"standing down" and making fewer arrests, having fewerprosecutions, and spending more money on treatment. M.A.R.Kleiman of the Kennedy School of Government at Harvard suggestsas a solution to the drug problem a "grudgingtoleration" allowing for sale of certain drugs throughstate-regulated stores, but the strategy would be to discourageconsumption. These and other alternatives to drug prohibition should bethoroughly considered so that our society may choose a newapproach that will avoid the widespread evils caused by thecurrent drug laws. Any alternative to drug prohibition shouldallow continued criminal sanctions against conduct affectingothers (the most obvious example being operating a vehicle whileunder the influence). It is the Committee's belief that a new approach to drugpolicy should leave state and local governments free to employthe full panoply of coercive penal sanctions when drug use isrelevant to conduct affecting others. For instance, as mentionedabove, operating any vehicle while under the influence of drugsis not tolerated and that should not change. Although in NewYork, voluntary intoxication remains relevant to negate specificintent, the Legislature may wish to restore individual liabilityin this area and make any intoxication that is voluntaryirrelevant as to mitigation, on the theory that by this voluntaryact the actor will be held responsible for the consequences ofhis conduct while under the influence. Such a sanction is hardlyunreasonable, nor would it strike anyone as being unfair,especially if facilities to deal with cases of actual addictionwere readily available. Finally, any alternative to drug prohibition should notpreclude state and local governments from addressing"quality of life" issues. Government should not bepowerless to control persons who are obviously and publiclyintoxicated. Through enforcement of the existing laws dealingwith public behavior, or appropriate amendments to such laws toinclude specific conduct, government intervention would havegreater effect and would be readily accepted as appropriate bythe overwhelming majority of the population. IV. CONCLUSION The Special Committee on Drugs and the Law has spent thebetter part of a decade examining this country's "drugproblem" and the mechanisms utilized to manage it,principally a federal and state system of criminal proscription. In recent years, the criminal penalties for possession anddistribution of proscribed drugs have increased, with mandatorysentences being imposed at both the state and federal levels. Theprison population in the United States has more than doubled inthe past ten years, largely as the result of these prohibitionistlaws. The scarce resources of the federal and state judiciaryhave been increasingly devoted to drug cases. Despite all of these efforts, the drug war rages on. TheCommittee recognizes the urgent and compelling need to makeadditional resources available for education and treatment. Webelieve that even at increased levels, however, treatment andeducation are not enough to control this country's drug problem.The Committee opposes the present prohibitionist system andrecommends the opening of a public dialog regarding newapproaches to drug policy, including legalization and regulation. KATHY HELLENBRAND ROCKLEN, CHAIR* ANN ROBERTSON, SECRETARY Hon. Harold Baer Jr. Stephen L. Kass Nancy A. Breslow Charles Edward Knapp Kenneth A. Brown Daniel Markewich Ellen M. Corcella Eleanor Jackson Piel Edward John Davis James Warwick Rayhill Eugene R. Dougherty Chester B. Salomon John H. Doyle, III Hon. Felice K. Shea Virginia M. Giddens John Trubin * The Committee wishes to express its special thanks to the Honorable Robert W. Sweet, the former Chair of the Committeeand a tireless advocate for drug policy reform. Justice Shea and Ms. Corcella abstained from voting on thereport. Mr. Doyle and Mr. Markewich dissented, in part. See, Separate Statement, infra. SEPARATE STATEMENT TO A REPORT OF THE SPECIAL COMMITTEE ON DRUGS AND THE LAW ENTITLED "A WISER COURSE: ENDING DRUGPROHIBITION" We are in agreement with the Report insofar as it calls forthe opening of a public dialog regarding new approaches to drugpolicy but disagree with its conclusion that drug prohibitionshould be ended. Our disagreement is based upon our concern thatthe legal sale of drugs would increase substantially the numberof persons who use and/or become addicted to drugs, causing harmnot only to themselves but to society. Such harm would, in ourview, outweigh the benefits of eliminating drug prohibition. 1. Legalizing Drugs Would Reduce Their Cost to the Public,Thereby Increasing Demand, Use and Addiction The theory of drug legalization is that it would take theprofit motive out of illegal drug dealing, eliminating the evilsof drug prohibition. In order to accomplish this result drugswould have to be sold at prices lower than their present illicitlevels. Many commentators have reached the conclusion that lowerprices would increase the demand for drugs. In Searching ForAlternatives - Drug-Control Policy in the United States, Editedand With Introduction by Melvyn B. Krauss and Edward P. Lazear,Hoover Institution Press, Stanford University, Stanford,California (1991), the authors have compiled commentar- ies fromboth proponents and opponents of drug legalization, most of whomacknowledged that lessening cost and increasing access may createhigher drug use. See, e.g., id. at 22-25; 83; 107. 2. The Report Fails to Provide a Concrete Proposal The Report states that "The Committee opposes the presentprohibitionist system . . . ." However the Report providesno concrete proposal that would permit us to determine whetherany net benefit to society would result from legaliza- tion.Should we endorse either (i) the legal sale of crack,amphetamines, hallucinogens and similar dangerous drugs or (ii)the sale of drugs to minors? Certainly, if we accept the propo-sition advanced by many commentators that the legal sale ofdrugs, at lower prices than the prices of illegal drugs, wouldgreatly widen demand, we should reject the proposal that suchharmful substances as those mentioned above be legally sold orthat any drugs be sold to minors. On the other hand, prohibitionof sale of those substances, or of drugs generally to minors,would give illegal drug traffickers a continuing opportunity toexploit these markets, and thus by definition the proposal wouldnot end the evils of drug prohibition. The Report's failure to provide a specific proposal leavesthese critical issues unresolved. We agree with the Report'sstatement that "These and other alternatives [types oflegalization proposals] should be thoroughly considered so thatour society may choose a new approach that will avoid the wide-spread evils caused by the current drug laws." A simple endto drug prohibition, however, cannot be accepted as a solution tothese evils, because the "solution" would producegreater social harm than the present system. 3. The Report Does Not Set Forth Any Convincing Basis for ItsConclusion That "Use in Continued Moderation" Would BeThe "Much More Likely Result of Decriminalization" The Report states that "the available evidence does notsupport [the] assumption" that the current prohibitionistlaws discourage many people from using drugs, citing: risinglevels of drug use, arrests and seizures; recent declines inalcohol and tobacco consumption; the role of drug pushers inboosting demand; a description of Prohibition suggesting nocorrelation between prohibition and use; the results of a 1970'sexperiment in which 10 states decriminalized possession of smallamounts of marijuana; and a poll taken of the general public. TheReport also cites drug use trends in the Netherlands and England,where the problems are less severe than in the United States.Since neither the United States nor any other developed countryhas legalized the sale of drugs, there is, of course, noempirical evidence directly on point. None of the evidence citedin the Report refutes the strong likelihood that reducing pricesand facilitating access would significantly increase demand fordrugs. Recent reductions in use of tobacco and alcohol are notreliable guidelines for legalized drugs because the pleasure-enhancing and tolerance-producing (i.e., addictive) characteris-tics of cocaine, crack and heroin are far more powerful thanthose of tobacco and alcohol. See, id. at 18, 24, 78. The resultsof Prohibition suggests a correlation between prohibition anduse. Alcohol use declined at the outset of Prohibition and thenincreased to only 60% to 70% of pre- Prohibition levels.Immediately after Repeal, alcohol use re- mained the same, but itincreased to pre-Prohibition levels during the next decade. See,Miron, "Drug Legalization and the Consumption of Drugs: AnEconomist's Perspective", published in Searching ForAlternatives - Drug-Control Policy in the United States, at id.,pages 74 to 75. England and the Netherlands both prohibit drug traf- fickingand have relaxed enforcement only at the level of the consumer orpatient. The experiences in those countries do not provide anybasis for predictions as to the impact of drug legalization inthe United States where there are far higher levels of bothsupply and demand of illegal drugs. See id. at 172-188.Similarly, the ten states where possession of small amounts ofmarijuana was decriminalized are not reliable indica- torsbecause trafficking and sale continued to be prohibited. 4. The Report is Mistaken in Characterizing Drug Abuse as anIndividual "Right" rather than as a Social Evil The Report argues that "Ending drug prohibition wouldenable the Court and our society to recognize the right of indi-viduals to alter their consciousness (the most private of mat-ters) so long as they do not harm others." Consistent withthis approach, the Report notes that "Any alternative todrug prohibition shall allow the continued minimal control ofconduct affecting others (the most obvious example beingoperating a vehicle while under the influence)." In characterizing drug abuse as a "right of individu-als" the Report ignores its social costs, which includephysical damage to babies born of drug using mothers; abuseand/or neglect by users of parents, offspring, friends andrelatives; death by overdose; teen suicides; homelessness;drug-induced altered states of consciousness producing violence,particularly from the use of cocaine and crack; loss ofproductivity of drug-using workers; waste of educationalresources used in attempts to teach drug-abusing students; theripple effect on the economy from the presence of large numbersof incapacitated or impaired individu- als; and the enormous costof drug treatment programs. See, Commentary by various authors inKrauss and Lazear, supra, at pages 97-107; 202-206; 227-236. 5. The Report Should Stress the Need to Reduce Demand forDrugs Without Endorsing Legalization The Report is enormously thoughtful and comprehensive anddeserves the most serious study. It describes accurately andcompletely the importance and effectiveness of harm reduction anddrug treatment programs. For the reasons stated above, however,the Report should not recommend ending drug prohibition. Becauseof the risk of catastrophic social harm from legalization, manyof the most thoughtful recent works on this topic do not recom-mend this approach. Mathea Falco, in The Making of a Drug-FreeAmerica (1992), cited in the Report, urges against a "biggerdrug war" (emphasis supplied) and that "[w]e need anentirely differ- ent approach" . . . "one that putsinto practice what we have learned in recent years about reducingthe demand for drugs." Id. at 191, 201. The author pointsout that ". . . law enforce- ment plays an important role,but it should not be the center- piece of drug policy." Id.at 199. In Reckoning Drugs, the Cities, and the American Future(1993), Elliot Currie, while noting the same evils of drugprohibition relied upon in the Report, states: ". . . no one seriously doubts that legalization wouldindeed increase availability, and probably lower prices for manydrugs. In turn, increased availability, as we know from theexperience with alcohol, typically leads to increasedconsumption, and with it increased social and public healthcosts." Id. at 187. In Addiction From Biology to Drug Policy (1994),Dr. Avram Goldstein recommends retaining the present prohibitionon heroin, cocaine and the amphetamines while endorsing a varietyof harm reduction and drug treatment methods aimed at reducingdemand. Id. at 268-285. In Drug Use in America (1994), (Peter J.Vesturelli, Editor) Prof. Patricia A. Adler recommends a"middle ground . . . between the extremes of legalizing alldrugs and bearing the costs of the zero tolerance approach."Id. at 260. The author endorses the regulated sale of marijuanawith the use of law enforcement savings for anti-drug abuseprograms aimed at heroin and cocaine. Id. at 262. Prof. Nadelmannhas commented, and we agree, that: "Today, studies similarto that of the Wickesham Commission and the RockefellerFoundation report [on prohibition and alcohol-control strategiesrespectively] are necessary to any systematic evaluation of drugprohibition and its alternatives." Krauss & Lazear,supra, at 242. CONCLUSION For the reasons above stated we agree with the emphasis of theReport on further public dialog, harm reduction and drugtreatment but disagree with its conclusion that drug prohibitionshould be ended. Contents | Feedback | Search DRCNet Library | Schaffer Library | Major Studies | A Wiser Course, Ending DrugProhibition WT01-B25-21IA031-000651-B019-399http://206.61.184.43:80/schaffer/LIBRARY/studies/aus/cannabis.htm 206.61.184.43 19970122122835 text/html 3356HTTP/1.0 200 OKDate: Wednesday, 22-Jan-97 12:28:28 GMTServer: WebSitePro/1.1f (S/N wpo-0deb)Allow-ranges: bytesContent-type: text/htmlLast-modified: Saturday, 28-Dec-96 07:16:01 GMTContent-length: 3139 Legislative options for cannabis use in Australia Contents | Feedback | Search DRCNet Library | Schaffer Library | Major Studies | LegislativeOptions for Cannabis Legislative options for cannabis use in Australia Commonwealth of Australia 1994 Monograph No. 26 CONTENTS Executive Summary Chapter 1: Introduction Chapter 2: Policy goals Chapter 3: Cannabis in context: history, laws and international treaties Chapter 4: Five legislative options for cannabis in Australia Chapter 5: Diversion and compulsory treatment Chapter 6: Evaluating new legislative approaches to cannabis Chapter 7: Conclusion Appendix 1. The medicinal use of cannabis Appendix 2. Industrial and horticultural uses of cannabis Appendix 3. The authors Contents | Feedback | Search DRCNet Library | Schaffer Library | Major Studies | LegislativeOptions for Cannabis WT01-B25-22IA031-000651-B019-425http://206.61.184.43:80/schaffer/LIBRARY/studies/ota/otatoc.htm 206.61.184.43 19970122122846 text/html 5309HTTP/1.0 200 OKDate: Wednesday, 22-Jan-97 12:28:36 GMTServer: WebSitePro/1.1f (S/N wpo-0deb)Allow-ranges: bytesContent-type: text/htmlLast-modified: Saturday, 28-Dec-96 06:51:33 GMTContent-length: 5092 Technologies for Understanding and Preventing SubstanceAbuse Contents | Feedback | Search DRCNet Library | Schaffer Library | Major Studies Technologies for Understanding andPreventing Substance Abuse and Addiction TECHNOLOGIES FOR UNDERSTANDING AND PREVENTING SUBSTANCEABUSE AND ADDICTION US Government Office of Technology Assessment October 18, 1994 Contents 1 Executive Summary Root Causes Necessary Preconditions Individual Factors Community Contexts Policy Options 2 Introduction Root Causes What Are Substance Abuse and Addiction Magnitude of the Problem Measuring Substance Use and Abuse Organization and Scope of the Report Part I: Necessary Preconditions 3 Biology and Pharmacology Drug Action Genetic Factors Role of Learning Summary 4 Availability Availability Are Drugs Readily Available Marketing Summary 5 Substance Use and Transitions to Abuse andAddiction Substance Use Stages in the Initiation of Use Stages in the Cycle of Use, Abuse, and Addiction Stages in Problem Behaviors Key Aspects of Use Summary Part II: Individual Factors 6 Individual Risk and Protective Factors Demographics Economics Psychosocial/Behavioral Summary Part III: Activity Settings 7 Ethnographic Drug Studies Ethnographic Studies of Alcohol and Other Drug Use Social Context of Drug Use Poverty, Racism, and Cycle of Abuse Future Research Summary 8 Community Activity Settings Homes and Families Schools and Peers Workplaces Recreational Settings Planning, Implementing, and Evaluating Community-wide Programs Summary 9 Policy Options Federal Focus and Prevention Program Structure Research Needs Community Activity Settings Availability APPENDICES A Drug Control Policy in the United States:Historical Perspectives B Federal Programs: Prevention andCausation C Perspectives on Defining Substance Abuse D List of Contracts E List of Workshops and Participants F Acknowledgments References Contents | Feedback | Search DRCNet Library | Schaffer Library | Major Studies Technologies for Understanding andPreventing Substance Abuse and AddictionWT01-B25-23IA031-000651-B020-1http://206.61.184.43:80/schaffer/LIBRARY/studies/dac/dacmenu.htm 206.61.184.43 19970122122857 text/html 3905HTTP/1.0 200 OKDate: Wednesday, 22-Jan-97 12:28:48 GMTServer: WebSitePro/1.1f (S/N wpo-0deb)Allow-ranges: bytesContent-type: text/htmlLast-modified: Saturday, 28-Dec-96 06:46:19 GMTContent-length: 3688 Drugs and Our Community - Report of the Premiers' DrugAdvisory Council -March, 1996 Contents | Feedback | Search DRCNet Library | Schaffer Library | Major Studies Drugs and our Community REPORT OF THE PREMIER'S DRUG ADVISORY COUNCIL MARCH 1996 Joint Departmental Information CentreCataloguing-in-Publication entry: Victoria Premier's Drug Advisory Council Drugs and ourCommunity: Report of the Premier's Drug Advisory Council/Premier's Drug Advisory Council, March 1996. Melbourne: Victorian Government, 1996. 164 p.; 30 cmBibliography. ISBN: 0 7306 9227 2 Cover title. 1. Drugutilization - Social aspects - Victoria. 2. Substance abuse -Victoria. I. Title. 362.2909945 Report designed and produced by O'SHEA SAUNDERS PTY. LTD. Tel:(03) 9583 8827 Cover designed and produced by ROYCE COMMUNICATIONS PTY. LTD.Tel: (03) 9820 3733 M A RC H 19 9 6 This report is available only in Adobe Acrobat PDF format DAC Report Part 1 DAC Report Part 2 CONTENTS ACKNOWLEDGMENTS i OVERVIEW iii 1 BACKGROUND 1 1.1 COUNCIL ACTIVITIES 1 1.2 COMMISSIONED WORK 2 2 ILLICIT DRUGS: CONTEXT AND FACTS 3 2.1 NATURE AND EXTENT OF TRAFFICKING AND USE 4 2.2 DETERRING MANUFACTURE, SUPPLY AND DISTRIBUTION 29 2.3 PREVENTING USE AND REDUCING HARM 40 2.4 AUSTRALIAN AND INTERNATIONAL EXPERIENCES 59 3 CHALLENGES AND CHOICES FOR VICTORIA 65 3.1 INTRODUCTION 65 3.2 CURRENT KNOWLEDGE 66 3.3 DEMAND AND SUPPLY TRENDS 68 3.4 DIFFERENT RESPONSES TO DIFFERENT DRUGS 72 3.5 INFORMATION AND HEALTH EDUCATION 77 3.6 SUPPORT AND TREATMENT SERVICES 87 3.7 LAW ENFORCEMENT AND POLICING IN A HARM MINIMISATIONSTRATEGY 100 3.8 THE LAW 105 3.9 INFRASTRUCTURE 115 4 RECOMMENDATIONS 119 APPENDICES 135 Contents | Feedback | Search DRCNet Library | Schaffer Library | Major StudiesWT01-B25-24IA031-000651-B020-43http://206.61.184.43:80/schaffer/LIBRARY/studies/nycla/nycla.htm 206.61.184.43 19970122122912 text/html 118779HTTP/1.0 200 OKDate: Wednesday, 22-Jan-97 12:28:59 GMTServer: WebSitePro/1.1f (S/N wpo-0deb)Allow-ranges: bytesContent-type: text/htmlLast-modified: Monday, 16-Dec-96 07:34:08 GMTContent-length: 118562 New York County Lawyers' Association Drug Policy TaskForce DRCNetOnline Drug Policy Library Report and Recommendations of the Drug Policy Task Force October, 1996 Table Of Contents Introduction List of Participants I. Failure of Contemporary Drug Policy to Meet its Stated Objectives II. The Costs of Current Drug Policy A. Economic Costs B. Social Costs III. Public Health Consequences of Current Drug Policy IV. The Relationship of Drug Policy to Violent Crime V. Drug Policy, Drug Law Enforcement and People of Color VI. The Impact of Current Drug Policy on Women VII. Effects of Contemporary Drug Policy on the Integrity of Government Task Force Recommendations I. Pursue Alternative Models in Establishing Future Drug Policy II. Provide Immediate Sentencing Relief and Additional Judicial Discretion in Criminal Prosecution of Drug Cases III. Reduce the Harms Associated With Substance Abuse and Drug Prohibition IV. Concentrate Law Enforcement Resources on Reducing Violent Crime and Prosecution of Violent Criminal Offenders V. Reshape the Drug Policy Debate -- Return to Objective Analysis and Realistic Goals VI. Implement Public Education Campaign on Drug Use and Substance Abuse VII. Decriminalize Marijuana VIII. Reverse Encroachments on Civil Rights and Restore "Due Process of Law" IX. Provide Alternative Social and Economic Opportunity for Inner City Youth X. End War on Youth and Inner City Communities -- Restore Confidence and Integrity in Government Bibliography Footnotes Introduction The Drug Policy Task Force, sponsored by the New YorkCountry Lawyers' Association, commenced its operations in theFall of 1993. The Task Force was established as a"blue-ribbon" panel of prominent and respectedindividuals, each known for his or her work, insights andinvolvement in the area of drug policy reform. The stated purpose of the Task Force has been to developand urge implementation of rational and workable alternatives tocurrent drug policy on both the state and federal levels. In an effort to develop a comprehensive and well-balancedapproach to future drug policy, participants of the Task Forcewere drawn from various disciplines, including legal, medical andacademic, as well as from each branch of government --legislative, judicial and executive. After extensive study, public hearings, discussion andanalysis of various issues within the broad scope of the drugpolicy debate, this working body now offers its "Report andRecommendations" for public consideration. The work of the Task Froce, toward development of acomprehensive, multidisciplinary approach to an effective andresponsible drug policy, and in tackling the difficult issuesinvolved in this important area, is ongoing. The "Report andRecommendations" which follow should be read and consideredin the context of the continuing nature of this endeavor. Respectufully, Alan B. Fischler Chair October, 1996 (This report has been approved and adopted by the Board ofDirectors of the New York County Lawyers' Association. NYCLA isone of the largest local bar associations in the nation.) Additional copies of this report are available at a cost of $4each. Please contact: New York County Lawyers' Association 14 Vesey Street New York, N.Y. 10007 Tel. (212) 267-6646 Fax (212) 40-NYCLA or The Drug Policy Foundation 4455 Connecticut Avenue, N.W. Suite B-500 Washington, D.C. 20008 Tel. (202) 537-5005 Fax (202) 537-3007 (You may contact the Chair of the NYCLA Drug Policy TaskForce directly by E-Mail at AlFischler@aol.com.) List of Participants Return to Table of Contents Charles D. Adler, Esq. President Center for Community Alternatives Hon. Sal F. Albanese Member, N.Y.C. City Council Robert M. Baum, Esq. Attorney-in-Charge, Legal Aid Society Hon. Harold Beeler Justice, N.Y.S. Supreme Court New York County Kildare Clarke, M.D. Kings County Medical Center David C. Condliffe Executive Director The Drug Policy Foundation Norman Corenthal, Esq. Borough Chief, N.Y.C. Law Department Family Court Division, Queens County Hon. Stephen G. Crane Justice, N.Y.S. Supreme Court New York County Hon. Lewis L. Douglass Justice, N.Y.S. Supreme Court Kings County Prof. Ernest Drucker, Ph.D. Director, Division of Community Health Montefiore Medical Center Albert Einstein College of Medicine Sheila Dugan, Esq. Attorney, Manhattan Hon. Laura Safer Espinoza Judge, N.Y.C. Criminal Court New York County Lynn Fahey, Esq., Former Deputy Attorney-in-Charge, Legal AidSociety, Criminal Appeals Bureau Alan B. Fischler, Esq. Chair, NYCLA Drug Policy Task Force Hon. Joseph L. Galiber* N.Y.S. Senator, Bronx Co. Robert Gangi Executive Director Correctional Association of New York Hon. Abraham Gerges Justice, N.Y.S. Supreme Court Kings County Prof. Shanara Gilbert* Associate Professor CUNY School of Law Prof. Keri A. K. Gould Director, Externship Programs Fordham University School of Law Diane Gover Special Assistant for Public Safety Office of the Manhattan Borough President Linda Kenepaske, Esq. Attorney, Manhattan Hon. Whitman Knapp Judge, U.S. District Court Southern District of New York Hon. Joseph R. Lentol Member, N.Y.S. Assembly Michael Z. Letwin, Esq. President Association of Legal Aid Attorneys David C. Leven, Esq. Executive Director Prisoners' Legal Services of New York Juliette S. Levin, Esq. Attorney, Manhattan Hon. Yvonne Lewis Justice, N.Y.S. Supreme Court Kings County Rhea Schaenman Mallett, Esq. Project Director Correctional Association of New York Hon. William I. Mogulescu Judge, N.Y.C. Criminal Court New York County John P. Morgan, M.D. Professor of Pharmacology CUNY Medical School Patrick V. Murphy Director, Criminal Justice and Public Policy Programs U.S. Conference of Mayors Ethan A. Nadelmann, J.D., Ph.D. Director Lindesmith Center Leonard Noisette, Esq. Project Director Neighborhood Defender Service of Harlem James Ostrowski, Esq. Attorney, Buffalo JoAnne Page Executive Director Fortune Society Carol Shapiro Project Director Vera Institute of Justice Thomas Sheehan, Esq. Attorney, Queens County Jesse Sligh, Esq. Executive Assistant District Attorney Office of the Queens County District Attorney Hon. Robert W. Sweet Judge, U.S. District Court Southern District of New York Deborah Weich, Esq. Secretary, NYCLA Drug Policy Task Force Hon. Jack B. Weinstein Senior Judge, U.S. District Court Eastern District of New York Lynn Zimmer, Ph.D. Associate Professor of Sociology CUNY at Queens College * We mourn the passing of Joseph L. Galiber, a tireless andarticulate advocate of reason, whose voice shall be sorelymissed. We also regret the loss of Shanara Gilbert, and shallmiss the thoughtful contributions she made to our discussions. I. Failure Of Contemporary Drug Policy To Meet Its Stated Objectives Return to Table of Contents It has become a widely accepted fact that drug policy, asemployed during the past three decades by the federal government,and in state and local jurisdictions throughout the UnitedStates, has largely failed to meet its stated objectives. Current drug policy relies on an "enforcement" or"penal" model, emphasizing interdiction, arrest,prosecution and incarceration of both distributors and users ofcontrolled substances as its primary "weapons" in whathas often been characterized as a "war on drugs."Commonly known substances generally designated as"controlled" or illegal include: hallucinogens(marijuana, hashish, mescaline and LSD), stimulants (amphetaminesand cocaine), and depressants (opium, heroin and barbiturates).(1) Notwithstanding the vast public resources expended on theenforcement of penal statutes against users and distributors ofcontrolled substances, contemporary drug policy appears to havefailed, even on its own terms, in a number of notable respects.These include: minimal reduction in the consumption of controlledsubstances; failure to reduce violent crime; failure to markedlyreduce drug importation, distribution and street-level drugsales; failure to reduce the widespread availability of drugs topotential users; failure to deter individuals from becominginvolved in the drug trade; failure to impact upon the hugeprofits and financial opportunity available to individual"entrepreneurs" and organized underworld organizationsthrough engaging in the illicit drug trade; the expenditure ofgreat amounts of increasingly limited public resources in pursuitof a cost-intensive "penal" or"law-enforcement" based policy; failure to providemeaningful treatment and other assistance to substance abusersand their families; and failure to provide meaningful alternativeeconomic opportunities to those attracted to the drug trade forlack of other available avenues for financial advancement. (2) Moreover, a growing body of evidence and opinion suggests thatcontemporary drug policy, as pursued in recent decades, may becounterproductive and even harmful to the society whose publicsafety it seeks to protect. This conclusion becomes more readilyapparent when one distinguishes the harms suffered by society andits members directly attributable to the pharmacological effectsof drug use upon human behavior, from those harms resulting frompolicies attempting to eradicate drug use. (3) With aid of these distinctions, we see that present drugpolicy appears to contribute to the increase of violence in ourcommunities. It does so by permitting and indeed, causingthe drug trade to remain a lucrative source of economicopportunity for street dealers, drug kingpins and all thosewilling to engage in the often violent, illicit, black markettrade. Meanwhile, the effect of present policy serves to stigmatizeand marginalize drug users, thereby inhibiting and underminingthe efforts of many such individuals to remain or becomeproductive, gainfully employed members of society. Furthermore,current policy has not only failed to provide adequate access totreatment for substance abuse, it has, in many ways, rendered theobtaining of such treatment, and of other medical services, moredifficult and even dangerous to pursue. (4) The appropriate goal of any drug policy must be to decreasethe prevalence and spread of harmful drug use and substanceabuse, and to minimize the harms associated with such problemswhere they are found to exist. (5) Additionally, any policy whichcreates more harmful results than the societal problems itproposes to solve, must be re-evaluated in terms of theadvisability of further pursuit of such policy. Further, tojustify continuation of any public policy, the costs incurredmust always be weighed against the benefits derived. It is withinthis context, and with these criteria in mind, that presentapproaches to drug policy must be objectively assessed and, whereappropriate, alternative models for future policy evaluated andconsidered. (6) In making its assessment, the Task Force has concluded thatcontemporary drug policy has failed by virtually every objectivestandard. Accordingly, we call for a dramatic shift in thinkingand approach in development and implementation of future drugcontrol efforts. At this time, although not recommending"decriminalization" or "legalization" of mostsubstances currently designated as "controlled" underfederal and state penal statutes, the Task Force does urge thatcertain incremental steps be taken to alleviate the more easilyresolved economic and social costs associated with current drugpolicy. These include: the decriminalization of marijuana;further measures attempting to separate the "hard" drugmarkets (e.g., for heroin and cocaine), from markets for"soft" drugs (e.g., marijuana and hashish); thedownward modification of existing draconian sentences for othernon-violent drug offenses; the elimination of mandatory minimumsentences in drug cases; and increased judicial discretion in thesentencing of drug offenders, with further reliance upon drugtreatment and other diversionary programs as alternatives toincarceration for the non-violent drug offender. Moreover, wehighly recommend the further study and serious consideration ofother alternative, non-criminal, regulatory drug controlmeasures, developed in accordance with a "publichealth" rather than a "penal" model of drugpolicy. II. The Costs Of Current Drug Policy Return to Table of Contents A. The Economic Costs Whether viewed in isolation or on balance with the benefitsderived, there can be no question that the economic costs ofcontemporary drug policy, as employed on the federal and statelevels, have proved unacceptably high. Indeed, as we face afuture of increasingly limited resources, the continuation ofpresent policy, with overwhelming emphasis on the arrest,prosecution and incarceration of drug offenders, will produceexponential growth in expenditures required to accommodate andmaintain this policy. (7) As a result of the stepped up incarceration of "drugoffenders" during the past three decades, since the early1970's, our nation has seen an alarming increase in the number ofindividuals incarcerated within its borders. (8) Meanwhile, inaddition to all other resources utilized, the need for additionalprison beds and increased correctional budgets has also grownexponentially, on both state and federal levels. (9) Other unacceptably high costs in the present"penal-based" model of drug policy have been: courtbudgets strained beyond capacity, affecting the ability of ourcourt systems to adequately address both criminal and civil casescoming within their respective jurisdictions; large portions offederal, state and local law enforcement resources devoted todrug interdiction, arrest and prosecution; large portions offederal and state prosecutors' budgets devoted to drug cases;increased costs for court appointed public defenders; and growingbudgets for other national and international drug enforcementefforts -- all exacting a substantial drain on the increasinglylimited financial resources of the nation. Further, the exponential growth in the number of individualsincarcerated throughout the nation has already, and willincreasingly, cause incalculable economic costs in terms of: lostproductivity of those individuals incarcerated; state support offamilies deprived of breadwinners; and the economic decline ofimpoverished communities through incarceration of great numbersof those in the prime of their productive lives, and theirreduced earning capacity upon release from prison. B. The Social Costs The adverse effects of current drug policy have been felt mostprofoundly in the urban centers of our nation. The imposition ofpenal sanctions for drug possession and sale has proven awoefully ineffective and otherwise harmful means of attempting tocontrol substance abuse in communities where, for some, drugs areoften the only escape from the harsh realities of poverty. In aclimate where there is no treatment on demand, criminalizing thesubstance abuser may be viewed as profoundly inhumane andcounterproductive. Imprisoning individuals for drug use causes further detrimentto those individuals and their families, destroying familycohesion and undermining rehabilitation efforts. (10) Theincrease in fatherless and motherless homes, which the currentpolicy of emphasis on incarceration causes, is extraordinarilydisruptive to the family unit, where often, those harmed the mostare the children. The separation of children from their primarycaretakers due to long term imprisonment, often results in amarked decline in the quality of shelter, nutrition, medicalassistance and emotional nurturing. Studies have shown thatchildren whose primary caretakers have spent significant amountsof time in prison are more likely to manifest symptoms ofanxiety, depression, behavioral difficulties and juveniledelinquency, which may often be followed by adult criminalactivity. (11) Many of these children, often left in the care ofless able caretakers, have turned to peer relationships withgangs, seeking to establish a family substitute. (12) The criminalization and consequent stigmatization of drugusers, whether or not accompanied by a period of incarceration,"marginalizes" users, since a criminal record decreasesthe likelihood of successful employment and completerehabilitation, while continuing to impact upon family finances.This, in turn, exacerbates financial and social instability inhouseholds, and financial and emotional instability inneighborhoods, while burdening otherwise stretched resources ofpublic assistance programs. Moreover, the increased enforcement of civil forfeiture lawshas further undermined the security and stability of families.Recognizing a growing trend of evictions and asset forfeiture asa further weapon employed in the "war on drugs," entirefamilies have lost and continue to lose homes and othersubstantial assets for the acts of a single household member,thereby punishing even drug-free members of the community. (13) The black market created by drug prohibition turnsneighborhoods into war zones -- through turf wars over the hugeprofits to be made in the illicit drug industry, violentaltercations over drug transactions gone bad, and battles betweenlocal drug dealers and law-enforcement officers. The increase inviolent street crime which this situation engenders, aggravatedby the experience of violent prison culture which incarceratedoffenders bring back to their neighborhoods upon release, createsa dangerous situation for all members of inner city communities. Moreover, the street culture of guns and violence spawned bythe drug trade spills over into other social interaction in urbanneighborhoods, with violence becoming a commonly accepted mode ofconflict resolution. Community residents live in fear of theviolent street culture generated, in large part, by theblack-market drug trade, and the increased incidence of innocentpedestrians struck in the cross-fires or by stray bullets frombattles involving participants in the drug trade. (14) History has shown us that even in an atmosphere of prohibitionand criminalization of drug dealing, participation in the drugtrade will continue to be widespread, since it indisputablyprovides the greatest entrepreneurial opportunity to many inpoorer communities. There is a strong economic motivation foryoung people and those who might otherwise be legally employedand law-abiding to engage in the sale of drugs, due to the highprofits generated by the illicit industry in an environment ofdrug prohibition, and the dearth of opportunities for poor,uneducated youth in the legitimate job market. Harsh sentencing laws themselves lead to the activerecruitment of children and first time offenders (frequentlywomen - "drug mules") into the drug trade, so thatdealers themselves can escape such penalties. (15) Evidencefurther reveals, that due to the great economic incentivesrepresented by the illicit drug trade, when one street dealer istemporarily incapacitated by incarceration, there is a readysupply of others waiting in the wings to fill the gap in themarket. As such, not only does the widespread incarceration oflow-level drug dealers fail to deter others from entering intothe drug trade, it arguably draws more individuals into theillegal trade than would otherwise occur without the periodicremoval of many of its participants. (16) Moreover, the deterrence rationale of harsh sentencing doesnot necessarily operate among the drug dealing community as mightbe anticipated, where many assume the extraordinary risks alreadyinvolved in the violent but lucrative illicit drug trade. As oneobserver has noted: "Apprehended dealers are replaced from a seemingly bottomless pool, for jail is not a deterrent to those who daily risk death in the drug trade." (17) Additionally, with respect to users of certain controlledsubstances, it appears questionable that conventional deterrencetheory can be meaningfully applied where substance abuse may beaccompanied by physical addiction. Finally, a social byproduct of the misplaced allocation offinancial resources which concentrates huge expenditures on theapprehension and imposition of penal sanctions on drug users andlocal drug dealers, is a clogged criminal justice system unableto focus on society's larger crime problems. Courts jammed withdrug cases inevitably results in insufficient resources availableto properly attend to these and other more serious crimesappearing on overburdened court dockets. This logjam leads toinstances of "revolving door" justice even for violentcriminals, since the system simply cannot handle the overload.(18) A further result of these conditions is a perceivedtrivialization of violent crime itself, reinforced by a penalscheme which punishes drug crimes as severely or more severelythan many criminal acts of violence. III. Public Health Consequences Of Current Drug Policy Return to Table of Contents The Task Force views substance abuse as, first and foremost, a publichealth issue. Accordingly, it appears that problems ofsubstance abuse would be more appropriately and effectivelyaddressed within our health care delivery systems, rather than byour law enforcement agencies, courts and correctionalinstitutions. The emphasis on a "penal" model of drug controlresults in reduced funding for drug treatment facilities. This isan unfortunate irony, since, as concluded by RAND researchers ina 1994 report, a dollar's worth of drug treatment is worth sevendollars spent on the most successful law-enforcement efforts tocurb the use of cocaine. (19) Moreover, the fear of arrest, stigmatization and even removalof their children from homes, (20) discourages substance abusersfrom taking advantage of those health care and counselingfacilities which are available. (21) Pregnant women who aresubstance abusers are deterred from seeking adequate prenatalcare, resulting in unhealthier children. A single positive drugtest result during pregnancy can trigger mandatory reportingrequirements. Therefore, the current policy of criminalization ofdrug use amplifies potential health hazards of substance abuse,and inhibits access to treatment, even for non-drug use relatedhealth care. Since possession and sale of any controlled substance isillegal, dangerous drugs (which despite criminalization are stillwidely available on the black market) are completely unregulated.Under a scheme of criminalization, regulatory control is ceded tounderworld figures, including violent, predatory and oftenruthless criminals. This total lack of quality control of illicitdrugs on the market results in more dangerous, adulterated drugsbeing produced and consumed, which, in turn, causes more diseaseand death from the use of controlled substances than would occurif the production and distribution of these drugs were regulatedby, for instance, U.S. Food and Drug Administration safetyregulations, warnings and other labeling requirements. (22) The "zero tolerance" approach to the "drugproblem," with its primary emphasis on law enforcement andpenal sanctions, results in an absence of any quality control forillegal drugs widely consumed throughout the nation, and a lackof information concerning safer drug use. This presents furtherserious health costs brought on by current drug policy, whichignores the reality that some degree of drug use in our societyis inevitable. This lack of public education and safetyregulations dramatically, and unnecessarily, increases the healthrisks involved in the consumption of those drugs presentlydesignated as illegal. Accordingly, it appears that present drug control lawsthemselves, have directly led to an increase in the health risksassociated with drug use and substance abuse. In addition tothose dangers posed by lack of quality control and safetyregulations governing illegal drugs, drug paraphernalia laws,together with a failure to promote needle exchange programs, haveresulted in the preventable spread of AIDS and other similarlytransmitted diseases to users, their partners and children. (23) Moreover, easier interdiction of marijuana, (with a largermass than other controlled substances), causes greater relativeavailability of "harder," stronger, more dangerousdrugs (e.g., cocaine and heroin), which are easier to conceal,transport and distribute. Additionally, increased dangers to ouryouth and others who may consume "soft" drugs, (e.g.,marijuana and hashish), result from failure of current policy toseparate out the markets for "hard" drugs from thosefor "soft" drugs. Therefore, since consumption of allof these drugs is illegal, (and distributed in the same"black-market"), those who only purchase and smokemarijuana, for instance, are inevitably forced to come in contactwith a more dangerous criminal element in order to obtain thisrelatively harmless substance. (24) Violence associated with the illicit drug trade createssubstantial public health problems, in the form of injuries anddeath. These health problems arise from effects of drugprohibition rather than substance abuse per se. Evidencesuggests that gunshot wounds (due to "drug-traderelated" violence) are more prevalent than overdoses("drug-induced" injuries) in inner city hospitalemergency rooms of major metropolitan areas. (25) Moreover, inaddition to the empirical evidence, our nation's experience withalcohol prohibition suggests the validity of these observations.Once prohibition ended, so did the violence associated with blackmarket alcohol distribution. (26) "Drug prohibition" also causes an increased demandfor more potent legal substances, like alcohol, which isdecidedly more harmful than certain controlled substances, mostnotably, marijuana. (27) Moreover, current drug policy is foundto be, in ways, arbitrary and inconsistent, since it has beenproven that among the most dangerous commonly consumed drugs aretobacco and alcohol, both of which are legal. (28) Finally, current drug policy discourages research intopotentially therapeutic effects of psychotropic drugs, (29) e.g."medical marijuana," which is known to alleviate thesuffering of cancer patients and to be therapeutically beneficialin treatment of certain other diseases. (30) IV. The Relationship of Drug Policy to Violent Crime Return to Table of Contents There exists a large and growing body of respected opinion andcredible evidence which suggests that contemporary drug policyhas failed to deter or reduce the prevalence of violent crime inour communities, notwithstanding harsh treatment of drugoffenders under present "penal" or "lawenforcement" based policy. Indeed, many observers haveconcluded that the current form of "drug prohibition"has generated a great deal of violence, much of it armedviolence encountered in the lucrative underworld drug industry,and some deriving from law enforcement efforts themselves in the"war on drugs". In analyzing these issues, we take great care to distinguishbetween violence caused by actual drug use or substance abuse("drug-induced" violence), and violence caused as abyproduct of the high stakes involved in the illicit drug trade("drug trade" or "drug prohibition" relatedviolence). (31) This distinction is critical, because unless thecauses of crimes and violence are accurately identified, noeffective solutions can be found. There is no doubt that some forms of drug use may result inundesirable, unacceptable and anti-social behavior. (32) However,it appears that the overwhelming causes of violent crimes, whichoften find categorization under the heading of "drugrelated," are caused by various factors unrelated to actualpharmacological effects of controlled substances upon humanbehavior. (33) Rather, much of the violent crime can be said tobe "drug prohibition-related," insofar as it resultsfrom the high costs, huge profits and great stakes involved inthe world of drug commerce as is carried on in cities, states andnations throughout the world. (34) Moreover, the complete banningof all forms of use and sale of controlled substances, includingmarijuana and hashish, has fostered an underworld black market,for both "hard" and "soft" drugs, whereviolence and weapons possession is part and parcel of doingbusiness under conditions of illegality. In cities throughout the United States, we find aproliferation of armed violence resulting from "turf"wars for control of territory for lucrative drug sales, togetherwith regularly recurring dangerous and deadly altercations overdrug deals gone bad. In addition to this community-basedviolence, there are "shoot-outs" between drug dealersand law enforcement officers, the latter developing the need forgreater and more powerful weapons, only to be matched and thensurpassed by those in the drug trade who have enormous profits,and personal liberty, at stake. The net result of thesecircumstances has been an extraordinary casualty rate for thoseinvolved in the drug trade, (35) injury and death to innocentbystanders "caught in the crossfires," injury and lossof life to law enforcement officers, and a prevailing atmosphereof violence in many inner city communities. A further byproduct of these conditions is an increase ofweapons possession, and thereby, the weapons trade, where use andsale of dangerous and increasingly powerful weapons haveproliferated. This widespread possession and use of dangerous anddeadly weapons has further resulted in the increase of armedviolence in our communities, not always directly related to localdrug wars, but fostered by the undercurrent of violence, guns andmoney supported by the drug trade. We note other ways in which current drug policy is likelyserving to exacerbate rather than alleviate violence in ourcommunities. Over the past decades, stepped up law enforcementefforts, disproportionately carried out in our inner citycommunities, have resulted in large and increasing numbers ofminority youth being brought within control of the criminaljustice system. It is reported that almost 1 in every 3 youngblack men in the U.S., between the ages of 20-29, is presentlywithin the control of the criminal justice system -- either inprison, on parole or on probation. (36) This figure is up fromapproximately 1 in every 4 as reported just 5 years ago. (37)Together with the destabilization of families and communitiesaffected by wholesale removal of young men from their ranks, manyindividuals arrested and incarcerated for the inherently"non-violent" offenses of drug possession or sale, arethen exposed to the violence of prison culture. This violence is,in turn, brought back to the communities to which these membersinvariably return. Current drug policy's emphasis on drug arrests, prosecutionand incarceration, also indirectly increases violence bydiverting law enforcement, court and other criminal justiceresources from concentration on violent crime and violentcriminal offenders. Further, institutional pressures bear uponprosecutors to concentrate on drug case, since the availabilityof paid and trained police and other law enforcement officers, asprimary witnesses in such cases, renders prosecution of drugcases easier and the statistical rates of conviction (or return)more favorable. (38) This is not to discount the politicalemphasis often placed on prosecution of drug cases, nor, ofcourse, the obligation of prosecutors to process those cases inwhich legally supportable arrests under current law have beenmade. The net result has been a dramatic shift in the proportionof "non-violent" to "violent" offendersincarcerated in jails and prisons throughout the United States --such shift decidedly toward imprisonment of"non-violent" drug offenders, (39) further stretchingresources and limiting the ability of correctional institutionsto hold and maintain "violent" offenders within theirwalls. (40) On a more global level, there can be no question that theimmense fortunes to be made by involvement in the underground,black market world of drug commerce, has resulted in enormouspower and wealth for national and international narcotics cartelswhich, in the experience of various smaller nations, hasthreatened national security itself. (41) It is clear, therefore, that the most dangerous threats to oursecurity relating to drugs -- in our cities, throughout ournation and even, internationally -- derive not from thepharmacological effects of drug usage, but from the violenceengaged in and power amassed by an entire industry of underworldfigures, driven by the high costs and huge profits to be made inthe illicit drug trade. Searching our nation's history for similar experiences fromwhich we may draw guidance, we turn, as many studying this issuehave, to our national experience with alcohol prohibition duringthe early 20th century. (42) During that era of alcoholprohibition, it was the illegality of that"controlled substance," alcohol, which drove up itscosts, caused a lucrative black market to develop, and supporteda widespread growth in wealth and power for underworld figuresand organizations. (43) This, in turn, brought on violence --between competing bootleggers and racketeers, and between theseunderworld interests and law enforcement officers -- as well asother related and unrelated violence, much as we see today withrespect to the drug trade, although on a much larger scale. Inthe case of drugs and "drug prohibition," theillegality of these substances has supported and perpetuated theviolent culture and dangerous cartels which have profited fromthe resulting economic circumstances. As one commentator hasremarked: "People aren't killing each other because they are high on drugs, any more than Al Capone ordered the execution of rival bootleggers because he was drunk." (44) In the final analysis, it appears evident that our nation'sdrug policy has not only failed to resolve the problems ofviolent crime, it has served to exacerbate them. Indeed, ournation's "war on drugs," as it has come to be known,has likely had the net effect of causing a more dangerous"war" to rage within our communities, with the onlyvision of the future appearing to be, if present trends continue,an increase in violence, the proliferation of weapons, a steadysupply of new community based drug dealers, and the continuedgrowth of ever-more dangerous "kingpins" and underworldorganizations -- all driven by the engine of the lucrative,illegal drug trade. It follows, therefore, that forms of"decriminalization," "legalization," orending "drug prohibition," must be seriously consideredas alternative directions for future drug strategy, howeverradical such ideas may presently appear. (45) Accordingly, theTask Force urges the further study of alternative, non-penalbased models, in development of future drug policy. In summary, it is abundantly clear that, whatever the harmspresently caused by use and abuse of "controlled"substances in our nation, many of the more pressing concerns withrespect to violence in our communities are unlikely to be solveduntil we find a way to take the profit out of the black marketdrug trade itself. If we continue to fail in addressing theseissues in an objective, rational and progressive manner, we mayfind ourselves devoured by a larger, more dangerous beast of ourown creation. V. Drug Policy, Drug Law Enforcement And People Of Color Return to Table of Contents The empirical evidence available clearly demonstrates that theadverse effects of current drug policy impact disproportionatelyon people of color. Although it is estimated that over 80% ofdrug users are white, minorities comprise 74% of thoseincarcerated for drug offenses. (46) Therefore, the injusticesinherent in the enforcement and criminal prosecution of drugoffenses impact more profoundly on communities of color. Mandatory drug sentencing laws and the mass guilty pleas theyentail lead to insufficient checks on improper police activity,since, generally, no trial or suppression hearings occur when adefendant pleads guilty, at which forums improprieties on thepart of law enforcement officers may be exposed. Civil rights areeroded with the creation of additional exceptions to the FourthAmendment's bar on warrantless searches (in what has effectivelybecome the "drug exception" to the U.S. Constitution),while discriminatory stereotyping regarding the profile of a drugdealer leads to the more frequent search and seizure of people ofcolor. Further, vaguely worded loitering and curfew laws,intended to curb drug dealing, are disproportionately enforced oninner city streets. Other factors lead to a disparity in the racial makeup ofthose arrested for narcotics offenses. Wealthier white drug usersmake their purchases behind closed doors, in business districtsand in more isolated suburban communities, away from the eye oflaw enforcement agents -- and therefore, more frequently escapedetection. On the other hand, street dealers, and many drug usersin inner city neighborhoods are considerably more exposed. At the same time, a statistically high number of drugprosecutions result in convictions. This is largely due to the"professional" nature of witnesses involved innarcotics cases, and because drug offenders are typicallyapprehended as a result of "buy-and-bust" operations orpursuant to "observation sales," where police set upoperations in designated "high crime" neighborhoods, soas to make undercover purchases from street dealers, and/orobserve and apprehend individuals involved in street sale andpurchase of narcotics. (47) Additionally, such community based"buy-and-bust" and other similar operations tend toconcentrate on low level dealers and users rather than the drugkingpins, since street sellers and purchasers are simply easierto locate and apprehend. Current drug policy has other irrational and discriminatoryconsequences, e.g. the disparate treatment of crack-cocaineoffenders (generally poor people of color), versus powder-cocaineoffenders (generally white, middle-upper class), and theinequitable prison sentences which this duplicity engenders. (48) Due to lack of other forms of attention, by government andprivate industry, inner city neighborhoods have become thebattleground for much of the drug trade, including enforcementefforts by police. Moreover, the great sums of money involved inthe illegal drug trade encourages police corruption, leading to abreakdown of appropriate law enforcement efforts in thesecommunities. Furthermore, broadly drafted civil forfeiture andother similar laws, providing for the eviction of entire familieswhere one of its members may be involved in drug dealing, (49)are more frequently enforced in poor communities, leading togreater hardship in communities where higher numbers of black andLatino people reside. In summary, many of the social costs outlined in Section II(B)above, are more profoundly felt in minority communities, to wit:high incarceration rates, increase in fatherless and motherlesshomes; active recruitment of children into the drug trade so thatdealers can escape harsh penalties of the drug laws; greaterfinancial and emotional instability in households; greaterfinancial and social instability in neighborhoods;criminalization and stigmatization of many young members of thesecommunities, affecting their future employability; serious injuryto innocent bystanders caught in the "cross-fires" ofrival drug dealers and their battles with police; and a pervasivestreet culture of guns and violence growing out of the drug tradeaffecting other forms of social interaction in urbanneighborhoods, with violence becoming a commonly accepted mode ofconflict resolution. Since current drug policy so profoundly and disproportionatelyimpacts upon people of color, review of present laws must beundertaken to remove any discriminatory bias, and steps taken toensure that whatever drug control laws and strategies areemployed in the future, that they are fairly conceived andeven-handedly enforced. VI. The Impact Of Current Drug Policy On Women Return to Table of Contents Women, particularly minority women, have disproportionatelyfelt the adverse impact of the harsh drug sentencing laws. (50) Astudy of female "drug mules" was conducted by theCorrectional Association of New York, (51) focused onprosecutions occurring in Queens, New York, where JFKInternational Airport serves as a major entry port forinternational travel. The Correctional Association found astartling increase in the number of women arrested and chargedwith "A-I" felony narcotics offenses, many of whom werefirst time arrestees. This was primarily a result of the combinedeffect of the accessorial liability statute and the"Rockefeller Drug Laws," so that women suspected ofbeing used as couriers by drug smugglers frequently facedmandatory prison sentences of 15 and 25 years-to-life, even ontheir first arrest. (52) The report further found that despite the fact that many ofthese women claimed to be unwitting agents of drug distributors,or marginally involved in drug operations, they did not go totrial because of the excessively high stakes involved. Pleabargain agreements, which guaranteed relatively short sentencesof 3 years-to-life, was "too good" an offer to refuse,(although unconscionable under many individual circumstances),given the risk of a much more severe sentence if found guilty attrial. Many of these women were mothers, (53) unable or unwillingto risk being separated from their children for considerablylonger periods in the event of conviction after trial, andtherefore pleaded guilty even if they were innocent or able topresent valid defenses to the offense charged. In these cases, women are disproportionately affected by thelack of judicial discretion involved in the mandatory sentencesstatutes, regardless of any mitigating circumstances which mayexist. (54) Due to draconian drug laws such as these, which oftenfail to distinguish between major and minor participants in drugcases, fail to provide any relief for first time offenders, or toallow reasonable consideration of other mitigating factors and/orindividual characteristics of the defendant, the resulting rateof incarceration for women in Queens County, and for womenthroughout the U.S., has grown dramatically in recent years. Thisgrowth includes an increase of 275% from 1980 to 1992, in thetotal number of women incarcerated in the U.S.; and an increaseof 433% during the five year period from 1986 to 1991, in thenumber of women incarcerated in state prisons for drug offenses.(55) Even those women who are not defendants in drug cases areprofoundly affected by current drug policy, with its emphasis onenforcement rather than rehabilitation. When fathers areincarcerated for drug use or sale, it is the women who are leftto raise children in single parent households. When teenage boysbecome involved in the drug trade, it is their mothers who areevicted when civil forfeiture laws are enforced. When men who areinjection drug users share needles because of lack ofavailability of clean needles, the women they sleep with risk HIVinfection. For those women who have substance abuse problems, acombination of mandatory reporting requirements and the childabuse and neglect laws serve to deprive them of access to medicalservices, pre-natal care, and even substance abuse counseling.(56) A further disturbing trend has emerged in states throughoutthe nation, wherein pregnant women and new mothers, sufferingfrom substance abuse problems, face criminal prosecution onserious charges, including drug distribution, assault and murder,upon theories that such drug use, while pregnant, constitutes"delivery" of drugs to the unborn fetus. (57) In thesecases, it is asserted that injury to the unborn and newly borninfant justifies imposition of severe criminal sanctions upon thefemale drug user. These criminal prosecutions represent a new andnovel category of penal sanctions, (58) from which men areentirely excluded -- another unfortunate result of our nation'scurrent punitive approach to drug policy. VII. Effects Of Contemporary Drug Policy On The Integrity Of Government Return to Table of Contents As a general principle, where respect for the integrity ofgovernment is severely compromised, its ability to govern and therule of law itself breaks down. In this regard, we note that pastdecades of drug policy, characterized by use of draconian penalsanctions, has resulted in legislative and enforcement measuresof questionable wisdom and validity. Integrity of government and, specifically, respect for itsrepresentatives in the law enforcement community has been furthereroded by repeated incidents of individual and systemic policecorruption relating to the lucrative, black-market drug tradewith which many law enforcement officers come into contact.Meanwhile, extreme harshness of drug laws, often requiringdraconian mandatory minimum sentences in the event of convictionafter trial, causes widespread plea bargaining and entry ofguilty pleas, even where such pleas are inappropriate. Thisresults in insufficient checks on improper police activity,generally tested at hearings or trial of such cases. It furtherresults in the criminal conviction of innocent individuals, andincarceration of many such individuals, (albeit for shorterperiods than had they been convicted after trial). A furtherproduct of these circumstances, is the widespread deprivation toindividuals of the right to due process of law (through inabilityto risk trial), and overall loss of confidence in the ability toobtain fair treatment in our courts of justice. Furthermore, there is a growing lack of respect for a justicesystem where drug use or sale, although not generally viewed asbeing as dangerous or morally reprehensible as the perpetrationof violent crime (e.g., robbery, assault, murder), isnevertheless prosecuted more frequently, and more consistently.We must also be mindful of the "trivialization" ofviolent criminal conduct, fostered by undue emphasis upon druglaw enforcement and by a penal scheme which punishes drug crimesas severely or more severely than many violent crimes. In NewYork, for example, the sale of a $10 dollar quantity of cocaine(a Class B felony) is treated as severely as the serious feloniesof armed robbery and rape, and more severely than the highestcharge of assault, i.e., crimes resulting serious physical injury(a Class C felony). (59) The inordinate concentration on street-level drug users andsellers, (generally in inner city neighborhoods, often regardedto as "high crime" areas), has resulted in thedisproportionate and discriminatory impact of drug laws uponpeople of color throughout our nation. (60) Moreover, widespreadinjustice often results from the imposition of unduly harshprison sentences upon drug offenders, pursuant to mandatoryminimum sentencing statutes, even for first time offendersplaying peripheral roles in the drug offenses with which they arecharged. (61) Additionally, the substantial and relentless street-levelenforcement of drug laws, targeted mainly at youth populations inour inner city communities, (unmatched by efforts to reduceviolent crime), has resulted in an atmosphere of police at"war" with the community, and garnering a growingdisrespect for law enforcement and the perpetuation of an"us-against-them" mentality with respect to both thelaw enforcement community and the government which it represents. The erosion of civil liberties tolerated in the name of the"war on drugs," has become so extreme that somecommentators have gone so far as to claim that "[t]he Billof Rights is in danger of becoming meaningless in cases involvingdrugs." (62) The perceived imperative of waging the drug war has twistedconstitutional protections against unreasonable searches andseizures by state officials beyond all recognition, setting anominous precedent for the widespread violation of individualrights which inevitably extends to other governmental activities.What might be called the "drug exception" to theConstitution threatens the civil liberties of every citizen,since precedents set in the context of a drug case are latercited to justify limitations of civil rights in other contexts.As has been further noted: "The Supreme Court has permitted warrantless searches of automobiles, the use of anonymous tips and drug-courier profiles as the basis for police searches, and the seizure of lawyers' fees in drug cases. Property on which marijuana plants are found can be forfeited even if the owner is charged with no crime." (63) Also subject to continuing erosion are our citizens' rights toprivacy in the name of the "drug war," represented byunwarranted and unjustified drug testing of employees, propertysearches of children, and other intrusions into the lives ofindividuals not otherwise implicated in any criminal conduct soas to justify such intrusions. For example, all federal employeesare required to submit to urine testing. (64) Such testing hasalso become commonplace in private industry, not otherwiseconfined by constitutional limitations but, nevertheless,encouraged by governmental policies. Serious "due process" and moral implications arisethrough increased use of civil forfeiture laws, where innocentfamilies are deprived of substantial assets and, at times, theirhomes, due to acts of a single household member, in which theyhad no involvement and over which they had no control. Forexample, the elderly mother of a drug dealer, who personally hasnot participated in any illicit activities, may be evicted fromher home on the grounds that drug related activities were takingplace under her roof. Under these circumstances, the governmentneed only show that there existed reasonable grounds to believethe property was subject to forfeiture -- i.e. that the home wasbeing used for illicit drug dealing activities. The burden ofproof then shifts to the owner (or lessee) of the property toprove by a preponderance of the evidence that the property is"innocent". (65) Meanwhile, innocent family members ofsuspected drug dealers may be rendered homeless. Furthermore, there appears to have developed a trend towardspenalizing innocent property owners, where the government, unableto succeed in its objectives through its own failed policies, hasbegun to shift obligations and responsibilities for eradicatingdrug activity to private citizens. For instance, in somejurisdictions, owners of residential apartment buildings may bedeprived of their property through failure to evict suspecteddrug dealers or users, even where the government, with its lawenforcement and prosecutorial powers, has been unable to convictsuch individuals of any criminal activity. (66) In summary, punitive, draconian, and often irrationalapproaches to drug policy have, over time, caused unwarrantedencroachments upon the civil rights of those within our borders.(67) These are often represented by exceptions to rights embodiedin the U.S. Constitution, including rights guaranteed under theFourth Amendment and the right of individuals to "dueprocess of law," in diverse areas and at various levels ofgovernmental involvement. (68) Therefore, to preserve the integrity of government itself,particularly impacted by our nation's drug policy, we mustreassess our goals (which must be realistic), the purpose andvalues implicit in those goals, as well as the means and policiesby which we hope to achieve betterment of our society. Inreassessing the appropriate direction for future drug policy, wemust first acknowledge that a drastic change in thinking andapproach is clearly called for. Our government's continuedpursuit of a failed, punitive policy, which serves not to providehelp and aid to those in need of assistance, but rather, to"criminalize," "marginalize" and"alienate" growing numbers of its population,ultimately causes more harm than good, garners disrespect for itsinstitutions, and raises the question of its ability to fairlyand effectively govern. Accordingly, we must set out on a course to devise a policywhich inspires confidence for positive and meaningful progress incombating substance abuse, violence, and other related problemsin our society. In embarking on such path, we would do well joinwith the medical profession in adherence to the "Hippocraticoath," which in its most common form of expressioninstructs: "First, do no harm". Task ForceRecommendations Return to Table of Contents I. Pursue Alternative Models inEstablishing Future Drug Policy Replace emphasis on "penal" based approach to drug policy with "medical" or other alternative policy models, which view substance abuse and related problems as primarily a public health issue. Improve and expand drug treatment, vocational support and diversionary programs, utilizing extensive cost savings derived in transition from cost-intensive "penal" based approach to drug policy. Adopt a more rational and compassionate approach to drug policy, founded upon the humane treatment of substance abusers and their families, and placing emphasis on assisting those drug users who need treatment in obtaining such treatment, rather than emphasizing arrest, prosecution and incarceration as a solution. Integrate drug treatment centers with other community based health facilities, so as to bring substance abusers in need of treatment within the health care system. Expand methadone maintenance programs and apply resources saved in transition from a "penal" based policy, to support empirical research on effective treatments of substance abuse problems. Apply cost-benefit analysis for all drug control policies implemented, to ensure that any such policy is unlikely to cause more harm than use of the substance(s) prohibited. Consider alternative drug policy models which would allow for government regulation and quality control for currently designated "controlled substances," in an effort to further reduce health risks associated with purchase and consumption of unsafe adulterated drugs from illegal, unregulated drug markets. Seriously study and consider alternative drug policy models, which attempt to remove huge profits which drive the illegal drug trade, in an effort to decrease the harms associated with "drug prohibition." For those controlled substances which may be "decriminalized," (e.g., marijuana), replace penal sanctions with government regulation and appropriate taxation. Allow states to experiment with alternative approaches to drug policy, including non-penal based models. Study alternative drug policies, including experimental programs conducted in the U.S. and abroad, in an attempt to arrive at the best, most helpful and cost-effective system available. Develop and encourage pilot programs and alternative approaches to substance abuse issues with close monitoring. Create state and federal commissions, including representatives from each of the executive, legislative and judicial branches of national and local governments, to recommend substantial and cohesive changes in drug policy. II. Provide Immediate SentencingRelief and Additional Judicial Discretion in Criminal Prosecution of Drug Cases Repeal mandatory minimum sentencing statutes for non-violent drug offenders. Revise draconian drug laws, downgrading the category of "non-violent" narcotics offenses to levels more commensurate with the seriousness of these offenses in relation to other crimes. Expand judicial discretion in sentencing drug offenders on both the state and federal levels, permitting judges to sentence individual defendants in a manner suitable to the circumstances of the offense and the offender. Where appropriate, permit downward modification of sentences for "drug mules" and other low-level participants in drug transactions. Subject to constitutional protections, provide for statutory relief for presently incarcerated drug offenders, modifying sentences to reflect proposed amendments to drug laws. To the extent criminalization of use and sale of controlled substances remains in place, avoid the present system's over-reliance on weight-based criteria in drug prosecutions, reserving more serious penalties for sales where aggravating factors exist, such as sale to children or use of violence in trade. Establish and improve diversionary and treatment programs and other alternative-to-incarceration programs for non-violent drug offenders. Encourage increased utilization of probation department resources toward facilitating expanded use of such programs by courts in sentencing drug offenders. III. Reduce the Harms AssociatedWith Substance Abuse and Drug Prohibition Move from policy of "zero tolerance," to one incorporating "harm reduction" principles, accepting the reality that marijuana and common recreational drugs, and other potentially harmful substances (including alcohol and tobacco), have always, and will continue to be consumed by some members of society, and concentrate efforts on reducing the harms associated with such use. Adjust policing priorities to concentrate enforcement efforts on curtailing and preventing violent criminal conduct, rather than emphasis on the apprehension and imposition of penal sanctions for use and consumption of drugs. Reduce the risk of young people coming into contact with the "hard" drug market by separating it out from the "soft" drug market. Expand availability of accurate information and education about harms which may be associated with drug use and substance abuse and ways to minimize those harms. Promote needle exchange programs and repeal drug paraphernalia laws, in order to curtail the spread of AIDS and other similarly transmitted diseases. Initiate measures and revise laws to promote, rather than hinder access of substance abusers to medical and other care, as may be needed. Assure doctor-patient privilege/confidentiality for those seeking treatment for substance abuse, pre-natal care and other forms of health care, to prevent fear of prosecution, removal of children from homes and other potential repercussions which discourage individuals from utilizing health care facilities. IV. Concentrate Law EnforcementResources on Reducing Violent Crime and Prosecution of Violent Criminal Offenders Reallocate law enforcement resources currently dedicated to the prosecution of non-violent drug offenders, toward prosecution of violent crime. Concentrate and redirect efforts of police, FBI, and other state, local and federal law enforcement agencies on investigation and arrest of violent criminal offenders. Reserve harsh sentencing laws, together with law enforcement, prosecution, court and prison resources for dealing with violent criminal offenders. Reject the notion that law enforcement efforts can eliminate drug use in our society, and redirect such policing efforts toward concentration on violence and community disruption. Attempt to eliminate causes of violent crime related to the lucrative illicit drug trade, by adopting policies which seek to remove huge profits from drug dealing and underworld black market narcotics distribution. V. Reshape the Drug Policy Debate --Return to Objective Analysis and Realistic Goals Commence objective, rational, non-partisan, and interdisciplinary review of current drug policy, with emphasis on realistic and appropriate goals to be achieved in dealing with problems of harmful drug use and substance abuse. Devise reasonable and compassionate means of addressing such problems. Establish constructive dialogue on drug policy reform, taking care to adopt terminology which distinguishes between harms caused by substance abuse per se and those harms caused by drug control policies themselves. Avoid use of the "drug problem" as "catch-all" for other societal ailments, in an effort to engage in a rational and honest dialogue on the development of a responsible drug policy. Carefully analyze, for scientific validity, claims of causal nexus between use of controlled substances and specific criminal activities. In analyzing causes of "drug-related" crime, identify and distinguish between criminal activity caused by: (i) use or abuse of psychoactive substances; (ii) the lucrative black-market drug trade; and (iii) implementation of current drug policy. Devise realistic policies which reduce, rather than perpetuate violence and other criminal activity. Undertake an accurate, scientific analysis of the pharmacological makeup, uses and effects and dangers of any given drug (controlled or otherwise), in order to inform the determination of a rational and appropriate policy for regulation, use and treatment of such drug. Evaluate how policies presently employed, with emphasis on arrest, prosecution and incarceration, work either to provide assistance, or to cause further harm, to those individuals who use drugs, their families and communities. Commence constructive dialogue distinguishing between substance abuse and drug use generally, in order to develop appropriate and cost-effective goals and policies relating to government, medical or other intervention into lives of citizens, minimizing involuntary intervention absent clear and compelling necessity. VI. Implement Public EducationCampaign on Drug Use and Substance Abuse Increase access to and availability of accurate information about the harms associated with types of drug use and of substance abuse. Provide access to information about safe use of controlled substances, in the absence of abstinence, and ways to reduce harms associated with such use. Counteract inaccurate, misleading and divisive "drug war" propaganda, which has characterized many drug education campaigns initiated by advocates of "zero tolerance" drug policy. VII. Decriminalize Marijuana Decriminalize marijuana, accepting that the economic and social costs of enforcing penal sanctions for possession of this relatively harmless drug can no longer be justified. If not decriminalized, where medically recommended, permit the medical use of marijuana and other controlled substances which have been determined by the medical community to be therapeutically beneficial. VIII. Reverse Encroachments on CivilRights and Restore "Due Process of Law" Repeal draconian sentencing laws for non-violent drug offenses, which deprive individuals of an opportunity to contest charges at trial due to risk of extensive and unreasonable periods of incarceration. In recognition of inherent rights to privacy and personal autonomy, reevaluate whether, and to what degree, government intervention is appropriate and justifiable with respect to casual use of drugs by its citizens. Restore a broader application of the U.S. Constitution's Fourth Amendment prohibition of unjustifiable search and seizure by government, eliminating the "drug exception" to the Constitution which has created unacceptable invasions of privacy and personal freedom. Severely curtail civil forfeiture laws, to permit government restraint of property only upon "reasonable cause," and allow for forfeiture of only those assets directly traceable to criminal transactions, obtained as such with knowledge of the owner of the property to be forfeited, and which laws are enforceable only upon prior notice and with the meaningful right to contest, in accordance with "due process of law". IX. Provide Alternative Social andEconomic Opportunity for Inner City Youth Declare war on causes of substance abuse, including: poverty; lack of education; lack of economic opportunity; family crises and; financial, emotional and physical instability. Utilize substantial savings anticipated from moving from cost-intensive "penal based" model of drug policy, to provide greater educational, vocational and recreational opportunities for youth at risk of becoming involved in the illegal drug trade. Expand and implement affirmative action programs designed to increase educational, economic and career opportunities for minority youth. Encourage public and private investment in poor communities to provide greater economic opportunities in the legitimate job market. X. End War on Youth and Inner CityCommunities -- Restore Confidence and Integrity in Government End discriminatory enforcement of drug laws in inner city communities, which fall most heavily on young people of color. Take measures to reduce violence associated with drug prohibition and the lucrative, illicit drug trade it fosters. Take measures to avoid placing police at "war" with inner city youth, as results from current drug laws and enforcement policies, and work to build positive alliances between police, minority communities and their youth. Restore confidence in government by having it assist and work with those in need, by creation of positive vocational, educational, recreational and other programs, in place of current emphasis upon arrests, prosecution and incarceration which prevails as a result of present drug policy. Equalize penal sanctions applicable to crack-cocaine users and powder-cocaine users, while reducing draconian penalties presently applicable to each. Bibliography Return to Table of Contents Association of the Bar of the City of New York, A WiserCourse: Ending Drug Prohibition, 49 The Record, No. 5,at 523 (June, 1994). Barbara Bloom, Incarcerated Mothers and Their Children:Maintaining Family Ties. Barbara Bloom & David Steinhart, Why Punish Children? AReappraisal of the Children of Incarcerated Mothers of America(1993). P. Bourgois, Just Another Night on Crack Street, NewYork Times Magazine, November 12, 1989, at 65. Bureau of Justice Statistics, U.S. Department of Justice, Drugs,Crime and the Justice System, at 195 (December, 1992). Bureau of Justice Statistics, U.S. Department of Justice, Prisonersin 1993, (1994). Duncan Campbell, Debate that Fails the Dope Test, Guardian(U.K.), May 15, 1993, at 24. Todd R. Clear, Tougher is Dumber, New York Times,December 12, 1993, at 21. Correctional Association of New York, Injustice Will BeDone: Women Drug Couriers and the Rockefeller Laws,(February, 1992). Correctional Association of New York & The New YorkCoalition for Criminal Justice, Imprisoned Generation(September, 1990). Department of Health & Human Services, NationalHousehold Survey on Drug Abuse, SAMHSA, (1993). Department of Justice, Report: Two-Thirds of Non-ViolentOffenders Serving Mandatory Minimum Sentences, The DrugPolicy Letter, Drug Policy Foundation, (Spring, 1994) at 28. Charles B. DeWitt, Information Sharing: A Plus forCorrections Construction, National Institute of JusticeReports, (Jan/Feb, 1991). Drugs & Crime Data Center & Clearinghouse, FactSheet: Drug Data Summary 1 (April, 1994). Drugs & Crime Data Center & Clearinghouse, FactSheet: Drug Data Summary 2, (April, 1994). Federal Bureau of Investigation, Crime in the United States,(1991). Alan B. Fischler, The Incarceration of America, NewYork Law Journal (NYLJ) , 11/6/92, at 2. Sen. Joseph L. Galiber, A Bill to Repeal Criminal DrugLaws: Replacing Prohibition with Regulation, 18 Hofstra L.Rev. 831 (1990). Abraham G. Gerges, The Possible End to 'TASC Pleas', NYLJ11/18/93, at 2. Keri A. Gould, Turning Rat and Doing Time for Uncharged,Dismissed, Or Acquitted Crimes: Do the Federal SentencingGuidelines Promote Respect for the Law?, 10 NYLS Journalof Human Rights 1 (1993). L.A. Greenfield & S.M. Harper, Women in Prison, U.S.Bureau of Justice Statistics, Special Report (1991). L. Grinspoon & J.B. Bakalar, The War on Drugs -- APeace Proposal, 330 New England Journal of Medicine357. L. Grinspoon & J.B. Bakalar, Marihuana -- The ForbiddenMedicine, (1993). J. Jackson, A Real War on Drugs Can't Ignore Poverty, NewYork Newsday, September 18, 1989, at 58. Hon. Whitman Knapp, Dethrone the Drug Czar, New YorkTimes, May 9, 1993, Section 4, at 15 (Op-Ed). Michael Z. Letwin, Report from the Front Line: The BennettPlan, Street-Level Drug Enforcement in New York City and theLegalization Debate, 18 Hofstra L. Rev. 795 (1990). Michael Z. Letwin, Wrong Way to Fight Crime, NewYork Times, October 6, 1990, at 23 (Op-Ed article). Michael Z. Letwin, Sentencing Angela Thompson, NYLJ4/18/94, p.2, col.3. David C. Leven, Curing the Addiction to Punishing Addicts, NYLJ5/24/93, at 2. David C. Leven, Public Hearing Testimony Before the NYSAssembly Standing Committee on Codes on the Rockefeller Drug Laws- Twenty Years Later, Prisoners' Legal Services of New York,June 4, 1993. L.F. Lowenstein, Recent Investigations into Criminality, TheCriminologist, (1992) at 105. Clarence Lusane, Pipe Dream Blues: Racism & the War OnDrugs, (1991). Marc Mauer, Americans Behind Bars: One Year Later, TheSentencing Project, (February, 1992). M. Mauer & Tracy Huling, Young Black Americans and theCriminal Justice System: Five Years Later, The SentencingProject, (October, 1995). M. Mauer, Young Black Men And The Criminal Justice System:A Growing Problem, The Sentencing Project, (1990). Ethan A. Nadelmann, Cops Across Borders, (1994). Ethan A. Nadelmann, Should We Legalize Drugs? HistoryAnswers Yes, American Heritage, (February/March,1993), at 42. Ethan A. Nadelmann, Thinking Seriously About Alternativesto Drug Prohibition, 121 Daedalus 3, (Summer, 1992). E. Nadelmann, A Rational Approach to Drug Legalization, AmericanJournal of Ethics and Medicine, (Spring, 1991). E. Nadelmann, Drug Prohibition in the United States: Costs,Consequences and Alternatives, 245 Science 939(September, 1989). E. Nadelmann, U.S. Drug Policy: A Bad Export, 70 ForeignPolicy 92 (Spring, 1988). James Ostrowski, The Moral and Practical Case for DrugLegalization, 18 Hofstra L. Rev. 607 (1990). James Ostrowski, Thinking about Drug Legalization, CatoInstitute Policy Analysis, No. 121, (May, 1989). Pratt & Peterson, Civil Forfeiture in the SecondCircuit, 65 St. John's L. Rev. 653 (1991). Jill Leslie Rosenbaum, Family Disfunction and FemaleDelinquency, 35 Crime and Delinquency (1989). C.P. Rydell & S.S. Everingham, Controlling Cocaine:Supply Versus Demand Programs, RAND (1994). R. Sabbag, The Cartels Would Like a Second Chance, RollingStone Magazine, May 5, 1994, at 35. J. Schuler & A. McBride, Notes From the Front: ADissident Law-Enforcement Perspective on Drug Prohibition, 18 HofstraL. Rev. 893 (1990). N. Steinberg, The Law of Unintended Consequences, RollingStone Magazine, May 5, 1994, at 33. M. Sviridoff, et al., The Neighborhood Effects ofStreet-Level Drug Enforcement: An Evaluation of TNT by The VeraInstitute Of Justice, (August, 1992). Hon. Robert W. Sweet & Edward A. Harris, Just andUnjust Wars: The War on the War on Drugs - Some Moral andConstitutional Dimensions of the War on Drugs, 87 NorthwesternL. Rev. 1302 (1993). Hon. Robert W. Sweet, The Abolition of Prohibition -- onDrugs, That Is, Mouthpiece, Journal of the N.Y.S.Association of Criminal Defense Lawyers, Vol. 5, No. 5, (Nov/Dec,1992). C. Torres, Legalize It?, The Nation, June 20,1994, at 857. University of California at San Francisco, The PublicHealth Impact of Needle Exchange Programs in the U.S. and Abroad,U.C.S.F. Institute for Health Policy Studies, (September, 1993). Hon. Jack B. Weinstein & Fred A. Bernstein, TheUnwarranted Denigration of Mens Rea on Drug Sentencing, FederalSentencing Reporter, Vol. 7, No. 3, (Nov/Dec, 1994). Hon. Jack B. Weinstein, The War on Drugs is Self-Defeating, NewYork Times, July 8, 1993 (Op-Ed). P. Wilkinson, The Young and the Reckless, RollingStone Magazine, May 5, 1994, at 29. S. Wisotsky, A Society Of Suspects: The War On Drugs andCivil Liberties, (1992). L. Zimmer & J.P. Morgan, Exposing Marijuana Myths: AReview of the Scientific Evidence, The Lindesmith Center,(October, 1995). L. Zimmer, Operation Pressure Point: The Disruption ofStreet-Level Drug Trade on New York's Lower East Side, Centerfor Research in Crime and Justice, N.Y.U. School of Law, (1987),at 9. Footnotes Return to Table of Contents 1. See The Merck Manual, 16th Ed. (1992) at1550; also see 21 U.S.C. 802, (regarding federalcriminal classification of presently designated controlledsubstances). Many of the more commonly known controlled substances were notillegal or "criminalized," until passage of theHarrison Act of 1914. Marijuana was banned in 1937. Alcohol wasbanned in 1920, although "decriminalized," by repeal ofthe 18th Amendment in 1933. While present drug policy hasstatutory "roots" dating back 80 years, we regardcontemporary drug policy, as characterized by the emphasis on"stepped-up" law enforcement efforts and enhanced penalsanctions, a more recent development dating back three decades,to the early 1970's. 2. See National Household Survey on Drug Abuse(1993), U.S. Department of Health and Human Services, SubstanceAbuse and Mental Health Services Administration (SAMHSA), whichreports that 12% of the total U.S. population, or 24 millionpersons within the U.S., had used illicit drugs within the pastyear. 77 million persons had used illicit drugs sometime duringtheir life. In a similar survey, conducted in 1994, it was foundthat 10.8% of the total population, or 22.6 million persons hadused illicit drugs some time during the previous year. Further, a U.S. General Accounting Office report, released in1989, noted the following findings: that drug abuse in the UnitedStates persisted at very high levels throughout the 1980's; thatthe amount of cocaine consumed in the U.S. doubled, whilethe price declined about 30%; that the price of heroin declined20%, while the average purity of heroin sold had doubled; andthat marijuana, while its use declined, continued to be readilyavailable in most areas of the country. See JamesOstrowski, Thinking About Drug Legalization, CatoInstitute Policy Analysis (1989) at 28. Thus, notwithstandinghuge expenditures in waging the "war on drugs," (seeSection IIA, infra), drug use remains widespreadthroughout the nation, its costs have actually decreased andpotency increased. See also, Joseph B. Treaster, HospitalData Show a Rise in Drug Abuse, New York Times, July9, 1992, at B1, (citing lower costs and greater purity of drugs,together with more young sellers entering the drug market due tounemployment, as reasons for upsurge in drug abuse in New YorkCity. Further reporting on New York State Office of Alcoholismand Substance Abuse estimate of 200,000 heroin addicts in NewYork City alone.) See also Association of the Bar of theCity of New York, A Wiser Course: Ending Drug Prohibition,49 The Record, No. 5 (1994) at 544. Failures in ability ofU.S. to prevent production and importation of narcotics,notwithstanding costly efforts, are also well documented. SeeE. Nadelmann, Cops Across Borders, (1993). 3. In aid of more meaningful and objective analysis of whathas commonly been referred to as "the drug problem,"care must be taken and appropriate distinctions made in usingterms such as: "drug use," "substance abuse,""drug-related crime," and "drug-inducedcrime." Definitions of these terms having been blurred inthe drug policy debate thus far, has led to a failure to properlyanalyze and distinguish harms caused by drug use, substanceabuse, the drug-trade, and drug control policies themselves. 4. See "Public Health Consequences of Current DrugPolicy," Section III, infra. 5. We acknowledge the reality, that forms of drug use andother potentially harmful behavior have, and always will be,engaged in by members of our society. Accordingly, we note thatpolicies based on "zero tolerance" are unrealistic,unnecessarily harsh, and often counterproductive to reachingthose in need of assistance. 6. Alternative models of drug policy which merit considerationinclude those incorporating principles of "harmreduction," which have received widespread acceptance amongdrug policy experts and by various governments throughout theworld. "Harm reduction" strategies seek to analyze thephenomenon of substance abuse in society by identifying andisolating the actual societal harms caused by substance abuse, aswell as policies employed to defeat it, and attempting to reducethose harms deriving from each. In seeking to reduce harmsassociated with drug use, "harm reduction" strategiesinclude the expansion of needle exchange programs and methadoneclinics, and education on safe drug use for that segment of thepopulation who will continue to use harmful drugs. Meanwhile,such policy redirects law-enforcement efforts from attempts toeradicate all drug use, to concentration in areas where crime andpublic disorder continue to occur. We find this approach to beboth more realistic and humane than present"zero-tolerance" based policy, with all its attendantcosts, marginal results, and questionable use of availableresources. 7. From 1973 to 1993 the total number of inmates held inprison and jail facilities throughout the U.S. quadrupled.Having doubled from 1973 to 1983, the years from 1983 through1993 saw the total number of prisoners held in the U.S. doubleonce again, from 660,800 to 1,408,685. During this period, thenumber of incarcerated drug offenders rose 510%. It is estimatedthat in 1990, when the number of individuals incarcerated in U.S.jails and prison facilities reached 1.1 million, the cost ofincarcerating these individuals was approximately $20.3 billion,with an anticipated need to double prison facilities inthe federal system. In some states, such as New York, the figures are even morestartling, New York having seen its inmate population almost tripleduring the period from 1981 through 1991. In only six years, from1983 to 1989, the state saw the annual number of individualsimprisoned for drug offenses grow 500%. By 1990, felony drugconvictions in New York represented 50% of all felony convictionshanded down by its state courts, up from 11.6% in 1980. As of1992, New York State anticipated the need for eight new prisons,at an approximate cost of $220 million to build one prison, and$22.5 million per year each to operate -- totaling near termcosts of approximately $2.2 billion dollars. See Alan B.Fischler, The Incarceration of America, N.Y. LawJournal, November 6, 1992 at 2; Marc Mauer and Tracy Huling, YoungBlack Americans and the Criminal Justice System: Five Years Later,The Sentencing Project (1995); M. Mauer, Americans BehindBars: One Year Later, The Sentencing Project (1992); Stateof New York, Division of Criminal Justice Services Statistics,1980-1990; Correctional Association of New York and the New YorkCoalition for Criminal Justice, Imprisones Generation,(September, 1990); Charles B DeWitt, Information Sharing: APlus for Corrections Construction, National Institute ofJustice Reports, (Jan/Feb., 1991). 8. In 1991, the U.S. became the leading nation in the rate atwhich it incarcerates its people. For instance, by 1991, 445 ofevery 100,000 persons in the U.S. were imprisoned, a rate ofincarceration more than 2 to 3 times that of its closest"competitors", e.g. Canada and China each at 111 per100,000, and Japan at 42 per 100,000. See M. Mauer, AmericansBehind Bars: One Year Later, The Sentencing Project (1992). 9. While some economic benefit is admittedly derived in thosecommunities where new prisons are built and to the correctionspersonnel hired to staff these additional facilities, such"benefits," nevertheless, represent redirection ofincreasingly limited public resources, and involve the muchgreater costs associated with warehousing drug offenders. 10. One study noted that 62% of the children of incarceratedwomen live more than 100 miles from the correctional facility,and 47% lived 21-100 miles from the facility; Barbara Bloom, IncarceratedMothers and Their Children: Maintaining Family Ties, at60-64. Overall, 54% of children whose mothers were incarceratednever visited the prison facility; Barbara Bloom and DavidSteinhart, Why Punish Children? A Reappraisal of the Childrenof Incarcerated Mothers of American, (1993) at 20. 11. L.F. Lowenstein, Recent Investigations into Criminality, TheCriminologist, (1992) at 105. 12. Jill Leslie Rosenbaum, Family Dysfunction and FemaleDelinquency, 35 Crime and Delinquency, (1989) at 31,39. Rosenbaum found that 96% of women who had been committed tothe youth authority as children, were later arrested as adults.76% of those women had at least one other family member with acriminal record. 51% of the mothers of those women had felonyarrest records, most of which were drug related. 13. See "Effects of Contemporary Drug Policy on theIntegrity of Government," Section VII, infra. 14. See Clarence Lusane, Pipe Dream Blues: Racism& The War on Drugs, (1991); J. Schuler & A. McBride, NotesFrom the Front: A Dissident Law-Enforcement Perspective on DrugProhibition, 18 HOFSTRA L. REV. 893 (1990); M. Sviridoff, etal., The Neighborhood Effects of Street-Level DrugEnforcement: An Evaluation of TNT by the Vera Institute ofJustice, (August 1992); and Michael Z. Letwin, Report fromthe Front Line: The Bennett Plan, Street-Level Drug Enforcementin New York City and the Legalization Debate, 18 HofstraL. Rev. 795 (1990). 15. On the phenomenon of "drug mules" generally, seeCorrectional Association of New York, Injustice Will Be Done:Women Drug Couriers and the Rockefeller Drug Laws, (1992). 16. See J. Schuler & A. McBride, Notes From theFront: A Dissident Law-Enforcement Perspective on DrugProhibition, 18 Hofstra L. Rev. 893 (1990). 17. See Michael Z. Letwin, Wrong Way to Fight Crime, NewYork Times, October 6, 1990, at 23 (Op-Ed article); andLetwin, Report from the Front Line: The Bennett Plan,Street-Level Drug Enforcement in New York City and theLegalization Debate, 18 Hofstra L. Rev. 795, at notes68 and 127. 18. See also, "Effects of Contemporary Drug Policy onthe Integrity of Government," Section VII, infra. 19. Treatment: Effective (But Unpopular) Weapon AgainstDrugs, RAND Research Review, (Spring, 1995); seealso Joseph Treaster, Study Says Anti-Drug Dollars AreBest Spent on Treatment, New York Times, June 19,1994; Marc Mauer and Tracy Huling, Young Black Americans andthe Criminal Justice System: Five Years Later, The SentencingProject (1995). 20. In New York, for example, a parent's substance abuse andfailure to cooperate with treatment is prima facieevidence of "neglect" for the purposes of Family Courtabuse and neglect proceedings; Family Court Act 1046(a)(iii). 21. For example, New York State law imposes mandatoryreporting requirements on health care professionals, includingmedical practitioners, social workers and counselors, requiringthem to report suspected child abuse and neglect to the ChildWelfare Administration. Since substance abuse is deemed a type of"child neglect" (see note 20, above), this has awidespread deterrent effect on access to health care by drugusers. With respect to fear of arrest and prosecution of women, see"The Impact of Current Drug Policy on Women,"Section VI, infra. 22. See J. Ostrowski, Thinking About DrugLegalization,Cato Institute Policy Analysis, No. 121,May 25, 1989; Association of the Bar of the City of New York, AWiser Course: Ending Drug Prohibition, 49 The Record,No. 5, at 523 (1994); E. Nadelmann, The Case for Legalization, ThePublic Interest, No. 92 (1988). 23. A 1993 Center for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC)study found that needle exchange programs are likely to reduceHIV transmission and do not increase drug use. However, itsrecommendations have not been followed because of, what webelieve to be, an irrational adherence to a "zerotolerance" drug policy. See U.C.S.F. Institute forHealth Policy Studies, The Public Health Impact of NeedleExchange Programs in the U.S. Abroad, (September, 1993). 24. L. Zimmer & J.P. Morgan, Exposing Marijuana Myths:A Review of the Scientific Evidence, The Lindesmith Center,(October 1995). Although between 60 to 70 million Americans haveused marijuana, not one has died from an overdose, a contrast notjust with alcohol but with aspirin; E. Nadelmann, A RationalApproach to Drug Legalization, American Journal of Ethicsand Medicine, (Spring, 1991). Nadelmann also cites DrugEnforcement Administration's Administrative Law Judge, FrancisYoung, concluding, after extensive hearings on the medicinalvalue of marijuana, that "it is one of the safesttherapeutically active substances known to man"); id.at 6. Nadelmann further reports that, in the 11 states thatdecriminalized marijuana during the 1970's, rates of consumptionwere indistinguishable from rates in those states that had not;and that, in the Netherlands, where cannabis was decriminalizedin 1976, consumption among young people had actually decreasedsubstantially. See also Robert W. Sweet, The Abolitionof Prohibition -- on Drugs, that is, Mouthpiece, Journalof the New York State Association of Criminal Defense Lawyers,Vol. 5, No. 5, (Nov/Dec, 1992), reporting on recommendations byPresident Nixon's commission on the drug laws and the those ofthe National Academy of Sciences in 1982, both of which calledfor an end to the criminalization of marijuana. Sweet furthernotes that decriminalization of marijuana would take 850,000arrests out of the system. It is also noteworthy, as reported in J. Ostrowski, ThinkingAbout Drug Legalization, Cato Institute Policy Analysis,No. 121, (1989) at 5, that when marijuana was banned in 1937, nomedical evidence was presented to Congress in support of suchlegislation. 25. Speech by Kildare Clarke, M.D., Kings Co. Medical Center,NYCLA Evening Forum, "Bursting at the Seams: Toward aRational Allocation of Resources in the Criminal JusticeSystem," (November 1992). 26. J. Ostrowski, The Moral and Practical Case for DrugLegalization, 18 Hofstra L. Rev. 607 (1990). 27. L. Zimmer & J.P. Morgan, supra at Note 24. Alsosee Note 28, infra. 28. It is well established that alcohol causes liver diseaseand tobacco is a carcinogen. Additionally, alcohol use and abuse,when combined with other activities, i.e., operation of a motorvehicle, has more dangerous effects than most presently illegalsubstances. Furthermore, alcohol abuse has been implicated inincreased incidence of violent behavior, including domesticviolence. While not advocating a return to "alcoholprohibition," we note that in the case of alcohol,appropriate sanctions are imposed upon harmful activitiesconducted while under the influence of this intoxicant, ratherthan punishment for its consumption per se. Thecomparative statistics are also quite poignant. Alcohol andtobacco have been directly implicated in approximately 100,000and 300,000 deaths per year, respectively. See R. Sweet, TheAbolition of Prohibition -- on Drugs, that is, supra, at 7,and E. Nadelmann, U.S. Drug Policy: A Bad Export, ForeignPolicy, No. 70, at 92 (Spring, 1988). Meanwhile, according tothe National Council on Alcoholism, only 3,562 people were knownto have died in 1985 from use of all illegal drugs combined,notwithstanding 1985 having been was one of the highest for percapita drug consumption. Id. 29. Extensive research in to the potential therapeutic effectsof psychedelics has been conducted by the MultidisciplinaryAssociation for Psychedelic Studies (MAPS). 30. See L. Grinspoon and J. Bakalar, Marihuana --The Forbidden Medicine, (1993). 31. In studying the causes of crime, use of the term"drug related" is often unhelpful and even misleading,as it fails to distinguish between those crimes actually causedby drug use or substance abuse (i.e. "drug induced,"meaning caused by the actual psychotropic experience, or mindand/or physical alterations brought on by use of illicit drugs),and those resulting from participation in the violent butlucrative drug trade under circumstances of drug prohibition,(i.e., "drug trade" or "drug prohibition"related crime). 32. A comparable distinction might be made between"alcohol-induced" crime (e.g., public disorder andaccentuated violent behavior, domestic or otherwise), and"alcohol trade" or "alcohol prohibition"related crime brought on by the era of prohibition (1920 to1933), which included assaults and homicides -- resulting fromturf wars between rival bootleggers, shoot outs with lawenforcement officials, transactions gone bad, etc., extortion,bribery, and sale of adulterated and poisonous liquor. This isnot to state, however, that all occasions of casual drug usecauses behavior which is harmful or sufficiently serious as tojustify intervention by the state, either by penal orrehabilitative measures. See Robert W. Sweet and Edward A.Harris, Just and Unjust Wars: The War on the War on Drugs --Some Moral and Constitutional Dimensions of the War on Drugs,(Book Review), Northwestern University L. Rev., Vol 87,No. 4, (Summer, 1993). 33. See Testimony of John P. Morgan, Professor ofPharmacology, City University of New York Medical School, June1994, at jointly sponsored public hearings of the New York CountyLawyers' Association and the Association of the Bar of the Cityof New York. We note, parenthetically, that of the substanceswhich have been most directly related to violent and other formsof anti-social behavior, alcohol rates most highly. This is not,however, a "controlled substance," as that term isdefined by criminal statutes, nor would the Task Force recommenda return to "prohibition" of alcohol, based on thelessons learned from that failed experiment. 34. Certain nations have succeeded in decreasing such"drug prohibition-related" violence by easingrestrictions on use and, to some extent, on sale of certainsubstances which are designated as "controlled" in theUnited States. This has decreased, to a degree, the black marketactivity and thereby, the cost and violence associated withillegal drug trade. Examples include: the Netherlands, Australiaand the United Kingdom. 35. We cannot fail to note here that many involved in the drugtrade, particularly in our nation's cities, are not"hardened criminals," but rather, minority youth whoare understandably attracted to the possibilities of immediateeconomic advancement through participation in the drug trade. Fordespite its risks, engagement in the sale of drugs represents oneof the few avenues available to such individuals in a world whichappears to present limited economic opportunity. 36. Marc Mauer and Tracy Huling, Young Black Americans andthe Criminal Justice System: Five Years Later, The SentencingProject (1995). 37. See Marc Mauer, Young Black Men and the CriminalJustice System: A Growing National Problem, The SentencingProject (1990). 38. Testimony of Jonathan Soroko, former Special NarcoticsAssistant District Attorney, at jointly sponsored public hearingsof the New York County Lawyers' Association and the Associationof the Bar of the City of New York (June, 1994). 39. As reported in the U.S. Dept. Bureau of Justice, Bureau ofJustice Statistics, Bulletin, Prisoners in 1993: "In 1992 . . . the number of new court commitments for drug offenses totaled an estimated 102,000 [up from 8,900 in 1980, ed.]. The number of persons admitted for drug offenses was nearly as large as the number admitted for property offenses (104,300) and larger than the number for violent offenses (95,300 and public-disorder offenses (29,400). An estimated 30.5% of all new court commitments in 1992 were drug offenders, up from 6.8% in 1980. . . .The increase in drug offenders admitted to prison accounted for nearly 46% of the total growth in new court commitments since 1980. . . . The growth in the number of persons arrested for drug law violations and the increase in the rate of incarceration for drug offenses account for the change in the prison offense distribution. Between 1980 and 1992, the estimated number of adult arrests for drug law violations increased by 108% from 471,200 to 980,700." The resulting shift in the percentage of drug offenders heldin U.S. prisons and jail, as compared to inmates incarcerated forother criminal offenses, is as follows: In 1983, the total drugoffenders held in federal prisons represented 27.6% of the totalinmate population. By 1993, this figure rose to 60.8%. Duringthat same period, the percentage of drug offenders rose in stateprisons from 7.0% to 22.5%, and in local jails from 9.3% to23.0%. Together with the shift in the makeup of jail and prisonpopulations, increased drug arrests and commitment of drugoffenders during this period has resulted in a doubling ofthe total number of individuals incarcerated in the U.S., from660,800 in 1983 to 1,408,685 in 1993. This figure quadruplesthe number of those incarcerated in the U.S. in 1973, just 20years ago; M. Mauer and Tracy Huling, Young Black Americansand the Criminal Justice System: Five Years Later, TheSentencing Project (1995). 40. M. Mauer, Americans Behind Bars: One Year Later,The Sentencing Project (Feb, 1992). Also see Keri A.Gould, Turning Rat and Doing Time for Uncharged, Dismissed, OrAcquitted Crimes: Do the Federal Sentencing Guidelines PromoteRespect for the Law?, 10 N.Y.L.S. Journal of Human Rightsat 1 (1993). 41. See, e.g., experiences of Colombia, Panama andPeru; see also E. Nadelmann, Cops Across Borders,(1993). 42. The 18th Amendment, instituting alcohol prohibition, wasenacted in 1920 and repealed in 1933. 43. E. Nadelmann, Drug Prohibition in the United States:Costs, Consequences, and Alternatives, 245 Science 939(September, 1989); J. Ostrowski, Thinking About DrugLegalization, Cato Institute Policy Analysis, No. 121,(1989). 44. Testimony of Loren Siegel, New York Civil Liberties Union,at jointly sponsored public hearings of the New York CountyLawyers' Association and the Association of the Bar of the Cityof New York (June, 1994). 45. Actually, discussions of "decriminalization" or"legalization" have always found wide currency,particularly in present times, due to the overwhelming failure,at huge cost, of a harsh law enforcement based strategy of drugcontrol. See Anthony Lewis, End the War, NewYork Times, November 3, 1995, at A29; Jefferson Morely, Crackin Black and White, The Washington Post, November 19,1995, at C1. Further, we must be mindful that drug prohibition,in its inception, began just 6 years prior to alcoholprohibition, by passage of the Harrison Narcotics Act of 1914, abill with little popular support but urged by then Secretary ofState William Jennings Bryan, a man of "deep prohibitionistand missionary convictions...'" J. Ostrowski, "ThinkingAbout Drug Legalization," Cato Institute PolicyAnalysis, No. 121, at 3 (1989). While drug control has takenon its present character as a serious law enforcement priorityduring the past three decades, ironically, this same period hasbeen one of unprecedented growth for the underworld, illegal drugindustry, in drug usage, and in the expenditure of economicresources fighting a futile "war on drugs." 46. M. Mauer and Tracy Huling, Young Black Americans andthe Criminal Justice System: Five Years Later, The SentencingProject (October, 1995). This recent report found that althoughAfrican Americans represent about 13% of the total population and13% of those who are monthly drug users, they are 35% of thosearrested for drug possession, 55% of those convicted for drugpossession, and 74% of the total serving sentences ofincarceration for drug possession. See also, 1 in 3 YoungBlack Men in Justice System, Washington Post, October5, 1995, at 1. 47. Such operations are rarely conducted in predominantlywhite, middle and upper-class neighborhoods. 48. According to the U.S. Sentencing Commission, 90% of thoseconvicted in 1994 for federal crack offenses were black and 3.5%were white. For powder cocaine, 29.7% were black and 25.9% werewhite (the rest were Hispanic). Under current federal law, thereis a mandatory minimum sentence of 5 years imprisonment forpossession of 5 grams of crack or 500 grams of powder cocaine.The Sentencing Commission's recent proposal to remove the100-to-1 sentencing disparity was rejected by Congress, theJustice Department and the Clinton Administration. See L.Greenhouse article, New York Times, 10/31/95, at A18. 49. See "Effects of Contemporary Drug Policy on theIntegrity of Government," Section VII, infra. 50. In the five years from 1989 to 1994, black, non-hispanicwomen from the ages of 20 to 29, faced the highest growth incriminal justice "control rates," (i.e., incarcerated,on parole or on probation) which increased 78% during thisperiod. In the five year period from 1986 to 1991, black,non-hispanic women overall faced the highest growth in numbers ofthose incarcerated in state prisons for drug offenses, with anincrease of 828% during this period. See also note 56, infra. 51. Correctional Association of New York, Injustice Will BeDone: Women Drug Couriers and the Rockefeller Drug Laws,(February 1992). 52. For federal arrestees, the potential sentence afterconviction for similar crimes, under the Federal SentencingGuidelines, is 50 years-to-life. 53. 80% of women prisoners are the sole caretakers of childrenunder age 18. L. A. Greenfield and S. M. Harper, Women inPrison, U.S. Bureau of Justice Statistics, Special Report(1991). 54. See, for example, M. Letwin, Sentencing AngelaThompson, NYLJ 4/18/94, p.2, col.3. 55. See Barbara Bloom and David Steinhart, WhyPunish Children?, supra, at 3; also see M.Mauer and Tracy Huling, Young Black Americans and the CriminalJustice System: Five Years Later, The Sentencing Project(1995). Regarding the general increase in the conviction andincarceration of women for drug offenses, in 1991, 1 in 3 womanin state prisons was incarcerated for a drug offense, up from 1in 8 in 1986. From 1986 to 1991, the number of female stateprisoners incarcerated for drug offenses grew from 2,370 to12,633, for an increase of 433%. Id. 56. See "Public Health Consequences of Current DrugPolicy," Section III, supra. 57. As regularly reported in Reproductive Freedom News,the newsletter published by The Center for Reproductive Law andPolicy, New York City. In criminal statutes, "delivery" of narcotics, withor without pecuniary compensation, is generally treated under themore serious category of sale or distribution of such narcotics, (see,for example, New York State Penal Law 220.00(1), whichdefines sale of narcotics as: to "sell, exchange, give ordispose of to another or offer or agree to do the same." (Emphasisadded.) Although such criminal prosecutions against women arenot presently known to have been brought in New York State, theyhave been, and continue to be brought in various statesthroughout the nation, (see Reproductive Freedom News, supra). 58. As regularly reported in Reproductive Freedom News, supra. 59. See New York State Penal Law (P.L.) 220.39(Criminal Sale of a Controlled Substance in the Third Degree), ascompared with P.L. 160.15 (Robbery in the First Degree), P.L.130.35 (Rape in the First Degree), and P.L. 120.10 (Assaultin the First Degree). 60. See "Drug Policy, Drug Law Enforcement and Peopleof Color," Section V, supra. 61. See "The Impact of Current Drug Policy onWomen," Section VI, supra. 62. L. Grinspoon & J. Bakalar, The War on Drugs -- APeace Proposal, 330 New England Journal of Medicine357, at 357. 63. L. Grinspoon & J. Bakalar, ibid., at 357. Seealso Florida v. Bostick, 111 S. Ct. 2382 (1991); U.S. v.Sokolow, 490 U.S. 1, at pp.13-14 (1989) (in his dissent,Justice Brennan enumerates cases in which the court failed toquestion the "chameleon-like way [in which the drug courierprofile] adapt[s] to any particular set of observations." 64. See S. Wisotsky, A Society of Suspects: The Waron Drugs and Civil Liberties, at 180 (1992). 65. The difficulty of establishing this negative propositionis borne out by the government's own statistics, which revealthat the Drug Enforcement Agency (DEA) made 14,430 domesticseizures of nondrug property in 1993, resulting in a fiscalwindfall of approximately $670 million; see Drugs &Crime Data Center & Clearinghouse, Fact Sheet: Drug DataSummary 2, (April, 1994). 66. For example, in New York, pursuant to Real PropertyActions and Proceedings Law 715, the District Attorney can seekfines and other sanctions against owners of such properties whofail to commence eviction proceedings against tenants suspectedof illegal conduct, irrespective of the ability of the DistrictAttorney to bring or sustain criminal charges with respect tosuch tenants. 67. We also note, with great concern, the conduct of variousgovernments outside our borders, both with and without directionand encouragement provided by the United States, whose ownpolicies clearly take on world-wide significance. See, e.g.,E. Nadelmann, Cops Across Borders, (1993). 68. As to the effect of federal drug sentencing laws incompromising the threshold requirement that mens rea beevident in the conduct of an individual defendant as an essentialelement in imposing criminal responsibility, see Jack B.Weinstein & Fred A. Bernstein, The Unwarranted Denigrationof Mens Rea on Drug Sentencing, Federal SentencingReporter, Vol. 7, No.3, (Nov/Dec 1994). 14 Vesey Street New York, NY 10007 (212) 267-6646 Additional Funding for Publication and Distribution ofthis Report Provided by: The DrugPolicy Foundation 4455 Connecticut Avenue, N.W. Suite B-500 Washington, D.C. 20008 (202) 537-5005 Join DRCNet DRCNet Home Page WT01-B25-25IA031-000651-B020-71http://206.61.184.43:80/schaffer/LIBRARY/studies/redfern/rftoc.htm 206.61.184.43 19970122122926 text/html 3422HTTP/1.0 200 OKDate: Wednesday, 22-Jan-97 12:29:16 GMTServer: WebSitePro/1.1f (S/N wpo-0deb)Allow-ranges: bytesContent-type: text/htmlLast-modified: Sunday, 19-Jan-97 10:54:58 GMTContent-length: 3207 Beyond Prohibition - Table of Contents Contents | Feedback | Search DRCNet Library | Schaffer Library | Major Studies | BeyondProhibition Beyond Prohibition Report of the RedfernLegal Centre Drug Law Reform Project September 1996 Contents Executive Summary 1. History of Project 2. Steps to Harm Reduction 3. Comments on"Steps" 4. Harm Reduction ModelControlled Drug Availability 5. Comments on the HarmReduction Model 6. Future drug law reformactivities Appendices This document has been produced with thefinancial assistance of the Law Foundation of NSW. The opinionsexpressed are those of Redfern Legal Centre and should not betaken as representing the views of the Law Foundation. Contents | Feedback | Search DRCNet Library | Schaffer Library | Major Studies | BeyondProhibitionWT01-B25-26IA031-000651-B020-100http://206.61.184.43:80/schaffer/LIBRARY/studies/nc/misintro.htm 206.61.184.43 19970122122952 text/html 7777HTTP/1.0 200 OKDate: Wednesday, 22-Jan-97 12:29:41 GMTServer: WebSitePro/1.1f (S/N wpo-0deb)Allow-ranges: bytesContent-type: text/htmlLast-modified: Saturday, 28-Dec-96 06:58:21 GMTContent-length: 7560 Marihuana: A Signal of Misunderstanding -- Introduction Contents | Feedback | Search DRCNet Library | Schaffer Library | Major Studies Marihuana, A Signal of Misunderstanding National Commission on Marihuana and Drug Abuse Marihuana: A Signal of Misunderstanding Introduction This is the first of two Reports by the National Commission onand Drug Abuse. Public Law 91-513 requires that we report to thePresident, Congress and the public initially on marihuana andthen on the broader issue of drug abuse in the United The secondReport will include a review of the marihuana issue withparticular attention to studies which have been conducted in theinterim. In large measure, the marihuana issue is a child of thesixties, the visual and somewhat pungent symbol of dramaticchanges which have permanently affected our nation in the lastdecade. Some have that our mandate has placed the cart before thehorse, and that we should have focused first on the wider socialissue and assessed marihuana's impact on society within thatcontext. much thought and investigation, we now believe thatCongress was wise in focusing this Commission's attention firston marihuana. separating it from the rest of the drugcontroversy, we have been better able to analyze the uniqueposition marihuana occupies in our society. Our mandate was a broad one, covering, for example, the natureand scope of use, the effects of the drug, the relationship ofmarihuana use to other behavior and the efficacy of existing law.Realizing that marihuana had never before in the Americanexperience been the subject of a concentrated, authoritativegovernmental study, we launched a comprehensive research andfact-finding effort. We sought.. to evaluate and supplementexisting material, to fill knowledge voids. and to assess theso-called truths commonly posed in the marihuana debate. Soon after funds became available on March 22, 1971, wecommissioned more than 50 projects, ranging from a study of theeffects of marihuana on man to a field survey of enforcement ofthe marihuana laws in six metropolitan jurisdictions. Ofparticular importance in our fact-finding effort were theopinions and attitudes of all groups in our society. Through formal and informal hearings, recorded in thousands ofpages of transcripts, we solicited all points of view, includingthose of public officials, community leaders, professionalexperts and students. We commissioned a nationwide survey ofpublic beliefs, information and experience referred to in thisReport as the National Survey. In addition, we conducted separatesurveys of opinion among', district attorneys, judges, probationofficers, clinicians, university health officials and free clinicpersonnel. This inquiry focused on the American experience. However, wehave been well aware from the outset that the scope of marihuanause in the United States differs considerably from that in othercountries where the drug has been used for centuries.Accordingly, the Commission sought to put the American experiencein perspective by seeing the situation first hand in India,Greece, North Africa, Jamaica, Afghanistan, and other countries. Because of our initial concentration on marihuana, certainissues common to marihuana and other drugs have been deferred formore complete coverage in the second Report. For example, adetailed analysis of educational programs about marihuana and itsuse will be considered when we evaluate drug education programsin general. Further, we do not discuss the rehabilitation of the problemmarihuana user since no such specialized programs exist; we foundthe subject is best approached from a broader perspective ofrehabilitation programs for problem users of all non-narcoticdrugs. An examination of federal and state organizationalresponse to the drug issue, as well as an in-depth study ofgeneral law enforcement strategies, have both been undertaken andwill continue, but will not be reported fully until the secondyear. Officers of the Federal Government have set a high priority onfuller understanding of the marihuana issue and appropriategovernmental action. President Nixon has frequently expressed hispersonal and official commitment to providing a rational andequitable public response to the use and misuse of drugs.Similarly, Congress has shown its concern in passing theComprehensive Drug Abuse Prevention and Control Act of 1970. Inappointing this Commission, both the President and Congress haverecognized the need for an independent, nonpartisan appraisal ofthe nature of marihuana and the consequences of its use, for asimilar appraisal of the abuse of all drugs, and for appropriaterecommendations for public policy as a result of both studies. The Commission decided early in its deliberations to write aReport that was complete but not overly technical so that thereader could understand the points discussed without analyzingdetailed studies. Some. studies and supporting data are includedin an Appendix to the Report, which is published separately. Forthe researcher and others interested in greater detail, theAppendix provides the necessary technical data. This Report focuses on marihuana, the popular name for amixture of stems, leaves and flowering tops of the Indian hempplant, Cannabis Sativa L. This Report presents the mostsignificant information gathered to date about the drug and itsusers, concluding with the Commission's recommendationsconcerning the most appropriate public response to marihuanausage in our society. Contents | Feedback | Search DRCNet Library | Schaffer Library | Major Studies Marihuana, A Signal of Misunderstanding WT01-B25-27IA031-000651-B020-133http://206.61.184.43:80/schaffer/LIBRARY/studies/nc/mis2.htm 206.61.184.43 19970122123003 text/html 70753HTTP/1.0 200 OKDate: Wednesday, 22-Jan-97 12:29:55 GMTServer: WebSitePro/1.1f (S/N wpo-0deb)Allow-ranges: bytesContent-type: text/htmlLast-modified: Saturday, 28-Dec-96 06:56:02 GMTContent-length: 70535 Marihuana and the Problem of Marihuana Contents | Feedback | Search DRCNet Library | Schaffer Library | Major Studies Marihuana, A Signal of Misunderstanding The National Commission on Marihuana and Drug Abuse Marihuana: A Signal of Misunderstanding I -- marihuana and the problem of marihuana "There are no whole truths; all truths are half -truths.It is trying to treat them as whole truths that plays thedevil." Alfred North Whitehead (1953) We are a nation of problem-solvers. We are restless andimpatient with perceived gaps between the way things are and theway we think ought to be. Understandably, such an impulse towardself-correction never leaves us wanting for social problems tosolve. Although it is a prerequisite to social progress, thisproblem-solving orientation misdirects our attention. In order tomaximize public awareness we are apt to characterize situationsas being far worse than they really are. Because any activity iscommonly regarded as a move toward a solution, rhetoric andstopgap legislation sometimes substitute for rational reflection.We become so impressed with social engineering that we overlookinherent human limitations. Since the mid-sixties, American society has been increasinglyagitated by what has been defined as a marihuana problem. Thetypical sequences of "a national problem" haveresulted: exaggeration, polarization and the inevitable demandfor a. solution. The appointment of this Commission and thepublication of this Report reflect the escalation of marihuanause into the realm of social problem. Since the beginning of ourofficial life, we have grappled with the threshold question: Whyhas the use of marihuana reached problem status in the publicmind? Origins of the Marihuana Problem Marihuana has been used as an intoxicant in various parts ofthe world for centuries and in this country for 75 years. Yet useof the drug has been regarded as a problem of major proportionsfor less than a decade. We will not find the reasons forcontemporary social concern in pharmacology texts or previousgovernmental reports, for we are dealing with two separaterealities: a drug with certain pharmacologic properties anddeterminable, although variable, effects on man; and a pattern ofhuman behavior, individual and group, which has, as a behavior,created fear, anger, confusion, and uncertainty among a largesegment of the contemporary American public. The marihuanabehavior pattern is the source of the marihuana controversy. The most apparent feature of the behavior is that it isagainst the law. But inconsistency between behavior and the legalnorm is not sufficient, in itself, to create a social problem.Marihuana, has been an illegal substance for several decades; andthe widespread violation of laws against gambling and adulteryhave not excited the public to the same extent as hasmarihuana-smoking in recent years. At the same time, we suspect that illegality may play animportant role in problem definition where drugs are concerned.Alcohol is of proven danger to individual and societal health andthe public is well aware of its dangers, yet use of this drug hasnot been accorded the same problem status. Marihuana's illegalitymay have been a necessary condition for the marihuana problem,but the increased violation of the legal proscription does not byitself explain the phenomenon. The Commission believes that three interrelated factors havefostered the definition of marihuana as a major national problem.First, the illegal behavior is highly visible to all segments ofour society. Second, use of the drug is perceived to threaten thehealth and morality not only of the individual but of the societyitself. Third, and most important, the drug has evolved in thelate sixties and early seventies, as a symbol of wider socialconflicts and public issues. VISIBILITY More than anything else, the visibility of marihuana use by asegment of our population previously unfamiliar with the drug iswhat stirred public anxiety and thrust marihuana into the problemarea. Marihuana usage in the United States has been with us for avery long period of time, dating back to the beginning of thecentury. For decades its use was mainly confined to theunderprivileged socioeconomic groups in our cities and to certaininsulated social groups, such as jazz musicians and artists. Aslong as use remained confined to these groups and had anegligible impact on the dominant social order, the vast majorityof Americans remained unconcerned. From the other side, theinsulated marihuana user was in no position to demand carefulpublic or legislative scrutiny. However, all this changed markedly in the mid-1960's. Forvarious reasons, marihuana use became a common form of recreationfor many middle and upper class college youth. The trend spreadacross the country, into the colleges and high schools and intothe affluent suburbs as well. Use by American servicemen inVietnam was frequent. In recent years, use of the drug hasspanned every social class and geographic region. The Commission-sponsored National Survey, "A NationwideStudy of Beliefs, Information and Experiences," indicatedthat some 24 million Americans have tried marihuana at least onceand that at least 8.3 million are current users. Other surveys uniformly indicate that more than 40% of theU.S. college population have tried marihuana, and in someuniversities the figure is much higher. Also, use of the drug hasbecome almost as common among young adults out of college, andamong older teenagers in high school. The National Surveyindicates that 39%, of young adults between 18 and 25 years ofage have tried marihuana. The stereotype of the marihuana user asa marginal citizen has given way to a composite picture of largesegments of American youth, children of the dominant majority andvery much a part of the mainstream of American life. Public confusion, anger, and fear over this development becameincreasingly apparent during the mid and late 1960's. Such massdeviance was a problem and the scope of the problem was augmentedby frequent publicity. The topic of the usage of marihuana by theyoung received considerable attention from newspapermen andtelevision reporters. The drug's youthful users abetted the mediain this regard by flaunting their disregard of the law, Few of ushave not seen or heard of marihuana being used en masse at rockconcerts, political demonstrations and gatherings of campusactivists. In addition, new scientific and medical interest in marihuanaand its use was stimulated by the sudden public interest. For thefirst time in the American experience, the drug became thesubject of intensive scrutiny in the laboratories and clinics.Unfortunately, this research was conducted in the spotlight ofpublic controversy. Isolated findings and incomplete informationhave automatically been presented to the public, with littleattempt made to place such findings in a larger perspective or toanalyze their meanings. Any new marihuana research has had ready access to the newsspotlight and often has been quickly assimilated into therhetoric of the marihuana, debate. Science has become a weapon ina propaganda battle. Because neither the reporters nor the publichave the expertise to evaluate this information, the result hasbeen an array of conflicting anecdotal reports, clinical studieson limited populations, and surveys of restricted utility. Visibility, intense public interest, and fishbowl research areall important components of the marihuana problem. PERCEIVED THREATS Although marihuana is taken by most users for curiosity orpleasure, the non-using public still feels seriously affected byuse of the drug. Several decades ago it was popularly assertedthat the drug brought about a large variety of social andindividual ills, including crime and insanity. As a result it wasprohibited by federal law in 1937. The marihuana explosion of themid-sixties occurred within the context of 30 years of instilledfear. Although based much more on fantasy than on proven fact,the marihuana "evils" took root in the public mind, andnow continue to color the public reaction to the marihuanaphenomenon. Even beyond the violation of law, the widespread useof marihuana, is seen as a threat to society in other ways. Andthe threats grow proportionately as the controversy swells. It has been astutely observed that any statement frequentlyrepeated in public assumes the status of fact. With so manypeople continually arguing about marihuana, the public hasunderstandably become alarmed and confused. On the basis of the National Survey, we have tried to identifythe ways in which the public feels threatened by marihuana use.Essentially these threats fall into three general categories:threats to the public safety, threats to the public health, andthreats to the dominant social order. In terms of public safety, the concern is with therelationship between marihuana and aggressive behavior, crime andjuvenile delinquency. Threats to the public health usually referinitially to the impact of marihuana on the user. Lethality,psychosis, addiction potential and effects of chronic long-termuse, are major concerns. Additionally, the fear exists thatmarihuana leads to the use of more dangerous drugs, especiallyLSD and heroin. The threat which marihuana use is thought to present to thedominant social order is a major undercurrent of the marihuanaproblem. Use of the drug is linked with idleness, lack ofmotivation, hedonism and sexual promiscuity. Many see the drug asfostering a counterculture which conflicts with basic moralprecepts as well as with the operating functions of our society.The "dropping out" or rejection of the establishedvalue system is viewed with alarm. Marihuana becomes more than adrug; it becomes a symbol of the rejection of cherished values. SYMBOLISM The symbolic aspects of marihuana are the, most intangible ofthe items to which the Commission must address itself, and yetthey may be at the heart of the marihuana problem. Use ofmarihuana was, and still is, age-specific. It was youth-relatedat a time in American history when the adult society was alarmedby the implications of the youth " movement": defianceof the established order, the adoption of new life styles, theemergence of "street people," campus unrest, drug use,communal living, protest politics, and even political radicalism.In an age characterized by the so-called generation gap,marihuana symbolizes the cultural divide. For youth, marihuana became a convenient symbol ofdisaffection with traditional society, an allure whichsupplemented its recreational attraction. Smoking marihuana mayhave appealed to large numbers of youth who opposed certainpolicies or trends, but who maintained faith in the Americansystem as a whole. In ;a time when symbolic speech is oftenpreferred to the literal form, marihuana was a convenientinstrument of mini-protest. It was also an agent of groupsolidarity, as the widely-publicized rock concerts so wellillustrate. For the adult society, the decade of the sixties was adistressing time. The net effect of racial unrest, campusdisruption, political assassination, economic woes and anunpopular war was widespread uneasiness. Attending a general fearthat the nation was witnessing its own disintegration was adesire to shore up our institutions and hold the line. That linewas easy to define where drugs, particularly marihuana, wereconcerned. Use of drugs, including marihuana, is against the law. Formany, marihuana symbolized disorder in a society frustrated byincreasing lawlessness. Insistence on application of the lawtended also to harden views, thereby escalating still further theuse of marihuana as a symbolic issue. The social conflicts underlying the drug's symbolic statushave dissipated somewhat in the past few years; and in some ways,the Commission has similarly noted a partial deflation of themarihuana problem and of the emotionalism surrounding it. We arehopeful that our attempt to clarify the scientific and normativedimensions of marihuana use will further deemphasize, the problemorientation and facilitate rational decision-making. The Need for Perspective This Commission has the task of exploring the marihuanacontroversy from as many vantage points as possible in itsattempt to make sound, realistic and workable policyrecommendations. Because we are dealing essentially with acomplex social concern rather than a simple pharmacologicphenomenon, any social policy decision must discuss the realitiesof marihuana as a drug, marihuana use as a form of behavior, andmarihuana as a symbol. Particularly important is the determination of the longevityof the behavior. Are we dealing with a behavior that is becomingrooted in our culture or are we experiencing an aberration, a fadthat will in time, of its own accord, pass away? The vortex of the marihuana controversy is the present, butthe prudent policy planner must not be blinded by the deluge ofrecent statistics. It is important that we scan the past forclues about the meaning of certain behavior and the promiseoffered by various social policy responses. We are convinced thata wider historical understanding will also go a long way towarddeflating marihuana as a problem. HISTORICAL PERSPECTIVE When viewed in the context of American society's ambivalentresponse to the non-medical use of drugs, the marihuana problemis not unique. Both the existing social policy toward the drugand its contemporary challenge have historical antecedents andexplanations. Somewhat surprisingly, until the last half of the19th century, the only drugs used to any significant extent fornon-medical purposes in this country were alcohol and tobacco. American opinion has always included some opposition to thenonmedical use of any drug, including alcohol and tobacco. Fromcolonial times through the Civil War, abstentionist outcriesagainst alcohol and tobacco sporadically provoked prohibitorylegislation. One 18th century pamphleteer advised against the useof any drink "which is liable to steal away a man's sensesand render him foolish, irascible, uncontrollable anddangerous." Similarly, one 19th century observer attributeddelirium tremens, perverted sexuality, impotency, insanity andcancer to the smoking and chewing of tobacco. Despite such warnings, alcohol and tobacco use took deep rootin American society. De Tocqueville noted what hard drinkers theAmericans were, and Dickens was compelled to report that "inall the public places of America, this filthy custom [tobaccochewing] is recognized." Nonetheless, the strain in ourculture opposed to all non-medical drug use persisted and in thelate 19th century gained ardent adherents among larger segmentsof the population. Beginning in earnest around 1870, abstentionists focused thepublic opinion process on alcohol. As science and politics werecalled to the task, public attention was drawn to the liquorproblem. "Liquor is responsible for 19% of the divorces, 25%of the poverty, 25% of the insanity, 37% of the pauperism, 45% ofchild desertion and 50% of the crime in this country,"declared the Anti-Saloon League. "And this," it wasnoted, "is a very conservative estimate." The Temperance advocates achieved political victory during thesecond decade of the 20th century. By 1913, nine states wereunder statewide prohibition, and in 31 other states local optionlaws operated, with the ultimate effect that more than 50% of thenation's population lived under prohibition. Four years later,Congress approved the 18th Amendment and on January 16, 1919,Nebraska became the 36th state to ratify the Amendment, thusinscribing national Prohibition in the Constitution. Although on a somewhat smaller scale and with lesser results,public attention was simultaneously attracted to a growingtobacco problem. Stemming partly from the immediate popularity ofcigarette-smoking, a practice introduced after the Civil War, andpartly from riding the coattails of abstentionist sentiment,anti-tobacconists achieved a measure of success which hadpreviously eluded them. The New York Time editorialized in 1885that: The decadence of Spain began when the Spaniards adopted cigarettes and if this pernicious habit obtains among adult Americans, the ruin of the Republic is close at hand. . . . Between 1895 and 1921, 14 states banned the sale ofcigarettes. Although though there has been some posthumous debate aboutthe efficacy of alcohol Prohibition as a means of reducingexcessive or injurious use, the experiment failed to achieve itsdeclared purpose: elimination of the practice of alcoholconsumption. The habit was too ingrained in the society to beexcised simply by cutting off legitimate supply. In addition, the 18th Amendment never commanded a. popularconsensus; in fact, the Wickersham Commission, appointed byPresident Hoover in 1929 to study Prohibition, attributed theAmendment's enactment primarily to public antipathy toward thesaloon, the large liquor dealers and intemperance rather than topublic opposition to use of the drug. Subsequent observers have agreed that Prohibition wasmotivated primarily by a desire to root out the institutionalevils associated with the drug's distribution and excessive use;only a minority of its supporters opposed all use. And in thisrespect, Prohibition succeeded. Upon repeal, 13 years afterratification, liquor was back, but the pre-Prohibition saloon andunrestrained distribution had been eliminated from the Americanscene. Both the scope of the alcohol habit and the ambivalence ofsupporting opinion are manifested in the internal logic ofProhibition legislation. The legal scheme was designed to cut offsupply, not to punish the consumer. Demand could be eliminatedeffectively, if at all, only through educational efforts. Onlyfive states prohibited possession of alcohol for personal use inthe home. Otherwise, under both federal and state law, theindividual remained legally free to consume alcohol. The anti-tobacco movement was not propelled by theinstitutions outrage or the cultural symbolism surrounding thealcohol problem It never succeeded on a national scale. Localsuccesses were attributable to the temporary strength of theabstentionist impulse, together with the notion thattobacco-smoking was a stepping-stone to alcohol use Lacking theconsensus necessary to reverse a spreading habit, tobacco"prohibition" never extended to possession. Insofar asthe anti-tobacco movement was really a coattail consequence ofalcohol Prohibition, is not surprising that all 14 states whichhad prohibited sale repealed their proscriptions by 1927. By the early 1930's, the abstentionist thrust against alcoholand tobacco had diminished. State and federal governmentscontented themselves with regulating distribution and extractingrevenue. When the decade ended, the general public no longerperceived alcohol and tobacco use as social problems. The twodrugs had achieved social legitimacy. A comparison between the national flirtation with alcohol andtobacco prohibition and the prohibition of the non-medical use ofother drugs is helpful in analyzing the marihuana issue. In 1900,only a handful of states regulated traffic in"narcotic" drugs--opium, morphine, heroin and cocaineeven though, proportionately, more persons probably were addictedto those drugs at that time than at any time since. Estimatesfrom contemporary surveys are questionable, but a conservativeestimate is a quarter of a million people, comprising at least 1%of the population. This large user population in 1900 includedmore females than males, more whites than blacks, was notconfined to a particular geographic region or to the cities, andwas predominantly middle class. This 19th century addiction was generally accidental and wellhidden. It stemmed in part from over-medication, carelessprescription practices, repeated refills and hidden distributionof narcotic drugs in patent medicines. Society responded to thislargely invisible medical addiction in indirect, informal ways.Self -regulation by the medical profession and pharmaceuticalindustry, stricter prescription practices by the stategovernments and regulation of labeling by the Federal Governmentin 1906 all combined in the early years of the new century toreduce the possibility of this accidental drug addiction. About this same time, during the late 19th and early 20thcenturies, attention within the law enforcement and medicalcommunities was drawn to another use of narcotics----the"pleasure" or "street" use of these drugs byethnic minorities in the nation's cities. Society reacted to thisnarcotics problem by enacting criminal legislation, prohibitingthe non-medical production, distribution or consumption of thesedrugs. Within a very few years, every state had passedanti-narcotics legislation, and in 1914 the Federal Governmentpassed the Harrison Narcotics Act. The major differences between the temperance andanti-narcotics movements must be, emphasized. The temperance,movement was a matter of vigorous public debate; theanti-narcotics movement was not. Temperance legislation was theproduct of a highly organized nation-wide lobby; narcoticslegislation was largely ad hoc. Temperance legislation wasdesigned to eradicate known problems resulting from alcoholabuse; narcotic--, legislation was largely anticipatory.Temperance legislation rarely restricted private activity;narcotics legislation prohibited all drug-related behavior,including possession and use. These divergent policy patterns reflect the clear-cutseparation in the public and professional minds between alcoholand tobacco on the one hand, and "narcotics" on theother. Use of alcohol and tobacco were indigenous Americanpractices. The intoxicant use of narcotics was not native,however, and the users of these drugs were either alien, like theChinese opium smokers, or perceived to be marginal members ofsociety. As to the undesirability and immorality of nonmedical use ofnarcotics, there was absolutely no debate. By causing its usersto be physically dependent, the narcotic drug was considered asevere impediment to individual participation in the economic andpolitical systems. Use, it was thought, automatically escalatedto dependence and excess, which led to pauperism, crime andinsanity. From a sociological perspective, narcotics use wasthought to be prevalent among the slothful and immoralpopulations, gamblers, prostitutes, and others who were already"undesirables." Most important was the threat thatnarcotics posed to the vitality of the nation's youth. In short, the narcotics question was answered in unison: thenonmedical use of narcotics was a cancer which had to be removedentirely from the social organism. Marihuana smoking first became prominent on the American scenein the decade following the Harrison Act. Mexican immigrants andWest Indian sailors introduced the practice in the border andGulf states. As the Mexicans spread throughout the West andimmigrated to the major cities, some of them carried themarihuana habit with them. The practice also became common amongthe same urban populations with whom opiate use was identified. Under such circumstances, an immediate policy response towardmarihuana quite naturally followed the narcotics pattern ratherthan the alcohol or tobacco pattern. In fact, marihuana wasincorrectly classified as a "narcotic" drug inscientific literature and statutory provisions. By 1931, all buttwo states west of the Mississippi and several more in the Easthad enacted prohibitory legislation making it a criminal offenseto possess or use the drug. In 1932, the National Conference of Commissioners on UniformState Laws included an optional marihuana, provision in theUniform Narcotic Drug Act, and by 1937 every state, either byadoption of the Uniform Act or by separate legislation, hadprohibited marihuana use. In late 1937, the Congress adopted theMarihuana Tax Act, superimposing a, federal prohibitory scheme onthe state scheme. Not once during this entire period was any comprehensivescientific study undertaken in this country of marihuana, or itseffects. The drug was assumed to be a 'narcotic' to render theuser psychologically dependent, to provoke violent crime, and tocause insanity. Although media attention was attracted tomarihuana use around 1935, public awareness was low and publicdebate non-existent. As long as use remained confined toinsulated minorities throughout the next quarter century, thesituation remained stable. When penalties for narcoticsviolations escalated in the 1950's, marihuana penalties wentright along with them, until a first-offense possessor was afelon subject to lengthy incarceration. With this historical overview in mind, it is not surprisingthat the contemporary marihuana experience has been characterizedby fear and confusion on one side and outrage and protest on theother. As scientific and medical opinion has become better known,marihuana has lost its direct link with the narcotics in thepublic mind and in the statute books. But extensive ambivalence remains about the policies forvarious drugs. Marihuana's advocates contend that it is no moreor less harmful than alcohol and tobacco and should therefore betreated in similar fashion. The drug's adversaries contend thatit is a stepping-stone to the narcotics and should remainprohibited. At the present time public opinion tends to considermarihuana less harmful than the opiates and cocaine and moreharmful than alcohol and tobacco. Interestingly, while marihuana. is perceived as less harmfulthan before, alcohol and tobacco are regarded as more harmfulthan before. In some ways, the duality which previouslycharacterized American drug policy has now been supplanted by anenlightened skepticism as to the variety of approaches to thenon-medical use of various drugs. Despite this shift in attitudes, however, the use of alcoholand tobacco is not considered a major social problem by manyAmericans, while marihuana use is still so perceived. This remains true despite the fact that alcoholism afflictsnine million Americans. According to the National Institute onAlcohol Addiction and Alcoholism of the National Institute ofMental Health: alcohol is a factor in half (30,000) of thehighway fatalities occurring each year; an economic cost to thenation of $15 billion occurs as a result of acoholism and alcoholabuse; one-half of the five million yearly arrests in the UnitedStates are related to the misuse of alcohol (1.5 million offensesfor public drunkenness alone) ; and one-half of all homicides andone-fourth of all suicides are alcohol related, accounting for atotal of 11,700 deaths annually. Similarly, tobacco smoking is not considered a major publicconcern despite its link to lung cancer and heart disease.According to the Surgeon General in The Health Consequences ofSmoking, 1972: cigarette smoking is the, major "cause" of lung cancer in men and a significant "cause" of lung cancer in women; the risk of developing lung cancer in both men and women is directly related to an individual's exposure as measured by the number of cigarettes smoked, duration of smoking, earlier initiation, depth of inhalation, and the amount of "tar" produced by the cigarette; and data from numerous prospective and retrospective studies indicate that cigarette smoking is a significant risk factor contributing to the development of coronary heart disease (CHD) including fatal CHD and its most severe expression, sudden and unexpected death. CULTURAL PERSPECTIVE Realizing the importance of social change in understanding theissues surrounding the use of marihuana and other drugs, theCommission decided early that an objective appraisal of culturaltrends was vital for the, development of policy recommendations.Since neither the increase in marihuana use nor its attendantcontroversy is an isolated phenomenon, we sought a wider culturalperspective. To this end, the Commission sponsored a wide-rangingseminar on "Central Influences on American Life." Withthe cooperation of the Council for Biology in Human Affairs ofthe Salk Institute, we elicited a three-day conversation among 13exceptionally thoughtful and perceptive observers of Americanlife.* *The participants included Jacques Barzun, as moderator, MaryBingham, Claude T. Bissell, Kenneth Boulding, Robert R. Bowie,Theodore Caplow, Jay W. Forrester, T. George Harris. Rollo May,Jay Saunders Redding, Jonas Salk, Ernest van den Haag, and LeroyS. Wehrle. It is well beyond both our mandate and our competence toattempt a definitive presentation of the status of the Americanethical system However, we shall try to suggest some of the moresalient influence in our changing society, recognizing that onlyagainst the backdrop of society's fears, aspirations and valuescan a rational response to marihuana be formulated. Although weare not prepared to identify specific causal connections betweenthese social trends and marihuana use, we do believe that some ofthe major points raised in the discussion of cultural changeprovide essential background in understanding the marihuanaproblem. The Search for Meaning One overriding influence in contemporary America is thedeclining capacity of our institutions to help the individualfind his place in society. As one of the participants at theSeminar observed: A society is stable, peaceful, happy, not when it has rid itself of the tensions-because you never get rid of the tensions, because people's drives will be satisfied in ways that clash and so on-but when a very high proportion of the people feel fulfillment of some sort within the context which the society normally provides. The long-term problem now, for many many people, not just young people, is that this condition is not met. Another noted: What is wrong with our social system, it seems to me, is that it no longer inspires in people a feeling of purpose, meaningfulness and so on. A number of institutional trends have joined to deprive theindividual of a sense of communal inspiration. Perhaps mostimportant is the economic element. Whereas the individual'seconomic achievement formerly gave his life broad social meaningand inspired his existence, automation and technological advancehave tended to depersonalize the individual's role in theeconomy. Instead of the economic system being dependent onindividual productivity, the individual is increasingly dependenton the system. As his work dwindles in significance to the totalsociety, it diminishes in meaning for him. Moreover, as more andmore of our people share the nation's affluence, Horatio Alger'sexample is no longer needed to climb the economic ladder. A particularly emphatic manifestation of the decliningeconomic demand on the individual is the institutionalization ofleisure time. Whereas the economy used to require long hours ofwork, now it barely requires more than a five-day week. Expandingvacation time and reduced work-weeks tend to diminish thestrength of the work ethic. The implications of enforced leisuretime are only now becoming apparent, and the concept of"idle hands are the devil's plaything" has to bereexamined in terms of acceptable forms of non-work behavior.This new time component, allowing for the assertion ofindividuality, has produced both privileges and problems. In the last decade we have seen the beginnings of theinstitutionalization of this leisure ethic. A leisure-timeindustry has sprung up to organize this time period for theindividual. Many Americans, due to the nature of their jobs in anautomated economic system, find little personal satisfaction intheir work, and many are now searching for individual fulfillmentthrough the use of free time. Where meaning is not found ineither work or recreational pursuits, the outcome is likely to beboredom and restlessness. Whether generated by a search forindividual fulfillment, group recreation or sheer boredom, theincreased use of drugs, including marihuana, should come as nosurprise. Another social development which has chipped away atindividual identity is the loss of a vision of the future. In anage where change is so rapid, the individual has no concept ofthe future. If man could progress from land transportation to themoon in 60 years, what, lies ahead? Paralleling the loss of thetechnological horizon is the loss of a vision of what the future,in terms of individual and social goals, ought to look like. Aretimes moving too fast for man to be able to plan or -to adjust tonew ways and new styles? This sense of the collapsing time framewas best summed up by one of the Seminar participants: .... there are great forces that have developed over the last several decades that cause one to lose sight of the distant future. Let me contrast a rural farm family of several decades ago which settled a farm. They expected their children to live there, they can imagine their grandchildren living there-there is an image of the future. There is really no one who [now] has any image of where his great grandchildren will he or what they will do. This comes about because of the nature of industrial society; it comes about because we have retirement plans instead of looking after one's own old age. There area whole set of these [factors]. Now the morality, the ethics get tied into it because ethics are really a long-time horizon concept. It's something you engage in because it's contrary to immediate reward and immediate gratification and so you look to some distant future. But as one loses sight of any future then I think the ethics and morality creep up to the very near term also . . . We have no one who has got an image of this country two hundred years from now, who is trying to create a structure that be believes will exist that long. So a number of these things . . . tie together in terms of the long-term goals and how they have shifted. In any of our systems there tend to be a conflict between the short-term and the long-term goals. If the long-term goals are lost sight of then the short-term expediencies seem to be the things that well up. To the extent that planning for the future no longer gives theindividual his inspiration, he must look to the present. Such aclimate is conducive to pleasure-seeking, instant gratificationand an entire life-perspective which our society has alwayspreviously disclaimed A third force depriving the individual of apresumed place in society is the loss of a sense of community, asense of belonging. Mobility, mass living and rapid travel allconspire to destroy the smaller community. The family moves fromplace to place and then separates with each child going his ownway. This global thinking leaves little time for home-townconcern. The dissipation of geographic roots parallels a socialuprooting. As one of our Seminar participants noted: When you grow up with a, small number of people with whom you have to live for a while, it does something which isn't done now. It forces you to face yourself. It forces you to ask what kind of pet-son you are, because you can't get away with it with a group you're going to have to live with. They know what you really are. The mobility has the effect of making it possible for people to live playing parts for years. It seems to me we see it among the youngsters: role playing as distinguished from being somebody. . . . All of these social trends have their most potent impact onyoung people who are just beginning to develop their values,beliefs and commitments. The adult society has found it easier toadjust to the emergence of the leisure value. Having experiencedit as a gradual process, they see it as a reward for previoustoil. For many of our young, however, a substantial segment ofleisure time may be considered an essential part of living; theyhave known no other experience. Similarly, an adult society,increasingly influenced toward the present, at least hasdeveloped an historical perspective. Also, adult values wereinternalized at a time when a future vision was possible. Formany of the young, however, the present weighs more, heavily.This notion is best reflected in the vociferous youth response tothe Vietnam conflict, the embodiment of a war fought for thefuture, Finally, all of these cultural changes have occurred,especially for the young, in an environment of affluence. Thesuccessful economic system has maximized individual freedom. Butthe individual has been given unlimited choices at exactly thetime when a, value system within which to make such choices is indoubt. Because he has no sense of direction, the result isrestlessness, boredom and an increase in the likelihood ofpresent-oriented choices. Self-destructive drug-taking is oneform such behavior may take. One of our Seminar participantsobserved in this connection: It seems to me that you've got this affluence. So that while most of us grew up with the feeling that the channels within which we were going to have to move and make choices were very narrow, channels for these youngsters look absolutely open. It's an absolutely a, la carte menu-it's the biggest a la, carte menu you can imagine. [This occurs] in a situation in which this sense of radical change is going on so fast that you can't master it, together with a feeling that the society is being operated by very large organizations which you can't get a grip on, giving one a sense of helplessness, of not knowing where to take hold. All these things inherently are disorienting to youngsters and don't give them a, feeling of challenge, [but rather] a doubt as to the meaning of their own lives, of the significance of their being here, [a sense of] being atoms. So then they do act like children in the sense of behaving violently to call attention to themselves. They do a whole lot of other things which, it seems to me, are the sort of things you often see when people feel their lives have no meaning. Skepticism Another major influence in contemporary American life withsubstantial relevance to the marihuana problem is the uneasyrelationship between the individual and society's institutions,particularly the state. For 50 years, there has been a continuingupward flow of power to large institutional units, whether theybe corporate conglomerates, labor unions, universities or theGovernment. We have created a society which "requires theindividual to lean on society," observed one of our Seminarparticipants, "in ways that formerly he did not have to do.He used to lean on the clan, on the family, on the village. Wehave used bureaucracy to deal with these problems." Formany, the Federal Government epitomizes this development,bureaucratizing a social response to the most human of needs. We suspect that the implications of this trend for theindividual, although inevitable, became more visibly apparent inthe 1960's. Mass institutions must deal through rules; theindividual becomes a number. "Intuitively, [the individual]feels that bureaucracies must make man into an object in order todeal with him." So we have a depersonalization at exactlythe time that many individuals are casting about for identity andfulfillment. Simultaneously, technological advance poses the awesomeprospect of 1984: the intrusion of the omnipresent state into theprivate affairs of the individual. Computerized data-banks andelectronic surveillance are perceived as restrictions onindividuality at a time when the desire for personal privacy isascendant. Another cultural feature of governmental bureaucracy duringthe sixties has been failure to match expectations. Governmentpromises the elimination of poverty, the dissipation of racialdiscrimination, the excision of drug abuse, and creates risingexpectations. But government is often ill-equipped or unable toperform such monumental tasks. As individual helplessnessincreases, as the "responsibility" of the bureaucracyenlarges, those in need often feel that the gap between publicdeclaration and performance must be the result of a conspiracy tofail. And for the rest of us, there is the credibility gap. Thenet result is a loss of confidence in society's institutions.Viewed from this perspective, youthful dissent, cynicism anddisobedience of the 1960's were not such surprising consequences. Still another significant feature of institutional life incontemporary America is the lag between purpose andimplementation. That is, some of our social institutions have notyet begun to deal with the consequences of the social andeconomic changes which have occurred over the last severaldecades. The best example, and the one most germane to the youth,is the educational system. Two generations ago, the labor forcecould assimilate the large majority of the nation's youth.Neither a high school nor a college education was prerequisite tooccupational choice or achievement. Increased educationalattainment was presumed to be limited to either the privileged orthe able and would be rewarded by certain careers. Today, however, the labor force grows more quickly than thesystem is able to assimilate it, and the educational system nowserves as custodian as well as teacher. Although we sincerelywish to achieve the democratic ideal of a highly educatedpopulace, we also keep our children in school as long as possiblebecause we have nothing else for them to do. The trend isstrikingly apparent even in the last 20 years. Percent enrolled in school Age 1950 1970 14-15 94.7 98.1 16-17 71.3 90.0 18-19 29.4 47.7 20-24 9.0 21.5 This custodial function confronts educators with a dilemma.Attrition is not in society's best interest; thus, single-mindeddevotion to the highest levels of achievement would bedysfunctional. In a sense, because the system no longer wants toturn away its subjects, the notion of failure has lost itsmeaning. As one of the Seminar participants observed: I think one of the problems is that there is no longer a penalty for failure. We-the educators-have had to lower standards in order to accommodate these people who need no longer fear failure. Of course this has been a cyclical thing, a wheel within a wheel. [If ] there is no longer a penalty for failure, then there is no longer the need to acquire. The changing function of education has been felt in both thesecondary schools and in our institutions of higher learning.Numerous high school graduates cannot read. Colleges and juniorcolleges have sprung up overnight to accommodate the population,but many provide classrooms with little specific purpose. Onlyslowly is the educational system beginning to come to grips withits role in a changed society. At the university level, manyeducators have been appalled at sacrifices which have ensued fromthe custodial feature; rote learning, they contend, hassupplanted citizen and character education. Uncertainty about the role of the educational system has notescaped the students, particularly at the college level. Many ofour youth, pressed into longer attendance, question its need ordesirability. The demand for "relevance" is but anotherreflection of the search for meaning, for an understandable rolein society. Drug use has perhaps provided an outlet for somemembers of this restless generation, uncertain of its place. The Limits of Rationality The social response to the individual's search for meaning hasfostered an ambivalence, an unwillingness to act, a paralysis. Inlarge measure, according to one Seminar member, this default ofauthority reveals the intensity of the search: In the same way we are getting universities that can't teach, families that can't socialize and police forces that can't catch criminals. In every case, the same issue is involved: the subject of authority questions the legitimacy of authority and the exerciser of it is unable to find-very often doesn't even try to find-a defense, because he feels in himself a sympathy, as do so many parents, with the challenge. To a significant extent, society is waiting, hoping that theimpulse for change will settle around certain fundamentalattributes of the American ethic. At the present time, however,no consensus about the nature of these fundamentals exists. Weare all looking for values that have deep roots, as we attempt tosort out the durable from the ephemeral. All of the participants at our Central Influences Seminaragreed that the unique feature of this search was its a rationalquality. As one observer put it: We have been discussing the question of how we change a society. I don't think it's changed by rational intention. As I understand societies, historically and our own, what really is required to change it is something on a deeper level that involves myth, ritual, sacrament-a number of these functions that have always been related to societies. On these you can't just suddenly make up your mind and then prescribe. Regarding our problem of authority, you cannot really ask the question: why can't these people hang onto their authority? They can't hang onto it because what gave them authority is something not of themselves, but part of the society, part of a ritual, a sacrament: a way of behaving in the group which gave them authority, [whether] professorial, parental or policy authority. In each one of these cases, what we see is not the diminishing of these men so much but rather the developing emptiness, the lack of the particular ethic that gave them authority to start with. This is why we are in a terrible dilemma. What is essentially lacking is a system of ethics, morality or religion that gives birth -to the myths, the rituals, the sacraments that are its expression. These touch human beings on the unconscious level. These are the ways we see the world. They are not our conscious thought, but the ways we form ourselves, form each other, love each other or hate each other-in terms not so much of rational intention as a deeper unconscious-conscious and unconscious-which is my definition of a myth; much more of a feeling level, a living level. That is what is not present now. What we need, below and above all of our deliberations, is the growth and development of an ethical system. We just do not have this now. As we move into the 1970's, our society is collectivelyengaged in the task -of determining what America means, and howeach individual should find fulfillment in `a changing age. Fromthis wider perspective of flux emerges an uncertainty about whatthe increased prevalence of marihuana use means for theindividual and the total society. Formulating Marihuana Policy Present symbolism, past implications, and future apprehensionsall combine to give marihuana many meanings. These diversenotions of what marihuana means constitute the marihuana problem.In this atmosphere, the policy-maker's position is precariousinsofar as no assumption is beyond dispute. Accordingly, theCommission has taken particular care to define the process bywhich a social policy decision should be reached. In studying the arguments of past and present observers tojustify a particular kind of marihuana policy, we conclude that amajor impediment to rational decision-making in this area isoversimplification. As suggested earlier, many ingredients areincluded in the marihuana mix-medical, legal, social,philosophical, and moral. Many observers have tended to isolateone element, highlight it and then extrapolate social policy fromthat one premise. In an area where law, science and morality areso intertwined, we must beware of the tendency toward suchselectivity. SCIENTIFIC OVERSIMPLIFICATION It is wrong to assume, as many have done, that a particularstatement of marihuana's effects compels a given social policy orlegal implementation. An accurate statement of the effects of thedrug is obviously an important consideration, but it isconclusive only if the effects are extreme one way or the other.For example, if the use of a particular drug immediately causesthe user to murder anyone in his presence, we have no doubt thata vigorous effort to eliminate use of that drug would be inorder. On the other hand, if the effects of the drug are purelybenign, presenting no danger whatsoever to the user or society,no reason would exist to suppress it. We know of no psychoactive substance, including marihuana,which falls at either of these extremes. Thus, it begs the issueto contend, as some have done, that because we don't know enoughabout the effects of heavy, chronic use, we should maintain thestatus quo. We know a lot about the adverse effects of alcoholismand heavy cigarette smoking, and yet no responsible observersuggests that we should adopt total prohibition for these drugs.Similarly, previous estimates of marihuana's role in causingcrime and insanity were based quite erroneous information; but toinfer from this that marihuana should be considered totallybenign and hence made freely available is also not logical. Bothapproaches are simplistic; both approaches fail to take intoaccount the social context in which the drug is used and thedynamic factors affecting the role that marihuana use may or maynot play in the future. A similar manifestation of scientific oversimplification isthe focus on causality. Many opponents of marihuana use feelcompelled to establish a causal connection between marihuana useand crime, psychosis, and the use of other drugs, while, theiradversaries focus the dispute on negating such relationships. TheCommission believes that this tendency misses the mark. The policy-maker's task is concerned primarily with theeffects of marihuana on human behavior. For both philosophicaland practical reasons, proof of causal relationships is next toimpossible. At the same time, however, the extent to whichmarihuana use is associated with certain behaviors and whetherany significant relationships exist can offer important clues. We must be cautious when dealing with such data. Yet we cannotafford to paralyze the decision-making process simply becauseabsolute "proof " is lacking. Spokesmen on both sidesof the marihuana debate should focus not on causation but insteadon the relevance of the association between various behavioraleffects and marihuana use. PHILOSOPHICAL OVERSIMPLIFICATION Some partisans stoutly maintain that the state has no right tointerfere with essentially private conduct or that the state hasno right to protect the individual from his own folly. Some ofthe greatest minds of the Western world have struggled over suchphilosophical issue always with the same outcome: a recognitionof the need to draw a line between the individual and his socialsurroundings. That is, everything an individual does, in privateor not, potentially may affect others. The issue is really todetermine when the undesirable effect upon others is likelyenough or direct enough for society to take cognizance of it andto deal with it. Coupled with this is the further question ofwhether the nature of the behavior and its possible effect issuch that society should employ coercive measures. Advocates of liberalization of the marihuana laws commonlycontend either that the decision to use marihuana is a privatemoral decision or that any harm flowing from use of the drugaccrues only to the user. Defenders of the, present restrictionsinsist that society not only has the right but is obligated toprotect the existing social order and to compel an individual toabstain from a behavior which may impair his productivity.Unfortunately, the issue is not so simple and the line oftendrawn between the private conduct and behavior affecting thepublic health and welfare, is not conclusive or absolutelydefinable. For example, a, decision to possess a firearm, while privateis considered by many to be of public magnitude, requiringgovernmental control. A decision to engage in adulterous conduct,although generally implemented in private, may have publicconsequences if society believes strongly in the desirability ofthe existing family structure. Similarly, excessive alcoholconsumption, in addition to its adverse effects on individualhealth, may impair familial stability and economic productivity,matters with which the total society is concerned. So, while we agree with the basic philosophical precept thatsociety may interfere with individual conduct only in the publicinterest, using coercive measures only when less restrictivemeasures would not suffice this principle merely initiatesinquiry into a rational social policy but does not identify it.We must take a careful look at this complicated question of thesocial impact of private behavior. And we must recognize at theoutset the inherent difficulty in predicting effects on publichealth and welfare, and the strong conflicting notions of whatconstitutes the public interest. Again and again during the course of our hearings, we havebeen startled by the divergence of opinion within differentsegments of our population. Sometimes the disagreement is quitevehement, and relates to the underlying social concerns ofparticular groups. For example, we were told repeatedly byleaders of the urban black communities that they wanted to purgeall drug use from their midst, marihuana included, and that the"legalization" of marihuana would be viewed as part ofa design to keep the black man enslaved. On the other hand, we were informed repeatedly by the activiststudent element that the pre-sent social policy regardingmarihuana was merely a tool for suppression of political dissent,and until the law was changed, there could be no hope ofintegrating the dissident population into the mainstream ofAmerican society. Such statements reemphasize the degree to which marihuana isregarded as a symbol of a larger social concern. The conflicting notions of the public interest by differentsegments of the population reinforced in the Commission'sdeliberations the realization that we have been called upon torecommend public policy for all segments of the population, forall of the American people. The public good cannot be defined byone segment of the population, the old or the young, users ornon-users of marihuana, ethnic minorities or white majority. Atthe same time, the fears of each of these groups must be takeninto consideration in arriving at the basic social objectives ofthe Commission's public policy recommendation. Where such fearsare real, they must be confronted directly; where they areimagined, however, they must be put in perspective and,hopefully, laid to rest. SOCIOLOGICAL OVERSIMPLIFICATION Public debate and decision-making in our society suffer fromthe glorification of statistical data. After a particular socialphenomenon, such as marihuana use, has been defined as a problem,armies of social scientific researchers set out to analyze anddescribe the problem. A sophisticated computer technologyinstantly translates millions of bits of data into correlations,probabilities and trends. The most striking findings are then fedto a data-hungry public. The result is data overload. Descriptive information about the nature and scope ofmarihuana use as a behavior is an essential component of thepolicy-maker's knowledge-base. However, such information does notin itself have social policy implications. The policy-maker mustdefine goals and evaluate means; only after he asks the rightquestions will statistical data suggest useful answers.Unfortunately, a tendency exists in the marihuana debate toassign prescriptive meanings to descriptive data without testingthe underlying assumptions. Further, the data have often beenaccumulating in a fragmented way. No overall plan was devisedbeforehand; the result has been an ad hoc use of available datatriggered by individual research interests rather than bylong-term policy needs. What does it mean that 24 million people have tried marihuana?Some have suggested that it means marihuana ought to belegalized. But does it mean the same thing if 15 million triedthe drug once and have decided not to use it again? And does itmean the same thing if popular interest in the drug turns out tobe a passing fancy, which wanes as suddenly as it waxed? On the other side of the controversy, what does it mean that asubstantial percentage of the public would favor increasedpenalties for marihuana use? The prescriptive implications of ademocratic impulse may be offset by a preference for individualfreedom of choice. Also, this segment of public opinion may havebeen influenced by incorrect information, such as unwarrantedbelief in marihuana's lethality or addiction potential. So,although the policy-maker must be aware of political realities,he must not allow his function to be supplanted by public opinionpolls. This is an area which requires both awareness of publicattitudes and willingness to assert leadership based on the bestinformation available. LEGAL OVERSIMPLIFICATION Perhaps the major impediment to rational decision-making isthe tendency to think only in terms of the legal system ingeneral and of the criminal justice system in particular. Thisthinking is certainly understandable, given the history ofmarihuana's involvement with the criminal law. Nonetheless, thelaw does not exist in a social vacuum, and legal alternatives canbe evaluated only with reference to the values and policies whichthey are designed to implement and the social context in whichthey are designed to operate. Legal fallacies are apparent on both sides of the marihuanacontroversy. Many of the persons opposed to marihuana use lookexclusively to the law for social control. This reliance on thelaw is stronger today because many of our fellow citizens areuneasy about the diminishing effectiveness of our otherinstitutions, particularly when the non-legal institutions havebeen relatively lax in controlling drug related behavior.Increasing reliance is placed upon the legal system to act notonly as policeman, but as father confessor, disciplinarian,educator, rehabilitator and standard-bearer of our moral code.Little or no thought is given to what impact this over-relianceon the law has on the viability of other social institutions, notto mention it's effect on the legal process. A society opposed to marihuana use need not implement thatpolicy through the criminal law. Non-legal institutions, such asthe church, the school and the family, have great potential formolding individual behavior. Accordingly, the policy-maker mustdelicately assess the capacity of the legal system to accomplishits task and must consider the mutual impact of legal andnon-legal institutions in achieving social objectives. We recognize the short-sightedness of an absolute assumptionthat the criminal law is the necessary tool for implementing asocial policy opposed to marihuana use. But equally short-sightedis the opposing contention which attempts to analyze the lawseparately from its underlying social policy objective. Thisargument assumes that if the law isn't working, or if the costsof enforcing the law outweigh its benefits, the law should,therefore, be repealed. If society feels strongly enough about the impropriety of acertain behavior, it may choose to utilize the criminal law eventhough the behavior is largely invisible and will be minimizedonly through effective operation of other agencies of socialcontrol. Laws against incest and child-beating are good examples.In weighing the costs and benefits of a particular law, one mustprovide a scale and a system of weights. The scale is thenormative classification of behavior, and the system of weightsis the largely subjective evaluation of the importance of thevalues breached by the behavior. This weighing process is what isopen to dispute. In sum, no law works alone. Where an unquestioned consensusexists about the undesirability of a particular behavior and allsocial institutions are allied in the effort to prevent it, as isthe case with murder and theft, the law can be said to"work" even though some murders and thefts may still becommitted. Where society is ambivalent about its attitude towardthe behavior and other institutions are not committed to itsdiscouragement, the law cannot be said to be working, even thoughmany people may not engage in the behavior because it is againstthe law. The question is whether the social policy, which the law isdesigned to, implement, is being achieved to a satisfactoryextent. To determine the role of law regarding marihuana, we mustfirst look to society's values and aspirations, and then definethe social policy objective. If we seek to discourage certainmarihuana-related behavior, we must carefully assess the role ofthe legal system in achieving that objective. The Report In this Chapter, we have tried to put the marihuana problem inperspective. In the remainder of this Report, we explore severalaspects of the phenomenon of marihuana use, its effects, itssocial impact and its social meaning, assessing their relativeimportance in the formulation of social policy. In Chapter II, we consider the effects of the drug on theindividual user, with particular attention to the size of theuser population for whom various effects are relevant. TheCommission emphasizes that this material is related onlyindirectly to its policy-making function. The social policyplanner is concerned not about the effects on the individual perse, but about the impact of any adverse effect on his behaviorand on the larger society and about the meaning of this behaviorin the larger social perspective. The material in Chapter IIserves primarily to educate and inform. In Chapter III, the Commission evaluates the various threatswhich marihuana use is perceived to present to the public safety,public health, and dominant social order. This Chapter isdesigned to assess the social impact of marihuana use, theinitial step in the policy making process. In Chapter IV, we consider what role marihuana use plays andwill play in the life of American society. This is the dynamicelement of marihuana use and is the most intangible of themarihuana realities, but is particularly important from apolicy-planning perspective. This consideration is the one mostoverlooked by contemporary observers and participants in themarihuana debate. Because social meaning is not a directly measurable entity, wemust examine the ways in which society responds to the behaviorand whether such responses, both formal and informal, are fluidor. static. After analyzing public opinion, law enforcementbehavior and the reactions of medical, educational, and othersegments of the population, we then discuss what marihuana usehas come to mean and is likely to mean in the future.Particularly important in this highly speculative endeavor is thewider cultural perspective which we described earlier in thisChapter. In Chapter V, we bring this information to bear on apolicy-making process. After establishing the philosophicalframework, we explore the spectrum of social policy options,choosing the one we judge most suitable to the present time. Thenwe consider the range of legal alternatives for implementing thischosen policy, and select the one we believe to be mostappropriate for achieving it. In an addendum to the Report, we present some ancillaryrecommendations. Some of these recommendations flow from ourbasic premise, others are a result of independent evaluation bythe Commission of other areas of concern. We ask the reader to set his preconceptions aside as we havetried to do, and discriminate with us between marihuana, thedrug, and marihuana, the problem. We hope that our conclusionswill be acceptable to the entire public, but barring that, wehope at the least that the areas of disagreement and theirimplications will be brought into sharper focus. Contents | Feedback | Search DRCNet Library | Schaffer Library | Major Studies Marihuana, A Signal of Misunderstanding WT01-B25-28IA031-000651-B020-165http://206.61.184.43:80/schaffer/LIBRARY/studies/nc/ncchap2.htm 206.61.184.43 19970122123012 text/html 104889HTTP/1.0 200 OKDate: Wednesday, 22-Jan-97 12:30:03 GMTServer: WebSitePro/1.1f (S/N wpo-0deb)Allow-ranges: bytesContent-type: text/htmlLast-modified: Saturday, 28-Dec-96 06:53:45 GMTContent-length: 104670 Marihuana Use and Its Effects Contents | Feedback | Search DRCNet Library | Schaffer Library | Major Studies Marihuana, A Signal of Misunderstanding The National Commission on Marihuana and Drug Abuse Marihuana - A Signal of Misunderstanding. Chapter II marihuana use and its effects "Facts are stubborn things; and whatever may be ourwishes, our inclinations, or the dictates of our passions, theycannot alter the state of facts and evidence." John Adams(1770) The ultimate objective of the Commission is to evaluate thetotal impact of actual and potential marihuana use oncontemporary American society. This endeavor involves threephases: first, an evaluation of the nature and scope ofcontemporary American marihuana use; second, a carefulreevaluation of the pharmacological effects of the drug on thehuman body with special emphasis on the drug's capacity to alteror modify behavior; and third, an evaluation of the impact ofmarihuana use on society. This chapter deals with the first andsecond phases, and Chapter Three deals with the third. The Marihuana User Cannabis has been used widely for many centuries innonindustrialized countries of Asia and Africa. Today, as inearlier years, use of drug is concentrated primarily among lowersocioeconomic groups. in these countries, the practice isestimated to be confined to a tenth of the lower socioeconomic,male population. Although such use of the drug iswell-established, it offers little direct comparison with theAmerican experience. Although the commercial, industrial and therapeutic value ofthe hemp plant was widely recognized and exploited in the UnitedStates from the earliest days of its history, knowledge and useof its intoxicating and psychoactive properties remained largelyunknown until about 1900. At that time, the custom of smoking marihuana was generallylimited to groups of Mexican itinerant workers in the borderstates of the Southwest. By 1910, marihuana use began to emergein other southern states and cities, particularly New Orleans,and in the port cities along the Mississippi River. In time,these cities became distribution centers for enterprisingsailors. From there, marihuana use spread cross-country to otherurban centers, mining camps, railroad construction sites, farmlabor camps, "bohemian" communities of artists and jazzmusicians, and various other groups outside the mainstream ofAmerican society. Recently, of course, use of the drug has spread to young,white, middle class groups and especially to high school andcollege populations. DEMOGRAPHIC CHARACTERISTICS On the basis of the Commission-sponsored National Survey, wehave concluded that contemporary marihuana use is pervasive,involving all segments of the U.S. population. The Surveyestimated that about 24 million Americans over the age of 11years (15% of the adults 18 and over, and 14% of the 12-17 yearolds) have used marihuana at least once, referred to in thisReport as ever-users. Until recently twice as many males asfemales had used it; the most up-to-date studies of high schoolstudents, college-age individuals, and young adults carried outby the Commission indicate that this sex differential appears tobe diminishing. In many youthful populations use is almostequally distributed between males and females. Marihuana use does not appear to vary significantly by race.With respect to the religious affiliation of the users, Jews andCatholics appear to be slightly overrepresented as compared toProtestants. Usage is highest in cities, towns, and suburbs but notuncommon in rural areas. States in the Northeast and West haveconsiderably higher rates of use than have the North Centralstates, which in turn have significantly higher rates than thosein the South. Use is found in all socioeconomic groups and occupations,though slightly more predominant among persons with above-averageincomes. A New York survey of the state's general populationindicated that ever-use as well as regular use is almost equallyprevalent among sales workers, clerical workers,skilled, semiskilled and unskilled workers, managers, owners,professionals and technical workers. At the same time, the incidence of use seems to vary accordingto educational attainment. Among all adults not now in school, 5%of those with an eighth grade education or less have used thedrug, contrasted with 11% of those who completed some highschool, 14% of those who graduated from high school, 25% of thosewho completed some college and 21 % of those who graduated fromcollege. Age is presently one of the most significant correlates ofmarihuana use. Among the total population, those who have triedor used marihuana at least once, termed ever-users, are heavilyconcentrated in the 16-25 age bracket. Of all the ever-users,about half are in this group. At the same time, however, weshould emphasize that use is by no means confined to teenagersand young adults. The proportion of individuals in different age groups who haveused marihuana is indicated in Figure 1. The incidence of use is greatest among young people: 27% ofthe 16-17 year olds, 40% of the 18-21 year olds, and 38% of the22-25 year olds have tried marihuana; at the low extremes, 6% ofthe 12-13 year olds and 6% of the over-50 generation have usedthe drug. Among those now in school, incidence also seems to rise withincreasing school level: Ever-users represent 44% of thosepersons now in college or graduate school; 30% of high schooljuniors and seniors; 17% of freshmen and sophomores; and 8% ofstudents in junior high school. At the same time, the use of the drug among adults is by nomeans confined to college students. Even among the 18-25 yearolds, 75% of the ever-users are not now in school. The initial patterns of contemporary marihuana use appear tobe shifting; there is a trend toward increased use among collegestudents as well as non-college students. Non-student users nowspan social class, income level and occupational classification.In addition, the proportion -of users increases during the teens,peaks during the young adult years and then falls off rapidly(Figure 1). Having described the incidence of any use of marihuana ever,and demographic characteristics of the 24 million Americans whohave tried the drug, we recognize the need to place thisinformation into perspective. The policymaker must also beconcerned with the patterns of use: frequency, amount consumed ateach smoking, and duration of use. PATTERNS OF USE The most striking of the use patterns revealed in the NationalSurvey is that 41 % of the adults and 45 % of the youth who haveever used marihuana reported that they no longer use the drug.Twenty-nine percent of the adults and 43% of the youth reportedthat they are still using marihuana (see Table 1). When asked whythey bad terminated use, the overwhelming majority of adults(61%) specified, among other reasons, that they had simply lostinterest in the drug. Table I.-EXPERIENCE WITH MARIHUANA Percent of ever-users Frequency Adults Youth Designation (18 and (12-17) over) Have used marihuana but no longer 4145 u se. lExperimenters. Once a month or less 9 15 2-3 times pet month 8 10 Intermittentusers. Once per week 4 9 @ Several times per week 5 4Moderate users. Once daily 1 1 1 More than once daily 2 4 Heavyusers. No answer 30 12 These data indicate that at least 41% of the adults and 45% ofthe youth have used marihuana but have -discontinued use; 9% ofthe adults and 15% of the youth use the drug sporadically, oncea, month or less. These persons can be characterized asexperimental marihuana users.* To ensure an understanding of this section of the Report, somedefinitions are required at this juncture. In this report, theCommission employs the following designations: Frequency of Use Experimental-At least one trial to once a monthor less. Intermittent-Two to 10 times monthly. Moderate-11 times monthly to once, daily. Heavy-Several times daily. Very Heavy-Almost constant intoxication withpotent preparations; brain rarely drug free. Duration of Use Short Term-Less than two years. Long Term-Two to 10 years. Very Long Term-Over 10 years. Twelve percent of the adults and 19% of the youth who haveever used marihuana can be designated intermittent users; theycontinue to use the drug more than once a month, but less thanseveral times a week, probably on weekends. Six percent of theadults and five percent of the youth are moderate users whocontinue to use marihuana several times a week to once daily. Finally, 2% of the adults and 4% of the youth who have everused marihuana are heavy users: they use the drug several timesdaily. A very small fraction of these heavy users may be veryheavy users, who are intoxicated most of their waking hours andprobably use very potent preparations of the drug. In addition to frequency, duration of use is an importantvariable in discussing use patterns and especially whenconsidering drug effects. Most users in this country have smokedthe drug over a short term, that is, less than two years. Othershave used the drug over a long term, two to 10 years. Very fewAmericans can be considered very long term users, that is, over10 years. Another important element of use is the amount of marihuanaused on each occasion. Most intermittent and moderate usersaverage about one-half to one cigarette per occasion, usually atnight. Most heavy users smoke at least one to two cigarettes anoccasion, with a few using as many as five consecutively. As this brief description of use patterns suggests, marihuanause and the marihuana user do not fall into simple, distinctclassifications. Although it is possible to sketch profiles ofvarious marihuana-using populations, no valid stereotype of amarihuana user or non-user can be drawn. The spectrum ofindividuals who use or have used marihuana varies according tofrequency, intensity and duration of use. It is meaningless totalk of "the marihuana user" or "marihuanause" without first clarifying descriptive data. *All respondents for the National Survey were asked tocomplete a self administered questionnaire. This instrumentcovered many sensitive areas, including a series of items onpersonal experience with marihuana and other drugs. Given thenature of the questions, the contractor took every precaution toinsure that the interviewee responded honestly and that hisresponses were kept strictly confidential. Even the interviewerwho orally administered the rest of the Survey was not permittedto view the written instrument. One of the inevitable costs of such confidentiality is therisk that a certain percentage of respondents would not completeone or more of the questions. Where a significant number ofquestions remained unanswered, the questionnaire was nottabulated at all. However, in 30%, of the otherwise completequestionnaires, the adult respondents who had ever used the drugdid not answer the question, "On the average, about howoften do you use marihuana at the present time?" Concerned about the meaning of this non-response rate, the,Commission directed the contractor to conduct a detailed analysiscomparing the non-respondents with all respondents and with thoseindividuals who had never used marihuana at all. On the basis ofthis analysis, we are confident that the overwhelming majority,if not all, of the non-respondents are experimenters. In the flrst place, the demographic characteristics of thenon-respondents coincide closely with those of the non-users andless frequent users. Very few of the young adults, where morefrequent use is concentrated, failed to respond. Secondly, the non-respondents are disproportionately locatedin the geographic regions where use was least prevalent and leastfrequent. For example, 50% of the ever-users in the North Centralregion failed to respond, compared to 71% in the West. Yet only5% of the ever-users in the North Central region continue to usethe drug more than once a week, compared to 21% in the West; andless than .5% of the ever-users in the North Central region usethe drug more than once a day, as compared to 4% in the West. PROFILES OF USERS Several studies by the Commission and many other recentcollege and high school surveys have elucidated a variety ofpersonality types or categories of marihuana users. Theseprofiles relate primarily to the patterns depicted above and tothe meaning of marihuana use for various individuals. Essentiallywe will describe a continuum with much overlapping among thecategories. The reader should understand that groupidentification is at best a hazardous occupation; the traitsdescribed are not exclusive to marihuana users. A much largernumber of individuals who have not used the drug can be similarlydescribed. Experimental Users The first and by far the largest group has been designated as"experimenters" because of their extremely infrequentor non-persistent marihuana usage. Experimentation with the drugis motivated primarily by curiosity and a desire to share asocial experience. These experimenters are characteristicallyquite conventional and practically indistinguishable from thenon-user in terms of life style, activities, social integration,and vocational or academic performance. Disciplined, optimistic, and self-confident, experimentersappear to be as conventional, responsible, goal-oriented andorderly as non-users. Intermittent Users The intermittent users are motivated to use marihuana forreasons similar to those of the experimenters. They use the drugirregularly and infrequently but generally continue to do sobecause of its socializing and recreational aspects. For theintermittent user, marihuana often contributes to theestablishment and solidification of close social relations amongusers similarly inclined. The individual has a sense of belongingto an intimate group. Investigations of behavioral aspects of marihuana smokingclearly demonstrate that marihuana smoking is a social activity,believed by intermittent users to enhance the enjoyment of sharedactivities, especially music, art, films and food. In a Commission-sponsored study to determine the effects ofrepeat doses of marihuana, under free access conditions, thesubjects smoked almost exclusively in groups. A certain number ofthese individuals tended to share much of their leisure time incommon activities, and marihuana, smoking was the focal activityaround which other types of social interactions revolved, such asconversation, watching TV, listening to music and playing games.The intermittent users studied exhibited an increased sense ofwell-being, relaxation, and friendliness during these activities.They were more inclined to seek and emphasize the social ratherthan personal effects of the drug. Intermittent marihuana users, like the experimenters, aregenerally conventional in most respects. They are more liberalpolitically and socially and they tend to stress education forpersonal improvement rather than for recognition or high grades.Like many non-users, these individuals are likely to beself-expressive, intellectually and culturally oriented,creative, and flexible. Placing a high value on experimentationand responsible, independent decision-making, they often manifesta desire to search for new experiences, resulting in somebehaviors which depart from the norms of the larger society.Often accompanying their search is a sense of uncertainty aboutthe future. Moderate and Heavy Users The final groups of marihuana users are the moderate and heavyusers. This range is wide and includes individuals who usemarihuana more than 10 times a month to several times a day.Practically all of the American research effort to date hasfocused on the large majority of individuals who use less often,that is, the experimental and intermittent users. Consequently,not enough is known about characteristics and behavior of themoderate and the heavy users, so it is difficult to distinguishaccurately between the two groups. We suspect however that themoderate users share traits with both the intermittent and theheavy users. Having already discussed the intermittent group, wewill now turn to the characteristics of the heavy group. Heavy users seem to need the drug experience more often. Theirinitial and continued marihuana use is motivated not only bycuriosity and an urge to share a social experience but also by adesire for "kicks," "expansion of awareness andunderstanding," and relief of anxiety or boredom. Generally, the heavy marihuana user's life style, activities,values and attitudes are unconventional and at variance withthose of the, larger society. These individuals are morepessimistic, insecure, irresponsible, and nonconforming. Theyfind routine especially distasteful. Their behavior and mood arerestless and uneven. Heavy users place particularly strong emphasis on impulsiveresponse in the interest of pleasure-seeking, immediategratification, and individual expression. They tend to evidencesocial and emotional immaturity, are especially indifferent torules and conventions, and are often resistant to authority.However, several surveys have also revealed that they tend to becurious, socially perceptive, skillful and sensitive to the needsof others, and possess broadly based, although unconventional,interests. The Boston free-access study permitted the Commission toobserve a group of individuals whose life styles, activities,values and attitudes are representative of a segment of theunconventional youthful subculture. The month-long period ofcontrolled study during the fall prevented the participation ofindividuals who were married, steadily employed, or enrolled inschool. Individuals who smoked marihuana once a week or less weresought by the researchers but were exceedingly unusual among thepopulation available for the study. Consequently, the groupstudies contrasted with the student and full-time workingpopulations in which weekly marihuana use is more common. Forthis reason, the intermittent users studied appeared to besimilar to, rather than different from, the moderate and heavyusers studied. Both groups had used marihuana for an average offive years. Under the study's confined conditions, participants tended tosmoke more marihuana than they did "on the outside."The intermittent users, who by our definition averaged eighttimes a month under outside conditions, averaged three cigarettesa day during the study. The range was from one-half to sixcigarettes daily. The moderate and heavy users, who "on the outside"averaged 33 times a month, now averaged six-and-a-half cigarettesa day. The range was three-and-a-half to eight cigarettes. Indiscussing the Boston study, we will call this group"daily" users. Smoking usually occurred at night, sometimes during theafternoon and only occasionally upon awakening. The intermittentand heavy users usually smoked one cigarette a session. The dailyusers were more likely to smoke more than one a session. A fewindividuals in the daily group could have been consideredconstantly intoxicated on a few occasions during the 21 -dayperiod. The mean age of the subjects studied was 23. Based on IQtesting, they were superior intellectually, although they hadcompleted, on the average, only two-and-a-half years of college.Their job histories were rather erratic, characteristic of apattern of itinerant living. The intermittent users -were from amiddle or upper class background, while the daily users generallyshared a lower socioeconomic status. Broken homes and instancesof alcohol or drug abuse were more common in the familybackgrounds of the daily users. Alcohol was rarely used by the subjects. Use of hallucinogensand amphetamines was significantly more widespread and had begunearlier in the daily user group. In contrast to the intermittentgroup, the daily users almost uniformly reported that marihuanasmoking produced relaxation, noting also increasedalteration in perception or psychedelic-like effects.Similarly, they reported an increased sense of well-being,friendliness, carefreeness and decreased hostility. Additionally,the daily users appeared to demonstrate a moderate psychologicaldependence on the marihuana experience while theintermittent users demonstrated little or no psychologicaldependence. Analysis of social-behavioral aspects of daily users'marihuana smoking clearly demonstrated that it is a pivotalsocial activity around which conversation, other personalinteractions, and much of the users' lives revolve. Smokingalmost exclusively occurred in groups and was the focal activityaround which these groups formed. The daily users exhibited areadiness to take part in but not to initiate a smoking session. In contrast to the intermittent users, all the daily users ina group smoked when marihuana was made available. Marihuanasmoking appeared to be a primary means of reinforcing groupsolidarity. Yet these users were more inclined to seek thepersonal effects of the drug rather than the socializing effectssought by the intermittent users. The social adjustment of the daily users, when judged from atraditional psychiatric standpoint, was impaired. Individualstended to be more withdrawn and to interact less with each otherthan the intermittent users, regardless of the type of activityor state of intoxication. However, the daily users did appear toaccommodate themselves better than the intermittent users to theeffects of the intoxication on social interaction. Despite a relatively high level of scholastic attainment andsuperior intelligence, many of the subjects were performing wellbelow their intellectual capability, usually working at menial,mechanical or artisan tasks. They were not oriented towardachieving the traditional goals of the larger society. Nonetheless, during the period of the Boston study, thesubjects could not be characterized as displaying a generallassitude and indifference, carelessness in personal hygiene orlack of productive activity, all supposed to be characteristic ofvery heavy use. Even during the periods of heaviest marihuanasmoking, they maintained a high level of interest andparticipation in a variety of personal activities, such aswriting, reading, keeping up on current world events, andparticipating in athletic and aesthetic endeavors. Additionally, all of the subjects maintained a desire tocomplete all aspects of the research study. Although they couldbe labeled 'underachievers" in terms of the traditionalstandards of the larger society, these individuals were motivatedto pursue actively the interests and activities of their own subculture. Generally, most studies which have been undertaken indicatethat individuals who are heavy marihuana users cannot find aplace for themselves in conventional society. Their heavymarihuana use may reflect and perhaps perpetuate theirunconventionality while providing social acceptance in one of thenon-conventional subcultures. Very Heavy Users The Commission's analysis of frequency, quantity and durationof marihuana use suggest that the United States is at the presenttime in a fortunate position. All of the studies available to theCommission have indicated that only a minute number of Americanscan be designated as very heavy marihuana users. These studiesuniformly indicate that chronic, constant intoxication with verypotent cannabis preparations is exceedingly rare in this country. The Commission believes that important distinctions must bemade between the daily (moderate and heavy) American marihuanauser and the very heavy hashish or charas user in other parts ofthe world where cannabis is widely cultivated and its use deeplyingrained. Many of the North African and Asian users do notemploy the drug only as an intoxicant in the western sense.Instead, it is frequently used in "folk medicalpractice," in religious rites and as a work adjunctparticularly in those occupations which are physically demanding,monotonous, unintellectual, and offer little possibility ofadvancement. In these countries, very heavy use is typically associatedwith young males from a lower socioeconomic background.Nonetheless, use is more widespread among all ages and elderlychronic users are not uncommon. Generally, these very heavy users consume high amounts of verypotent preparations continually throughout the day so that theyare rarely drug-free. These individuals evidence strongpsychological dependence on the drug, requiring compulsivedrug-taking. Clear-cut behavioral changes occur in these extremecases. The very heavy User tends to lose interest in allactivities other than drug use. A common element of thebehavioral pattern is lethargy and social deterioration. Notsurprisingly, these users have been held in low esteem and veryheavy use has been subject to societal disapproval in almost allcountries. BECOMING A MARIHUANA USER Our attempt to classify marihuana users is primarily fordescriptive purposes. It does not imply that all individuals whoresemble any of the categories are necessarily marihuana users.Nor is it implied that all marihuana users fit neatly orprecisely into these slots. There is no "typical"marihuana user, just as their is no typical American. The mostnotable statement that can be made about the vast majority ofmarihuana users-experimenters and intermittent users-is that theyare essentially indistinguishable from their non-marihuana usingpeers by any fundamental criterion other than their marihuanause. But if most users and non-users of marihuana essentially areindistinguishable, why have some people chosen to use the drugand others not, and why have some people continued to use it andothers not? An important part of the explanation is that use ofmarihuana, like all human behavior, occurs within specific socialand cultural settings. The individual's biologicalcharacteristics and personality probably play an important rolein determining the pattern his use will take. However, thecultural and social setting play a larger role in determiningwhether be will use it at all. Numerous studies have demonstrated that the young person whochooses to use marihuana differs in some important sociologicalrespects from his peer who does not choose to do so. Thesedifferences relate to his willingness to experiment with a drug,especially a forbidden one. in short, the process of becoming amarihuana user is not a " seduction of the, innocent"as is often portrayed. Based on interrelated familial, social andcultural factors, persons, especially young persons, who maychoose to use marihuana can be predicted statistically. Parental Influence The decision to use marihuana is related to parental lifestyle. Parents provide the most important example of acceptabledrug-taking behavior for their children. That marihuana usersfrequently have medicine-taking, cigarette-smoking, orliquor-drinking parents has been demonstrated. In a series ofCanadian studies, grade and high school students who said theirmothers took tranquilizers daily were three times more likely totry marihuana than the students who did not so report. Beyond the influence of a drug-taking example, parents havethe primary influence on their childrens' acquisition of skills,values and attitudes necessary to be mature and responsibleadults. Many parents have oriented their children toward becomingindependent, competent, educated, and adaptive adults. Simultaneously, many young people observe in their parents'lives the trend toward shorter work periods, earlier retirementand increased emphasis on leisure time activities. It appearsthat the incidence of adolescent marihuana use is stronglycorrelated with this trend toward increased leisure time. Situational Factors and BehavioralCorrelates All studies of the ever user, including theCommission-sponsored National Survey, have established thatmarihuana smoking is significantly correlated with a number ofdemographic variables. Males, college students, and residents ofmetropolitan areas, especially in the Northeast and West, aregenerally overrepresented in proportion to their percentage ofthe total population. Among the behaviors statistically correlated with marihuana,use are radical politics, visits to psychiatrists, sexualfreedom, and separate residences from parents. The mostsignificant behavior seems to be use of legal drugs, especiallyalcohol and tobacco. Young people who choose to experiment withmarihuana are fundamentally the same people, socially andpsychologically, as those who use alcohol and tobacco. Forexample, in a study of high school youngsters, only 3% of all thenonsmokers in the sample had ever tried marihuana, compared with50% of all the current cigarette smokers. Similarly, for alcoholdrinking outside the family setting, only 2% of all thenondrinkers had tried marihuana, as compared to 27% of thedrinkers. The National Survey tends to confirm the closeassociation between marihuana use and cigarette smoking andalcohol use. Among all the adults sampled in the Survey, 71% hadsmoked cigarettes and 39% are current smokers. Similarly, ofadult non-marihuana users, 70% have smoked cigarettes and 38% arecurrent smokers. These percentages increase somewhat formarihuana users: 87 have smoked cigarettes and 54% are currentcigarette smokers. In regard to alcohol consumption, 40% of all the adultssampled indicated that they had not consumed beer or bard liquorin the 30 days prior to the survey. Marihuana users tended tohave consumed alcohol more often than non-marihuana users (Table,2). Table 2.-LIQUOR CONSUMPTION DURING 30-DAYPERIOD 1-4 5-10 11 or No 0 days days days moreanswer days Percent of nonmarihuana users. . 4519 6 7 21 Percent of marihuana users...... 2630 12 8 24 Social Group Factors One of the most influential factors in determining behavior incontemporary America among adolescents and young adults is peergroup influence. Knowing other people who use marihuanapredisposes the individual to use marihuana, and havingmarihuana-using friends provides the social opportunity for thecurious. Ile individual who is already part of a, social groupwhich uses marihuana indicates by this choice that his attitudesand values are already to some degree compatible with illicitdrug use. Social peer groups are especially influential upon individualswho have not yet become "successful" adults, such asadolescents, college students and young adults, who spend a greatdeal of time and effort competing for status in situations wherestatus opportunities are minimal. The social peer group providesan opportunity for achieving status among equals by demonstratingcompetence and autonomy. Outstanding performance in athletics,organizations or academics demonstrates competence but notautonomy because these activities are adult-oriented andcontrolled. Additionally, only a relative few are able to excel. Opportunity to prove oneself is more readily available in thepeer group. Often, adolescents participate in forms of delinquentbehavior, termed symbolic infractions, in order to demonstrateautonomy and competence to their peers. These include joy-riding,vandalism, sexual promiscuity, underage drinking, violation ofrules of decorum and dress, and purposeless confrontation withauthority. Marihuana use has recently been added to the list ofinfractions and offers several advantages for adolescents andyoung adults. Most important, it provides a shared groupexperience which offers the, shy, lonely, socially awkwardneophyte a means of entrance to the group, complete with its ownceremonial initiation. Repetition of the behavior serves toincrease closeness and commitment to the group. Usually theexperience is pleasurable and the individual is able to controlhis level of intoxication. This delinquency is viewed asrelatively harmless to oneself and others, although its symbolicimpact on parents and authority is often greater than that ofother common infractions. Therefore, a, subtle process of acquiring attitudes favorableto drug use, of having friends and acquaintances who define themarihuana experience in acceptable and pleasurable terms, and ofhaving a social belief system which prepares one to accept theconversion process to begin with, are all powerful complementaryfactors which direct a young person toward marihuana use. At thispoint, the use of marihuana provides further opportunities foracquiring new marihuana using friends and entering the socialmilieu of marihuana, users. The Dynamics of Persistent Use The cultural and social factors sketched above, in combinationwith the individual's somatic and psychic characteristics,determine the pattern of his drug behavior once he has chosen toexperiment with it. The majority of individuals who reach thispoint progress no further and often discontinue marihuana use.The most common explanation for discontinuing use is loss ofinterest; the effect lost its novelty and became boring. Otherless common reasons are fear of legal hazards, social pressure,and concerns over physical and mental drug effects. Among theinfrequently noted reasons are: interference with otheractivities; replacement by alcohol; unavailability; cost;unpleasant experiences; fear of moral transgression; orprogression to other forms of non-drug interests such as yoga,transcendental meditation, agrarian communes, esoteric religionand restrictive diets. For those who continue use, psychosocial factors are importantdeterminants of the use patterns. Many marihuana users arestrongly committed to traditional society in which they desire torise socially. They have chosen to participate fully in thetraditional adult-oriented activities and the formalachievement-reward system. Their peer groups consist primarily ofsimilarly oriented individuals. The infrequent use of marihuanaby these persons is a social activity for fun and satisfiescuriosity. Those individuals who continue to use marihuana morefrequently appear to be different types of people and orientedtoward a different part of the social system. Most of themmaintain stable career orientations and continue to functionwithin the broader society. But they feel more burdened by thetraditional system of social controls and more removed fromcontemporary society's institutions. These individuals tend toturn away from more traditional adult-oriented reward systems andintensify their peer-group orientation. Their interests andactivities emphasize an informal "in-crowd,"out-of-school or work orientation. The meaning of marihuana useby this peer group emphasizes the ideological character of usage.In contrast to the infrequent type of user, these individualsseem to build their self-identity around the marihuana-using peergroup. BECOMING A MULTIDRUG USER The more one smokes marihuana, the more involved hisinterpersonal relationships are likely to become with his peerswho share the experience with him. As he spends more time withthis group, he begins to sever his contacts with conventionalindividuals and conventional routines. He may eventually viewhimself as a drug user and be willing to experiment with otherdrugs which are approved by his peer group. Only ;a small portionof the marihuana users who reach this stage are likely to becomepersistent, frequent users of these other drugs. The majorityappear to experiment only. Epidemiologic Studies The Commission's studies have confirmed the associationbetween marihuana usage and the consumption of other drugs forcuriosity and pleasure. This association holds for all drugs,including over-thecounter and prescription pain relievers,tension relievers, sleeping pills, and stimulants as well ashashish, methamphetamines, cocaine, LSD and mescaline, andheroin. The National Survey showed that current marihuana usersare about twice as likely to have used any illicit drugs than arethose who have ceased using marihuana (Table 3). Table 3.-ILLICIT DRUG USE BYADULTS Have used Currently but no using Substance Never used marihuana longer usemarihuana marihuana (percent) (percent) Hashish Less than 0.5 percent 28 63 LSD or mescaline Less than 0.5 percent 11 28 Methamphetamine Less than 0.5 percent 10 23 Cocaine Less than 0.5 percent 4 10 Heroin Less than 0.5 percent 1 4 The Commission additionally has contracted a study of 105selected, middle class, young, working adults from California,who are marihuana smokers. Of this sample, 11% were dailymarihuana users and 47% used it several times a week; 33% used itseveral times a month; 6% used it once to several times a year;and 3% had used it but were not currently using marihuana. Thestudy indicates that while most of the subjects were frequentmarihuana users, the incidence of other drug use was relativelylow (Table 4). Table 4.-FREQUENCY OF OTHER DRUG USE BYMARIHUANA USERS Percent who use marihuana Percent Substance who Once to SeveralSeveral never several times timesDaily used times a month aweek marihuana a year Hashish 42 31 21 5 0 LSD 96 4 0 0 0 Mescaline 79 19 0 0 2 Psilocybin 96 4 0 0 0 STP, DMT 100 0 0 0 0 Heroin 98 2 0 0 0 Codeine 87 11 0 0 2 Amphetamines 89 7 0 4 0 Barbiturates 86 10 4 0 0 Cocaine 75 19 2 4 0 Glue 100 0 0 0 0 With the exception of marihuana and hashish, no drug was usedby more than 25% of this population and this use was almostexclusively experimental. Interestingly, the more exotic drugs,mescaline and cocaine were more frequently used (21% and 25% ofthis sample respectively) than the common dangerous drugs: LSD(4%), heroin (2%), codeine (11%), barbiturates (14%), andamphetamines (11%). Among high school students, marihuana, is normally the, firstillicit drug used, although several recent studies have suggestedthat a significant number of students initiate illicit use, withother drugs. Of the marihuana users, a majority have used noother illicit drug, and they tend to be experimental orintermittent users of marihuana. The more frequently the adolescent uses marihuana, the morelikely he is to experiment with other drugs. For example, in onerecent study of San Diego high school students of predominantlywhite middle socioeconomic background, 80% of the students whoused marihuana weekly or more often had used other drugs, and 50%of this group had used LSD. In contrast, 33% of the less thanweekly users bad used other drugs. Profiles and Dynamics The personality profile of the heavy marihuana user discussedearlier includes elements propelling him toward heavy involvementin the multiple-drug-using-subculture. Heavy drug use by theseindividuals may reflect and aggravate a total alienation anddisaffiliation from American society and its institutions. Thisgroup hopes to find in drug use more than simple, fun or relieffrom boredom. The heavy use of drugs represents a shift into thedrug subculture and an adoption of a totally new life style. Someobservers feel that this shift provides a new identity whichallows the individual to counteract his apathy and search formeaning in a society he views as unloving, lonely, andmeaningless. He seeks to become involved with what he describesas the exciting, relevant, "real" experience of life.Additionally, he believes drug use provides new feelings andawareness needed to overcome barriers between himself, others,and the natural world. The drug culture as a community also helps to meet the needsof the individual. It provides a ready supply of drugs, unitescommon experiences and secrets that enhance the drug experience,and protects the individual against undesired experiences andagainst "the outside world." Most important, theculture instills self-confidence by reassuring the individualthat he has been wise in choosing this new identity. Frequently, these are individuals who express feelings ofloneliness, isolation and over-protection from their home andfamily. One frequent pattern involves an intimate, dominatingmother and a distant, unemotional father. In some cases, thedrug-use ritual and the, sense of community closeness offered bythe drug subculture appear to satisfy certain personal needs.Additionally, joining the subculture provides a release fromsheltered life, a test of competence, an opportunity toparticipate, and a chance to express anger. When the anger isturned inward instead of directed at society and family, drug usebecomes a form of passive, self-destructiveness. Sociocultural Factors After the individual views himself as a drug user and hasbecome immersed in the drug-using subculture, the drugs hechooses to experiment with and his pattern of use are determinedprimarily by non-drug factors well beyond the simple propertiesof the psychoactive chemical. These factors are predominantlysocioeconomic and sociocultural, although psychic and somaticfactors also play a role in determining who will continue and howintensively. The availability of a distribution system which stocks theother drugs is essential. Most often, contact with thisdistribution system is increased by having friends oracquaintances who use or sell other drugs. However, much of themarihuana selling takes place, at the customer level betweenfriends, and involves little profit and relatively smallquantities of the drug. The marihuana user who only buys haslittle contact with the professional multidrug dealing system.However, the user-buyer-seller of marihuana is more involved withthe multidrug system, uses more himself and has more friends whouse and sell other drugs. This factor of being a seller ratherthan only a buyer-user is influential in determining the degreeof an individual's involvement with and commitment to the use ofother drugs. Marihuana use does not itself determine which drugs theheavily involved user will choose to use. Generally, theselection of other drugs is influenced by the social group. Forexample, blacks and whites have roughly equal rates of trying andusing marihuana, but their choice of other drugs and the stylesof drug use are quite different and distinctive, due to theirfrequently different sociocultural backgrounds. Additionally, onerecent study of white high school and college students revealeddifferent patterns of further drug use among males and females.Men and women used marihuana in equal numbers, but the men whoused other drugs tended to use hallucinogens while the womentended to use amphetamines. An extensive survey of drug use among 3,500 liberal artsundergraduates attending 14 campuses in the New York areademonstrated the racial character of drug use among thispopulation (Table 5). Table 5.-RACIAL CHARACTER OF DRUG USE Meth- Amphet- Hallu- Percentage tried drugs Heroin Cocaineamphet- amine cinogens mine Blacks................ 9 16 59 13 Whites................ 4 7 1119 21 According to recent studies, heroin usage is not common amongwhite marihuana users. Heroin is most strongly linked tomarihuana use in black and Spanish-speaking ghettos where manyfeel they have little chance of personal advancement andself-fulfillment. In such communities, a segment of thepopulation constructs new illegitimate but accessible avenues forsocial coping. For some this involves the hustle (non-violentstealing) and the excitement of obtaining and using heroin andcocaine. They regard marihuana as a "cool" drug and useit for its social and calming effects. In contrast, studies have demonstrated that the psychedelicsare more often used by the white, middle to upper middle class,collegeeducated populations. The typical use of these drugs inhigh school college and working populations is episodic andexperimental, and is usually discontinued rather rapidly incontrast with marihuana use, which for many persons is of longduration. In many instances, psychedelic drug use begins almostsimultaneously with marihuana. For a few, drug use becomes an ideologic focus, reflectingdisillusionment with society and rejection of the"establishment." These and other motives, includingmere pleasure-seeking, lead to continued use of LSD and otherhallucinogens. Marihuana is viewed as a dilute LSD and is oftenused to enhance or prolong the effects of that drug. Sometimes itis encountered after first LSD use. Methamphetamine, or "speed," use is morecharacteristic of those lower socioeconomic white, youth who arenot school or work oriented. Living for the moment is thecharacteristic attitude of the speed scene. The speed user viewsmarihuana as he does alcohol and uses it for fun or for itscalming effects. For these three groups of illicit drug users, marihuana usehas different meanings and is secondary in importance to the useof the other drugs. Whether or not marihuana leads to other druguse depends on the individual, on the social and cultural settingin which the drug use takes places, and on the nature of the drugmarket. Its use, however, is neither inevitable nor necessary. The Effects of Marihuana on the User The previous section has attempted to paint a broad picture ofthe marihuana user. This section will deal with the, drug and itseffects on these individuals. The meaning of drug often varies with the context in which itis used. The physician would define a drug as any substance usedas a medicine in the treatment of physical or mental disease.Today, due to the influence of many factors, the layman may focuson the negative connotations of drugs, such as the stupefying,poisoning, habit-forming misuse of the opiate drugs. Theconsiderably wider and more scientific definition of a drug whichwill be used in this section is: any chemical substance which hasan action on living tissues. A psychoactive drug is any substance capableof modifying mental performance and individual behavior byinducing functional or pathological changes in the centralnervous system. As defined, psychoactive drugs exert their major effect on thestate of the mind including emotions, feelings, sensibility,consciousness and thinking. The definition implies neitherpositive nor negative meanings. Chemical substances are notinherently good or bad. All substances, including medicines andfoods, which man has chosen to consume have certain desiredeffects (whether therapeutically beneficial or pleasurable) andundesired effects (whether detrimental or unpleasant). Forexample, eating food is certainly a necessary and pleasurableactivity. However, obesity plays an important role in manydiseases, including diabetes, high blood pressure and heartattacks, and tends to limit physical activities. The classification of any drug effect as either beneficial orharmful often greatly depends on the values the classifier placeson the expected effects. This is especially relevant with respectto the psychoactive drugs such as tranquilizers, stimulants,coffee, cigarettes, alcohol, marihuana and other licit or illicitdrugs. For all of these drugs, the weights of benefit and harmare difficult to determine when viewed merely in terms of theirstated effects. BOTANY AND CHEMISTRY Marihuana refers to a preparation derived from a plant,cannabis sativa L. The preparation contains varying quantities ofthe flowers and their resinous secretions, leaves, small stemsand seeds. These plant parts contain many chemical substances.The chemical substance which produces the major drug effects istetrahydrocannabinol (THC). According to current information, theamount of THC present determines the potency of the preparation.Hereinafter, any reference to drug content or drug effect ofmarihuana will, for all practical purposes, mean that oftetrahydrocannabinol. The drug content of the plant parts is variable, generallydecreasing in the following sequence: resin, flowers, leaves.Practically no drug is found in the stems, roots or seeds. Thepotency and resulting drug effect of marihuana fluctuates,depending on the relative proportions of these plant parts in themarihuana mixture. Most marihuana available in this country comes from Mexico andhas a THC content of less than 1%. Marihuana of American originoften contains less than two-tenths of 1% THC. Marihuanaoriginating in Jamaica and Southeast Asia often has a 2% to 4%THC content. Marihuana is the least potent preparation of the plant.Jamaican ganja, containing primarily the flower tops and thesmall leaves or bracts, has a THC content of about 4% to 8%depending on the mixture. Indian ganja is less potent. The mostpotent preparation is hashish (charas) which is composed of onlythe drug-rich resinous secretions of the flowers. Generally, theTHC content of hashish is 5 % to 12 %. FACTORS INFLUENCING DRUG EFFECT A number of variable factors exert an important influence onthe psychopharmacologic effects of marihuana in man, as is truefor all drugs. Failure to take these factors into considerationprobably accounts for a large part of the inconsistency andcontroversy surrounding the description of the drug effect. Dosage The dosage or quantity of the drug (tetrahydrocannabinol)consumed is the most important variable. As with most drugs, thelarger the dose taken, the greater the physical and mental effectwill be and the longer the effect will last. The effect of a highdose of marihuana on an individual would be quite different fromthe effect of a low, usual "social" dose. Method of Use The method of use has a bearing upon the drug effect. Themethod is directly related to both dosage and time lapse beforethe drug effect is felt. Injection directly into a vein deliversthe total dose immediately, producing a rapid, maximal responseof minimal duration. Smoking and inhalation cause rapid but lessefficient delivery of the dose; variable quantity of the drug isdestroyed during burning or escapes into the air and does notreach the lungs. Oral ingestion produces different effects,according to the system in which the drug is dispersed.Generally, oral ingestion diminishes the drug effect, butprolongs it. Metabolism Another factor which influences the effect of the drug ismetabolism. During the metabolic process, the body cells,principally in the liver and lungs, chemically alter drugsubstances, changing their activity and providing for theirelimination from the body. Increasing evidence indicates thatmarihuana is first changed by the body in a way that activates orenhances the drug effect and is subsequently altered in a waythat inactivates the drug prior to its removal from the body. The rate and direction of these metabolic steps cansignificantly influence the effect of marihuana. For instance,individuals with extensive exposure to marihuana or other drugsmetabolize more rapidly, and perhaps differently, from thoseindividuals with no drug exposure. Set and Setting An important variable in discussing the effect of marihuana onthe user is the social and emotional environment; that is, theindividual's "set" and "setting." "Set" refers to a combination of factors that createthe "internal environment" of the individual, includingpersonality, life style, and philosophy, past drug experiences,personal expectations of drug effect, and mood at the time of thedrug experience. "Setting" refers to the external environment andsocial context in which the individual takes the drug. Thesefactors are most influential when drugs are taken at low dosagesand, like marihuana, produce minimal physical and subtlesubjective mental effects. The effect of marihuana generally willbe quite different for an intermittent social adult smoker fromthat of a youth deeply involved in the youthful drug subculture.These factors partially account for the belief of a marihuanauser that he is experiencing a "high" in certainexperiments even when he is given a non-marihuana substance(placebo) but is told it is marihuana. Tolerance Another important factor that determines the immediate effectof any drug is tolerance. Tolerance has two differentconnotations. The first, initial tolerance, is a measure of theamount of a drug which a subject must receive on first exposureto produce a designated degree of effect. A variety of innate andenvironmental factors contributes to initial tolerance amongindividuals. Different individuals require varying amounts of thedrug to attain the same physical and mental effect. The second connotation, which shall be referred to when we usethe word tolerance, is that of an acquired change in tolerance.That is, within the same individual, as a result of repeatedexposure to the drug, the same dose of the drug may produce adiminishing effect so that an increased amount of the drug isrequired to produce the same specified degree of effect. Tolerance develops at differential rates to given effects ofthe same drug. If tolerance has developed to one specific effect,it has not necessarily developed to other specific effects. By definition, the development of tolerance is neitherbeneficial nor detrimental. If tolerance develops rapidly to thedesired mental effect of a "high" but slowly to thebehavioral or physical effects, rapid increase in dose would benecessary in order to have the desired effect, and progressivebehavioral and physical disruption would be seen. This is thepattern for amphetamines. However, if tolerance develops slowly or not at all to thedesired mental effects but more rapidly to the behaviorally orphysically disruptive effects, no dosage increase or only aslight one would be necessary and the unpleasant and undesiredeffects would progressively diminish. With regard to marihuana, present indications are thattolerance does develop to the behaviorally and physicallydisruptive effects, in both animals and man, especially at highfrequent doses for prolonged time periods. Studies in foreigncountries indicate that very heavy prolonged use of very largequantities of hashish leads to the development of tolerance tothe mental effects, requiring an increase in intake to reach theoriginal level of satisfaction. However, for the intermittent usepattern and even the moderate use pattern, little evidence existsto indicate the development of tolerance to the desired"high," although the high may persist for a shortertime period. During the Boston free-access study, no change wasapparent in the level of the high produced by a relatively largedose of the drug over a 21-day period of moderate to heavysmoking. The fact that some individuals smoke more of the drug thanothers may merely reflect a desire for a different level of"high." There is a tendency to develop a tolerance tothe physical effects and behaviorally disruptive effects,especially the depressant effects, in heavy daily users. Thedevelopment of such behavioral tolerance of this nature mayexplain the fact that experienced marihuana smokers describe alower occurrence rate of undesirable drug effects. Thedevelopment of tolerance may also explain why these smokersexhibit normal behavior and competent performance of ordinarytasks, while not appearing intoxicated to others even though theyare at their usual level of intoxication. Reverse Tolerance Repeated exposure to marihuana has been said to cause anindividual to need lesser amounts of the drug to achieve the samedegree of intoxication. This "reverse tolerance" may berelated to one's learning to get high or to the recognition ofthe subtle intoxication at low doses. Or perhaps, such tolerancereflects an increase in the body's ability to change the drug toan active chemical. To date, the existence of "reversetolerance" has not been substantiated in an experimentalsetting. Duration of Use Tolerance development is only one of a variety of occurrenceswhich possibly are related to repetitive use of marihuana. Anydiscussion of drug effect must also take into account the timeperiod over which the drug use occurs. Immediate effects of asingle drug experience must be contrasted with effects ofshort-term use and the effects of longterm use in order to detectany cumulative effects or more subtle, gradually occurringchanges. This issue of an individual's change over a period of years isquite complex; a multitude of factors other than marihuana usemay affect his life. As previously defined, short-term refers toperiods of less than two years, long-term to periods of two to 10years, and very long-term to periods greater than 10 years. Mostof the American experience involves short-term and long-term use,with low doses of weak preparations of the drug. Patterns of Use The drug effect of marihuana can be realistically discussedonly within the context of who the user is, how long he has usedmarihuana, how much and how frequently he uses it, and the,social setting of his use. In general, for virtually any drug, the heavier the pattern ofuse, the greater the risk of either direct or indirect damage.For purposes of this discussion, the patterns of use developed inthe first section of this chapter will be utilized. Becausefrequency of use is presently the, primary determinant of usepatterns in this country, we employ similar designations: (1) The experimenter who uses marihuana,at most a few times over a short term and then generally ceasesto use it, or uses once a month or less; (2) The intermittent user who usesmarihuana, infrequently, that is more than once monthly but lessthan several times a week; (3) The moderate user who uses it fromseveral times a week to once daily, generally over a long term; (4) The heavy user who uses it severaltimes a day over a long term and; (5) The very heavy user who isconstantly intoxicated with high tetrahydrocannabinol contentpreparations, usually hashish, over a very long term. Again, these classifications are not intended to be rigid butare designed to facilitate a discussion of the many usagepatterns. Definition of Dependence Before describing the effect of marihuana, onthe user, two additional definitions are required. They concernthe concept of dependence which has so clouded public andprofessional consideration of psychoactive drugs. Throughout theremainder of this report, we refer Separately to psychologicaland physical dependence, defined as follows: Psychological dependence is the repeateduse of psychoactive drugs leading to a conditioned pattern ofdrug-seeking behavior. The intensity of dependence varies withthe nature of the drug, the method, frequency, and duration ofadministration, the mental and physical attributes of theindividual, and the characteristics of the physical and socialenvironment. Its intensity is at its peak when drug-seekingbecomes a compulsive and undeviating pattern of behavior. Physical dependence is the state oflatent hyper-excitability which develops in the central nervoussystem of higher mammals following frequent and prolongedadministration of the morphine-like analgesics, alcohol,barbiturates, and other depressants. Such dependence is notmanifest subjectively or objectively during drug administration.Specific symptoms and signs, the abstinence syndrome, occur uponabrupt termination of drug administration; or with morphinelikeagonists by administering the specific antagonists. EFFECTS RELATED TO PATTERNUSE Set out below is a brief summary of effects of marihuana,related to frequency and duration of use. The remainder of theChapter discusses the effects of immediate, short-term, long-termand very long-term use of the drug. Experimenters and intermittent users ------ Little or nopsychological dependence. Influence on behavior related largely to conditioning to drug use and its social value to the user. No organ injury demonstrable. Moderate users ------------ Moderatepsychological dependence in- creasing with duration of use. Behavioral effects minimal in stable per- sonalities, greater in those with emo- tional instability. Probably little if any organ injury. Duration of use increases probability of escalation of all effects including shift from moderate to heavy use. Heavy users -------------- American "pothead." Strong psychological dependence. Detectable behavior changes. Possible organ injury (chronic diminution ofpulmonary function). Effects more easily demonstrable with long-termuse. Very heavy users ---------- Users in countrieswhere the use of cannabis has been indigenous for centuries. Very strong psychological dependence to pointof compulsive drug seeking and use. Clear-cut behavioral changes. Greater incidence of associated organ injury. IMMEDIATE DRUG EFFECTS The immediate effects are those which occur during the drugintoxication or shortly following it. The user is aware of someof these effects, for they often cause him to use the drug. Atthe same time, many changes may occur in his body which can bemeasured by others but are not obvious to him. Subjective Effects A description of an individual's feelings and state ofconsciousness as affected by low doses of marihuana is difficult;the condition is not similar to usual waking states and is theresult of a highly individual experience. Perhaps the closestanalogies are the experience of day dreaming or the moments justprior to falling asleep. The effect is not constant and acyclical waxing and waning of the intensity of the intoxicationoccurs periodically. At low, usual "social" doses, the intoxicatedindividual may experience an increased sense of well-being;initial restlessness and hilarity followed by a dreamy, carefreestate of relaxation; alteration of sensory perceptions includingexpansion of space and time; and a more vivid sense of touch,sight, smell, taste, and sound; a feeling of hunger, especially acraving for sweets; and subtle changes in thought formation andexpression. To an unknowing observer, an individual in this stateof consciousness would not appear noticeably different from hisnormal state. At higher, moderate doses, these same reactions areintensified but the changes in the individual would still bescarcely noticeable to an observer. The individual may experiencerapidly changing emotions, changing sensory imagery, dulling ofattention, more altered thought formation and expression such asfragmented thought, flight of ideas, impaired immediate memory,disturbed associations, altered sense of self-identity and, tosome, a perceived feeling of enhanced insight. At very high doses, psychotomimetic phenomena may beexperienced. These, include distortions of body image, loss ofpersonal identity, sensory and mental illusions, fantasies andhallucinations. Nearly all persons who continue to use marihuana describethese usual effects in largely pleasurable terms. However, othersmight call some of these same effects unpleasant or undesirable. As discussed earlier, a wide range of extra-drug factors alsoinfluences marihuana's effects. The more the individual usesmarihuana and the longer he has been using it, the more likelythe experiences will be predominantly pleasurable, and the lesslikely the effects will be unpleasant. An increasingsensitization to those effects viewed as pleasant occurs as theuser has more experience with the drug. Persons subject to unpleasant reactions may eliminatethemselves from the using group although the occasionalexperience of an unpleasant effect does not always discourageuse. Body Function A large amount of research has been performed in man andanimals regarding the immediate effect of marihuana on bodilyprocesses. No conclusive evidence exists of any physical damage,disturbances of bodily processes or proven human fatalitiesattributable solely to even very high doses of marihuana.Recently, animal studies demonstrated a relatively large marginof safety between the psychoactive dose and the physical andbehavioral toxic and lethal dose. Such studies seemed to indicatethat safe human study could be undertaken over a wide dose range. Low to moderate doses of the drug produce minimal measurabletransient changes in body functions. Generally, pulse rateincreases, recumbent blood pressure increases slightly, andupright blood pressure decreases. The eyes redden, tear secretionis decreased, the pupils become slightly smaller, the fluidpressure within the eye lessens and one study reports that theeyeball rapidly oscillates (nystagmus). A minimal decrement in maximum muscle strength, the presenceof a fine hand tremor, and a decrease in hand and body steadinesshave also been noted. Decreased sensitivity to pain andoverestimation of elapsed time may occur. The effects of marihuana on brain waves are still unclear andinconsistent. Generally, the intoxication produces minimal,transient changes of rapid onset and short duration. Sleep timeappears to increase, as does dreaming. Investigation of the effects of marihuana on a wide variety ofother bodily function indices has revealed few consistentlyobserved changes. These few consistently observed transient effects on bodilyfunction seem to suggest that marihuana is a rather unexcitingcompound of negligible immediate toxicity at the doses usuallyconsumed in this country. The substance is predominantly apsychoactive drug. The feelings and state of consciousnessdescribed by the intoxicated seem to be far more interesting thanthe objective state noted by an observer. Mental Function Marihuana, like other psychoactive substances, predominantlyaffects mental processes and responses (cognitive tasks) and thusthe motor responses directed by mental processes (psychomotortasks). Generally, the degree of impairment of cognitive andpsychomotor performance is dose-related, with minimal effect atlow doses. The impairment varies during the period ofintoxication, with the maximal effect at the peak intoxication.Performance of simple or familiar tasks is at most minimallyimpaired, while poor performance is demonstrated on complex,unfamiliar tasks. Experienced marihuana users commonlydemonstrate significantly less decrement in performance thandrug-naive, individuals. The greater his past marihuana experience, the better theintoxicated individual is able to compensate for drug effect onordinary performance at usual doses. Furthermore, markedindividual variation in performance is noted when all else isheld constant. The effect of marihuana on cognitive andpsychomotor performance is therefore highly individualized andnot easily predictable. Effects on emotional reactions and onvolition are equally variable and are difficult to measure underlaboratory conditions, but can be significant. The Intoxicated State Studies of intoxicated persons have suggested possibleexplanations for the subtle effects on mental processes producedby marihuana, Generally, a temporary episodic impairment ofshort-term memory occurs. These memory voids may be filled withthoughts and perceptions extraneous to organized -mentalprocesses. Past and future may become obscured -as the individualfocuses on filling the present momentary memory lapse. His senseof self -identity may seem altered if he cannot place himself inhis usual time frame. This altered state of mind may be regarded by the individualas pleasant or unpleasant. The important factors of dosage andset and setting play a most important role in this determination.When the nature of the drug-taking situation and thecharacteristics of the individual are optimal. the user is apt todescribe his experience as one of relaxation, sensitivity,friendliness, carefreeness, thoughtfulness, happiness,peacefulness, and fun. For most marihuana users who continue touse the drug, the experience is overwhelmingly pleasurable. Unpleasant Reactions However, when these circumstances are not optimal, theexperience may be unpleasant and an undesirable reaction to themarihuana intoxication occurs. In these instances, anxiety,depression, fatigue or cognitive loss are experienced as ageneralized feeling of ill-being and discomfort. A heavy sluggishfeeling, mentally and physically, is common in inexperiencedmarihuana smokers who overshoot the desired high or in personswho might orally ingest too large a dose. Dizziness, nausea,incoordination, and palpitations often accompany the "toostoned" feeling. Anxiety States "Novice anxiety reactions" or feelings of panicaccount for a majority of unpleasant reactions to marihuana. Whenthe distortion of self image and time is recognized by theindividual as drug-induced and temporary, the experience isviewed as pleasurable. Anxiety -and panic result when thesechanges cause the individual to fear that the loss of hisidentity and self-control may not end, and that he is dying or"losing his mind." These anxiety and panic reactionsare transient and usually disappear over a few hours as thedrug's effects wear off, or more quickly with gentle friendlyreassurance. The large majority of these, anxiety reactions occur inindividuals who are experimenting with marihuana. Most oftenthese individuals have an intense underlying anxiety surroundingmarihuana use, such as fears of arrest, disruption of family andoccupational relations, and possible bodily or mental harm. Oftenthey are older and have relatively rigid personalities with lessdesire for new and different experiences. The incidence of these anxiety reactions may have decreased asmarihuana use has become acceptable to wider populations, as thefears of its effects have lessened and as users have developedexperience in management of these reactions. Psychosis Rare cases of full-blown psychotic episodes have beenprecipitated by marihuana. Generally, the individuals hadprevious mental disorders or had poorly developed personalitiesand were marginally adjusted to their life situation. Often theepisode occurred at times of excessive stress. These episodes arecharacteristically temporary. Psychotherapy and sometimesmedications are useful in prompt control and treatment of thispsychological reaction. In addition, rare nonspecific toxicpsychoses have occurred after extremely high doses. This state ofnonspecific drug intoxication or acute brain syndrome isself-limited and clears spontaneously as the drug is eliminatedfrom the body. Conclusions In summary, the immediate effect of marihuana on normal mentalprocesses is a subtle alteration in state of consciousnessprobably related to a change in short-term memory, mood, emotionand volition. This effect on the mind produces a varyinginfluence on cognitive and psychomotor task performance which ishighly individualized, as well as related to dosage, time,complexity of the task and experience of the user. The effect onpersonal, social and vocational functions is difficult topredict. In most instances, the marihuana intoxication ispleasurable. In rare cases, the experience may lead to unpleasantanxiety and panic, and in a predisposed few, to psychosis. SHORT-TERM EFFECTS The effect of an enormous daily oral dose of the drug (up toabout one hundred thousand times the minimal behaviorallyeffective human dose) was recently studied in rats and monkeysfor three months. A severe, generalized nervous system depressionwas evident the first few days. Evidence of cumulative toxicitywas observed at these doses. Severe central -nervous systemdepression produced fatalities in some rats in the first few daysuntil tolerance developed. Later, extreme hyperactivitydeveloped. The monkeys experienced severe central nervous systemdepression and one group showed mild hyperactivity, but allrapidly returned to normal behavior after the development oftolerance to these effects. Minimal dose-related toxic effects onbodily organs were noted at autopsy at the conclusion of theexperiment. These non-specific findings of unknown meaningincluded bypocellularity of the bone marrow and spleen andhypertrophy of the adrenal cortex. A 28-day study employing intravenous administration of fromone to ten thousand times the minimal effective human dose tomonkeys produced -similar findings clinically. In the high dosegroups delayed deaths from acute hemorrhagic pneumonia werepossibly caused by accumulation of clumps of THC in the lungproducing irritation similar to that seen at the injection sites.No other organ pathology was noted. These animal studiesillustrated that the margin of safety between active dose andtoxic dose was enormous. A few studies have recently been carried out to observe theeffect of a few weeks of daily marihuana smoking in man. Theamount smoked was a relatively large American dose. Frequency ofuse was once to several times daily. During the 21-day Boston free-access study, no harmful effectswere observed on general bodily functions, motor functions,mental functions, personal or social behavior or workperformance. Total sleep time and periods of sleep wereincreased. Weight gain was uniformly noted. No evidence of physical dependence or signs of withdrawal werenoted. In the heaviest smokers, -moderate psychologicaldependence was suggested by an increased negative mood aftercessation of smoking. Tolerance appeared to develop to the immediate effects of thedrug on general bodily functions (pulse rate) andpsychomotor-cognitive performance (time estimation, short-termmemory, and shootinggallery skill) but not to the"high." Marihuana intoxication did not significantlyinhibit the ability of the subjects to improve with practicethrough time on these psychological-motor tasks. Neither immediate nor short-term (21 day) high-dose marihuanaintoxication decreased motivation to engage in a variety ofsocial and goal-directed behaviors. No consistent alteration thatcould be related to marihuana smoking over this period of timewas observed in work performance of a simple task, participationin aspects of the research study, or interest and participationin a variety of personal activities, such as writing, reading,interest and knowledge of current world events, or participationin athletic or aesthetic activities. Marihuana smoking appeared to affect patterns of socialinteractions. Although use of the drug was found to be a groupsocial activity around which conversation and other types ofsocial behavior were centered, it was not uncommon for some orall of the smokers to withdraw from the social interaction andconcentrate on the subjective drug experience. During the first part of the smoking period, both intermittentand daily users demonstrated a marked decrement in totalinteraction. Total interaction continued to diminish amongintermittent users but increased above presmoking levels amongthe daily users during the later parts of the smoking period. Thequality of the interaction was more convivial and lesstask-oriented when marihuana was available to the group. Additionally, an assessment of the effect of marihuana onrisktaking behavior revealed that daily users tended to becomemore conservative when engaging in decision-making underconditions of risk. LONG-TERM EFFECTS Our knowledge about marihuana is incomplete, but certainbehavior characteristics appear to be emerging in regard to longterm American marihuana use which, for the most part, issignificantly less than 10 years. These impressions wereconfirmed in the Boston free-access study. The group of Americanyoung adults studied averaged five years (range 2-17 years) ofintermittent or daily use, of marihuana. No significant physical, biochemical, or mental abnormalitiescould be attributed solely to their marihuana smoking. Someabnormality of pulmonary function was demonstrated in many of thesubjects which could not be correlated-with quantity, frequencyor duration of smoking marihuana and/or tobacco cigarettes. (Oneother investigation recently completed uncovered no abnormalitiesin lung or heart functioning of a group of non-cigarette smokingheavy marihuana users). Many of the subjects were in fair to poorphysical condition, as judged by exercise tolerance. The performance of one-fifth of the subjects on a battery oftests sensitive to brain function was poorer on at least one,index than would have been predicted on the basis of their IQscores and education. But a definite relationship between thepoor test scores and prior marihuana or hallucinogen use couldnot be proven. In the past few years, observers have noted various social,psychological and behavioral changes among young high school andcollege age Americans including many who have used marihuanaheavily for a number of years. These changes are reflected by aloss of volitional goal direction. These individuals drop out andrelinquish traditional adult roles and values. They becomepresent rather than future oriented, appear alienated frombroadly accepted social and occupational activity, and experiencereduced concern for personal hygiene and nutrition. Several psychiatrists believe they have detected clinicallythat some heavy marihuana-using individuals appear to undergosubtle changes in personality and modes of thinking, with aresulting change in life style. In adopting this new life style,a troubled youth may turn toward a subculture where drug use anduntraditional behavior are acceptable. This youthful population resembles in many respects themarihuana smoker described in the Boston study. No evidenceexists to date to demonstrate that marihuana use alone causedthese behavioral changes either directly or indirectly. Manyindividuals reach the same point without prior marihuana use oronly intermittent or moderate use; and many more individuals usemarihuana as heavily but do not evidence these changes. For someof these young people, the drop out state is only a temporaryphase, preceding a personal reorganization and return to a moreconventional life style. If heavy, long-term marihuana use is linked to the formationof this complex of social, psychological and behavioral changesin young people, then it is only one of many contributingfactors. VERY LONG-TERM EFFECTS OF HEAVY AND VERY HEAVYUSE Knowledge of the effects of very heavy, very long-term use ofmarihuana by man is still incomplete. The Commission hasextensively reviewed the world literature as well as ongoingstudies in Jamaica and Greece, and carefully observed very heavy,very long-term using populations in countries in other parts ofthe world, such as Afghanistan and India. These populations smokeand often drink much stronger drug preparations, hashish andganja, than are commonly used in America. From theseinvestigations, some observable consequences are becoming muchclearer. Tolerance and Dependence Some tolerance does occur with prolonged heavy usage; largedrug doses are necessary for the desired effects. Abruptwithdrawal does not lead to a specific or reproducible abstinencesyndrome and physical dependence has not been demonstrated in manor in animals. The very heavy users studied did evidence strongpsychological dependence, but were able to cease use for shortperiods of time. In these users, withdrawal does induce, symptoms characteristic ofpsychological dependence. The anxiety, restlessness, insomnia,and other non-specific symptoms of withdrawal are very similar inkind and intensity to those experienced by compulsive cigarettesmokers. Although the distress of withdrawal exerts a very strongpsychogenic drive to continue use, fear of withdrawal is, in mostcases, not adequate to inspire immediate criminal acts to obtainthe drug. General Body Function In the Jamaican study, no significant physical or mentalabnormalities could be attributed to marihuana use, according toan evaluation of medical history, complete physical examination,chest x-ray, electrocardiogram, blood cell and chemistry tests,lung, liver or kidney function tests, selected hormoneevaluation, brain waves, psychiatric evaluation, andpsychological testing. There was no evidence to indicate that thedrug as commonly used was responsible for producing birth defectsin offspring of users. This aspect is also being studied further. Heavy smoking, no matter if the substance was tobacco organja, was shown to contribute to pulmonary functions lower thanthose found among persons who smoked neither substance. All theganja smokers studied also smoked tobacco. In Jamaica, ganja isalways smoked in a mixture with tobacco; and many of the subjectswere heavy cigarette smokers, as well. In a study of a Greek hashish-using population preliminaryfindings revealed poor dentition, enlarged livers, and chronicbronchitis. Further study is required to clarify the relationshipof these to hashish use, alcohol or tobacco use, or general lifestyle of this user population. Social Functioning Similarly, the Jamaican and Greek subjects did not evidenceany deterioration of mental or social functioning which could beattributed solely to heavy very long-term cannabis use. These individuals appear to have used the drug withoutnoticeable behavioral or mental deviation from their lowersocioeconomic group norms, as detected by observation in theircommunities and by extensive sociological interviews,psychological tests and psychiatric examination. Overall life style was not different from non-users in theirlower socioeconomic community. They were alert and realistic,with average intelligence based on their education. Mostfunctioned normally in their communities with stable families,homes, jobs, and friends. These individuals seem to have survivedheavy long-term cannabis use without major physical or behavioraldefects. Mental Functioning The incidence of psychiatric hospitalizations for acutepsychoses and of use of drugs other than alcohol is notsignificantly higher than among the non-using population. Theexistence of a specific longlasting, cannabis-related psychosisis poorly defined. If heavy cannabis use produces a, specificpsychosis, it must be quite rare or else exceedingly difficult todistinguish from other acute or chronic psychoses. Recent studies suggest that the occurrence of any form ofpsychosis in heavy cannabis users is no higher than in thegeneral population. Although such use is often quite, prevalentin hospitalized mental patients, the drug could only beconsidered a. causal factor in a, few cases. Most of these were,short-term reactions or toxic overdoses. In addition, aconcurrent use of alcohol often played a role in the, episodecausing hospitalization. These findings are somewhat surprising in view of thewidespread belief that cannabis attracts the mentally unstable,vulnerable individual. Experience in the United States has notinvolved a level of heavy marihuana, use comparable to theseforeign countries. Consequently, such long-lasting psychicdisturbances possibly caused by heavy cannabis use have not beenobserved in this country. Motivation and Behavioral Change Another controversial form of social-mental deteriorationallegedly related to very long-term very heavy cannabis use isthe "amotivational syndrome." It supposedly affects thevery heavy using population and is described world-wide as a,loss of interest in virtually all activities other than cannabisuse, with resultant lethargy, amorality, instability and socialand personal deterioration. The reasons for the occurrence ofthis syndrome are varied and hypothetical; drug use is only oneof many components in the socioeconomic and psychoculturalbackgrounds of the individuals. Intensive studies of the Greek and Jamaican populations ofheavy long-term cannabis users appear to dispute the solecausality of cannabis in this syndrome. The heavy ganja andhashish using individuals were from lower socioeconomic groups,and possessed average intelligence but had little education andsmall chance of vocational advancement. Most were married andmaintained families and households. They were all employed, mostoften as laborers or small businessmen, at a level whichcorresponded with their education and opportunity. In general, their life styles were dictated by socioeconomicfactors and did not appear to deteriorate as a result of cannabisuse. The Jamaicans were working strenuously and regularly atgenerally uninteresting jobs. In their culture, cannabis servesas a work adjunct. The users believe the drug provides energy forlaborious work and helps them to endure their routine tasks. In contrast, others have described Asian and Africanpopulations where heavy to very heavy hashish or charas smokingfor a very long time is associated with clear-cut behavioralchanges. In these societies, the smokers are mostly jobless,illiterate persons of the lowest socioeconomic backgrounds. Theygenerally begin to use the drug in their early teens and continueits use up to their 60's. The users prefer to smoke in groups of two to 20, generally ina quiet place out of the reach of non-smokers. Weakness,malnutrition and sexual difficulties, usually impotence, a-recommon. Some of them report sleep disturbances. Most users who have used the drug for 20 to 30 years are lazyand less practical in most of their daily acts and reluctant tomake decisions. However, their ability to perform non-complicatedtasks is as good as non-smokers. Although the smokers think they become faster in their dailywork, a general slowness in all their activities is noticed byothers. This user population is typically uncreative. They makelittle if any significant contribution to the social, medical oreconomic improvement of their community. SUMMARY Once existing marihuana, policy was cast into the realm ofpublic debate, partisans on both sides of the issueover-simplified the question of the effects of use of the, drugon the individual. Proponents of the prohibitory legal systemcontended that marihuana, was a, dangerous drug, while opponentsinsisted that it was a harmless drug or was less harmful thanalcohol or tobacco. Any psychoactive drug is potentially harmful to theindividual, depending on the intensity, frequency and duration ofuse. Marihuana is no exception. Because the particular hazards ofuse differ for different drugs, it makes no sense, to compare theharmfulness of different drugs. One may compare, insofar as theindividual is concerned, only the harmfulness of specificeffects. Is heroin less harmful than alcohol because, unlikealcohol, it directly causes no physical in-jury? Or is heroinmore harmful than alcohol because at normal doses its use is moreincapacitating in a behavioral sense? Assessment of the relative dangers of particular drugs ismeaningful only in a wider context which weighs the possiblebenefits of the drugs, the comparative scope of their use, andtheir relative impact on society at large. We consider thesequestions in the next Chapter, particularly in connection withthe impact on public health. Looking only at the effects on the individual, there, islittle proven danger of physical or psychological harm from theexperimental or intermittent use of the natural preparations ofcannabis, including the resinous mixtures commonly used in thiscountry. The risk of harm lies instead in the heavy, long-termuse of the drug, particularly of the most potent preparations. The experimenter and the intermittent users develop little orno psychological dependence on the drug. No organ injury isdemonstrable. Some moderate users evidence a degree of psychologicaldependence which increases in intensity with prolonged durationof use. Behavioral effects are lesser in stable personalities butgreater in those with emotional instability. Prolonged durationof use does increase the probability of some behavioral andorganic consequences including the possible shift to a heavy usepattern. The heavy user shows strong psychological dependence onmarihuana and often hashish. Organ injury, especially diminuationof pulmonary function, is possible. Specific behavioral changesare detectable. All of these effects are more apparent withlong-term and very long-term heavy use than with short-term heavyuse. The very heavy users, found in countries where the use ofcannabis has been indigenous for centuries, have a compulsivepsychological dependence on the drug, most commonly used in theform of hashish. Clear-cut behavioral changes and a greaterincidence of associated biological injury occur as duration ofuse increases. At present, the Commission is unaware of anysimilar pattern in this country. CliffSchaffer's Home Page WT01-B25-29IA031-000651-B020-209http://206.61.184.43:80/schaffer/LIBRARY/studies/nc/ncc3.htm 206.61.184.43 19970122123038 text/html 105438HTTP/1.0 200 OKDate: Wednesday, 22-Jan-97 12:30:14 GMTServer: WebSitePro/1.1f (S/N wpo-0deb)Allow-ranges: bytesContent-type: text/htmlLast-modified: Saturday, 28-Dec-96 06:54:07 GMTContent-length: 105219 Social Impact of Marihuana Use Contents | Feedback | Search DRCNet Library | Schaffer Library | Major Studies Marihuana, A Signal of Misunderstanding National Commission on Marihuana and Drug Abuse Marihuana: A Signal of Misunderstanding Chapter III Social Impact of marihuana use "Man is a creature who lives not uponbread alone but principally by catchwords." -Robert LouisStevenson, Virginia Puerisque (1881) Implicit in existing social and legal policy toward marihuanais the view that society suffers in some way from use of thedrug. When the widespread practice of marihuana smoking appearedin the United States in the early decades of the 20th century,the medical, law enforcement, newspaper, and legislativecommunities immediately indicted the drug. They assumed that thedrug posed serious dangers to individual health; but moreimportantly, they viewed it as a menace to the public order.Crime, insanity and idleness were thought to be the inevitableconsequences of its use. That some of these original fears were unfounded and thatothers were exaggerated have been clear for many years. Yet, manyof these early beliefs continue to affect contemporary publicattitudes and concerns. Consequently, one of the Commission'smost important tasks is to evaluate carefully all data relevantto the social impact of marihuana use. We must determine whetherand in what respects social concern is justified. What is mythand what is reality? The literature pertaining to -the presumed effects andconsequences of marihuana use still reveals a wide diversity ofopinion about social impact. Careful scrutiny is inhibited by theprevalence of hearsay, rhetoric and undocumented assertions aboutthe effects and consequences of marihuana use. Nonetheless,evidence is mounting and a number of significant trends haverecently emerged. In the previous Chapter we explored theevidence regarding the nature and scope of contemporary marihuanause, and the effects of the drug on the individual user. Now wemust consider the impact on society of behavior resulting fromuse of marihuana. In dealing with the behavioral consequences of marihuana, use,the Commission has made, a concerted effort to review andevaluate the enormous body of existing popular and scientificliterature, and has itself initiated new empirical research,including national surveys, retrospective studies and controlledlaboratory experiments. Awareness of the difficulties involved in investigating aninherently complex social phenomenon and applying its researchfindings to policy decisions has fostered particular sensitivityto the quality of previous and Commission-sponsored research. Assuch, considerable attention was given to such basic researchquestions as: What behavioral effects are most relevant in assessing theconsequences of marihuana use? What measures produce the most valid data concerning giveneffects? What reliance should be placed on various research techniques,such as self-reporting, controlled experiments, clinicalobservations and statistical relationships? What generalizations can be made from particular populationsstudied? What are the limits of given data in terms of inference.interpredation and attribution of cause? With respect to the Commission's own research program, theprocess of selection and allocation of resources was indeeddifficult, and some areas of inquiry have undoubtedly been eitherneglected or shortchanged. Nonetheless, we believe that thestudies undertaken and information gathered will addsignificantly to our understanding of the conditions andcircumstances under which marihuana use is likely to affectadversely the public safety, public health and welfare, anddominant social order. Marihuana and Public Safety The belief that marihuana is causally linked to crime andother antisocial conduct first assumed prominence during the1930's as the result of a concerted effort by governmentalagencies and the press to alert the American populace to thedangers of marihuana use. Newspapers all over the country beganto publish lurid accounts of "marihuana atrocities." Inthe absence of adequate understanding of the effects of the drug,these largely unsubstantiated stories profoundly influencedpublic opinion and gave birth to the stereotype of the marihuanauser as physically aggressive, lacking in self-control,irresponsible, mentally ill and, perhaps most alarming,criminally inclined and dangerous. The combination of thepurported effects of the drug itself plus the belief that it wasused by unstable individuals seemed to constitute a significantdanger to public safety. Now, more than 30 years later, many observers are skepticalabout the existence of a cause-effect relationship betweenmarihuana use and antisocial conduct. MARIHUANA AND CRIME Over the years, there have been several hypotheses about therelationship between marihuana and antisocial conduct. Theearliest view was that marihuana causes or leads to thecommission of aggressive and violent criminal acts such asmurder, rape and assault. These acts are committed, it has beenargued, because marihuana allegedly produces a relaxation ofordinary inhibitions, a weakening of impulse control and aconcomitant increase in aggressive tendencies while the user isunder its influence. Marihuana's alleged criminogenic role is not always limited toviolent or aggressive behavior. Some commentators also postulatethat marihuana leads to or causes non-violent forms of criminalor delinquent conduct, ranging from sexual promiscuity to grandlarceny. Underlying this second causal hypothesis are theassumptions that marihuana frequently impairs judgment, distortsreality and diminishes, at least temporarily, the user's sense ofpersonal and social responsibility. Regular or heavy use over anextended period of time is felt to interfere, perhapsirreversibly, with the orderly development of psychosocial andmoral maturity. As indicated above, however, a growing uncertainty prevailsabout ,the existence of a causal link between marihuana use andantisocial conduct. In fact, recent surveys, including severalsponsored by the Commission, suggest that large segments of theprofessional public, particularly the law enforcement andcriminal justice communities, are no longer willing to assert a,cause-effect relationship but observe, instead, the existence ofa statistical association. The Issue of Cause and Effect The controversy over the cause-effect relationship betweenmarihuana use and criminal, violent or delinquent behavior posesa number of serious problems for the investigators Proponents andopponents of the causal view tend to rely on different kinds ofevidence and to call upon different types of experts, therebydiffering substantially in the kinds of information they acceptas relevant, reliable or valid. Practitioners, such as police and probation officers forexample, frequently cite case examples in which apprehendedoffenders are found to be in possession of marihuana at the timeof arrest. The mere presence of the drug or the fact that anoffender is a known user of marihuana is sometimes deemedsufficient to establish a causal link between the marihuana andthe offense.* Empiricists, on the other hand, would deny that the simplepresence of the drug constitutes a satisfactory demonstration ofa causal relationship between marihuana use and the crime inquestion. They would defer, instead, to the results of empiricalstudies designed explicitly to test the assertion. Essentially,they emphasize that even if some offenders do use marihuana, anequal or larger number of offenders do not, and there arecertainly large numbers of marihuana users in thepopulation-at-large who never engage in the kinds of antisocialconduct deemed to be related to or caused by the use of the drug. Proving any positive and direct relationship, be it causal orotherwise, between two inherently complex social phenomena isfraught with enormous difficulties. The relationship of marihuanause to crime, violence, aggression or juvenile delinquencypresents no exception. Before examining the evidence with respectto the existence of a causal connection, certain basicconsiderations deserve at least brief mention here. To prove, the existence of a positive and direct relationship,one would be required to demonstrate that the alleged offenderwas, indeed, a marihuana, user; that he was under the influenceof the drug at the time he committed the offense; and that thecrime was directly attributable to the effects of the marihuana.The kinds of evidence necessary to establish these facts are noteasy to obtain. First, evidence of the use of marihuana by the accused isgenerally dependent upon either direct admission of use, hearsayevidence, or inferences derived from knowledge of possession(that is, the offender was found to have marihuana on his personor in his possession at the time of arrest). Second, because no chemical tests presently exist outside thelaboratory to identify the presence of marihuana in the body ofthe accused, it is difficult if not impossible to prove that theoffender was definitely under the influence of marihuana when hecommitted the offense. Third, in order to prove that the marihuana represented thesignificant contributory or precipitating variable, all otherfactors possibly related to the offense would have to be examinedand excluded. The problems of validation are further compounded byadditional variations in behavior attributable to: (a) thepharmacological potency of the drug; (b) possible adulteration ofthe marihuana; (c) the interaction of marihuana with other drugssimultaneously ingested; (d) differing individual response tosimilar dosage levels; (e) the time-action function; (f) thecumulative effect of marihuana use; and (g) various social,psychological and situational variables such as set and setting,individual expectations, personal predispositions or preexistingimpulse disorders. Despite the inherent complexities of the issue and thedifficulties in securing reliable and valid evidence, arelatively large body of research is now available pertaining tothe criminogenic effects of marihuana upon the individual and thenature and extent to which the drug constitutes a danger topublic safety. In the following section, we present the availableevidence and assess the strength and direction of the allegedrelationships between marihuana use and violent or aggressivebehavior and also non-violent forms of criminal and delinquentbehavior. *In the widely publicized Licata case of the 1930's. forexample, a 16-year-old cannabis user was charged with the axmurder of his family and the offense was directly attributed tothe effects of marihuana. There was, however. no preciseinformation available regarding the use of marihuana in relationto the crime. Nor. in the various accounts of the case, was theregenerally any reference to the fact that several of the boy'srelatives had previously been committed to mental institutions;that the police hall, about one year prior to the offense (andpresumably before the youth's alleged use of marihuana) attemptedto commit him for his bizarre behavior; or that shortly after thecrime, the boy began to exhibit the symptoms of paranoidschizophrenia. Marihuana and Violent Crime As indicated earlier, the belief that marihuana causes orleads to the commission of violent or aggressive acts firstemerged during the 1930's and became deeply embedded in thepublic mind. Until recently, however, these beliefs weregenerally based on the anecdotal case examples of law enforcementauthorities, a few clinical observations and severalquasi-experimental studies of selected populations comprised ofmilitary offenders, convicted or institutionalized criminals ordelinquents and small groups of college students. Few effortswere made to compare the incidence of violent or aggressivebehavior in representative samples of both user and non-userpopulations. Even in these early observations and investigations, however,no substantial evidence existed of a causal connection betweenthe use of marihuana and the commission of violent or aggressiveacts. Indeed, if any relationship was indicated, it was not apositive and direct causal connection but in inverse or negativestatistical correlation. Rather than inducing violent -or aggressive behavior throughits purported effects of lowering inhibitions, weakening impulsecontrol and heightening aggressive tendencies, marihuana wasusually found to inhibit the expression of aggressive impulses bypacifying the user, interfering with muscular coordination,reducing psychomotor activities and generally producing states ofdrowsiness lethargy, timidity and passivity. In fact, only a small proportion of the marihuana users amongany group of criminals or delinquents known to the authoritiesand appearing in study samples had ever been arrested orconvicted for such violent crimes as murder, forcible rape,aggravated assaultor armed robbery. When these marihuana-usingoffenders were compared with offenders who did not use marihuana,the former were generally found to 'have committed lessaggressive behavior than the latter. In an effort to accumulate data on the relationship betweenmarihuana use and aggressive or violent criminal behavior, theCommission sponsored several studies designed to assess thepurported causal relationship. First, the Commission wanted to tap the unique experience ofthe law enforcement and criminal justice communities.Representative samples of prosecuting attorneys, judges,probation officers and court clinicians were asked their opinionsabout the relationship between marihuana use and the commissionof aggressive or violent criminal acts. When asked to evaluatethe statement that "most aggressive acts or crimes ofviolence committed by persons who are known users of marihuanaoccur when the offender is under the influence ofmarihuana," three-quarters of the judges, probation officersand clinicians indicated either that the statement was probablyuntrue or that they were unsure of its accuracy. Of these threegroups, a greater proportion of clinicians (76.5%) thought thestatement false than did the probation officers (60%)and judges(44.2%). In a separate mail survey of the chief prosecuting attorneysin the 50 states-the group which has often supported the causalhypothesis-52% of the respondents stated that they either did notbelieve or were uncertain of the truth of the proposition thatuse of marihuana leads to aggressive behavior. We have already noted that only a small fraction of theoffender populations in past studies were found to have beenarrested for crimes of violence. Similarly, in aCommission-sponsored study of 1,776 16to-21-year-olds arrested infive New York counties for marihuana law violations between 1965and 1969, onlv a small percentage bad either previously orsubsequently come to the attention of authorities for suchoffenses as assault or robbery. In fact, less than 1% of theoffenders in this sample had been arrested for these offensesprior to their first marihuana arrest, and less than 3% wereknown to the Federal Bureau of Investigation for these offensessubsequent to their marihuana violation. Perhaps more important than professional opinion or theincidence of violent offenses in an offender population, however,is the determination of the extent to which marihuana use isrelated to violent or aggressive behavior in the generalpopulation. In a Commission-sponsored survey, face-to-face interviews wereconducted with a representative sample of 559 West Philadelphiaresidents in order to ascertain the extent of marihuana use inthis heterogeneous population and the relative involvement ofmarihuana users and nonusers in violent criminal behavior. Incorroboration of the earlier findings, the researchers found nosignificant differences in the proportions of users andnon-users; who stated that they had committed any of theaggressive or violent crimes enumerated. Further, no findings indicated that marihuana was generally orfrequently used immediately prior to the commission of offensesin the very small number of instances in which these offense'sdid occur. In contrast, however, the aggressive and violentoffenders in this sample did report with significantly greaterfrequency the use of alcohol within 24 hours of the offense inquestion. These findings should be considered in fight of an earlierWest Coast study of disadvantaged minority-group youthfulmarihuana users, many of whom were raised in a combative andaggressive social milieu similar to that found in several of theWest Philadelphia sampled neighborhoods. The data show thatmarihuana users were much less likely to commit aggressive orviolent acts than were those who preferred amphetamines oralcohol. They also show that most marihuana users were able tocondition themselves to avoid aggressive behavior even in theface of provocation. In fact, marihuana was found to play asignificant role in youth's transition from a "rowdy"to a "cool," non-violent style. The Commission is aware of the claim that a few emotionallyunstable or impulsive individuals have become particularlyaggressive or impulsive under the influence of marihuana. As wehave noted, some newspaper accounts have attributed sensationalhomicides or sexual assaults to marihuana-induced transitorypsychotic states on the part of the user. No evidence exists,however, to indicate that marihuana was responsible forgenerating or creating excessive aggressiveness or impulsivity inindividuals having no prior history of impulse or personalitydisorder. The most that can be said is that in those rareinstances, marihuana may have aggravated a preexisting condition. In sum, the weight of the evidence is that marihuana does notcause violent or aggressive behavior, if anything, marihuanagenerally serves to inhibit the expression of such behavior.Marihuana-induced relaxation of inhibitions is not ordinarilyaccompanied by an exaggeration of aggressive tendencies. No evidence exists that marihuana use will cause or lead tothe commission of violent or aggressive behavior by the largemajority of psychologically and socially mature individuals inthe general population. Marihuana and Non-Violent Crime A second hypothesis reflecting the statements of significantnumbers of government officials is that marihuana plays a majorrole in the commission of other, essentially non-violent, formsof criminal and delinquent behavior. In general, those espousing this more general cause-effectrelationship assume that the drug frequently produces, inaddition to the lowering of inhibitions, impairment of judgment,distortion of reality and at least temporary reduction of a senseof personal and social responsibility. Indeed, the earlierstereotype of the marihuana user was that of an immoral,physically debilitated, psychologically unstable and criminallymarginal man whose state of severely and irreversiblyunderdeveloped psychosocial and moral maturity was said to derivedirectly from his continued use of marihuana. As indicated earlier, neither the inherent complexities of theissue nor the previously inconclusive empirical evidence hasdeterred the formulation and expression of strong opinions aboutthe relationship of marihuana use to crime and delinquency.Opinion in this area, quite apart from the empirical evidence,has long assumed critical importance in the development of socialpolicy. The Commission has addressed the issue in three differentways. One was to assess the state of current public andprofessional opinion relative to the general proposition thatmarihuana causes or leads to the commission of criminal ordelinquent acts. A second approach was to review the professionalliterature addressed to the issue, and a third was to initiateempirical investigations of our own. The opinion surveys found that substantial numbers of personsraised serious questions about the existence of a causalrelationship between marihuana use and criminal or delinquentbehavior. Confusion and uncertainty about the existence of such arelationship have been expressed by both youth and adults,including practicing professionals in the criminal justicesystem. Recent data suggest that some of this confusion may be theresult of a fairly widespread misconception about the addictionpotential of marihuana. To the extent that persons believemarihuana users are physically dependent on the -drug, they mayassume that, like the heroin user, the marihuana user commits hisoffenses in order to support what is perceived as a drug habit;and that, like the heroin model, offenses are committed moreoften in the desperate attempt to obtain the drug rather thanunder its influence following use. There is no evidence that thisis the case, even for those who use the drug heavily. In the Commission-sponsored National Survey, the respondentswere asked whether they agreed or disagreed with the statementthat "many crimes are committed by persons who are under theinfluence of marihuana." Fifty-six percent of the adultpopulation and 41% of the youth indicated agreement. As in theSurvey generally, there was a significant difference of opinionaccording to age in the adult population. While 69% of theover-50 age group agreed with this statement, only aboutone-third of the 18-to-25 age group and the 14-to-17-yearoldsagreed. One of every four youth respondents and 18% of the adultssaid they were "not sure" of the existence of such arelationship between marihuana use and crime. Much greater consensus exists, even between generations,regarding the association of alcohol and crime. While 56% of alladults expressed their belief that many crimes are committed bypersons under the influence of marihuana, 69% of these sameadults believed that alcohol was related in the same way. Only 7%felt unsure about the alcohol crime relationship, in contrast to18% who expressed uncertainty about the relationship betweencrime and marihuana. The Commission also surveyed opinion within the criminaljustice community. A sample of 781 judges, probation officers andcourt clinicians replied to a questionnaire which askedrespondents to indicate whether or not their professionalexperience led them to believe that "use of marihuana causesor leads to antisocial behavior in the sense that it leads one tocommit other criminal or delinquent acts." Of allrespondents, 27% believed this to be the case. Within eachprofessional group, 34% of the judges, 18% of the probationofficers and 2% of the clinicians indicated their agreement. On the assumption that some, proportion, however small, ofmarihuana users might ultimately be arrested for non-drugoffenses, these officials were also asked to assess the relative,truth of the statement that "most non-drug offensescommitted by persons who are known users of marihuana or arefound to have marihuana on their person or in their possessionoccur when the offender is under the influence ofmarihuana." Seventy-one percent of the responding judges,75% of the probation officers and 85% of the court clinicianseither thought the statement false or were unsure of itsaccuracy. Respondents likewise rejected, however, the proposition thatthese crimes perpetrated by marihuana users occur when theoffender is attempting to obtain the drug rather than while underits influence; 65.6% of the judges, 64.6% of the probationofficers and 78.3% of the court clinicians either denied or wereunsure of the truth of this proposition. In short, marihuana, is not generally viewed by participantsin the criminal justice community as a major contributinginfluence in the commission of delinquent or criminal acts. This increasing professional skepticism is buttressed by theweight of research findings. A comprehensive review of theliterature revealed that in the various offender populationsstudied for this purpose, only a small percentage were marihuanausers. In only a handful of cases did researchers report thatcriminal conduct followed the use of marihuana. Generally, therate of self -reported, non-drug crime did not significantlydiffer between users and non-users. Both of the Commission-sponsored studies (the New York andPhiladelphia studies referred to earlier) corroborated thisresearch consensus. In the Philadelphia study, for example, lessthan 10% of the sample were known to the police, and there wereno significant differences among marihuana users and non-users inthe sample who reported the commission of major criminal actswhen statistical controls were applied. Further, most of thefirst offenses committed by users occurred prior to their use ofmarihuana, and only in rare instances did the offensesimmediately follow (within 24 hours) upon the use of marihuana(five cases out of 741 first offenses and 19 cases out of 516most recent offenses). Likewise, the New York study revealed that about one-fifth of-the marihuana law violators arrested between 1965 and 1969 werefound to have previous arrest records. Of those with previousarrests, the great majority of offenses (86%) involved trafficviolations and minor violations of the vagrancy statutes. In but10% of the cases the previous arrests were for assault, robbery,burglary or larceny. In essence, neither informed current professional opinion norempirical research, ranging from the 1930's to the present, hasproduced systematic evidence to support the thesis that marihuanause, by itself, either invariably or generally leads to or causescrime, including acts of violence,, juvenile delinquency oraggressive behavior. Instead the evidence suggests thatsociolegal and cultural variable's account for the apparentstatistical correlation between marihuana use and crime ordelinquency. A Sociocultural Explanation The persistent belief that some relationship exists betweenmarihuana use and crime is not without statistical support.Undoubtedly, the marihuana user of the 1920's and 1930's wasoverrepresented in the nation's jails and penitentiaries and inthe general crime and delinquency statistics. Especially duringthe late 1920's and early 1930's when the nation was preoccupiedwith lawlessness, the translation of this statistical correlationinto a causal hypothesis is not surprising. The increasing incidence of use in the mid-sixties by white,affluent, middle class, high school youth, college students andadults has occasioned a reevaluation of the marihuana user and areexamination of the crime issue. The overwhelming majority ofthe new marihuana offenders have had no previous arrests, andcome from the normally low risk, middle and upper socioeconomicpopulation groups. Recent public opinion surveys suggest that considerable socialdisapproval is attached to the "hippie" life style,unconventional mode of dress and apparent disregard for the lawdisplayed by many of these individuals. Nonetheless, fewerpersons are now willing to classify as criminal those marihuanausers whose only contact with the law has been as a result oftheir marihuana use. Perceptions have undergone a change as aresult of the increased usage of marihuana among youth of thedominant social class. Nonetheless, a statistical associationremains. First, the majority of both marihuana users and offendersother than actual marihuana law violators fall into the14-to-25-year age group. Second, the majority of those arrestedfor marihuana law violations as well as other delinquent orcriminal acts were, and to a much lesser degree, still are, drawnfrom the same "high risk" populations, such as minoritygroups, socially and economically disadvantaged, young, male,inner-city residents. Third, various offender populations subjected to study oftenincluded a number of marihuana users, although it was not themarihuana violations per se but other, more serious criminalconduct that originally brought most of them to the attention ofthe authorities. Finally, during the past five years, marihuanalaw violators have increasingly swelled the crime and delinquencystatistics; in most cases, their only contact with the law hasbeen for these marihuanaspecific offenses. The Philadelphia study corroborated this continuingstatistical association. The simple relationship between usingmarihuana and committing offenses was positive and statisticallysignificant, and there was also a high correlation betweenfrequency of smoking marihuana and committing offenses. Thesedirect associations were reduced to insignificance, however, uponfurther analysis of the data, and other explanations for thecoincidence of marihuana use and crime became evident. Theseincluded: race, education, age, the use of other drugs, andhaving drug-using friends. We conclude that some users commit crimes more frequently thannon-users not because they use marihuana but because they happento be the kinds of people who would be expected to have a highercrime rate, wholly apart from the use of marihuana. In mostcases, the differences in crime rate between users and non-usersare dependent not on marihuana use per se but on these otherfactors. In summary, although the available evidence suggests thatmarihuana use may be statistically correlated with the incidenceof crime and delinquency, when examined in isolation from theother variables, no valid evidence was found to support thethesis that marihuana' by itself, either inevitably, generally oreven frequently causes or precipitates the commission of crime,including acts of violence, or juvenile delinquency. Within this framework, neither the marihuana user nor the drugitself can be said to constitute a danger to public safety. For,as two researchers have so cogently stated for the Commission,"Whatever an individual is, in all of his cultural, socialand psychological complexity, is not going to vanish in a puff ofmarihuana smoke." MARIHUANA AND DRIVING Within the context of public safety another issue which meritsattention is the extent to which drivers under the influence ofmarihuana constitute a hazard on the nation's streets andhighways. Although in recent years increasing attention has beengiven to this issue, at present little empirical evidence existsto inform discussion. To assess the actual and potential impact of marihuana ontraffic safety, a number of basic research questions must beanswered. the extent to which marihuana, users actually drive whileunder the influence of the drug the extent to which marihuana users driving while"high" commit traffic violations and are involved intraffic accidents the amounts of marihuana consumed immediately prior to thecommission of traffic violations or the involvement in trafficaccidents and the drug's role in these events the nature and extent to which marihuana actually impairspsychomotor skills, judgment and driving performance To date, the generalizations made concerning the effects ofmarihuana on driving behavior have generally been based onstatistical studies of traffic violations and accidents andinferences drawn from more general studies of the physiologicaland psychological consequences of marihuana use, such as changesin pulse rate, reaction time, neuromuscular coordination, timeestimation and spatial perceptions. Such studies pose serious limitations in the nature,reliability and validity of the data. The basic problems derivefrom difficulties in identifying and attributing cause. A majorobstacle in such retrospective analysis is the inability toseparate the effects of marihuana from those possibly engenderedby the use of other drugs, such as alcohol, tranquilizers andamphetamines. Finally, conclusive analysis is impossible until areliable technique is developed for measuring the level ofmarihuana present in the body of the driver at the time of hisviolation or accident. Prospective experimental studies of actual reactions to roadconditions and traffic emergency situations would undoubtedlyprovide the most reliable and valid data, but such studies wouldthemselves endanger the public and have not been undertaken.Researchers have relied, therefore, on controlled laboratorysimulator studies and direct interviews with those who haveadmitted to driving while under the influence of marihuana. With respect to the simulator studies , the available evidencesuggests that while, in some cases, marihuana has producedinterference with certain motor or mental abilities which affectdriving behavior, these effects were generally believed to bereadily overcome by the exercise of extreme caution by the driverand a significant reduction in speed. The few driving simulator tests completed to date havegenerally revealed no significant correlations between marihuanause and driving disabilities. Comparison of the simulator scoresof users and nonusers, however, did reveal small butnonsignificant differences in the number of speedometer errorsmade. These simulator studies also examined the comparative effectsof alcohol and marihuana on driving scores. The findings of onestudy, though controversial, suggested that intoxicationresulting from low doses of marihuana was less detrimental todriving performance than was the presence of alcohol at thelegally prohibited blood level of .10%. The methodological limitations of the study raise seriousquestions about the reliability and validity of the findings. Asone critic has noted, "It does not follow automatically thatlack of effect of a drug on the simulated task will correlatewith lack of effect on the actual task." Further , the useof dissimilar doses of alcohol and marihuana has led anothercritic to assert that "finding that a heavy dose of alcoholcaused more impairment than a mild dose of marihuana is neithersurprising nor helpful in assessing the relative effects of thetwo drugs in the relative doses in which they are normallyused." Recent research has not yet proven that marihuana usesignificantly impairs driving ability or performance. TheCommission believes, nonetheless, that driving while under theinfluence of any psychoactive drug is a serious risk to publicsafety; the acute effects of marihuana intoxication, spatial andtime distortion and slowed reflexes may impair drivingperformance. That the risk of injury may be greater for alcoholthan for marihuana matters little. Obviously, Much more research needs to be undertaken in thisarea. Hopefully, recent studies sponsored by the NationalInstitute of Mental Health and other agencies will soon providethe concrete information that is needed. Marihuana, Public Health and Welfare As the feared threat to public safety through violent crimehas diminished in recent years, policy-makers and the public havebegun increasingly to view marihuana and other illicit drug useas a public health concern. The National Survey indicates thatAmerican adults regard drug abuse as the third most pressingproblem of the day, closely following the economy and Vietnam.However, public attitudes reflect considerable confusion aboutthe facts concerning marihuana and drugs in general. This confusion has resulted from too little understanding ofthe motives for drug use as well as inadequate knowledge of theclassification of drugs according to their main effects. Legalpenalties have frequently mirrored this confusion, and theresulting inconsistencies cause, many young people to loseconfidence in adult authority. Even in the medical profession,much uncertainty is evident, and for most of the general publicthere is no clear authority to whom they can turn for guidance. A PUBLIC HEALTH APPROACH The Commission broadly defines public health concerns as allhealth problems which affect people en masse and are therebydifficult to treat on a traditional physician-to-patient basis.This category would include social and economic dependence andincapacity. A health problem which spreads to other susceptiblemembers of the society cannot be controlled by the individualphysician. This view coincides with the concept of preventivemedicine, recognizing that all public health problems must bedealt with on both an individual and societal level. To illustrate, the increasing incidence of deaths due to lungcancer subsequent to chronic, heavy tobacco usage is a majorpublic health concern. In this instance, prevention of smokingand ascertaining the cause of the malignancies, rather than theindividual treatment of each case by a physician, define thepublic health dimension. A major concern exists because thepopulation at risk is large and growing, and the risk of harm isgreat. In addition to the risk of large numbers of the populace beingaffected, the issue of contagion must also be examined. Unlikeinfectious diseases such as influenza and smallpox, where theperson affected " catches" the ailment unintentionally,those individuals who use marihuana choose to come into contactwith it. The contagion model is relevant only insofar as socialpressure from proselytizing friends and social contacts play arole in spreading the use of the, drug. This dimension existswith marihuana, as well as alcohol and tobacco. After assessing the potential harm to the individual andsociety, the size of the population at risk and the contagionaspect, society must determine the nature of the controlmechanism used to deal with the problem, and how nine]) of itshealth resources, manpower and facilities will be allocated tomeet the perceived threat to the public health. Therefore, ananalysis of the relative risk of marihuana use must beundertaken. We must examine not only the effects of the drug onthe individual but also determine which groups are at risk andwhy. Practically all substances consumed by man are potentiallydangerous to the physical or mental health of the individual ifused irresponsibly or by particularly sensitive persons. Certainsubstances are sufficiently complex in their effects thatsocietal control is necessary to reduce risk, for example,fluorides added to the water supply, prescription drugs, and foodadditives. The degree of concern and control varies, depending onrelative public health dangers. The Population At Risk Before the dangers can be assessed, the population at riskmust be defined. Viewing the public health picture on a largescale, the United States in 1972 may still be consideredfortunate with regard to marihuana usage. While it is the thirdmost popular recreational drug, behind alcohol and tobacco, ithas not been institutionalized and commercialized. Most of the Americans who have used marihuana have been merelyexperimenting with it. As noted in Chapter 1, there are 24million Americans who have tried marihuana at one time oranother, with 8.3 million still using it. Of those who have quit,most say they have simply lost interest in it. The same Surveyshows that experience with marihuana peaks in the18-to-25-year-old group and falls off sharply thereafter. A factof some significance is that at least 71% of all adults (18-yearsand older) and 80% of youth (12-to-17-years) have never usedmarihuana at all.* The Survey also indicates that the majority of those youth andadults who continue to use marihuana do so intermittently, thatis, between one and 10 times a month. These individuals areclassified as intermittent marihuana smokers who use the drug forits socializing effects. They are, for the most part, ordinaryAmericans who are either in school or are employed. About 2% of those who have ever used marihuana, or 500,000people, now use the drug heavily. They use the drug several timesa day. These individuals use marihuana for its personal drugeffects in addition to its socializing effects. Generally, theirlife styles, values, attitudes, behaviors and activities areunconventional. Marihuana plays an important role in their lives.Because the risk of psychological, and perhaps physical, harmfrom marihuana increases with the frequency quantity and durationof its use, these heavy marihuana users constitute the greatestat-risk population in the United States today. The heavy marihuana user presents the greatest potentialconcern to the, public health. It is the Commission's opinionthat these heavy marihuana users constitute a source of contagionwithin American society. They actively proselytize others into adrug-oriented way of life. The effectiveness of peer grouppressure has been described earlier in Chapter II We anticipate that this at-risk population would increase innumber should a policy of institutionalized availability beadopted toward marihuana. Although marihuana is readily availableillicitly in the United States today, a policy permitting itslegal distribution could be expected to bring about an increasein users, with some percentage of them becoming heavy users. Itis the availability of the drug, coupled -with a governmentalpolicy of approval or neutrality, that could escalate this groupinto a public health and welfare concern. While this isspeculative, it is a concern which cannot be dismissed. Theexperience with the rise in the use of tobacco and alcohol makesclear the probable consequences of commercial exploitation. Another concern of the Commission is the experience of othercountries which have large heavy user populations. While thepattern of behavior in one country is not automatically similarto a pattern of behavior in another country, the existence ofheavy user populations constitutes a serious public healthconcern which must be avoided in this country. The availabilityof the drug alone does not seem to determine increased usage;supply and governmental inaction appear to tip the balance towardincreased use. The proportion of our population susceptible tothis pattern of use is conjectural but good preventive publichealth requires limiting the number to an irreducible minimum. *In the self-administered instrument, several separatequestions were utilized to elicit the respondent's experiencewith marihuana. This technique permitted an analysis ofconsistency of responses, and also minimized the possibility ofnonresponse. Nevertheless, 14% of the adults and 6% of the youthdid not respond to enough of these questions to ascertain whetherthey had ever tried marihuana or not. Percentage who- Adult Youth Ever used ------------------------------------- 15 14 Never used ------------------------------------ 71 so No response ----------------------------------- 14 6 Confusion and Fact One of the primary sources of confusion surrounding the use ofmarihuana and other psychoactive drugs is the ambiguity of theterm "drug abuse." In many quarters the excessive useof any drug is considered drug abuse, regardless of the effect ofthe drug on the individual or his behavior. In order to clarifythis issue the Commission defines psychoactive drug abuse asfollows: Drug abuse is the use of psychoactive drugsin a way likely to induce mental dysfunction and disorderedbehavior. It should be emphasized that demonstrable pathology of organsystems, including the brain, is not a necessary characteristicof psychoactive drug abuse. There are numerous non-psychoactivedrugs which can induce extensive organ pathology but do notmodify behavior; such drugs leave their imprint primarily on theindividual, not on society. The Commission believes that many ofthe perplexing issues relating to psychoactive drugs, includingmarihuana, can be clarified if drug abuse refers only to theimpact of drug-induced behavior on society. Three types of such drug-induced behavior are consideredunacceptable in most organized societies: (1) aggressivenessleading to violence; (2) loss of psychomotor control; (3) mentalor physical disorder leading to social and economic incapacity ordependency. This is not to say that society is unconcerned about theharmful effects of psychoactive drugs on the individual, or thatsuch effects do not merit the attention of public healthofficials. Cigarette smoking, although affecting primarily theindividual, is surely a matter of public health concern. Webelieve, however, that the term drug abuse, with its attendantsocietal disapprobation, should be reserved for drug taking whichhas a more direct effect on society through disordered behavior. Beyond the confusion surrounding the term drug abuse, arational evaluation of the public health impact of marihuana useis also inhibited by extensive misinformation about the drug.Recently, a great deal of research has increased significantlyour knowledge about marihuana. Further research data arenecessary before ;a conclusive statement about marihuana andpublic health can be made. However, enough is known today todiscuss some of the public perceptions in detail. And sufficientdata are presently available to allow for rationaldecision-making. ASSESSMENT OF PERCEIVED RISKS The Commission believes that marihuana. is perceived by theAmerican public to present the following risks to the publichealth: lethality potential for genetic damage or teratogenicity immediate adverse physical or mental effects long-term physical or mental effects including psychosis and"amotivation" syndrome "addiction" potential * progression to other stronger drugs, especially heroin Lethality The Commission's National Survey revealed that 48% of adultsbelieve that some people have died from marihuana use. A carefulsearch of the literature and testimony of the nation's healthofficials has not revealed a single human fatality in the UnitedStates proven to have resulted solely from ingestion ofmarihuana. Experiments with the drug in monkeys demonstrated thatthe dose required for overdose death was enormous and for allpractical purposes unachievable by humans smoking marihuana. Thisis in marked contrast to other substances in common use, mostnotably alcohol and barbiturate sleeping pills. Of comparative note, 89% of all adults in the same Surveybelieve that some people have died from using alcohol. Thisindicates that public opinion regarding alcohol and its potentiallethality is more accurate than it is for marihuana. At the sametime, factual knowledge regarding the inherent danger in using asubstance, for example alcohol, seemingly does not deter manypersons from using it irresponsibly. Potential For Genetic Damage The thalidomide tragedies of the 1950's have taught us toponder carefully the possibility of genetic damage subsequent toany drug use. The much publicized controversy regarding LSD andsubsequent genetic damage has led investigators to studymarihuana and its possible genetic effects. Although a number ofstudies have been performed, at present no reliable evidenceexists indicating that marihuana causes genetic defects in man. Early findings from studies of chronic (up to 41 years), heavy(several ounces per day) cannabis users in Greece and Jamaicaalso failed to find such evidence. In all its studies, theCommission found no evidence of chromosome damage or teratogenicor mutagenic effects due to cannabis at doses commonly used byman. However, since fetal damage cannot be ruled out, the use ofmarihuana like that of many other drugs, is not advisable duringpregnancy. Immediate Effects The intoxicant effects of marihuana on the mental function ofthe user does have potential health significance both for theindividual and others with whom he may come in contact. Becausemarihuana is a psychoactive drug, it is important to examine theacute toxic effects which may occur in certain predisposedindividuals and which increase with the potency of thepreparation. The Commission has reviewed numerous clinical studiesdescribing acute panic reactions and transient psychotic-likeepisodes which occur as acute effects of the drug intoxication.In addition, a predisposed individual might experienceaggravation of a latent psychotic state or other underlyinginstability. Although severe abnormal psychological states arerare when compared to the total number of marihuana users, lesserproblems are not rare, and they may endanger both the individualand those around him at the time of their occurrence. Theindividual contemplating use is not capable of predicting whetherhe is predisposed by his particular circumstances to anundesirable mental reaction. The undesirable consequencesoccurring while an individual is involved in complex tasks suchas driving or operating machinery or tasks requiring finepsychomotor precision and judgment are all too imaginable. From a public health point of view, the immediate effects ofmarihuana intoxication on the individual's organs or bodilyfunctions are of little significance. By and large these effects,which have been carefully outlined in Chapter 11 of the Report,are transient and have little or no permanent effect upon theindividual. Effects Of Long-Term, Heavy Use To determine the long-term chronic effects of heavy marihuanause, the Commission has carefully reviewed the world literatureand contemporary studies of heavy, chronic (up to 41 years)cannabis users in the world. In addition, lower socioeconomicpopulations in Afghanistan, Greece, and Jamaica have beenexamined. Effects On The Body These recent studies in Greece and Jamaica report minimalphysical abnormalities in the cannabis users as compared withtheir non-using peers. Minimal abnormalities in pulmonary function have been observedin some cases of heavy and very heavy smokers of potent marihuanapreparations (ganja or hashish). However, one study concluded thecause was smoking in general no matter what the substance. Theother study could not express any conclusion because of theabsence of a control population. Such decrements in normalpulmonary capacity may represent early warning signals in thedevelopment of chronic lung disease. They must be considered inany program of early prevention of disease and future disability. No objective evidence of specific pathology of brain tissuehas been documented. This fact contrasts sharply with thewell-established brain damage of chronic alcoholism. Effects On The Mind No outstanding abnormalities in psychological tests,psychiatric interviews or coping patterns have been conclusivelydocumented in studies of cannabis users in other countries of theworld. Further research in this important area is necessarybefore definite conclusions can be drawn relating or linkingmarihuana to mental dysfunction because available psychologicaltests do not measure certain higher mental functions veryaccurately. Cannabis use has long been known to precipitate short-termphychotic-like episodes in predisposed individuals or those whotake excessive doses. Some observers report that the prevalenceof shortterm psychoses as well as the psychotic episodes oflonger duration in heavy cannabis users are compatible with theprevalence rate of psychosis in the general population and,therefore, may not be attributable to cannabis use. In fact, somebelieve that in populations under stress where marihuana iswidely used, occurrence of the acute psychotic-like episodesoccur less often than one would expect in such a population.Other researchers have disagreed with these conclusions, and thematter is still controversial. Effects On Motivation The Commission is deeply concerned about another group ofbehavioral effects that have been described in other nations asbeing associated with the heavy, long-term use of cannabis. Thisbehavioral condition has been termed the "amotivationalsyndrome." An extreme form has been reported in populationsof lower socioeconomic males in several developing nations. Thesereports describe lethargy, instability, social deterioration, aloss of interest in virtually all activities other than drug use.This state of social and economic disability also results inprecipitation and aggravation of psychiatric disorders (overtpsychotic behavior) and possible somatic complications among veryheavy, very long-term users of high potency cannabis products.However, in the populations so far observed in Jamaica, Greece,and Afghanistan, physical and psychosocial deterioration was notreported. The life styles of these populations appeared to beconditioned by cultural and socioeconomic factors. Someresearchers believe cannabis' may serve to keep these individualsstratified at this lower socioeconomic level. The occurrence of a similar, though less intense, syndrome hasbeen identified recently with heavy marihuana use among youngpersons in the Western world, including the United States. Someclinicians have described the existence of a complex of subtlesocial, psychological and behavioral changes related to a loss ofvolitional goal direction in certain individuals, including somelong-term heavy users of marihuana. Such persons appear to orientonly to the present. They appear, alienated from generallyaccepted social and occupational activities, and they tend toshow a reduced concern for personal hygiene and nutrition. Some clinicians believe that this picture is directly causedby the action of marihuana. However , other behavioral scientistsbelieve that among impressionable adolescents, marihuana-inducedsuggestibility may facilitate the rapid adoption of new valuesand behavior patterns, particularly when the drug is taken in asocially alienated subculture that advocates and stronglyreinforces such changes. Whichever interpretation one accepts, the fact is apparentthat the chronic, heavy use of marihuana may jeopardize socialand economic adjustments of the adolescents We believe this isone concern which merits further research and evaluation. On thebasis of past studies, the chronic, heavy use of marihuana, seemsto constitute a high-risk behavior, particularly amongpredisposed adolescents. This consideration is especiallycritical when we consider the adolescent who is in the throes ofa normally turbulent emotional process. The Commission hasreviewed numerous reported studies and heard the testimony ofseveral clinicians dealing with heavy users of marihuana whoexhibit this particular behavior pattern. Although the UnitedStates does not, at the present time, have a large number of suchpersons within its population, the incidence is too frequent toignore. Expanded epidemiologic studies are imperative to obtain abetter understanding of this complex behavior. Addiction Potential Unfortunately, fact and fancy have become irrationally mixedregarding marihuana's physiological and psychological properties.Marihuana clearly is not in the same chemical category as heroininsofar as its physiologic and psychological effects areconcerned. In a word, cannabis does not lead to physicaldependence. No torturous withdrawal syndrome follows the suddencessation of chronic, heavy use of marihuana. Although evidenceindicates that heavy, long-term cannabis users may developpsychological dependence, even then the level of psychologicaldependence is no different from the syndrome of anxiety andrestlessness seen when an American stops smoking tobaccocigarettes. Progression To Other Drugs As noted in Chapter 11, to say marihuana leads to any otherdrug avoids the real issue and reduces a complex set of variablesto an oversimplified premise of cause and effect. If any onestatement can characterize why persons in the United Statesescalate their drug use patterns and become polydrug users, it ispeer pressure. Indeed, if any drug is associated with the use ofother drugs, including marihuana, it is tobacco, followed closelyby alcohol. Study after study which the Commission reviewedinvariably reported an association between the use of tobacco,and, to a lesser extent, of alcohol with the use of marihuana andother drugs. The fact should be emphasized that the overwhelming majorityof marihuana users do not progress to other drugs. They eitherremain with marihuana or foresake its use in favor of alcohol. Inaddition, the largest number of marihuana users in the UnitedStates today are experimenters or intermittent users, and 2% ofthose who have ever used it are presently heavy users. Onlymoderate and heavy use of marihuana is significantly associatedwith persistent use of other drugs. Some persons in our society are interested in experimentingwith a series of drugs, and there is no uniformity regardingwhich drug these multidrug users take first. In some cases, thedrug used is a matter of preference; in others, a matter ofavailability; and in further instances, it matter of groupchoice. Citizens concerned with health issues must consider thepossibility of marihuana use leading to use of heroin, otheropiates, cocaine or hallucinogens. This so-called stepping-stonetheory first received widespread acceptance in 1951 as a resultof testimony at Congressional hearings. At that time, studies ofvarious addict populations repeatedly described most heroin usersas marihuana users also. The implication of these descriptionswas that a causal relationship existed between marihuana andsubsequent heroin use. When the voluminous testimony given atthese hearings is seriously examined, no verification is found ofa causal relationship between marihuana use and subsequent heroinuse. Again, we must avoid polarity on this issue. To assume thatmarihuana use is unrelated to the use of other drugs would beinaccurate. As mentioned earlier, the heavy or very heavymarihuana users are frequently users of other drugs. Thestepping-stone theory holds that the adolescent begins the use ofillicit drugs with marihuana, and later proceeds to heroin in thesearch for greater thrills. The opposing viewpoint holds that thelarge majority of marihuana users never become heroin addicts anddenies the validity of a causal relationship. In the National Survey, among the adult respondents, 70%thought that marihuana makes people want to try stronger drugssuch as heroin; 56% of the youth in the 12-to-17-year-oldcategory agreed with the same statement. These perceptionscontrast with another finding in the same Survey which revealedthat 4% of current marihuana users have tried heroin. On theother hand, very few respondents perceived alcohol and tobacco tobe precipitants of other drug use. Studies of the escalation process demonstrate that the ratesof progression vary from one group to another and from onesegment of the population to another. There is no set proportionof marihuana users who "escalate" to the use of otherdrugs. The other drugs which some marihuana smokers use varyaccording to the social characteristics of the population inquestion. Within some groups, heroin may be the choice; in othergroups, it may be LSD. Marihuana use per se does not dictate whether other drugs willbe used; nor does it determine the rate of progression, if andwhen it, occurs, or which drugs might be used. As discussed inChapter 11, the user's social group seems to have the strongestinfluence on whether other drugs will be used; and if so, whichdrugs will be used. PREVENTIVE PUBLIC HEALTH CONCERNS The hallmark of a good health care delivery system ispreventing as much illness as possible. This objective isachieved by means of immunizations, regular routine checkups, andeducational programs. Education programs regarding marihuana have been notablyineffective, partly due to an exaggeration of the effects ofusing the drug and partly because the effects of the opiates andmarihuana have been compared inaccurately. As a result, manypersons have developed a conscious or unconscious denial ofnearly all dangers associated with marihuana use. Some educatorsbelieve that drug programs merely sharpen the curiosity ofchildren and tempt them to use drugs which they otherwise wouldnot use. Others believe that the responsibility should not belodged with the schools but rather with the home or thecommunity. Because of the uncertainty about the efficacy of these,programs, education programs dealing with drug usage simply donot exist in the school systems of a number of major cities; inothers, token programs are offered in response to the demand thatsomething be done. Health educators have the responsibility tohelp this vulnerable group of Americans become aware of alloptions so that they are able to make enlightened choices. The educational role of physicians and other clinical healthpersonnel should not be underestimated. The National Survey showsthat the public believes young people should receive informationconcerning marihuana first from schools and second from familyphysicians. The health professional has a unique position as bothteacher and confidant to an individual struggling with a"drug abuse" problem. Honest, sincere, and confidentialguidance from a physician may prevent later difficulties to boththe individual and the society. The Commission believes thataction must be taken to inform and support the physician in hisrole as confidant and counsellor to those seeking assistance. Considering the current patterns of marihuana use in theUnited States, the need for treatment and/or rehabilitation doesnot appear necessary for the vast majority of persons who areexperimenting with the drug or using it intermittently. Rather,these persons need to be realistically educated regarding thepotential hazards they face. To this end, a comparison of thepersonal and public health risks of marihuana and those ofheroin, cocaine, amphetamines, and other drugs would be useful. A concern for public health also requires thoughtfulconsideration of the consequences of any change in public policy.We have objectively appraised the present scope of public healthconcerns concluding that the most serious risk lies with thepopulation of heavy users, which is, at this time, quite small inthis country. Now, we must soberly consider the likely effect of adoption ofa social policy of neutrality or approval toward marihuana use.Any legal policy which institutionalizes availability of the drugcarries with it a likely increase in the at-risk population. Thisfactor is not necessarily conclusive in itself , but it doesweigh heavily for the policymaker. Even though the proportion ofheavy users in the total using population might not increase ifsuch a social or legal policy were adopted, the absolute numberof heavy users would probably increase. Thus, we would have anincrease in the at-risk segment of the populace. A greater stresswould thereby be placed on the general health care deliverysystem in all the areas of health concern described earlier. Regardless of emerging social policy, greater emphasis must beplaced on educating our youth regarding the prospective dangersinherent in expanded marihuana use. This anticipatory guidancecan serve to defuse or at least forestall a potentially serioussocial phenomenon. Summary From what is now known about the effects of marihuana, its useat the present level does not constitute a major threat to publichealth. However, this statement should not lead to complacency.Marihuana is not an innocuous drug. The clinical findings ofimpaired psychological function, carefully documented by medicalspecialists, legitimately arouse concern. These studies identifymarihuana-related problems which must be taken into account inthe development of public policy. Unfortunately, thesemarihuana-related problems, which occur only in heavy, long-termusers, have been over generalized and overdramatized. Two percent of those Americans who have ever used marihuanaare now heavy users and constitute the highest risk group. Strongevidence indicates that certain emotional changes have takenplace among predisposed individuals as a result of prolonged,heavy marihuana use. The clinical reports in the literaturedescribing transient psychoses, other psychiatric difficulties,and impairment of cognitive function subsequent to use ofmarihuana and of other drugs do not prove causality but cannot beignored. The causes of these emotional difficulties are much toocomplex to justify general conclusions by the public or thepress. The mass media have frequently promoted such clinicalreports to appear as far reaching events affecting the entirepopulation. The clinician sees only the troubled Population ofany group. In evaluating a public health concern, the essentialelement is the proportion of affected persons in the generalgroup. The people responsible for evaluating public healthproblems must concern themselves with the proportion of peopleout of the total population who are affected by any specificcondition. The highest risk groups should be identified as thesource of primary concern. A recognition that a majority ofmarihuana users are not now a matter of public health concernmust be made so that public health Officials may concentratetheir attention where it will have maximum impact. The concept of relative risk is crucial to an evaluation ofthe impact of marihuana on public health. We believe thatexperimental or intermittent use of this drug carries minimalrisk to the public health, and should not be given overzealousattention in terms of a public health response. We are concernedthat social influences might cause those who would not otherwiseuse the drug to be exposed to this minimal risk and the potentialescalation of drug-using patterns. For this group, we mustdeglorify, demythologize, and deemphasize the use of marihuanaand other drugs. The Commission reemphasizes its concern about the smallminority of heavy, long-term marihuana users who are exposed to amuch greater relative risk of impaired general functioning incontemporary America. Public health officials should concentratetheir efforts on this group. Fortunately, the group has to datenot grown sufficently in size to warrant its being considered amajor public health concern. We retiterate, too, the public health implications of anincrease in the at-risk population. We suspect that such anincrease is most likely if a sudden shift in social policysignificantly increased availability of the drug. One of thefactors we consider in Chapter V when evaluating the varioussocial policy options and legal implementations is the effect ofeach policy on incidence and patterns of use. Regardless of howheavy this particular variable will weigh in that process, wemust state that a significant increase in the at-risk populationcould convert what is now a minor public health concern in thiscountry to one of major proportions. Marihuana And The Dominant Social Order For more than 30 years it has been widely assumed that themarihuana user constitutes a threat to the well-being of thecommunity and the nation. Originally, the users were consideredto be "outsiders" or marginal citizens. Included weresuch people as hustlers, prostitutes, itinerant workers, merchantseamen, miners and ranchhands, water-front day laborers anddrifters, many of whom were drawn from the lower socioeconomicsegments of the population. Concerns about marihuana use expressed in the 1930's relatedprimarily to a perceived inconsistency between the life stylesand values of these individuals and the social and moral order.Their potential influence on the young was especially worrisome.When marihuana was first prohibited, a recurrent fear was thatuse might spread among the youth. And in the late 1930's and1940's, the attraction of young people to jazz music was thoughtto be in part related to marihuana use by this"outsider" population. Throughout this early period, American society, in reaction toits fear of the unfamiliar, translated rumor about thecriminality and immorality of the marihuana user into"unquestioned fact" which, in turn, was translated intosocial policy. From the mid-thirties to the present, however, socialperceptions have undergone significant change in response to theemergence of new and challenging social problems. As marihuana,use has spread to include the affluent, middle class, white highschool and college-age youth as well as minority group members oflower socioeconomic circumstances in urban core areas, theconcept of marginality has become blurred. Also, as the use of marihuana has increased, those individualsformerly labeled as marginal and threatening have been replacedby a more middle class, white, educated and younger population ofmarihuana smokers. A stereotyped user no longer exists, andtherefore, the question now properly focuses on who poses athreat to the dominant order. The Adult Marihuana User Despite the fact that substantial numbers of adults usemarihuana, society does not appear to feel greatly threatened bythis group, probably because included in the group are aconsiderable number of middle class individuals who are regularlyemployed and whose occupational and social status appear to besimilar to those of peers and colleagues who do not usemarihuana. In the course of its fact-finding effort, the Commission hasmet with several groups of socially and economically"successful" marihuana users in the professions of law,medicine, banking, education and business. In most cases, thesepersons, in their external appearances, seemed to be mature andresponsible adults whose social attitudes and behavior did notmark them as radical ideologues or essentially irresponsibleindividuals. For the most part, use of marihuana by adults has been foundto be more directly related to the facilitation of socialinteraction (much like the adult use of alcohol in socialgatherings) than to any other factor. Although their marihuanasmoking behavior is illegal, most adult users are not ordinarilyconsidered by their peers to be criminal nor is their usegenerally likely to result in arrest. Because the adult user generally maintains low visibility, isprimarily a recreational user, is not usually involved in radicalpolitical activity and maintains a life style largelyindistinguishable from his non-using neighbors, he is notordinarily viewed as a threat to the dominant social order. Inshort, aside from his use of marihuana, the adult recreationaluser is not generally viewed as a significant social problem. The Young Marihuana User The widespread use of marihuana by millions of young people ofcollege and high school age has been viewed by many as a directthreat to the stability and future of the social order. Many parents, adults in general, and government officials haveexpressed concern that young people who use marihuana oftenreject the essential values and traditions upon which the societyis founded. Some have suggested that youthful marihuana use is,in itself, an indication of the rejection of responsibility and asign of reckless hedonism which may well interfere with anorderly maturation process. Others see youthful marihuana use aspart of a pattern of conduct which produces dropping out,underachievement and dependency. In short, the mass character of youthful marihuana use hasbeen frequently interpreted as a rejection of theinstitutionalized principles of law and a lack of concern forindividual social responsibility, which threatens the social andpolitical institutions. Implicit in this view is the assumption that a young personwho uses marihuana in spite of the law cannot be expected toassume an individually and socially responsible, adult role. Thestrength of this fear is drawn largely from the vocal and visible"counterculture" to which marihuana is often tied. Notsurprisingly, the concerns posed by an alternate youthful lifestyle are extended to the drug itself. Threats to the social order are often seen, for example, inthe character of youthful leisure time activities, such asattendance at rock concerts, occasioned by the high mobility andaffluence of today's youth. They are also seen in the new modesof speech and dress and in the seemingly casual manner of theirday-to-day living. Equally troublesome for many, however, is theidea of intentional intoxication for purposes of recreation. Such conduct and the more casual attitude toward sexualrelationships as well as participation in radical politics haveprovoked increasing concern throughout the adult society. TheNational Survey illustrates the extent to which the older adultperceives youthful marihuana use as part of a much larger patternof behavior which bodes ill for the future of the nation. First, the older the adult respondent, the more likely he wasto picture the marihuana user as leading an abnormal life. Only9% of the over-50 generation agreed with the statement that"most people who use marihuana lead a normal life."Nineteen percent of the 35to-49 age group and 29% of the26-to-34-year-olds were of the same belief. Conversely, half ofthe young adults (18-to-25) considered most marihuana usersnormal. This fact is not surprising since many of theircontemporaries are marihuana users. Second, the marihuana user, as envisioned by adults, istypically a youthful dropout from society. He doesn't like to bewith other people, is uninterested in the world around him, isusually lazy and has an above-average number of personalproblems. Third, the less optimistic the adult respondent was about thenation's youth, the more likely he was to oppose alteration ofthe marihuana laws and to envision major social dislocations ifthe laws were changed. Fifty-seven percent of the adultpopulation in general agreed with the statement, "ifmarihuana were legal, it would lead to teenagers becomingirresponsible and wild." Among those adults who mostdisapproved of youthful behavior in general, 74% agreed with thequoted statement. Similarly, 84% of the non-approving adultsfavored stricter laws on marihuana. As we discussed in Chapter I, marihuana's symbolic role in aperceived generational conflict has brought marihuana use intothe Category of a social problem. Today's youthful marihuana useris seen as a greater threat to the social order than either themarginal user of earlier times or the adult user of the present.Since the concerns about marihuana today relate mostly to youth,the remainder of this section will focus on these youth-relatedissues. 'THE WORLD OF YOUTH Youth of today are better fed, better housed, more mobile,more affluent, more schooled and probably more bored with theirlives than any generation which has preceded them. Adults have difficulty understanding why such privileged youngpeople should wish to offend by their language and appearance andspend so much effort trying to discredit those institutions ofsociety which have made possible the privileges which those youthenjoy. Many adults perceive the present level of youthfuldiscontent to be of a greater intensity than has been true ofpast generations. Marihuana has become both a focus and a symbol of thegeneration gap and for many young people its use has become, anexpedient means of protest against adult values. Adults in positions of authority, parents, teachers, policyofficials, judges, and others often view marihuana use as thesign of youth's rejection of moral and social values and of thesystem of government under which they live. The problem is thatboth youth and adults tend to make pronouncements and arefrequently unable to reason together in logical fashion. Insteadthey overstate their positions in such a way that effectiveresolution of their differences becomes very difficult. In effect, each group takes the rhetoric of the other at facevalue. For youth, however, marihuana use plays many roles, onlyone of which is a symbolic assault on adult authority and values. Marihuana use, for many young people, has become a part of aritual. It takes on the aspect of participating in a sharedexperience which, for some if not all, is enjoyable in itself.For many, it becomes an even more interesting experience becauseit is forbidden. Some of the rituals concerned with the purchase, storage,preparation, and use of marihuana take on a mystique similar tothe time of Prohibition when people went through certain ritualsnecessary to get a drink in a speak-easy. The three knocks and"Joe sent me" cues have been replaced by thenot-so-secret handshakes, the new vocabulary of youth and otherexclusionary devices to delineate the "in" group. The use of marihuana is attractive to many young people forthe sense of group unity and participation which develops aroundthe common use of the drug. This sense tends to be intensified bya sense of "common cause" in those circumstances whereusers are regarded as social or legal outcasts. They know, too, that many of their peers who share themarihuana experience and also share the designation of lawbreakerare, in reality, productive and generally affirmative individualswho are interested neither in promoting the downfall of thenation nor in engaging in acts which would harm the generalwell-being of the community. In short, many youth have found marihuana use to be apleasurable and socially rewarding experience. They have foundthat the continuance of this behavior has brought them morepleasure than discomfort, more reward than punishment. Youth have increasingly come to see law enforcement activitydirected at marihuana use as an unreasonable and unjustifiablerejection of their generation. Most of these youth have grown upwith a positive image of the police as protectors of society.Now, many are confronted with the possibility of police intrusioninto their private lives and the threat of a criminal record. Theunfortunate result, in many instances, has been a blanketrejection and distrust of both the agents and institutions ofgovernment. In part, marihuana use as a social behavior is an unintendedbyproduct of the formal and informal educational process. Somepersons even suggest that youthful drug usage is a"success" in terms of the educational and socializationprocess. Our society values independence of thought,experimentation, and the empirical method, often reinforcing thisattitude by such advertising cliches as "make up your ownmind," "be your own man...... judge for yourself." Although experimentation with regard to drugs should not beconsidered a "success, the Commission does believe that theeducational efforts necessary to discourage this curiosity, whichmay be valuable in other matters, have not succeeded. Weunderstand why teenagers and young adults encouraged over theyears to make up their own minds have not been restrained byexaggerated accounts of marihuana's harmful effects, or by themore recent assertions that a true evaluation of marihuana usesrequires more research. The Scottish verdict of "notproven" does little to restrain youthful curiosity. In the previous Chapter, we emphasized the difference betweenthe vast majority of experimenters and intermittent users and thesmall group of moderate and heavy users who generally use drugsother than marihuana as well. The former do not differsignificantly from non-users on many indices of socialintegration. Various studies indicate that they maintain normalpatterns of living and social interaction, and are employed,competent citizens. On the other hand, there undoubtedly are a number of personswho have used marihuana and have exercised poor judgment,performed inadequately, or behaved irresponsibly while under thedrug's influence, thus jeopardizing themselves or others. Thefact remains, however, that a certain number of these personswere immature and irresponsible individuals even prior tomarihuana use, who would be expected to have poor or impairedjudgment whether or not marihuana was involved. The marihuana user is not, for the most part, a socialisolationist or a severely disturbed individual in need oftreatment or confinement. Most users, young or old, demonstratean average or above-average degree of social functioning,academic achievement and job performance. Their general image ofthemselves and their society is not radically different from thatof their non-marihuana-using peers. The majority of both groupstends to demonstrate equal interest in corporate concerns. Based upon present evidence, it is unlikely that marihuanausers will become less socially responsible as a result of theirmarihuana use or that their patterns of behavior and values willchange significantly. WHY SOCIETY FEELS THREATENED Society appears to be concerned about marihuana use primarilybecause of its perceived relationship to other social problems.We noted in the discussion of marihuana and public health thatthe focus of social concern should be the heavy users and thepossibility that their numbers will increase. Here we considerthe perceived impact of marihuana use upon the institutions andproclaimed goals of the society. Dropping Out Many parents have a genuine fear that marihuana use leads toidleness and "dropping out." During the 1960's,marihuana use, as well as the use of other psychoactive drugs,became equated with unconventional youth life styles. When anumber of young people adopted unconventional life styles, manyadults tended to view long hair, unkempt appearance and drugs assymbols of counterculture. They concluded that anyone who allowed his hair to grow orgave little attention to his clothing or appearance was probablya drug user with little or no motivation to achieve and nointerest in conventional goals. A number of researchers and clinicians have observed the useof marihuana or hashish in other societies, particularly amongpoor, lower class males. Some have observed that many of theseindividuals are generally unmotivated and ordinarily appear toshow little aspiration or motivation to improve their way oflife, regardless of whether they are judged by the standards ofthe more prosperous members of their own society or by middleclass standards of contemporary American society. One of the problems with this type of analysis is that itfails to perceive the social and cultural realities in which thephenomenon takes place. In the Middle East and in Asia wherehashish is used, the societies, in all instances, are highlystratified with people in the lower classes having virtually nosocial or economic mobility. Poverty, deprivation and diseasewere the conditions into which these people were born and inwhich they remain, regardless of whether they use cannabis. Inthis context, a person's resignation to his status in life is notlikely to be caused or greatly influenced by the effects ofcannabis. Any society will always have a certain number ofpersons who, for various reasons, are not motivated to strive forpersonal achievement or participate fully in the life of thecommunity. Therefore, the determination is difficult to makewhether cannabis use influences a person to drop out and, if itdoes, to what extent. Some individuals possess particular personality as well aspsychosocial characteristics which in specified instances couldproduce amotivation or dropping out. However, little likelihoodexists that the introduction of a single element such asmarihuana use would significantly change the basic personalityand character structure of the individual to any degree. Anindividual is more likely to drop out when a number ofcircumstances have joined at a given point in his lifetime,producing pressures with which he has difficulty in coping. Thesepressures often coincide with situations involving painful ordifficult judgments resulting from a need to adjust to thepressures of the social environment. Many young people, particularly in the college population, areshielded in their earlier years from experiences which might beemotionally stressful or unpleasant. Some young people, sosheltered, are neither equipped to make mature and independentjudgments nor prepared to enjoy the new-found freedom of theuniversity or college in a mature and responsible way. Some ofthese students are often unable to cope with social or academicadversity. After being sheltered for so long, some of these youngpeople may be easily attracted to experiences which promise newexcitement and to fall under the influence of a peer group whosevalues and living patterns may be inimical to a productive,healthy and continuous process of personal growth and maturity.In these instances, marihuana serves as the medium by which theseindividuals encounter social and psychological experiences withwhich they are ill-equipped to cope. Certain numbers of these young people have demonstrated whatis described as amotivation long before the smoking of marihuanabecame fashionable. Adolescence is often a particularly difficultperiod of searching in many directions at the same time. Inaddition to seeking a concept of "self" the adolescentis, at the same time, attempting to comprehend the nature of theworld around him and to identify his status and role in society. Different individuals, with different backgrounds,socialization patterns, belief systems and levels of emotionalmaturity cope with the period of transition from childhood toadulthood in different ways., For a small number, dropping outmight be one of these coping mechanisms whether or not they usemarihuana. For others, the response to the difficult adjustmentsof adolescence takes other forms, some of which are more,acceptable, "normal" and easier for adults tounderstand. The young person who does not find it possible to cope withthe pressures of his adolescent developmental period in waysconvenient to the understanding of adult society should not berejected, stigmatized or labeled. He requires both support andunderstanding and the opportunity to participate in roles whichhave meaning for him and in ways in which he feels comfortable.For a certain number of young people, marihuana and the mystiqueof the experience eases this passage by helping them share theirfeelings, doubts, inadequacies and aspirations with peers withwhom they feel safe and comfortable. Dropping Down Apart from the concern over youthful dropping out andidleness, there is also widespread concern about "droppingdown" or underachieving. Parents frequently express fear that marihuana will undermineor interfere with academic and vocational career development andachievement by focusing youthful interests on the drug and thoseassociated with the drug subculture. Some parents makeconsiderable sacrifices for their children to go to school, andthe fears that marihuana might undermine the academic, emotionaland vocational development of their young are quiteunderstandable. The Commission reviewed a number of studies related tomarihuana use by high school and college youth. No conclusiveevidence was found demonstrating that marihuana by itself isresponsible for academic or vocational failure or "droppingdown," although it could be one of many contributoryreasons. Many studies reported that the majority of young peoplewho have used marihuana received average or above-average gradesin school. In part, underachievement is related to a view of what oneindividual judges to be the achievement capacity of another. Thisjudgment is often made without concern for what the individualhimself feels about his potential, his interests and his goals.Perceptions about achievement also frequently fail to take intoconsideration the individual feelings about the goals of hispeers and the values of the larger society, including therelative prestige and status attached to various academicprograms, occupations and professions. Youth and Radical Politics Aside from the issue of unconventional life styles and theconcerns evoked by them, the other major concern of the sixtieswhich related to youth and drugs was radical politics. During the latter half of the decade, youthful anti-war groupswere organized on many of the nation's college campuses and highschools. These groups could be divided into two segments. Thelargest segment consisted of concerned, sometimes confused,frustrated and well-meaning petition signers and demonstrators.Within this large group there was a small coterie of individualswho constantly sought to turn the demonstration into aconfrontation and to protest for peace by means of violence. Thesecond segment consisted of organizations of individuals whosestated purpose was to undermine the social and politicalstability of the society through violent means. What must be clearly understood, however, is that among theyoung people, and some not so young, who protested against thewar in Vietnam, only a minority were bent on violence andmanipulated and corrupted these otherwise peaceful demonstrationsfor their own purposes. At the various gatherings, a number of the young peopleprotesting in these mass groups did smoke marihuana. We willnever know how many were initiated to marihuana use during thecourse of these peace demonstrations. The fact remains, however,that in the large campins, such as those in Washington, marihuanawas involved in two ways. First, there was the "normal"use in which the smoking was part of the social experience.Individuals came together and smoked, in part, to acknowledge andstrengthen group solidarity. Second, another quite differentaspect of the marihuana use at these gatherings said, in effect,"we know it's illegal but go and arrest all of us for doingit. . . ." This aspect can perhaps best be characterized asa symbolic challenge to authority. Unfortunately, however, the media, particularly television andsome of the news magazines, sometimes portrayed the image of agroup of young people plotting the overthrow of the nation byviolent means while under the influence of marihuana. In thoserelatively few instances where explosives and other violent meanswere employed, the evidence points to a cold and calculated planwhich was neither conceived nor executed under the influence ofmarihuana. As a result of these protests and demonstrations, therefore,radical politics has been seen by many as a mechanism throughwhich large numbers of young people would be introduced tomarihuana as well as to other drugs. Radical political activityor mass political protest is viewed by some as a threat to thewelfare of the nation and is assumed to be aided and encouragedby our enemies. The involvement of large numbers of youth in politicalactivism and the concomitant public concern about drug use havebeclouded the issue of marihuana use and have led to a broadeningof the concerns about marihuana on the part of adults. Some of the radical movement's leaders abetted this tendencyby pointing out the alleged irrationality and unfairness of themarihuana laws to recruit members to their ranks. Not surprisingis the fact that 45% of the adult respondents in the NationalSurvey felt that marihuana is often promoted by people who areenemies of the United States. Nor is it surprising that thisbelief is a function of age. While 22% of all young people(12-to-17 years of age) and 26% of young adults (18-to-25 years)identified marihuana with national enemies, more than one-half(58%) of those persons 50 years and older did so. Youth and the Work Ethic Of the many issues related to youth and the use of marihuana,one that greatly troubles many adults, is youthful attitudestoward work. The work ethic in our society is based on a beliefthat work is a good and necessary activity in and of itself. The traditional view holds that work is not only a right andmoral act but that it keeps people from mischief and from wastingtime on harmful recreational pleasures. The rationale for thisthesis is that work in American society has served as the primarymeans by which persons acquired the treasured symbols of society. In fact, throughout much of our history, with the exception ofthe small number who inherited or married wealth, no ethicalalternative to work existed. In recent years, the increasedemphasis placed upon leisure time activities has resulted inshorter work weeks, longer vacation periods and more paidholidays. Among the concerns of the adults about today's youthfulattitudes toward work and leisure are that young people seem toenjoy their recreational pursuits so much that they forget thatto a considerable degree their enjoyment is paid for by the laborof others. Many young people do not express the same level of concern astheir parents did about preparing themselves for a career and"getting ahead in the world." In part, this attitude isattributable to the fact that increasingly, the results of thislabor are not tangible, material goods. Service occupationsgenerally do not produce such tangible products, and even inmanufacturing industries the individual worker is usually tooremote from the product to feel any pride or interest in it. Inboth instances, the traditional symbol of the "manhood"of work, a tangible product, is no longer present. In sum, society has become increasingly disturbed by certainattitudes of today's youth which seem to stress pleasure, fun,and enjoyment without a counterbalancing concern for adisciplined and sustained work effort. Nevertheless, the numberof young people who view work as unimportant is small whencompared to the total number of young people. The Commission hasfound no evidence to suggest that the majority of youth areunwilling or incapable of productive and disciplined workperformance. In fact, the great majority of young people areperforming their tasks in industry, the professions and educationquite effectively. Although many young people delay entry into the work force toenjoy the fruits of our prosperous society, this delay does notmean they will not one day contribute their best efforts to thecontinued growth and advancement of the nation. The Changing Social Scene The present confusion about the effects of youthful marihuanause upon the dominant social order is caused by a variety ofinterrelated social concerns, many of them emotionally chargedissues, including anti-war demonstrations, campus riots, hippielife styles, the rising incidence of crime and delinquency andthe increased usage of all illicit drugs. The focus of concernabout marihuana is aggravated by the data overload mentioned inChapter 1, by the outpouring of incidental information about thedrug and its effects in a form and volume far beyond the capacityof the readers or listeners to assimilate or interpret. Ratherthan informing the public, much of the data disseminated hasproduced frustration and misinterpretation of the informationpresented. Adult society, including parents and policy-makers, finds itdifficult to comprehend and account for many of the attitudes andbehavior of the young, including the use of marihuana. In manycases the adults are still influenced by the myths of an earlierperiod which overstated the dangers of the drug. At a time ofgreat social change and turbulence, the tendency to depend on the"traditional wisdom," and its moral justification, is astrong one. Just as youth must try to understand and appreciate thestrengths of the institutions of our society, adults must try tounderstand the times through the eyes of their children. Wheremarihuana is concerned, society must try to understand its rolein the lives of those who use it. The key to such understandinglies in the changes which have taken place in society withinrecent years and the effects these changes have had on succeedinggenerations of youth. The increased use of marihuana is only oneof these effects. One focal point in discussion between generations is thecontrast between the use of marihuana and the use of alcohol.Many young people perceive that marihuana is less dangerous thanalcohol in terms of its addiction potential and long-termphysical and psychological consequences. Many believe also thatmarihuana - and other psychoactive drugs make it possible toexpand their perceptions and see this as a perfectly legitimateobjective. Viewed against the background of the profound changes ofrecent years in the fields of economics, politics, religion,family life, housing patterns, civil rights, employment andrecreation, the use of marihuana by the nation's youth must beseen as a relatively minor change in social patterns of conductand as more of a consequence of than a contributor to these majorchanges. When the issue of marihuana use is placed in this context ofsociety's larger concerns, marihuana does not emerge as a majorissue or threat to the social order. Rather, it is mostappropriately viewed as a part of the whole of society's concernsabout the growth and development of its young people. In view of the magnitude and nature of change which oursociety has experienced during the past 25 years, the thoughtfulobserver is not likely to attribute any of the major socialproblems resulting from this change to marihuana use. Similarly,it is unlikely that marihuana will affect the future strength,stability or vitality of our social and political institutions.The fundamental principles and values upon which the societyrests are far too enduring to -go up in the smoke of a marihuanacigarette. CliffSchaffer's Home Page WT01-B25-30IA031-000651-B020-246http://206.61.184.43:80/schaffer/LIBRARY/studies/nc/ncchp4.htm 206.61.184.43 19970122123100 text/html 63284HTTP/1.0 200 OKDate: Wednesday, 22-Jan-97 12:30:48 GMTServer: WebSitePro/1.1f (S/N wpo-0deb)Allow-ranges: bytesContent-type: text/htmlLast-modified: Saturday, 28-Dec-96 06:55:40 GMTContent-length: 63066 Social Response to Marihuana Use Contents | Feedback | Search DRCNet Library | Schaffer Library | Major Studies Marihuana, A Signal of Misunderstanding The Report of the National Commission on Marihuana and DrugAbuse Chapter IV social response to marihuana use "I find the great thing in this world is not so muchwhere we stand, as in what direction we are moving: To reach theport of heaven, we must sail sometimes with the wind andsometimes against it-but we must sail and not drift, nor lie atanchor." Oliver Wendell Holmes, The Autocrat of the Breakfast Table(1858) A general interpretation of the National Survey indicates thatroughly one-quarter of the American public is convinced thatcriminal sanctions should be withdrawn entirely from marihuanause. Another fourth of the public is equally convinced thatexisting social and legal policy is appropriate, and wouldordinarily jail possessors, with the exception of young firstoffenders. Approximately half of the citizenry is confused aboutwhat marihuana means and ambivalent about what society ought todo about its use. This half of the population is unenthusiasticabout classifying the marihuana user as a criminal, but isreluctant to relinquish formal control over him. In considering social and legal policy alternatives, theCommission has analyzed the pattern of social response tomarihuana use. The Initial Social Response As we noted in Chapter I, the initial social reaction tomarihuana use was shaped by the narcotics policy adopted by theFederal Government. In the early legislation, marihuana wasofficially characterized as a narcotic on the basis of the widelyshared assumption that it was a habit-forming drug, leadinginevitably to a form of dependence. Although the medicalcommunity was aware that marihuana was distinguishable from theopiates in that it did not produce physical dependence, nofunctional distinction was drawn; it was assumed that most userswere psychologically compelled to continue using the drug. As onepsychiatrist noted in 1934, the marihuana "user wants torecapture over and over again the ecstatic, elated state intowhich the drug lifts him . . . The addiction to cannabis is asensual addiction: it is in the services of the hedonisticelements of the personality." The notion of psychological dependence is still ill-defined,and was understood even less in the early days of Americanmarihuana use. The Commission has concluded that the automaticclassification of marihuana as "addictive" was derivedprimarily from an underlying social perception of the substrataof society which used the drug: aliens, prostitutes, and personsat the bottom of the socioeconomic ladder. Additional characteristics of the opiates were alsotransferred to marihuana. Particularly important in this regardwas the association of marihuana with aggressive behavior andviolent crime. One district attorney in New Orleans, wheremarihuana use was particularly common, wrote in 1931: It is an ideal drug to cut off inhibitions quickly . . . Atthe present time the underworld has been quick to realize thevalue of this drug in subjugating the will of human derelicts tothat of a master mind. Its use sweeps away all restraint, and toits influence may be attributed many of our present day crimes.It has been the experience of the Police and ProsecutingOfficials in the South that immediately before the commission ofmany crimes the use of marihuana cigarettes has been indulged inby criminals so as to relieve themselves from the naturalrestraint which might deter them from the commission of criminalacts, and to give them the false courage necessary to commit thecontemplated crime. By 1931, those states in which marihuana use was at all commonhad formally responded with a total eliminationist policy. Theygenerally amended the preexisting narcotics legislation toinclude marihuana. Meanwhile, in 1929, the Federal Governmentalready had classified marihuana officially as a"habit-forming drug along with the opiates and cocaine, inthe legislation which established two federal "farms"for treating narcotics addicts in Fort Worth, Texas, andLexington, Kentucky. During the 1930's, the remaining states criminalized marihuanause by adopting the Uniform Narcotic Drug Act, in which the drugwas included (optionally) in the definition of narcotic drugs.Then, in 1937, Congress adopted the Marihuana Tax Act, completingthe initial period of official response to marihuana use. A difference of opinion among historians still exists as towhy policymakers thought national legislation was necessary atthat time. Whatever the reason, however, Congress respondedswiftly, without much attempt to learn the facts about the drugand its use. The assumptions underlying that legislation weresummarized in the Report of the House Ways and Means Committee: Under the influence of this drug the will is destroyed and allpower of directing and controlling thought is lost. Inhibitionsare released. As a result of these effects, it appeared fromtestimony produced at the hearings that many violent crimes havebeen and are being committed by persons under the influence ofthis drug. Not only is marihuana used by the hardened criminalsto steel them to commit violent crimes, but it is also beingplaced in the hands of high-school children in the form ofmarihuana cigarettes by unscrupulous peddlers. Cases were citedat the hearings of school children who have been driven to crimeand insanity through the use of this drug. Its continued useresults many times in impotency and insanity. When Congress escalated penalties for narcotics offenses in1951 and again in 1956, marihuana was included, with thefollowing effects: Possession Minimum sentence First offense ------------------------------------------ 2years Second offense ---------------------------------------- 5years Third and subsequent offense --------------------------- 10years Fine ------------------------------------------------- $20,000 Sale Minimum sentence First offense ------------------------------------------ 5years Second and subsequent offense --------------------------- 10years Sale to minor by adult ---------------------------------- 10years Parole or probation were made unavailable to all except firstoffenders in the possession category. The perceptions of 1937 were perpetuated in the comments ofSenator Price M. Daniel, Chairman of the Senate subcommitteeconsidering the 1956 Act, although by now an important new factorhad been added: Marihuana is a drug which starts most addicts in the use ofdrugs. Marihuana, in itself a dangerous drug, can lead to some ofthe worst crimes committed by those who are addicted to thehabit. Evidently, its use leads to the heroin habit and then tothe final destruction of the persons addicted. The Change With the adoption of marihuana use by middle and upper classcollege youth in the mid-60's, the exaggerated notion of thedrug's dangers and the social tension so widespread during thisperiod combined to reopen the question of the impact of marihuanause. But governmental policy held to the appropriateness ofexisting law. Arrests, prosecutions, convictions and sentences ofimprisonment all increased at both the federal and state levels.Marihuana arrests by the U.S. Bureau of Customs increasedapproximately 362% from fiscal year 1965 to 1970. Arrests by theBureau of Narcotics and Dangerous Drugs, an agency which concernsitself primarily with sale, rose 80% from 1965 to 1968. Becausemajor responsibility for enforcing the possession laws lies atthe state level, state arrests rose dramatically (1,000%) duringthe five years from 1965 to 1970. Although the data compiled bythe Federal Bureau of Investigation are not comprehensive, theFBI sample tracks the continuing increase of state arrests (Table6). Table 6.-STATE MARIHUANA ARRESTS Year Arrests Percentage increase 1965 18,815 1966 31,119 65.39 1967 61,843 98.73 1968 95,870 55.02 1969 118,903 24.02 1970 188,682 58.68 In the wake of this upsurge in marihuana arrests, the criminaljustice system faced a far from usual "criminal"population. Nonetheless, judging from federal figures, the numberof people prosecuted, convicted, and incarcerated did risesubstantially as prosecutors and judges attempted to carry outthe law. Beginning in 1966, however, the proportion of defendantsultimately convicted declined gradually, as did the percentage ofdefendants who were incarcerated, and the average length of theirsentences. This response reflected an attempt to -mitigate theharshness of the law as applied to this new user population. By1968, the trend toward leniency seemed to have temporarilyleveled off, before it accelerated again in 1969 (Table 7). Paralleling the vigorous law enforcement effort between 1965and 1968 was a punitive reaction in the schools and large numbersof students using marihuana were suspended, expelled or referredto the police. Similarly, the military's first reaction to thesurge of marihuana use took the form of court-martial,administrative punishment, or discharge from the service. Table 7.-DISPOSITION OF FEDERAL MARIHUANA ARRESTS Year Total defendants Percent convicted Percent incarcerated Average length of sentence (in months) 1964 85 49 1965 523 90 52 58.2 1966 746 87 45 53.7 1967 941 80 38.5 51.0 1968 1,433 79 39.4 51.2 1969 2,189 76 34.3 52.6 1970 2,082 73 27.4 46.7 1971 3,323 60 28.5 39.9 The family, however, suffered the most from the suddenconflict between accepted norms and this expression of youthfulindependence. The use of drugs, particularly marihuana, became asignificant barrier between parent and child. Many young peopleadopted marihuana as a symbol of their uneasiness with society'sprevailing norms. As noted in Chapter 1, the sudden increase in marihuana useprecipitated extensive research by the medical and scientificcommunities. By 1969, a consensus emerged holding that many ofthe earlier beliefs about the effects of marihuana wereerroneous. Available U.S. data seemed to indicate that dependenceon the drug was rare, as was the incidence of psychosis amongmarihuana users. Particularly important was the recognition thatthere was little, if any, convincing proof that marihuana causedaggressive behavior or crime. As such findings accumulated,public attention was drawn increasingly to the consequences ofexisting policy: soaring arrests, convictions and in some states,lengthy sentences. Policy-makers, in social institutions and government, as wellas the public began to believe that the harshness of the criminalpenalties was far out of proportion to the dangers posed by thedrug. As users were incarcerated, newspapers and televisionstations often brought the matter to public attention,particularly when the arrested youngster came from a prominentfamily. Official response to this development was twofold: a trendtoward leniency in marihuana cases within the legal system, and arecognition by policy-makers of widespread uncertainty regardingthe effects of marihuana. Reflecting the first response, the courts, prosecutors andpolice applied existing law more leniently, and the law-makers inmost states and at the federal level changed the letter of thelaw, reducing the penalties for possession of marihuana,generally to a misdemeanor (up to a year in jail). In theprocess, they repealed the mandatory minimums which had been ofmajor concern to the judiciary. By June 1970, 24 states and the District of Columbia hadreduced the penalties, although 34 states and the District stillclassified marihuana as a narcotic. Meanwhile, on the federallevel, Congress had been considering the Nixon Administration'scomprehensive proposal to overhaul the national government'spatchwork of drug legislation. Since the passage of the Harrison Narcotics Act in 1914,federal drug laws had taken the form of tax measures, an approachcompelled for constitutional reasons. The Marihuana Tax Act of1937 followed the same format. The result, however, was a complexset of offenses involving order forms and registrations. When theSupreme Court declared certain aspects of the Tax Actunconstitutional in 1969, revision of the law became essential.Taking up the challenge, the Administration proposed a majorpiece of legislation which tightened control over pharmaceuticaldistributions and also reappraised the penalty structure fornarcotics and dangerous drug offenses. Possession of all drugs, including marihuana, was reduced to amisdemeanor. Special treatment for first offenders was provided,allowing expungement of the record upon satisfactory completionof a probationary period. Casual transfers of marihuana weretreated in the same manner as possession. After a series ofwide-ranging hearings, Congress passed the Comprehensive DrugAbuse Prevention and Control Act, and on October 27, 1970, thePresident signed it into law. After passage of the new federal drug law, the Conference ofCommissioners on Uniform State Laws adopted a Uniform ControlledSubstances Act, conforming in structure and emphasis to thefederal law. Although the Uniform Act specifies no penalties, theCommissioners recommended that possession of all drugs be amisdemeanor. At this writing, 42 of the states and the District of Columbiaclassify possession as a misdemeanor or have adopted specialprovisions so classifying possession of small amounts ofmarihuana. In half of the remaining eight jurisdictions, thecourts have discretion to sentence possessors as misdemeanants. In 11 jurisdictions, casual transfers are treated in the samemanner as possession, and in 27 jurisdictions, conditionaldischarge is available to certain classes of offenders. The second characteristic of the 1969-70 official response wasits acknowledgment of uncertainty. No longer perceived as a majorthreat to public safety, marihuana use had now become primarilyan issue of private and public health. Scientific researcherswere asked to define the nature and scope of the health concern.In a sense, lawmakers took the minimum official action dictatedby social and scientific realities, but were uncertain where togo from there. The need to know more about the effects of thedrug, particularly its chronic, long-term effects, became thecore of official response. Many states appointed special task forces and commissions toreport on marihuana and drug abuse in general. Congress directedthe Department of Health, Education and Welfare to file annualReports on Marihuana and Health and, in the Comprehensive DrugAbuse Prevention and Control Act of 1970, established thisCommission. The Current Response In addition to an objective appraisal of the effects ofmarihuana use, this Commission was directed to evaluate theefficacy of existing law. The marihuana laws were and still arethe focus of much public debate. We have recognized from theoutset that a meaningful evaluation of the law is dependent uponan understanding of objectives and the social context in whichthe law operates. Particularly important in this connection arethe attitudes and practices of society's non-legal institutionsand the general direction of public opinion. In order to comprehend the entire range of contemporary socialresponse, the Commission launched a threefold inquiry. First, wedesigned a series of projects designed to ascertain opinion andbehavior within the criminal justice system. Included were ananalysis of all marihuana arrests during the last six months of1970 in six metropolitan jurisdictions, a similar study of allfederal marihuana arrests during 1970, an opinion survey of alllocal prosecuting attorneys, and a similar survey of attitudesamong a representative sample of Judges, probation officers, andcourt clinicians. We next focused on the practice and opinion of the medical,clerical, educational, and business communities. To this end, wesolicited written responses from representative groups, invitedvarious spokesmen to testify before us, made numerous fieldvisits to secondary schools, colleges and universities andsurveyed opinion in free clinics and university health services.We also launched a study of drug use and abuse in industry whichwill be covered in our second Report on drug abuse. Finally, we commissioned the National Survey of public opinionabout marihuana to which we have previously referred. THE CRIMINAL JUSTICE SYSTEM How does the criminal justice system respond when an enormousincrease in an illegal conduct, of a primarily private nature,makes full enforcement of the law impossible, and when there iswidespread doubt about the rationale for making the conductillegal? This question guided our analysis of the responses andopinions from members of the criminal justice system. Law Enforcement Behavior On the basis of a detailed study of all federal marihuanaarrests during 1970 and of a sample of state arrests during thelast half of 1970 in Cook County, Illinois; Dallas, Texas; Omaha,Nebraska; Tucson, Arizona; San Mateo County, California; and theWashington, DC Metropolitan Area, we present the followingfindings. FEDERAL The federal authorities make little or no effort toseek out violators of laws proscribing possession of marihuana.The Federal Government ceded responsibility for enforcement ofpossession laws to the states several years ago. However, in thecourse of general enforcement activity, the Federal authoritiesdo make possession arrests. If a person is arrested at theFederal level for possession or casual transfer of small ormoderate amounts of marihuana, the case generally is eitherdropped or turned over to the states for prosecution. The Bureau of Narcotics and Dangerous Drugs does notconcentrate much of its energy on marihuana. By its own estimate,approximately 6% of its investigative efforts are directed atmarihuana offenses. Most BNDD marihuana arrests occur as a resultof the agency's general investigation into the commercialdistribution of all drugs. The overwhelming majority of all federal marihuana arrestsoccur at or near the borders, as the Bureau of Customs, sometimesin cooperation with the Border Patrol of the Immigration andNaturalization Service, attempts to interdict the importation ofthe drug. State At the state level, where enforcement of the possession lawsis focused, about 93% of the arrests in our sample were for thisoffense. Yet, there was little formal investigative effort toseek out violators of the possession laws. Instead, 69% of allmarihuana arrests arose from spontaneousor accidental situationswhere there had been no investigation at all. Well over half ofthese spontaneous arrests occurred when police stopped anautomobile and saw or smelled marihuana. The remainingspontaneous arrests occurred when police stopped persons on thestreet or in a park and discovered marihuana. In an additional 16% of the cases, the marihuana arrestresulted from police follow-up of a phoned tip or similar lead.In less than 11% of all the cases was there any significantpolice involvement. (Scope of investigation was unknown in about4% of the cases). Because of this enforcement pattern, arrests were concentratedamong the young. Typically the arrestee was a white male, inschool or employed in a blue collar job, without a prior record.Of those arrested at the state level: * 58% were under 21; 30% were between 21 and 26; 10% were over26 (2% unknown) * 85% were male; 15% were female * 77% were white; 21% were black; 2% were Spanish speaking * 27% were students, 2% were military; 28% were employed inblue collar jobs; 15% were employed in white collar jobs; 11%were unemployed (16% unknown) * 44% had not been arrested previously; 31% had been arrestedpreviously (in 25% of the cases, the extent of prior contact wasunknown) ; only 6% of the arrestees had been previouslyinearcerated Such arrestees generally possessed only small amounts ofmarihuana. Of our entire sample of 3,071 arrests: 67% were for possession of less than one ounce (18% were for less than one gram; 23% were for between one and 5 grams; 26% were for between 5 and 30 grams) 7% were for possession of between one ounce and 4 ounces 8% were for possession of over 4 ounces 13% were for possession of unknown quantities 3 % were for transfer of less than one ounce 3% were for transfer of over one ounce,* Offenders at the state level were generally arrested ingroups. * 29 % were arrested alone * 24% were arrested with one other person * 43% were arrested with two or more other persons (4%unknown) Faced with this population of offenders, the criminaljustice System responded often by dismissing or diverting to anoncriminal institution the young first-offense possessor ofsmall amounts. Adult Cases At least 48% of the cases were terminated in the defendant'sfavor: The police themselves disposed of l0% of the cases, refrainingfrom filing charges, or diverting the case, to some otherinstitution. The prosecution declined to file complaints in an additional7% of the cases. An additional 28% of the cases were dismissed in the course ofpretrial judicial proceedings. In 3% of the cases, the defendant was acquitted at trial. *Because the figures have been rounded off, the total is notalways 100%. Juvenile Cases At least 70% of the cases were terminated in the youth'sfavor: The police themselves disposed of 21% of the cases, refrainingfrom referring the youth to juvenile authorities or diverting thecase to some other agency. An additional 48% of the cases were dismissed either becausethe juvenile officer responsible for filing a delinquencypetition refused to do so, or because the judge dismissed thecase prior to trial. in 1% of the cases, the juvenile was found innocent. Of the entire sample of arrests, both adult and juvenile, 33%of those apprehended were ultimately sentenced,, after pleadingguilty or being found guilty. (Since 11% of the 3,071 cases -werestill pending at the time of our study, and disposition wasunknown in 2% of the cases, the figure may be as high as 40% ofall arrests). Of those convicted for possession of marihuana, 24% wereincarcerated, usually for a year or less. Most of the remainingpersons were put on probation, although some were fined only. Bycomparison, of those convicted of sale (5% of the convictedindividuals), 65% were incarcerated, usually for over a year. In short, in the 2,610 cases where disposition was final andwas available to 6% of those apprehended were ultimatelyincarcerated. From this analysis of enforcement behavior. it appears thatthe law enforcement community has adopted a policy ofcontainment. Although effort is sometimes expended to seek outprivate marihuana use, the trend is undoubtedly to invoke, themarihuana possession laws only when the behavior (possession)comes out in the open. We were told by police officials in somecities, for example, that arrests are made only when marihuanause is flaunted in public. The salient feature of the present law has become the threatof arrest for indiscretion. The high percentage of cases which,after arrest, are disposed of by dismissal or informal diversionattests to the ambivalence of police officials, prosecutors andjudges about the appropriateness of existing law. Anyoneprocessed through the entire system does run a risk ofincarceration, especially when the individual had a prior recordand the offense was sale or possession of a significant amount. Law Enforcement Opinion Prosecutorial opinion toward the existing system suggests botha containment objective and a, flexible, response. As toprosecution policy: 31% of the prosecutors state that they would not prosecuteanyone one arrested at a private, social gathering of marihuanausers who are passing a cigarette. Large numbers of prosecutors admit that they consider factorsother than strength of the evidence in deciding whether or not toprosecute a possession case; 41% cite age, 38% cite lack of priorrecord, 36% consider the amount of marihuana seized and 26% takeinto account the family situation of the accused; 31% thought oneor another of these non-legal factors was most important in hisdecision 29% of the prosecutors acknowledge that they use informalprobation in lieu of prosecution in some cases. As to the efficacy of existing law, a majority of theprosecutors agree that the marihuana laws do not deter, or deteronly minimally: Persons under 30 from initiating use (53%) Users from using regularly (56%) Users from transferring small amounts for little or noremuneration (55%) From the studies made by the Commission of enforcementpractices, we consider this to be a realistic assessment. Conversely, however, the prosecutors agree that the laws havea significant effect in deterring users from smoking marihuanaopenly (62%) and persons over 30 from initiating use (44%). We also asked the district attorneys for their views on anappropriate legal policy concerning marihuana use. Their opinionstend to fall in three groups. One group, representing about 25%of the prosecutors, favors the status quo, and does not want anyfurther reduction in penalties. A fifth of the prosecutorsconclude, on the basis of their experience, that possession ofmarihuana, and perhaps sale of the drug, should be removedentirely from the criminal justice system. The remaining prosecutors, a majority, is willing to considermitigation of the harshness of the law either by legislation orby benign exercise of discretion, but is reluctant to relinquishformal, criminal control. These prosecutors doubt the deterrentvalue of the law and are willing to be lenient in appropriatecases, but they believe some use of the legal system is necessaryto prevent all increase in marihuana use. Underlying these opinions are diverse attitudes aboutmarihuana use and the efficacy of existing law. For example,prosecutors who doubt the efficacy of existing law and reject the"escalation" and "aggressive behavior"hypotheses, are generally willing to modify the laws by theirenforcement policies and by legislative reform (Table 8). The same general pattern of practice and opinion emerges atthe judicial and dispositional level. Only 13% of the respondingjudges would jail an adult for possession of marihuana and only4% said they would incarcerate a minor. Lesser proportions ofprobation officers and clinicians would imprison adults (8% and1%) and minors (2% and %). Conversely, 11% of the Judges, 15.5%of the probation officers and 63.5% of the clinicians noted thatthey would assess no penalty for possession by adults. Forminors, the proportions are 3%, 5%, and 35% respectively. Table 8.-DISTRICT ATTORNEYS, OPINIONS Percent who Percent who Percent who believe the believe believe marihuana Percent Change favored marihuana marihuana laws do not who utilize leads to leads to deter persons informal hard drug aggressive under 30 probation use behavior from initi- ating use None 87.1 47 51.3 28.5 Reduction of possession penalties 68.8 35.1 63.2 34.3 Preclusion of incarceration. . 64.7 33 59 33.2 Decriminalization of possession of small amounts 41.5 21.9 67.2 37.4 Legalization of marihuana. .. 32.2 11.1 69 37.8 How to read table: 87.1%, of the prosecutors who favor nochange in existing law believe that marihuana leads to the use ofhard drugs; in contrast, 32.2% of the prosecutors who favorlegalization believe that marihuana leads to the use of harddrugs. With regard to appropriate legal policy, the judges exhibitthe same inclination as the prosecutors to look for alternativeswithin a formal control system which would avoid the use ofcriminal penalties. We asked essentially the same question in twoways and received similar responses (Table 9). The judges, as a group, are less enthusiastic about criminalcontrol than the prosecutors, but are equally unwilling torelinquish formal control. By contrast, the probation officersand clinicians, who have more personal contact with theseoffenders and are perhaps more intensively aware of the controlpotential of the criminal justice systern, are highly skepticalabout formal control (Tables 10, -and 11). In conclusion, as one proceeds through the criminal justicesystem, from district attorneys to court clinicians, the peopleresponsible for the functioning of that system seem to bedecreasingly enthusiastic about the appropriateness of criminalcontrol and decreasingly insistent on any technique for formalcontrol. Table 9.*-JUDGES, OPINIONS Types of Means of control Percent Statutory schemes Percent control for adult users who for possession who favored favored Informal Personal choice 11 Control outside 24.3 control Informal social 22 criminal justice control system Non-criminal Required treatment 21 Expungement of 57.9 formal Other 11 criminal record control Criminal Criminal law 25 Control within 11.5 control criminal justice system 'Because of a small percentage of non-responses, figures donot always total 100%. How to read table: When asked to identify the appropriatemeans of control for adult users, 33% of the judges opted forinformal control (1 1% would rely on personal choice and 22%,would rely on informal social control). Similarly, when askedabout the appropriate statutory scheme for possession, 24.3% ofthe judges preferred control outside the criminal justice system,a functional equivalent of "informal control." Table 10.*-PROBATION OFFICERS' OPINIONS Types of Means of control Percent Statutory schemes Percent control for adult users who for possession who favored favored Informal Personal choice 21 Control outside 35.5 control Informal social 32.7 criminal justice control system Non-criminal Required treatment 11.8 Expungement of 54.5 formal Other 10 criminal record control Criminal Criminal law 15.5 Control within 9 control criminal justice system *Because of a small number of non-responses, the figures donot always total 100%. To supplement our survey of behavior and opinion within thecriminal justice system, we also solicited the views of theAmerican Bar Association. The President of the A13A in turn urgedthe respective Committees of the Association to submit theirviews to us. The two Committees directly concerned with the drugarea, the Committee on Alcoholism and Drug Reform of the SectionoNn Individual Rights Table ll.*-CLINICIANS, OPINIONS Types of Means of control Percent Statutory schemes Percent control for adult users who for possession who favored favored Informal Personal choice 61.7 Control outside 74 control Informal social 21 criminal justice control system Non-criminal Required treatment 1 Expungement of 22.6 formal Other 10 criminal record control Criminal Criminal law 3.5 Control within 0 control criminal justice system 'Because of a small number of non-responses, the figures donot always total 100%. and Responsibilities, and the Committee on Drug Abuse of theSection on Criminal Law, were in essential agreement regardingthe appropriate course of action. Both Committees expressed doubt about the wisdom andlegitimacy of existing policy and about the, capacity of thecriminal justice system to deal with marihuana use. They bothurged the Commission to recommend the removal of criminalpenalties from possession of the drug for personal use and casualnon-profit transfers. Both Committees suggested that a regulatoryapproach to distribution of the drug be given seriousconsideration. THE NON-LEGAL INSTITUTIONS Law enforcement authorities, given available and prospectiveresources, cannot possibly enforce the existing marihuana lawsfully. The best they can do is keel) marihuana use contained andout of sight. In addition, many officials within the criminaljustice system are reluctant to enforce the marihuana laws, beingeither uncommitted to the usefulness of this particular law oropposed to the law itself. The net result is for the legal systemto leave much of the responsibility for social control to othersocial institutions such as family, schools, churches, and themedical profession. Since these other institutions themselveshave relied heavily on the legal system for control, caution andconfusion now dominate the social response to marihuana use. The diminishing severity of the law enforcement response maynot have occurred if the other institutions of society hadcontinued to regard the marihuana user as a criminal. However,many of these institutions have come to view the marihuana userprimarily in social or medical terms, and to recommend a form ofsocial control in accord with their respective self-interests ororientations. In many cases, the ,attitudes of these otherinstitutions mirror that of the criminal justice system:uncertainty about the proper role of formal legal control. The Family The most important institution for instilling social norms isthe family. Parental attitudes generally parallel public opinion,and specific responses in our National Survey suggest aninclination among parents and non-parents to deal with youthfulmarihuana users through discussion and persuasion rather thanharsh or punitive measures. When asked what action they wouldtake upon discovering that one of their teenage children wassmoking marihuana with friends, 47% of the adults responded thatthey would use persuasion and reason. Twenty-three percentfavored a punitive approach. Interestingly, 9% of the lattergroup felt so strongly about the matter that they were willing toreport their own child to the police. A considerable number, 35%indicated that they were uncertain about what to do, or failed torespond to this multiple response question. The non-punitive trend was also apparent when the adults wereasked what they would do if their teenage child was arrested fora marihuana offense. A substantial number (58%) indicated theywould attempt to extricate their child from the situation, manynot wishing their child to have a police record, while 34%expressed the sentiment that the child's arrest would help himlearn a lesson. The Schools Marihuana use continues to increase among high school andcollege students. The National Survey reveals that 30% of thehigh school juniors and seniors have used marihuana. The NationalSurvey also reveals that 44% of those currently attending collegeat the graduate or undergraduate levels have used it, while othersurveys indicate this figure is significantly higher in somemajor universities. Not surprisingly, there has been, during the last two years,ail appreciable change in the attitudes of school administrators,faculty and even of the boards of education and trustees towardmarihuana use, Administrators at the secondary and college levelsare generally more relaxed and tolerant toward marihuana, usethan they were during the mid-1960's, when support for a punitiveresponse was common. After the initial shock of widespread usedissipated, many school officials came to believe that strongdisciplinary action, including suspension and arrest, wascounterproductive. In addition, as the evidence accumulated thatmarihuana, was not as dangerous as had once been thought,parental and community pressures were sometimes brought to bearon school administrators to be less punitive and moreunderstanding of marihuana use. At the secondary level, the policies very somewhat from stateto state and even within states. Nevertheless, school boardsgenerally seem to have become less enthusiastic about suspensionand arrest as an appropriate response to marihuana use. Oneschool administrator in Philadelphia noted sarcastically that ifall users were suspended or arrested, the high schools wouldbecome empty cells, with their entire clientele turned out ontothe streets. A West Coast official emphasized that student alcohol use wasa much more serious problem than marihuana use; he even suggestedthat legalization of marihuana might reduce alcohol use among theyoung. The Commission ascertained that no suspensions formarihuana use had occurred during 1971 in the entire schoolsystem of a southern metropolitan area. Although securityofficers in that system did make 20 arrests, they were all forselling marihuana and other drugs. At the secondary level, then, increased reliance is beingplaced on persuasion rather than discipline, as a means ofdiscouraging marihuana use. Drug education programs, now beinginstituted in almost every school system, often includeinformation about alcohol and tobacco. We will explore thevarious pedagogical techniques employed in such programs and willattempt to evaluate them in our next Report. At the college level, the response is even more lenient. Inmany cases official neutrality or even protection against policeintervention substitutes for the restraint common at thesecondary level. Under formal or informal arrangements with locallaw enforcement officials, many schools bar on-campus arrests formarihuana use. Apparently they have concluded that enforcement ofthe marihuana laws causes more harm. than does use of the drug.In some cases, college authorities have substituted their ownpolicy for society's official policy. The Commission learned atone of its hearings in Chicago, for example, that a majorMidwestern university explicitly declared that students would besubject to university disciplinary action if they were found inpossession of more than one week's supply of marihuana. Control at the college level is usually considered a medicalConcern and is handled either through the university healthcenters or free clinics. The trend toward leniency is alsoapparent in the policy responses of the representative sample ofuniversity health service and free clinic physicians. whoseprofession presumably brings them into contact with thepopulation most it risk from marihuana. Among personnel of thefree clinics, 62% of the respondents favor legalization; 5% wouldcontinue the present policy, and the remainder would eitherreduce penalties (11%) or await further research (22%). Even among the "establishment-oriented" healthservice personnel, similar attitudes prevail. Nineteen percentwould continue the present policy, and 16% would legalize. Of theremaining 55% (10% did not respond), 38% would reduce, penaltiesand 17% would await further research. This pattern of views bearsa striking resemblance to that of the prosecuting attorneys, andindeed of the public at large. The large majority indicatesuneasiness with the present system and opposition tolegalization, but is uncertain about exactly what to do. The Churches The nation's churches play a major role in the process bywhich society's norms and values are transmitted to the young.Moral education, through individual and family counseling bychurch personnel, is influential in the process of socialcontrol, particularly for adolescents. Consequently, theCommission sought to learn the attitudes, responses andrecommendations of the clergy. The larger societal uncertainty about the social and moralimplications of marihuana use is also reflected in the attitudesof religious institutions. For example, Dr. Thomas E. Price,speaking for the National Council of Churches of Christ in theU.S.A. before the Commission, referred to marihuana as a"tightly drawn moral knot." This uncertainty has ledmany religious groups to minimize a punitive and repressiveresponse to marihuana use in their official statements and formalprograms. Instead, they have concentrated on educational andrehabilitative programs. Many church spokesmen have urged a reconsideration of socialand legal policy. The range of their suggestions for changereflects, once again, widespread uncertainty. Some ask for someform of "adequate" punishment or supervision so as todiscourage marihuana use. Others say "reform orelimination" of penalties for possession would beappropriate. And there are those who suggest legalization withsome government regulation. Some church spokesmen have defendedexisting policy, recommending only that the law be more strictlyand uniformly enforced. The Medical Community In contrast to the mixed opinions of other segments ofsociety, the medical profession has a rather broad consensus atthe present time. In a series of responses from various medicalsocieties, associations and committees, we found certainrecurrent themes. Every medical group emphasized the need formore research into the effects of marihuana. There was uniformemphasis on how marihuana, as a "drug," affects heart,head, blood, brain and so on, but not on how it affects societyas a behavior. The consensus was that marihuana, the drug, posessome danger for the individual, physically or psychologically.The only major disagreement is about the degree of such danger. The second recurrent theme was that marihuana shoulddefinitely not be legalized. Legalization would imply sanction,medical groups said, with a probable, increase in use as aresult. One doctor compared legalization with the failure ofProhibition: "The fact [that] Prohibition was a failuredoesn't make alcoholism a good thing and the six million or so(alcoholics) we have are no bargain. Therefore, since there is nolegitimate use for marihuana it seems rather silly to legalizeits use to initiate a second headache." Another reasoncommonly given by physicians for opposing legalization is thatsuch a step should be taken if and when it is proven thatmarihuana is not dangerous. The third common theme of medical opinion was a call for amore. lenient approach toward users, again a position reflectedin almost every quarter of society. One officer of a publichealth association told a convention: " (Our committee)deplores the strong punitive measures suggested by some becausewe feel that a jail sentence for the offense of smoking marihuanais not likely to solve the problem of eliminating marihuana use.On the contrary, a prison sentence is likely to do great damageto a young person's personality as well as to his futurecareer." Another group called for prosecutors to usediscretionary powers in handling youthful first offenders. When discussing penalties, the medical community begins totake, a look at marihuana use as a form of social behavior ratherthan simply a drug which produces certain physical andpsychological effects. One doctor wrote: "Because marihuanain present patterns of use is, by and large, a relativelyinnocuous drug and because its use has many motivations fromsimple curiosity to symbolism of hostility to the'establishment', the legal penalties in many jurisdictionsthroughout the United States are excessively punitive." Summary Social institutional spokesmen now commonly recognize thatcontrol of marihuana is only partially a law enforcement problem.Opinions cluster around the propositions that society should notbe punitive on the one hand, but should not make the drugavailable, at least for now. Beyond these points, however,uncertainty prevails. There is no common vision of an appropriatesocial control policy. Each institution is going about the business of control in itsown way. Parents emphasize mutual communication. The secondaryschools emphasize health education. The colleges recognizepersonal freedom so long as it does not jeopardize theeducational enterprise. Churches emphasize uncertainty about themoral implications of marihuana use. The medical fraternitystresses the need for further research into the healthconsequences of marihuana use. Uncertainly is the commondenominator. THE PUBLIC RESPONSE For most Americans marihuana use is not an abstractphenomenon. Fifteen percent of the adult population, the NationalSurvey revealed, has tried the drug and 44% of the non-tryingadults personally know someone who has used the drug. Fourteenpercent of the youth have tried the drug and 58% of thenon-triers personally know someone who has used the drug. Indeed,six percent of the non-trying youth indicated that half or moreof their friends used marihuana. The public is also aware of the consequences of the existingsystem and concerned about its impact. Ninety-seven percent ofthe adults know that selling marihuana is against the law. Only afew less, 94%, know that possession is against the law. In fact,one fourth of the adults know someone who has been arrested on apossession charge. Ninety-two percent of the youth know that saleis prohibited, and four out of five know that possession isagainst the law. Fifty-three percent of the 16- and 17-year-oldsactually know someone who has been arrested for possession. Acutely aware of the legal consequences of use, the public isalso cognizant of the difficulties encountered by the criminaljustice system in its attempt to enforce a widely-violated law,Adults were asked whether they mostly agreed or mostly disagreedwith a series of 12 selected propositions regarding thedesirability of maintaining or altering the present system ofmarihuana control. The two propositions which received the mostsupport relate to problems inherent in the existing laws. Eighty-three percent of the adults mostly agreed with thestatement that "because of marihuana a lot of young peoplewho are not criminals are getting police records and being put injail." And 76% agreed that "laws against marihuana arevery hard to enforce because most people use it in private." Marihuana use is more personal than most public issues, but itis also more confusing. Bombarded in recent years -withcontradictory "findings" and statistics about theeffects of marihuana, and with conflicting arguments about publicpolicy, the public tends to believe everything, whether pro orcon. Particularly important in this regard is the widespreadacceptance of beliefs which have little basis in fact. Approximately half of the adult public believes that"many crimes are committed by persons who are under theinfluence of marihuana," and that "some people havedied from using it." Seven of every 10 adults believe that"marihuana makes people want to try stronger things likeheroin." Although the probability that a person believesthese statements increases with age, a significant percentage ofall groups are represented. The underlying confusion is strongly indicated in thecontradictory attitudes toward various reasons for maintaining orchanging the law. For example, 43% of the adults thought, in thecontext of an argument for making marihuana legal, that "itshould be up to each person to decide for himself, like withalcohol or tobacco." Yet 75% of the adults agreed, in thecontext of an argument for keeping the laws the way they are,that "there are already too many ways for people to escapetheir responsibilities. We don't need another one." Youth tend to be less convinced than adults that marihuana usemay be fatal to the user, or cause him to commit crime or leadhim to use other drugs; but young people as a group also arenoticeably more uncertain about these matters. One of every fouryoung people indicated that they were unsure whether marihuanacaused death or crime, and one of every six expressed uncertaintyregarding the progression to other drugs. Similarly, young peoplewere more than twice as likely as adults to have "noopinion" about the various propositions regarding the needfor legal change. Public attitudes toward marihuana exhibit both doubt andtension. On the one hand, we note an acute awareness of the legalconsequences of marihuana use and an appreciation of the adverseimpact of processing users through the criminal justice system.On the other hand, we note some misconceptions about the dangersof marihuana and confusion about the consequences of changing ormaintaining the present system. Public responses on the basic questions of social and legalpolicy reflect the underlying ambivalence. The overwhelmingmajority of the public does not want to treat the marihuana userharshly. This attitude appeared repeatedly through the entireSurvey. When asked "For the good of the country, which ofthe following courses of action would be the best thing to doabout [marihuana use] ?" the public responded in thefollowing manner: Percentage Youth Adults* 12-17 Handle the problem mostly through the police and courts: the process of arrest, conviction, punish- ment ------------------------------------------ 37 90 Handle the problem mostly through medical clinics: the process of diagnosis, treatment, care ----------- 51 48 Don't worry about the use of marihuana, but spend time andmoney on preventing and solving other crimes No opinion --------------------------------------- 5 20 *Some adults gave more than one answer. Adults and youth were also asked to look at marihuana use fromthe perspective of the system, and to identify the appropriatepenalty for possession of marihuana. Both groups were reluctantto put users in jail, especially for a first offense.Eighty-three percent of the adults and 64% of the youth would notincarcerate a youthful first offender; 54% of the adults and 41 %of the youth would not even give the young offender a policerecord (Table 12). Table 12.-ADULTS' VIEWS ON POSSESSION PENALTIES If defendant is teenager If defendant is adult Penalty First Previous First Previous offense conviction offense conviction (percent) (percent) (percent) (percent) No penalty 20 Total 6 Total 13 Total 7 Total Fine (no police record).. 34 83 11 37 28 64 6 24 Probation 29 20 23 11 Jail sentence Up to a week 8 Total 20 Total 11 Total 14 Total Up to a year 3 13 24 56 12 32 24 70 More than a year 2 12 9 32 No opinion 4 7 4 6 YOUNG PEOPLES, (age 12-17) VIEWS ON POSSESSION PENALTIES If defendant is teenager If defendant is adult Penalty First Previous First Previous offense conviction offense conviction (percent) (percent) (percent) (percent) No penalty 13 Total 6 Tota I 11 Tota 1 7 Total Fine (no police record).. 28 64 9 35 21 50 7 27 Probation 23 20 18 13 Jail sentence Ur, to a week 8 Total 13 Tota 1 16 Total 12 Tota I Up to a year 6 19 21 51 11 36 18 59 More than a year 5 17 9 29 No opinion 17 14 14 14 Interestingly, the youth population as a whole was lesslenient than the adult population as a whole. Within each group,however, the older teenagers and young adults were the mosttolerant in all respects. These statistics suggest that the I public generally prefersleniency when responding to questions specifically directed tomarihuana use. But when asked about "control" or"the law" in general, the response often appears quiteharsh. For example, when asked to consider a range of fivealternative control schemes, most adults tended to resist change. Thirty-one percent of the adults thought that making marihuanalegally available through regulated channels (like alcohol) wasacceptable but 67% thought it was unacceptable. Although 23%thought the removal of criminal sanctions from possession wasacceptable, 74% thought this approach was unacceptable. On theother hand, 56% of the adults thought that the existing lawswere, acceptable; yet 41% found the present law unacceptable.Finally, 72% thought "stricter laws" would beacceptable, while only 26% thought such a change would beunacceptable. Indeed 43% thought stricter laws were the"ideal solution" and 62% thought this was the best ofthe alternatives. These responses seem to be contradictory. We are puzzled aboutwhat the respondents thought they meant when they expressed apreference for stricter laws. They probably did not mean stricter penalties for possession.Such an interpretation would be entirely inconsistent withresponses to questions aimed directly at appropriate policytoward users. Under existing law some states still treat firstoffenders as felons and most states treat multiple offenders asfelons. But, only a third of the adult respondents would put anadult multiple offender in jail for more than a year. The preference for stricter laws might be interpreted to meanheavier penalties for sale, or better enforcement of existingproscriptions against trafficking. Two-thirds of the adults didindicate that they preferred heavier penalties for sale than forpossession. But penalties for selling for profit are alreadyquite heavy in every jurisdiction. We suspect that a majority of the public, including many ofthose favoring "stricter laws," is actually disturbedabout the increase in marihuana use and would like a system whichwould work better than the existing system to discourage use. Amajority of the adult public seeks a better system of control,albeit one which is not punitive toward the user. Apparentlyuneasy about the individual and social consequences of thepresent system, the large center of public opinion is nonethelessreluctant to relinquish formal control. This insistence on maintenance of formal controls over theuser rests upon two interrelated factors: respect for law andfaith in the efficacy of legal control. First, the public doesnot believe the, legal order should wither away simply becausemany people choose to violate the laws against marihuana use.Obedience, of the, law is highly valued in our society. This factor is illustrated clearly by the widespread publicdisagreement with the following arguments for changing the law:76% of the adults disagreed with the statement that "youngpeople would have more respect for the law if marihuana were madelegal;" and four out of five adults disagreed with thestatement that "so many people are using marihuana that itshould be made legal." Second, most adults believe that legal remedies, even thoughnot punitive, are necessary to discourage use of the drug. Thisbelief is tied largely to their understanding of the effects ofthe drug and is reflected in the response to the question about"the best way" to handle the use of marihuana. As wenoted earlier, 51% of the public thought that marihuana use oughtto be handled as a medical problem. Also, the substantial majority of people who are reluctant toincarcerate possessors do prefer the imposition of fines withouta police record or probation. Both of these alternatives retainformal control over the user and indicate faith in the deterrentvalue of the law. The public responses in this respect bear astriking resemblance to those of the judges and probationofficers, who repeatedly indicated a preference for non-punitiveformal control. This interpretation of dominant opinion was drawn fromostensibly inconsistent responses to a long series of questionson appropriate social and legal policy. A substantial minority ofthe public, however, exhibited a consistent pattern of responseto all questions. About a quarter of the public is convinced thatthe criminal sanction should be withdrawn entirely from marihuanause. Another quarter of the public prefers the criminal approach,even for the user. In sum, the existing system is not supported by the consensusof public opinion that once existed. There is a consensus thatpunitive measures are generally inappropriate. There is also apredominant opinion that the legal system should not abandonformal control. Contents | Feedback | Search DRCNet Library | Schaffer Library | Major Studies Marihuana, A Signal of Misunderstanding WT01-B25-31IA031-000651-B020-287http://206.61.184.43:80/schaffer/LIBRARY/studies/nc/ncrec.htm 206.61.184.43 19970122123126 text/html 120846HTTP/1.0 200 OKDate: Wednesday, 22-Jan-97 12:31:07 GMTServer: WebSitePro/1.1f (S/N wpo-0deb)Allow-ranges: bytesContent-type: text/htmlLast-modified: Saturday, 28-Dec-96 06:53:24 GMTContent-length: 120627 Marihuana and Social Policy Contents | Feedback | Search DRCNet Library | Schaffer Library | Major Studies Marihuana, A Signal of Misunderstanding Marihuana, A Signal of Misunderstanding The Report of the National Commission on Marihuana and DrugAbuse Chapter V marihuana and social policy "The difficulty in life is the choice." George Moore (1900) A constant tension exists in our society between individualliberties and the need for reasonable societal restraints. It iseasy to go too far in either direction, and this tendency isparticularly evident where drugs are concerned. We have guided our decision-making by the belief that thestate is obliged to justify restraints on individual behavior.Too often individual freedoms are submerged in the passions ofthe moment, and when that happens, the public policy may bedetermined more by rhetoric than by reason. Our effort has beento minimize the emotional and emphasize the rational in thisReport. Drugs In a Free Society A free society seeks to provide conditions in which each ofits members may develop his or her potentialities to the fullestextent. A premium is placed on individual choice in seekingself-fulfillment. This priority depends upon the capacity of freecitizens not to abuse their freedom, and upon their willingnessto act responsibly toward others and toward the society as awhole. Responsible behavior, through individual choice, is boththe guarantor and the objective of a free society. DRUGS AND SOCIAL RESPONSIBILITY The use of drugs is not in itself an irresponsible act.Medical and scientific uses serve important individual and socialneeds and are often essential to our physical and mentalwell-being. Further, the use of drugs for pleasure or othernon-medical purposes is not inherently irresponsible; alcohol iswidely used as an acceptable part of social activities. We do think the use of drugs is clearly irresponsible when itimpedes the individual's integration into the economic and socialsystem. A preference for individual productivity and contributionto social progress in a general sense still undergirds theAmerican value structure, and we emphasize the policy-maker'sduty to support this preference in a public policy judgment. At the same time, in light of the emerging leisure ethic andthe search for individual meaning and fulfillment noted inChapter 1, we cannot divorce social policy from the questionsraised by the recreational use of drugs. Productivity andrecreation both have a place in the American ethical system. Theyare not inconsistent unless the individual's use of leisure timeinhibits his productive role in society. Drugs should be servants, not masters. They become masterswhen they dominate an individual's existence or impair hisfaculties. To the extent that any drug, including alcohol,carries with it risks to the well-being of the user and seriouslyundermines his effectiveness in the society, that drug becomes amatter of concern for public policy. An essential step in the process of policy-formation is adetermination of the circumstances under which use of any givendrug' poses such risks. For some drugs, the risks may be so greatthat all permissible measures should be taken to eliminate use.For other drugs, such risks may be present only under certainspecific circumstances, in which case society may defer toresponsible individual choice on the matter of recreational usebut take appropriate steps to minimize the incidence andconsequences of dysfunctional use. In our Report next year, forwhich studies are already underway, we will consider from thisperspective the whole range of drugs now used for non-medicalpurposes. A Social Control Policy for Marihuana In formulating a Marihuana policy, our strongest concern iswith irresponsible use, whether it be too often, too much,indiscriminate, or under improper circumstances. The excessive orindiscriminate use of any drug is a serious social concern; andthis is particularly true of marihuana since we still know verylittle about the effects of long term, heavy use. We have littledoubt that the substantial majority of users, under any socialcontrol policy, including the existing system, do not and wouldnot engage in irresponsible behavior. In identifying the -appropriate social control policy formarihuana, we have found it helpful to consider the followingpolicy options: I Approval of Use. II Elimination of Use. III Discouragement of Use. IV Neutrality Toward Use. APPROVAL OF USE Society should not approve or encourage the recreational useof any drug, in public or private. Any semblance of encouragementenhances the possibility of abuse and removes, from apsychological standpoint, an effective support of individualrestraint. For example, so long as this society (not only the government,but other institutions and mass advertising as well) in effectapproved of the use of tobacco, the growing medical consensusabout the dangers of excessive use did not make a significantimpression on individual judgment. With the Surgeon General'sReport on Tobacco in 1964, Smoking and Health, a very real changehas occurred in the way society now thinks about cigarettes. The institutions of society definitely add their influences tothe variety of social pressures which persuade individuals to useany kind of drugs. Rational social policy should seek to minimizesuch social pressures, whether they come from peers, from themedia, from social custom, or from the user's sense ofinadequacy. Official approval would inevitably encourage somepeople to use the drug who would not otherwise do so, and wouldalso increase the incidence of heavy or otherwise irresponsibleuse and its complications. On this basis we reject policy optionnumber one, approval of use. ELIMINATION OF USE For a half-century, official social policy has been not onlyto discourage use but to eliminate it (option number two). Withthe principal responsibility for this policy assigned to lawenforcement, its implementation reached its zenith in the late1950's and early 1960's when marihuana-related offenses werepunishable by long periods of incarceration. This policy grew outof a distorted and greatly exaggerated concept of the drug'sordinary effects upon the individual and the society. On thebasis of information then available, marihuana was not adequatelydistinguished from other problem drugs and was assumed to be asharmful as the others. The increased incidence of use, intensive scientificreevaluation, and the spread of use to the middle and uppersocioeconomic groups have brought about the informal adoption ofa modified social policy. On the basis of our opinion surveys andour empirical studies of law enforcement behavior, we areconvinced that officialdom and the public are no longer aspunitive toward marihuana use as they once were. Now there exists a more realistic estimate of the actualsocial impact of marihuana use. School and universityadministrators are seldom able to prevent the use of marihuana bytheir students and personnel and are increasingly reluctant totake disciplinary action against users. Within the criminaljustice system, there has been a marked decline in the severityof the response to offenders charged with possession ofmarihuana. In our survey of state enforcement activities, only 11% of allmarihuana arrests resulted from active investigative activity,and most of those were in sale situations. For the most part,marihuana enforcement is a haphazard process; arrests occur onthe street, in a park, in a car, or as a result of a phone call.Among those arrested, approximately 50% of the adults and 70% ofthe juveniles are not processed through the system; their casesare dismissed by the police, by the prosecutors or by the courts.Ultimately less than 6% of all those apprehended areincarcerated, and very few of these sentences are for possessionof small amounts for personal use. In the law enforcement community, the major concern is nolonger marihuana but the tendency of some users to engage inother irresponsible activity, particularly the use of moredangerous drugs. Official sentiment now seems to be a desire tocontain use of the drug as well as the drug subculture, and tominimize its spread to the rest of the youth population. Lawenforcement policy, both at the Federal and State levels,implicitly recognizes that elimination is impossible at thistime. The active attempt to suppress all marihuana use has beenreplaced by an effort to keep it within reasonable bounds. Yetbecause this policy still reflects a view that marihuana smokingis itself destructive enough to justify punitive action againstthe user, we believe it is an inappropriate social response. Marihuana's relative potential for harm to the vast majorityof individual users and its actual impact on society does notjustify a social policy designed to seek out and firmly punishthose who use it. This judgment is based on prevalent, usepatterns, on behavior exhibited by the vast majority of users andon our interpretations of existing medical and scientific data.This position also is consistent with the estimate by lawenforcement personnel that the elimination of use isunattainable. In the case of experimental or intermittent use of marihuana,there is room for individual judgment. Some members of oursociety believe the decision to use marihuana is an immoraldecision. However, even during Prohibition, when many people wereconcerned about the evils associated with excessive use ofalcohol, possession for personal use was never outlawed federallyand was made illegal in only five States. Indeed, we suspect that the moral contempt in which some ofour citizens hold the marihuana user is related to other behavioror other attitudes assumed to be associated with use of the drug.All of our data suggest that the moral views of the overwhelmingmajority of marihuana users are in general accord with those ofthe larger society. Having previously rejected the approval policy (option numberone), we now reject the eliminationist policy (option numbertwo). This policy, if taken seriously, would require a greatincrease in manpower and resources in order to eliminate the useof a drug which simply does not warrant that kind of attention. DISCOURAGEMENT OR NEUTRALITY The unresolved question is whether society should try todissuade its members from using marihuana or should deferentirely to individual judgment in the matter, remaining benignlyneutral. We must choose between policies of discouragement(number three) and neutrality (number four). This choice is adifficult one and forces us to consider the limitations of ourknowledge and the dynamics of social change. A number ofconsiderations, none of which is conclusive by itself, point atthe present time toward a discouragement policy. We will discusseach one of them separately. 1. User Preference Is Still Ambiguous Alcohol and tobacco have long been desired by large numberswithin our society and their use is deeply ingrained in theAmerican culture. Marihuana, on the other hand, has only recentlyachieved a significant foothold in the American experience, andit is still essentially used more by young people. Again, theunknown factor here is whether the sudden attraction to marihuanaderives from its psychoactive virtues or from its symbolicstatus. Throughout this Commission's deliberations there was arecurring awareness of the possibility that marihuana use may bea fad which, if not institutionalized, will recede substantiallyin time. Present data suggest that this is the case, and we donot hesitate to say that we would prefer that outcome. To theextent that conditions permit, society is well advised tominimize the number of drugs which may cause significantproblems. By focusing our attention on fewer rather than moredrugs, we may be better able to foster responsible use anddiminish the consequences of irresponsible use. The more prudent course seems to be to retain a social policyopposed to use, attempting to discourage use while at the sametime seeking to deemphasize the issue. Such a policy leaves uswith more options available when more definitive knowledge of theconsequences of heavy and prolonged marihuana use becomesavailable. 2. Continuing Scientific Uncertainty Precludes Finality In 1933 when Prohibition was repealed, society was cognizantof the effects of alcohol as a drug and the adverse consequencesof abuse. But, because so many people wished to use the drug,policy-makers chose, to run the risk of individual indiscretionand decided to abandon the abstentionist policy. There are manytoday who feel that if the social, impact of alcohol use had thenbeen more fully understood, a policy of discouragement ratherthan neutrality would have been adopted to minimize the negativeaspects of alcohol use. Misunderstanding also played an important part when thenational government adopted an eliminationist, marihuana policyin 1937. The policy-makers knew very little about the effects orsocial impact of the drug; many of their hypotheses werespeculative and, in large measure, incorrect. Nevertheless, the argument that misinformation in 1937automatically compels complete reversal of the action taken atthat time is neither reasonable nor logical. While continuingconcern about the effects of heavy, chronic use is not sufficientreason to maintain an overly harsh public policy, it is still asignificant argument for choosing official discouragement inpreference to official neutrality. 3. Society's Value System Is In a State of Transition As discussed in Chapter 1, two central influences incontemporary American life are the individual search for meaningwithin the context of an increasingly depersonalized society, andthe collective search for enduring American values. In ChapterIV, we noted that society's present ambivalent response tomarihuana use reflects these uncertainties. For the reasons discussed in the previous Chapters, a suddenabandonment of an official policy of elimination in favor of oneof neutrality toward marihuana would have a profoundreverberating impact on social attitudes far beyond the one issueof marihuana use. We believe that society must have time toconsider its image of the future. We believe that adoption of adiscouragement policy toward marihuana at this time wouldfacilitate such a reappraisal while official neutrality, underpresent circumstances, would impede it. 4. Public Opinion Presently Opposes Marihuana Use For whatever reasons, a substantial majority of the Americanpublic opposes the use of marihuana, and would prefer that theirfellow citizens abstain from using it. In the National Survey,64% of the adult public agreed with the statement that"using marihuana is morally offensive` (40% felt the sameway about alcohol). Although this majority opinion is not by any means conclusive,it cannot be ignored. We are well aware of the skeptics in withwhich marihuana user, and those sympathetic to their wishes, viewthe policy making process; and we are particularly concernedabout the indifference to or disrespect for law manifested bymany citizens and particularly the youth. However, we are also apprehensive about the impact of a majorchange in social policy on that larger segment of our populationwhich supports the implications of the existing social policy.They, too, might lose respect for a policy-making establishmentwhich appeared to bend so easily to the wishes of a"lawless" and highly vocal minority. This concern for minimizing cultural dislocation must, ofcourse, be weighed against the relative importance of contraryarguments. For example, in the case of desegregation in theSouth, and now in the North, cult-Lire shock had to be acceptedin the light of the fundamental precept at issue. In the, case.of marihuana, there is no fundamental principle supporting theuse of the drug, and society is not compelled to approve or beneutral toward it. The opinion of the majority is entitled togreater weight. Looking again to the, experience with Prohibition, when anabstentionist policy for alcohol was adopted on the nationallevel in 1918, its proponents were not blind to the vociferousopposition of a substantial minority of the people. By the late1920's and early 1930's, the ambivalence of public opinion towardalcohol use and the unwillingness of large numbers of people tocomply with the new social policy compelled reversal of thatpolicy. Even many of its former supporters acknowledged itsfutility. With marihuana, however, the prevailing policy of eliminatinguse had never been opposed to any significant degree until themid-1960's. Unlike the prohibition of alcohol, which had been thesubject of public debate off and on for 60 years before it wasadopted, present marihuana policy has not until now engaged thepublic opinion process, some 50 years after it first began to beused. Majority sentiment does not appear to be as flexible as itwas with alcohol. 5. Neutrality Is Not Philosophically Compelled Much of what was stated above bespeaks an acute awareness bythe Commission of the subtleties of the collective consciousnessof the American people, as shown in the National Survey. There isa legitimate concern about what the majority of the non-usingpopulation thinks about marihuana use and what the drugrepresents in the public mind. The question is appropriatelyasked if we are suggesting that the majority in a free societymay impose its will on an unwilling minority even though, as itis claimed, uncertainty, speculation, and a large degree ofmisinformation form the basis of the predominant opinion. If wehave nothing more substantial than this, the argument goes,society should remain neutral. To deal with this contention, one must distinguish betweenends and means. Policy-makers must choose their objectives with asensitivity toward the entire social fabric and a vision of thegood society. In such a decision, the general public attitude isa significant consideration. The preferred outcome in ademocratic society cannot be that of the policy-makers alone; itmust be that of an informed public. Accordingly, the policy-makermust consider the dynamic relationship between perception andreality in the public mind. Is the public consensus based on areal awareness of the facts? Does the public really understandwhat is at stake? Given the best evidence available, would thepublic consensus remain the same? Assuming that dominant opinion opposes marihuana use, thephilosophical issue is raised not by the goal but by how it isimplemented. At this point, the interests of the unwilling becomeimportant. For example, the family unit and the institution ofmarriage are preferred means of group-living and child-rearing inour society. As a society, we are not neutral. We officiallyencourage matrimony by giving married couples favorable taxtreatment; but we do not compel people to get married. If itshould become public policy to try to reduce the birth rate, itis unlikely that there will be laws to punish those who exceedthe preferred family size, although we may again utilizedisincentives through the tax system. Similarly, this Commissionbelieves society should continue actively to discourage peoplefrom using marihuana, and any philosophical limitation isrelevant to the means employed, not to the goal itself. FOR THESE REASONS, WE RECOMMEND TO THE PUBLIC AND ITSPOLICY-MAKERS A SOCIAL CONTROL POLICY SEEKING TO DISCOURAGEMARIHUANA USE, WHILE CONCENTRATING PRIMARILY ON THE PREVENTION OFHEAVY AND VERY HEAVY USE. We emphasize that this is a policy for today and the immediatefuture; we do not presume to suggest that this policy embodieseternal truth. Accordingly, we strongly recommend that oursuccessor policy planners, at an appropriate time in the future,review the following factors to determine whether an alteredsocial policy is in order: the state of public opinion, theextent to which members of the society continue to use the drug,the developing scientific knowledge about the effects and socialimpact of use of the drug, and the evolving social attitudetoward the place of recreation and leisure in a work-orientedsociety. In our second Report next year, we will carefully reviewour findings to see if our perceptions have changed or if societyhas changed at that time. Implementing The Discouragement Policy Choice of this social control policy does not automaticallydictate any particular legal implementation. As we noted inChapter 1, there is a disturbing tendency among participants inthe marihuana debate to assume that a given statement of thedrug's effects, its number of users or its social impact compelsa particular statutory scheme. Law does not operate in a social vacuum, and it is only one ofthe institutional mechanisms which society can utilize toimplement its policies. Consequently, the evaluation ofalternative legal approaches demands not only logic but also adelicate assessment of the mutual relationship between the lawand other institutions of social control, such as the church, thefamily and the school. THE ROLE OF LAW IN EFFECTIVE SOCIAL CONTROL Social control is most effectively guaranteed by the exerciseof individual self-discipline. Elementary social psychologyteaches us that restraint generated within is infinitely moreeffective and tenacious than restraint imposed from without. One of the participants at our "Central Influences"Seminar observed: When people grow up into a society, the principal aim is to internalize drives-that is, I assume they come up 'with certain drives which can be satisfied in many ways and you're trying to internalize, ways of satisfying those drives which will be compatible with life in a community and also satisfying to the individual. The external restraints can only complement this, they cannot possibly substitute for it. The supplemental effect of external restraints, particularlylegal restraints, must also be weighed against the nature of thecontrol sought. It was put this way at our Seminar: Think of the social welfare function as a mountain-the hill ofthe Lords really. Large parts of it are something of a plateau;that is you can be all sorts of places on it and be safe. Youdon't have to maximize. This is an economist's fallacy. You canhave all sorts of variations, you can be Socialists, Capitalists,Mormons, Adventists and get away with it-even Liberals. But thereare cliffs, and you can fall off of them. This is what we areworrying about today. We are nervous about these cliffs. The "no-no's"-as the kids call them-are the fenceson these cliffs. That is, we have set up taboos and say there's acliff there. Now -one of the problems socially is that we set up"no-no's" where there are no cliffs. There are nocliffs and people jump over these [fences] and they say, "Nocliffs! See no cliffs!" [Then, over other fences-and]chop-chop-chop-crash! See, it's just as dangerous to set upfences without any cliffs as not have fences where there arecliffs. To this functional consideration of external restraint, wemust also add the philosophical faith in the responsible exerciseof individual judgment which is the essence of a free society. Toillustrate, a preference for individual productivity underliesthis society's opposition to indiscriminate drug use, the factthat so few of the 24 million Americans who have tried marihuanause it, or have used it, irresponsibly, testifies to the extentto which they have internalized that value. The hypothesis that widespread irresponsibility would attendfreer availability of marihuana suggests not that a restrictivepolicy is in order but rather that a basic premise of our freesociety is in doubt. We note that the escalation thesis, used asan argument against marihuana rather than as a tool forunderstanding individual behavior, is really a manifestation ofskepticism about individual vulnerabilities. For example,one-half of the public agreed with the statement that "ifmarihuana were made legal, it would make drug addicts out ofordinary people." At the same time, we do feel that the threat of excessive useis most potent with the young. In fact, we think all drug useshould continue to be discouraged among the young, because ofpossible adverse effects on psychological development and becauseof the lesser ability of this part of the population todiscriminate between limited and excessive use. Social policy implementation in this regard is extraordinarilydifficult. For example, although existing social policies towardtobacco, alcohol and marihuana alike oppose their use by theyoung, those policies are far from being fully effective. Forexample: Tobacco The National Survey (1971) indicates that of young people age12-to-17, 50 % have smoked at one, time or another; 15% smoke now; and At least 8% smoke at least a half a pack a day. In a 1970 sample of smoking habits in the 12-to-18 populationconducted for the National Clearinghouse for Smoking and Health,it was found that: 18.5% of the boys and 11.9% of the girls were regular smokers; and About 8% of the boys and 5% of the girls smoked more than a half a pack a day. Alcohol The National Survey also ascertained the drinking patternduring the previous month of young people aged 12-to-17, findingthat: At least 23% had used beer during that month, at least 14% had used wine and at least 12% had used hard liquor; and 6% had used beer five or more days during the months 3% had used wine five or more days, and 3% had used hard liquor five or more days. Marihuana Of the 12-to-17 population, the Survey found that: 15% of this population had tried marihuana; At least 6 % still use it; and Less than 1% use it once a day or more The inclination of so many young people to experiment withdrugs is a reflection of a so-called successful socializationprocess on one hand, and of society's ambivalence to the use ofdrugs on the other. This entire matter will occupy much of ourattention in the coming year, but it is essential that we make afew anticipatory comments now. This nation tries very had to instill in its childrenindependence, curiosity and a healthy self-assurance. Thesequalities guarantee a dynamic, progressive society. Where drugsare concerned, however, we have relied generally onauthoritarianism and on obedience. Drug education has generallybeen characterized by overemphasis of scare tactics. Somesegments of the population have been reluctant to inform for fearof arousing curiosity in young minds. Where drugs are concerned,young people are simply supposed to nod and obey. - This society has always been and continues to be ambivalentabout the non-medical (in the strict sense) use of drugs. Andthis ambivalence does not escape our children. If we can come togrips with this issue, we might convince our youth that thecuriosity that is encouraged in other aspects of our culture isundesirable where drugs are concerned. The law is at best a highly imperfect reflection of drugpolicy. The laws proscribing sale of tobacco to minors arelargely ignored. Prohibitions of sale of alcohol to minors areenforced sporadically. As to marihuana, there are areasthroughout this nation where possession laws are not enforced atall. In other sections, such proscriptions are strictly enforced,with no apparent decrease in marihuana use. As a guiding doctrine for parents and children, the law iscertainly confusing when it imposes widely varying punishments indifferent states, and even in different courts of the same state,all for use of the same substance, marihuana. That marihuana usecan be treated as a petty offense in one state and a felony inanother is illogical and confusing to even the most sincere ofparents. The law is simply too blunt an instrument to manifest thesubtle distinctions we draw between the motivations and thecircumstances of use. At the same time, legal status carries acertain weight of its own, and other institutions must takeaccount of the law in performing their functions. In legally implementing our recommended social policy, we seekto maximize the ability of our schools, churches and families tobe open and honest in discussing all drugs, including marihuana.The law must assist, not impede. In this respect, we note withconcern the counterproductive tendency in our society to seeksimple solutions to complex problems. Since the statutory law isa simple tool, the tendency in our society to look to the law forsocial control is particularly strong. We have discussed the four basic social policy objectives ofelimination, discouragement, neutrality and approval of marihuanause and have selected discouragement of use, with emphasis onprevention of heavy and very heavy use, as our generalized aim.We have considered three legal responses, each with a wide rangeof alternatives: 1. Total Prohibition. 2. Partial Prohibition. 3. Regulation. TOTAL PROHIBITION The distinctive feature of a total prohibition scheme is thatall marihuana-related behavior is prohibited by law. Under thetotal prohibition response now in force in every state and at thefederal level, cultivation, importation, sale, gift or othertransfer, and possession are all prohibited acts. In 11 statesand the District of Columbia, simply being present knowingly in aplace where marihuana is present is also prohibited; and manystates prohibit the possession of pipes or other smokingparaphernalia. For our purposes, the key feature of the totalprohibition approach is that even possession of a small amount inthe home for personal use is prohibited by criminal law. From the very inception of marihuana control legislation, thisnation has utilized a policy of a total prohibition, far morecomprehensive than the restrictions established during theprohibition of alcohol. Until recent years, society was operating under aneliminationist policy. The exaggerated beliefs about the drug'seffects, social impact, and user population virtually dictatedthis legal approach. During this entire, period, totalprohibition was sought through the use of heavier and heavierpenalties until even first-time possession was a felony in everyjurisdiction, and second possession offenses generally received amandatory minimum sentence without parole or probation. Yet thelast few years have seen society little by little abandoning theeliminationist policy in favor of a containment policy. Under the total prohibition umbrella, this containment policyhas been implemented by a unique patchwork of legislation,informal prosecutorial policy and judicial practice. Possessionis now almost everywhere a misdemeanor. Although some term ofincarceration remains as a penalty for possessors, it isgenerally not meted out to young first offenders or to possessorsof small -amounts. Instead, most such offenders are dismissed orinformally diverted to agencies outside the criminal system bythose within the system who are trying to help them avoid thestigma of a criminal record. Offenders who are processed within the criminal justice systemgenerally receive fines and/or probation. In many jurisdictions,enforcement officials make little or no effort to enforcepossession proscriptions, concentrating instead on majortrafficking. Possessors are generally arrested only when they areindiscreet or when marihuana is found incident to questioning orapprehension resulting from some other violation. From oursurveys, state and federal, we have found that only minimaleffort is made to investigate marihuana possession cases. Such a tendency is a reflection of the adoption of acontainment policy. By acting only when marihuana appears aboveground, enforcement officials are helping to keep its useunderground. The shift away from the elimination policy has beenmatched by a similar shift in legal implementation, but thedistinctive feature of the total prohibition scheme stillremains: all marihuana-related behavior, including possession forpersonal use within the home, is prohibited by criminal law. Is such a response an appropriate technique for achieving thesocial control policy we outlined above? The key question for ourpurposes is whether total criminal prohibition is the mostsuitable or effective way to discourage use and whether itfacilitates or inhibits a concentration on the reduction andtreatment of irresponsible use. We are convinced that totalprohibition frustrates both of these objectives for the followingreasons. 1. Application of the Criminal Law to Private Possession IsPhilosophically Inappropriate With possession and use of marihuana, we are dealing with aform of behavior which occurs generally in private where a personpossesses the drug for his own use. The social impact of thisconduct is indirect, arising primarily in cases of heavy orotherwise irresponsible use and from the drugs symbolic aspects. We do not take the absolutistposition that society is philosophically forbidden fromcriminalizing any kind of "private" behavior. Thephrase "victimless crimes," like "public, healthhazard, has become a rhetorical excuse for avoiding basic socialpolicy issues. We have chosen a discouragement policy on thebasis of our evaluation of the actual and potential individualand social impact of marihuana use. Only now that we have done socan we accord appropriate weight to the nation's philosophicalpreference for individual privacy. On the basis of this evaluation we believe that the criminallaw is too harsh a tool to apply to personal possession even inthe effort to discourage use. It implies an overwhelmingindictment of the behavior which we believe is not appropriate.The actual and potential harm of use of the drug is not greatenough to justify intrusion by the criminal law into privatebehavior, a step which our society takes only 'with the greatestreluctance. 2. Application of the Criminal Law Is ConstitutionallySuspect The preference for individual privacy reflected in the debateover the philosophical limitations on the criminal law is alsomanifested in our constitutional jurisprudence. Although nocourt, to our knowledge, has held that government may notprohibit private possession of marihuana, two overlappingconstitutional traditions do have important public policyimplications in this area. The first revolves around the concept that in a free society,the legislature may act only for public purposes. The"police powers" of the states extend only to the"public health, safety and morals." In the period ofour history when the people most feared interference with theirrights by the government, it was generally accepted that thisbroad power had an inherent limitation. For example, earlyprohibitions of alcohol possession were declared unconstitutionalon the basis of reasoning such as that employed by the SupremeCourt of Kentucky in 1915 in the case of Commonwealth v.Campbell: It is not within the competency of government to invade theprivacy of the citizen's life and to regulate his conduct inmatters in which alone is concerned, or to prohibit him anyliberty the exercise which will not directly injure society. Noting that the defendant was "not charged with havingthe liquor in his possession for the purpose of selling it, oreven giving it to another," and that "ownership andpossession cannot be denied when that ownership and possession isnot in itself injurious to the public," the Kentucky courtconcluded that: The right to use liquor for one's own comfort, if they useit without injury to the public, is one of the citizen's naturaland inalienable rights.... We hold that the police power-vagueand wide and undefined as it is-has limits. . . . Even the perceived dangers of opium were not enough toconvince some members of the judiciary that the government couldprohibit possession. It is historically instructive to considerthese words, penned in 1890, by Judge Scott in Ah Lim vTerritory: I make no question but that the habit of smoking opium maybe repulsive and degrading. That its effect would be to shatterthe nerves and destroy the intellect; and that it may tend to theincrease of the pauperism and crime. But there is a vastdifference between the commission of a single act, and aconfirmed habit. There is a distinction to be recognized betweenthe use and abuse of any article or substance.... If this actmust be held valid it is hard to conceive of any legislativeaction affecting the personal conduct, or privileges of theindividual citizen, that must not be upheld.... The prohibitedact cannot affect the public in any way except through theprimary personal injury to the individual, if it occasions himany injury. It looks like a new and extreme step under ourgovernment in the field of legislation, if it really was passedfor any of the purposes upon which that character of legislationcan be sustained, if at all. As a matter of constitutional history, a second tradition, theapplication of specific provisions in the Bill of Rights, hasgenerally replaced the notion of "inherent"limitations. The ultimate effect is virtually the same, however.The Fourth Amendment's proscription of "unreasonablesearches and seizures" reflects a constitutional commitmentto the value of individual privacy. The importance of the FourthAmendment to the entire, constitutional scheme was eloquentlydescribed by Justice Brandeis in 1928 in the case of Olmstead vU.S.: The makers of our Constitution undertook to secureconditions favorable to the pursuit of happiness. They recognizedthe significance of man's spiritual nature, of his feelings andhis intellect. They knew that only a part of the pain, pleasureand satisfaction of life are to be found in material things. Theysought to protect Americans in their beliefs, their thoughts,their emotions and their sensations. They conferred, as againstthe Government, the right to be let alone-the most comprehensiveof rights and the right most valued by civilized men. Although the Fourth Amendment is itself a proceduralprotection, the value of privacy which it crystallizes is oftenread in conjunction with other important values to setsubstantive limits on legislative power. The Supreme Court, inthe case of Griswold vs. Connecticut, held in 1965 thatConnecticut could not constitutionally prohibit the use of birthcontrol devices by married persons. Although the Justices did notagree completely on the reasons for their decision, JusticeDouglas stated in the opinion of the Court: The present case, then, concerns a relationship lyingwithin the zone of privacy created by several fundamentalconstitutional guarantees. And it concerns a law which, inforbidding the use of contraceptives rather than regulating theirmanufacture or sale, seeks to achieve its goals by means ofhaving a maximum destructive impact upon that relationship. Sucha law cannot stand in light of the familiar principle, so oftenapplied by this Court, that a "governmental purpose tocontrol or prevent activities constitutionally subject to stateregulation may not be achieved by means which sweep unnecessarilybroadly and thereby invade the area of protected freedom."(citation omitted) Would we allow the police to search the sacredprecincts of marital bedrooms for telltale signs of the use ofcontraceptives? The very idea is repulsive to the notions ofprivacy surrounding the marriage relationship. Four years later, the Supreme Court, in Stanley v. Georgia,held that even though obscenity is not "speech"protected by the First Amendment, a state cannot constitutionallymake private possession of obscene material a crime. The Court'sreasoning is revealed in the following language: [The] right to receive information and ideas, regardless oftheir social worth, (citation omitted), is fundamental to ourfree society. Moreover, in the context of this case- aprosecution for mere possession of printed or filmed matter inthe privacy of a person's own home-that right takes on an addeddimension. For also fundamental is the right to be free, exceptin very limited circumstances, from unwanted governmentalintrusions into one's privacy ... While the judiciary is the governmental institution mostdirectly concerned with the protection of individual liberties,all policy-makers have a responsibility to consider ourconstitutional heritage when framing public policy. Regardless ofwhether or not the courts would overturn a prohibition ofpossession of marihuana for personal use in the home, we arenecessarily influenced by the high place traditionally occupiedby the value of privacy in our constitutional scheme. Accordingly, we believe that government must show a compellingreason to justify invasion of the home in order to preventpersonal use of marihuana. We find little in marihuana's effectsor in its social impact to support such a determination.Legislators enacting Prohibition did not find such a compellingreason 40 years ago; and we do not find the situation any morecompelling for marihuana today. 3. Total Prohibition Is Functionally Inappropriate Apart from the philosophical and constitutional constraintsoutlined above, a total prohibition scheme carries with itsignificant institutional costs. Yet it contributes very littleto the achievement of our social policy. In some ways it actuallyinhibits the success of that policy. The primary goals of a prudent marihuana social control policyinclude preventing irresponsible use of the drug, attending tothe consequences of such use, and deemphasizing use in general.Yet an absolute prohibition of possession and use inhibits theability of other institutions to contribute actively to theseobjectives. For example, the possibility of criminal prosecutiondeters users who are experiencing medical problems from seekingassistance for fear of bring attention to themselves. Inaddition, the illegality of possession and use createsdifficulties in achieving an open, honest educational program,both in the schools and in the home. In terms of the social policy objective of discouraging use ofthe drug, the legal system can assist that objective in threeways: first, by deterring people from use; second, by symbolizingsocial opposition to use; and finally, by cutting off supply ofthe drug. The present illegal status of possession has not discouragedan estimated 24 million people from trying marihuana or anestimated eight million from continuing to use it. Our survey ofthe country's state prosecuting attorneys shows that 53% of themdo not believe that the law has more than a minimal deterrenteffect in this regard. Moreover, if the present trend towardpassive enforcement of the marihuana law continues, the lawultimately will deter only indiscreet use, a result achieved aswell by a partial prohibition scheme and with a great deal morehonesty and fairness. A major attraction of the law has been its symbolic value.Yet, society can symbolize its desire to discourage marihuana usein many other, less restrictive ways. The warning labels oncigarette packages serve this purpose, illustrating that even aregulatory scheme could serve a discouragement policy. DuringProhibition, the chosen statutory implementation symbolizedsociety's opposition to the use of intoxicating beverages; yet,most jurisdictions did not think it necessary to superimpose aproscription of possession for personal use in the home. Finally, prohibiting possession for personal use has nosubstantive relation to interdicting supply. A possession penaltymay make enforcement of proscriptions against sale a littleeasier, but we believe this benefit is of minimal importance inlight of its costs. The law enforcement goal repeatedly stated at both the federaland state levels has been the elimination of supply and theinterdiction of trafficking. These avowed aims of law enforcementmake sense, since they are the most profitable means of employingits manpower and resources in this area. Indeed, the time consumed in arresting Possessors isinefficiently used when contrasted with the same amount of timeinvested in apprehending major dealers. Although a credibleeffort to eliminate supply requires prohibitions of importation,sale and possession-with intent-to-sell, the enforcement of aproscription of possession for personal use is minimallyproductive. As noted, most law enforcement officials, district attorneysand judges recognize the ineffectiveness of the possessionpenalty. as a deterrent. Its perpetuation results in the makingof what is commonly referred to as "cheap" cases thathave little or no impact on deterring sale. The marihuana supply system can be viewed as pyramid with themajor bulk of marihuana entering the system at top of the pyramidand then descending to the base which represents the userpopulation. Common sense dictates where law enforcement shoulddevote its efforts. To remove the profit from the trafficrequires arresting sellers, not users. The oft-heard argumentthat the police need possession penalties to compel users toreveal their sources is not convincing. "Turninginformants" at the base of the pyramid is of marginal valueand limited utility in reaching upwards toward the apex. Further,the National Survey showed that 60% of the users don't"buy" marihuana but get it from a friend. The volume oftraffic in the drug at these levels is at best minimal. In short, personal possession arrests and even casual sales,which account for more than 95% of the marihuana arrests at thestate local level, occur too low in the chain of distribution todiminish supply very effectively. In addition to the misallocation of enforcement resources,another consequence of prohibition against possession forpersonal use is the social cost of criminalizing large numbers ofusers. Our empirical study of enforcement of state and federalmarihuana laws indicates that almost all of those arrested arebetween the ages of 18 and 25, most have jobs or are in school,and most have had no prior contact -with the criminal justicesystem. The high social cost of stigmatizing such persons ascriminals is now generally acknowledged by the public at large aswell as by those in the criminal justice system. According to the National Survey, 53% of the public wasunwilling to give young users a criminal record and 87% objectedto putting them in jail. The nation's judges expressed anoverwhelming disinclination to sentence and convict users formarihuana possession. Of these judges only 13% thought it wasappropriate to incarcerate ail adult for possession and only 4%would jail a juvenile for marihuana possession. Thisdisinclination is reflected in the low percentage of arrestedusers who are convicted, and the even lower percentage who arejailed. Even among the nation's prosecutors, a substantial majorityfavor the present trend toward avoiding incarceration for firstoffenders. Most jurisdictions have devised informal proceduresfor disposing of cases in lieu of prosecution. Our empiricalstudy shows that 48% of the adult cases, and 70% of the juvenilecases, were dropped from the system at some point between arrestand conviction. The picture displayed is one of a largeexpenditure of police manpower to enforce a law most participantsfurther along the line are not anxious to apply. Other disturbing consequences of laws proscribing possessionfor personal use are the techniques required to enforce them.Possession of marihuana is generally a private behavior; in orderto find it, the police many times must operate on the edge ofconstitutional limitations. Arrests without probable cause,illegal searches and selective enforcement occur often enough toarouse concern about the integrity of the criminal process. Yet another consequence of marihuana possession laws is theclogging of judicial calendars. President Nixon has noted thatone of the major impediments to our nation's efforts to combatserious crimes is the fact that the judicial machinery moves soslowly. Swift -arrests, prosecution, trial and sentence wouldsignificantly improve the deterrent effect of law. Yet thejudicial system is overloaded with petty cases, with publicdrunkenness accounting for about 50% of all non-traffic offenses. In his March 1971 address to the National Conference on theJudiciary, President Nixon said: What can be done to break the logjam of justice today, toensure the right to a speedy trial-and to enhance respect forlaw? We have to find ways to clear the courts of the endlessstream of "victimless crimes" that get in the way ofserious consideration of serious crimes. There are more importantmatters for highly skilled judges and prosecutors than minortraffic offenses, loitering and drunkenness. To this list we would add marihuana possession, which accountsfor a rising percentage, of judicial caseloads. In Chicago alone,during the last half of 1970, there were more than 4,000possession arrests. A final cost of the possession laws is the disrespect whichthe laws and their enforcement engender in the young. Our youthcannot understand why society chooses to criminalize behaviorwith so little visible ill-effect or adverse social impact,particularly when so many members of the law enforcementcommunity also question the same laws. These young people havejumped the fence and found no cliff. And the disrespect for thepossession laws fosters a disrespect for all law and the systemin general. On top of all this is the distinct impression among the youththat police may use the marihuana laws to arrest people theydon't like for other reasons, whether it be their politics, theirhair style or their ethnic background. Whether or not suchselectivity actually exists, it is perceived to exist. For all these reasons, we believe that the possession offenseis of little functional benefit to the discouragement policy andcarries heavy social costs, not the least of which is disrespectand cynicism among some of the young. Accordingly, even under ourpolicy of discouraging marihuana use, the better method ispersuasion rather than prosecution. Additionally, with the saleand use of more hazardous drugs on the increase, and crimes ofviolence escalating, we do not believe that the criminal justicesystem can afford the time and the costs of implementing themarihuana possession laws. Since these laws are not mandatory interms of achieving the discouragement policy, law enforcementshould be allowed to do the job it is best able to do: handlingsupply and distribution. A criminal fine or similar penalty for possession has beensuggested as a means of alleviating some of the more glaringcosts of a total prohibitory approach yet still retaining thesymbolic disapproval of the criminal law. However, most of theobjections raised above would still pertain: the possibilities ofinvasion of personal privacy and selective enforcement of the lawwould continue; possessors would still be stigmatized ascriminals, incurring the economic and social consequences ofinvolvement with the criminal law; the symbolic status ofmarihuana smoking as an anti-establishment act would beperpetuated. On the other hand, a fine most likely would deter use no morethan does the present possibility of incarceration. It wouldcontinue to impede treatment for heavy and very heavy use andwould persist in directing law enforcement away from the policy'sessential aim which is to halt illegal traffic in the drug. For all these reasons, we reject the total prohibitionapproach and its variations. REGULATION Another general technique for implementing the recommendedsocial policy is regulation. The distinguishing feature of thistechnique is that it institutionalizes the availability of thedrug. By establishing a legitimate channel of supply -anddistribution, society can theoretically control the quality andpotency of the product. The major alternatives within thisapproach lie in the variety of restraints which can be imposed onconsumption of the drug and on the informational requirements towhich its distribution can be subject. We have given serious consideration to this set ofalternatives; however, we are unanimously of the opinion thatsuch a scheme, no matter how tightly it might restrictconsumption, is presently unacceptable. 1. Adoption of a Regulatory Scheme at this Time WouldInevitably Signify Approval of Use In rejecting the total prohibition approach, we emphasized thesymbolic aspects. In essence, we do not believe prohibition ofpossession for personal use is necessary to symbolize a socialpolicy disapproving the use. Theoretically, a tightly controlledregulatory schemes with limited distribution outlets, significantrestraints on consumption prohibition of advertising andcompulsory labeling, could possibly symbolize such disapproval.Our regulatory policy toward tobacco is beginning to slowly toreflect a disapproval policy toward Cigarette smoking.Nonetheless, given the social and historical context of such amajor shift in legal policy toward marihuana, we are certain thatsuch a change would instead symbolize approval of use, or atleast a position of neutrality. The Commission is concerned that even neutrality toward use asa matter of policy could invest an otherwise transient phenomenonwith the status of an accepted behavior. If marihuana smokingwere an already ingrained part of our culture, this objectionwould be dispelled. However, we do not believe that this is thecase,. We are inclined to believe, instead, that the presentinterest in marihuana is transient and will diminish in time ofits own accord once the major symbolic aspects of use aredeemphasized, leaving among our population only a relativelysmall coterie of users. With this possibility in mind, we arehesitant to adopt either a policy of neutrality or a regulatoryimplementation of our discouragement policy. The law wouldinevitably lose its discouragement character and would becomeeven more ambiguous in its rationale and its enforcement. The effect of changing a social policy direction may be seenwith tobacco policy. In recent years, society has ostensiblyadopted a policy of discouraging cigarette smoking. This newpolicy has been implemented primarily in the information areathrough prohibition of some forms of advertising and throughcompulsory labeling. Yet, the volume, of cigarettes usedincreased last year. We believe that the failure of the newpolicy results from the fact that it supplants one that formerlyapproved use. This set of circumstances argues against any policywhich would be regarded as approval of use, including aregulatory scheme. It is always extremely difficult to transforma previously acceptable behavior into a disapproved behavior. 2. Adoption of a Regulatory Scheme Might Generate aSignificant Public Health Problem We noted above that institutionalizing availability of thedrug would inevitably increase the incidence of use, even thoughthat incidence might otherwise decrease. Of greater concern isthe prospect that a larger incidence of use would result in alarger incidence of long term heavy and very heavy use of potentpreparations. There are -now approximately 500,000 heavy users of lesspotent preparations in this country, representing about 2% ofthose who ever tried the drug. Even if the prevalence of -heavyuse remained the same in relation to those who ever used, thisat-risk population would inevitably increase under a regulatoryscheme. If the emotional disturbances found in very heavy hashishusers in other countries were to occur in this country, theadverse social impact of marihuana use, now slight, wouldincrease substantially. We have acknowledged that society, nonetheless, chose to runsuch a risk in 1933, when Prohibition was repealed. But alcoholuse was already well-established in this society, and noalternative remained other than a regulatory approach. In lightof our suspicion that interest in marihuana is largely transient,it would be imprudent to run that risk for marihuana today. 3. Adoption of a Regulatory Scheme Would Exacerbate SocialConflict and Frustrate a Deemphasis Policy A significant segment of the public on both sides of the issueviews marihuana and its "legalization" in a highlysymbolic way. Any attempt to adopt a regulatory approach nowwould be counterproductive in this respect. The collision ofvalues resulting from such a dramatic shift of policy wouldmaintain the debate at a highly emotional level and wouldperpetuate the tendency to perceive marihuana use as a symbol ofthe struggle between two conflicting philosophies. 4. Not Enough Is Known About Regulatory Models In This Area Advocates of legalization of marihuana are often inclined topropose a licensing scheme or an "alcohol model"without offering a specific program of regulation taking all thevariables into account. Responsible policy planning cannot be socursory. Consequently, we have given serious study to the manyissues presented by such a scheme and to the nation's experiencewith other drug licensing schemes. On the basis of our inquiry,we are convinced that such a step should not be taken unless arealistic assessment of the efficacy of existing schemes andtheir potential application to marihuana indicates it would besuccessful. Such an assessment raises a number of disturbingquestions. The regulatory approaches which this nation has used in thecases of alcohol and tobacco have failed to accomplish two oftheir most important objectives: the minimization of excessiveuse and the limitation of accessibility to the young. Despite thewarning and restraints on distribution and consumption, more than50 million Americans smoke cigarettes regularly, and more thannine million Americans are "problem" drinkers. We havepreviously cited data indicating how many of our children beginhabits which have been legally forbidden to them. Since the younguser and the chronic user of marihuana are of primary concern toour public health officials, the lack of success with alcohol andtobacco discourages an assumption that the regulation of supplywould minimize use by the younger generation. Another important purpose of a regulatory scheme is to channelthe product through a controlled system of supply anddistribution. In that way the quality and quantity of thesubstance can be regulated. The efficacy of such a scheme asapplied to marihuana is questionable. Cannabis can be grown easily almost anywhere in the UnitedStates with little or no human assistance. Even if a legitimatesource of supply were established, it is likely that many personswould choose to ignore the legitimate source and grow their own,the purity of which would not be in question. If such a practicewere illegal, the necessity for a concerted governmentaleradication program is raised, which would involve a monumentallaw enforcement effort. According to the U.S. Department ofAgriculture, there are presently an estimated five million acresof wild marihuana growing in this country and an undeterminednumber of acres under cultivation. Yet, if such a practice were not forbidden, therevenue-raising, product-control and consumption-restrictionfeatures of a regulatory scheme would be threatened. Instructiveto note is the fact that intensive regulation of alcoholicbeverage production 'has not eliminated illicit production.During 1970, in fact, 5,228 illegal stills were destroyed by theAlcohol, Tobacco and Firearms Division of the U.S. Treasury and5,279 persons were arrested. In 1971, 3,327 illegal stills weredestroyed and 5,512 persons were arrested. Another disturbing question is raised by the issue of potencyregulation. Most advocates of legalization stipulate potencylimitations as one feature of their scheme. Presumably they wouldlimit the THC content of the regulated product. This is not aneasy undertaking. Especially when cannabis is so easily grown anda black market is so easily created, we are dubious about thesuccess of a regulatory scheme distributing only a product withlow THC content. Again, attention must be paid the prospect ofincreased hashish use under a regulatory scheme; merelystipulating potency control is not sufficient. As we noted inChapter II, the heavy, long-term use of hashish is a source ofmajor concern to the Commission from both private and publichealth standpoints. These are a few of the problems confronting the policy-makerif be seeks to devise an effective regulatory system ofdistribution for what is, in fact, a universally common plant.Our doubts about the efficacy of existing regulatory schemes,together with an uncertainty about the permanence of socialinterest in marihuana and the approval inevitably implied byadoption of such a scheme, all impel us to reject the regulatoryapproach as an appropriate implementation of a discouragementpolicy at the present time. Future policy planners might well come to a differentconclusion if further study of existing schemes suggests afeasible model; if responsible use of the drug does indeed takeroot in our society; if continuing scientific and medicalresearch uncovers no long-term ill effects; if potency controlappears feasible and if the passage of time and the adoption of arational social policy sufficiently desymbolizes marihuana sothat availability is not equated in the public mind withapproval. PARTIAL PROHIBITION The total prohibition scheme was rejected primarily because nosufficiently compelling social reason, predicated on existingknowledge, justifies intrusion by the criminal justice systeminto the private lives of individuals who use marihuana. TheCommission is of the unanimous opinion that marihuana use is notsuch a grave problem that individuals who smoke marihuana, andpossess it for that purpose, should be subject to criminalprocedures. On the other hand, we have also rejected theregulatory or legalization scheme because it wouldinstitutionalize availability of a drug which has uncertainlong-term effects and which may be of transient social interest. Instead we recommend a partial prohibition scheme which wefeel has the following benefits: Symbolizing a continuing societal discouragement of use; Facilitating the deemphasis of marihuana essential toanswering dispassionately so many of the unanswered questions; Permitting a simultaneous medical, educational, religious, andparental effort to concentrate on reducing irresponsible use andremedying its consequences; Removing the criminal stigma and the threat of incarcerationfrom a widespread behavior (possession for personal use) whichdoes not warrant such treatment; Relieving the law enforcement community of the responsibilityfor enforcing a law of questionable utility, and one which theycannot fully enforce, thereby allowing concentration on drugtrafficking and crimes against persons and property; Relieving the judicial calendar of a large volume of marihuanapossession cases which delay the processing of more seriouscases; and Maximizing the flexibility of future public responses as newinformation comes to light. No major change is required in existing law to achieve all ofthese benefits. In general, we recommend only a decriminalizationof possession of marihuana for personal use on both the state andfederal levels. The major features of the recommended scheme arethat: production and distribution of the drug would remaincriminal activities as would possession with intent to distributecommercially; marihuana would be contraband subject toconfiscation in public places; and criminal sanctions would bewithdrawn from private use and possession incident to such use,but, at the state level, fines would be imposed for use inpublic.* Specifically, we recommend the following statutory schemes. RECOMMENDATIONS FOR FEDERAL LAW Under the Comprehensive Drug Abuse Prevention and Control Actof 1970, Congress provided the following scheme with respect tomarihuana, by which was meant only the natural plant and itsvarious parts, not the synthetic tetrahydrocannabinol (THC) : Cultivation, importation and exportation, and sale or distribution for profit of marihuana are all felonies punishable by imprisonment for up to five years for a first offense and by up to 10 years for a second offense (the available penalty is doubled for sale to a minor). Possession of marihuana with intent to distribute is a felony punishable by imprisonment for up to five years for the first offense and by up to 10 years for a second offense. Possession of marihuana for personal use is a misdemeanor punishable by up to one year in jail and a $1,000 fine for first offense and by up to two years in jail and a $2,000 fine for second offense (expungement of criminal record is available for first offenders). Transfer of a small amount of marihuana for no remuneration is a misdemeanor punishable by up to one year in jail and a $1,000 fine for first offense and by up to two years in jail and a $2,000 fine for second offense (Congress singled out marihuana in this way to allow misdemeanor treatment of casual transfers and permitted first offender treatment, as allowed for possession for personal use). The Commission recommends only the following changes infederal law: POSSESSION OF MARIHUANA FOR PERSONAL USE WOULD NO LONGER BE AN OFFENSE, BUT MARIHUANA POSSESSED IN PUBLIC WOULD REMAIN CONTRABAND SUBJECT TO SUMMARY SEIZURE AND FORFEITURE. CASUAL DISTRIBUTION OF SMALL AMOUNTS OF MARIHUANA FOR NO REMUNERATION, OR INSIGNIFICANT REMUNERATION NOT INVOLVING PROFIT WOULD NO LONGER BE AN OFFENSE. The Commission further recommends that federal law besupplemented to provide: A PLEA OF MARIHUANA INTOXICATION SHALL NOT BE A DEFENSE TO ANY CRIMINAL ACT COMMITTED UNDER ITS INFLUENCE, NOR SHALL PROOF OF SUCH INTOXICATION CONSTITUTE A NEGATION OF SPECIFIC INTENT. * Commissioners Rogers, Congressman from Florida, and Carter,Congressman from Kentucky, agree with the Commission's selectionof a discouragement policy and also agree that criminalizationand incarceration of individuals for possessing marihuana fortheir own use is neither necessary nor desirable as a means ofimplementing that policy. At the same time, both Commissioners feel that the contrabandconcept is not a sufficiently strong expression of socialdisapprobation and would recommend in addition a civil fine forpossession of any amount of marihuana in private or in public. Both Commissioners feel that the civil fine clearly symbolizessocietal disapproval and is a simple mechanism for lawenforcement authorities to carry out. If a person is found by alaw enforcement officer to be in possession of marihuana, theofficer would issue such person a summons to appear in court on afixed day. Although a warrant would not issue for Research of aprivate residence unless there were probable cause to believe acriminal offense was being committed, a police officerlegitimately present for other reasons could issue a civilsummons for violation of the "possession" proscription. Commissioners Rogers and Carter believe that the legal systemmust be utilized directly to discourage the person from usingmarihuana rather than being utilized only indirectly as In thecase of contraband. This civil fine would not be reflected in a police record, norwould it be considered a criminal act for purposes of future jobconsideration, either in the private sector or for governmentservice. Agreeing with the other Commissioners that the casualtransfers of marihuana for no profit should be treated in thesame manner as possession for one's own use, Congressmen Rogersand Carter do not agree that it should extend to transfersinvolving remuneration. They prefer the limiting language of theComprehensive Drug Abuse Prevention and Control Act of 1970 whichdoes not include the term "or insignificant remuneration notinvolving a profit." Apart from the addition of the civil fine to the contrabandrecommendation in the respects set out above, Congressmen Carterand Rogers are in complete agreement with the statutoryrecommendations set out in the Report. Commissioner Ware concurs completely with the statements madeby Congressmen Rogers and Carter but wishes to reemphasize thatthe social policy and legal scheme adopted is applicable only tomarihuana and should not be construed to embrace otherpsychoactive drugs. The policy set forth in this Report, subjectto the already noted comments of the two CongressionalCommissioners, makes sense for marihuana on the basis of what isknown about the drug and in the absence of any conclusive showingwhich would verify some of the anecdotal law enforcementtestimony heard by the Commission regarding criminal behaviorexhibited while under the influence of marihuana. Commissioner Ware feels that some penalty short ofcriminalizing the user, such as a civil fine or some type ofintensive drug education, will act as a positive deterrent towardminimizing the incidence of marihuana use especially among theyoung. Further, he is opposed to the use of any drug for theexpress purpose of getting intoxicated, and includes alcoholwithin this category. The Commissioner feels that what is neededis an internalizing of discipline among our citizenry, with thelegal system assisting this process through the use ofdisincentives. Commissioners Hughes, Senator from Iowa, and Javits, Senatorfrom New York, feel that the Commission has taken a major, highlylaudable step in recommending that the private use of marihuanabe taken out of the criminal justice system. They concur in itsthreshold judgment that overall social policy regarding this drugshould seek to discourage use, while concentrating primarily onthe prevention of irresponsible use. They disagree, however, withthree specific recommendations relating to the implementation ofthis discouragement policy. First, they would eliminate entirely the contraband provisionfrom the partial prohibitory model adopted by the Commission.They want it eliminated first because its legal implications areconfusing and the subject of disagreement even among lawyers.Whether or not possession of a given substance is criminal,possession of material designated as contraband makes thatpossession unlawful. Also, marihuana designated as contrabandwould be subject to government search and seizure, even thoughthe underlying possession is no longer criminal. Theprovision-which does not apply to marihuana held for personal usewithin the home is considered by both Commissioners to be anunnecessary "symbol" of the discouragement policy. Itwill not foster elimination of the misunderstanding and mistrustwhich is a hallmark of our current marihuana policy. Commissioner Hughes and Javits seek to eliminate it alsobecause as a practical matter it serves no useful law enforcementpurpose within the overall partial prohibitory model. Ifmarihuana held for personal use within the home is notcontraband, why should marihauna held for personal use withinone's automobile be contraband? The area of operation of thecontraband provision is extremely narrow. If one possesses morethan one ounce of marihuana in public, it may be seized withoutregard to the contraband doctrine since such possession is acriminal violation. Since the contraband provision does not apply to marihuanapossession and use in private, the only effective area covered bythe contraband provision is the area of possession in public ofless than one ounce. The Commission has chosen to remove thestigma of the criminal sanction in this kind of case. To imposeinstead a contraband provision, which it is argued is in thenature of a civil "in rem" seizure which does notoperate against the person, is to cloud the issue and to weakenthe force of the basic decriminalization. A persuasivejustification simply has not been made. Both Commissioners seek to eliminate it also because theybelieve that the voice of the Commission should be loud and clearthat the preservation of the right of privacy is of paramountimportance and cannot be casually jeopardized in the pursuit ofsome vague public or law enforcement interest which has not beendefined and justified with clarity and precision. The second area of disagreement with the Commission'srecommendations concerns the casual distribution of marihuana andthe not-for-profit sale. As understood: (1) The totally donative transfer is not subject to criminalpenalty, regardless of where it takes place. (2) The transfer of small amounts for insignificantremuneration not involving a profit is not subject to criminalpenalty (except if it is accomplished in public, in which case itis subject to criminal sanction), but (3) The transfer of"large amounts" for "significant"remuneration not involving a profit is subject to criminalpenalty. Footnote 4 on page 158 of the Report, the Commission refers toa Report of The Senate Judiciary Committee on the ComprehensiveDrug Abuse Prevention and Control Act of 1970. In substance, itimplies that within the meaning of the Act, transfers of -morethan one or two marihuana cigarettes in return for 50 cents orone dollar to cover cost are not intended to be covered as casualtransfers, but rather are to be treated as unlawful sales. Commissioners Hughes and Javits feel that the Commission hasfailed to set forth a clear standard which will adequately informthe public of their obligations under the law. The recommendationand its discussion in the Report are confusing and fail toprovide the individual with sufficient guidance to allow him toact without having to dodge in and out of illegality. It alsoundermines a basic, stated objective of the Commission i.e., toconcentrate the weight of the criminal sanction upon significantsupply and distribution activities, rather than upon casualconsumption. Moreover, proscribing even the most casual not-for-profittransfers when they occur in public is, in their opinion, wrong.Such transfers are necessarily incident to private possession anduse. To hold that they should be subject to criminal sanction islogically inconsistent with the Commission's rationale andrecommendation on decriminalization of such private activities. Instead, both Commissioners recommend that all not-for-profitsales be excluded from the criminal sanction. It Is fundamentalthat there be a clear separation between the serious, commercial,profit-making-seller, or "pusher" as he is known, andthe individual who merely splits the cost of a reasonable supplyof the drug with his friends or acquaintances. Thirdly, exception is taken to the retention of the criminalsanction on public possession of more than one ounce. Theindividual who buys an ounce and a half would be a criminal whenhe buys on the corner, when he puts it in his pocket, when hegets in his car and drives home, when he is on his doorstep, butnot when he crosses the threshold of his home. Commission policyshould direct the attention of the law enforcement community tothe person who sells the drug for profit, and not to the personwho uses the drug privately. If an individual has more than a few ounces in his possession,and there is probable cause to believe that he intends to sell itfor profit, that activity is already covered under theCommission's recommendation that possession with intent to sellis illegal. Therefore, there is no need to further proscribesimple public possession. All the component parts of the recommended policy of theCommission should be consistent with its objective ofnon-interference with casual transfers and possession and usewhich is essentially and fundamentally private and personal. The contraband device, the not-for-profit sale, and publicpossession of some reasonable amount which should be presumed tobe necessarily incident to private use should all be removed fromthe ambit of legal sanction. To do so would be to strike down"symbols" of a public policy which had never beenadequately justified in the first instance. Such steps would inno way jeopardize the firm determination of the Commission thatthe use of marihuana ought to be discouraged. RECOMMENDATIONS FOR STATE LAW Under existing state marihuana laws, cultivation distributionand possession with intent to distribute are generally feloniesand in most states possession for personal use is a misdemeanor.The Commission strongly recommends uniformity of state laws and,in this regard, endorses the basic premise of the UniformControlled Substances Act drafted by the National Conference ofCommissioners on Uniform State Laws. The following are ourrecommendations for a uniform statutory scheme for marihuana, bywhich we mean, as under existing federal law, only the naturalcannabis plant and its various parts, not the synthetictetrahydrocannabinol (THC) Existing Law CULTIVATION, SALE OR DISTRIBUTION FOR PROFIT AND POSSESSIONWITH INTENT TO SELL WOULD REMAIN FELONIES (ALTHOUGH WE DORECOMMEND UNIFORM PENALTIES). Private Activities POSSESSION IN PRIVATE OF MARIHUANA FOR PERSONAL USE WOULD NOLONGER BE AN OFFENSE. DISTRIBUTION IN PRIVATE OF SMALL AMOUNTS OF MARIHUANA FOR NOREMUNERATION OR INSIGNIFICANT REMUNERATION NOT INVOLVING A PROFITWOULD NO LONGER BE AN OFFENSE. Public Activities POSSESSION IN PUBLIC OF ONE OUNCE OR UNDER OF MARIHUANA WOULDNOT BE AN OFFENSE, BUT THE MARIHUANA WOULD BE CONTRABAND SUBJECTTO SUMMARY SEIZURE AND FORFEITURE. POSSESSION IN PUBLIC OF MORE THAN ONE OUNCE OF MARIHUANA WOULDBE A CRIMINAL OFFENSE PUNISHABLE BY A FINE OF $100. DISTRIBUTION IN PUBLIC OF SMALL AMOUNTS OF MARIHUANA FOR NOREMUNERATION OR INSIGNIFICANT REMUNERATION NOT INVOLVING A PROFITWOULD BE A CRIMINAL OFFENSE PUNISHABLE BY A FINE OF $100. PUBLIC USE OF MARIHUANA WOULD BE A CRIMINAL OFFENSE PUNISHABLEBY A FINE OF $100. DISORDERLY CONDUCT ASSOCIATED WITH PUBLIC USE OF ORINTOXICATION BY MARIHUANA WOULD BE A MISDEMEANOR PUNISHABLE BY UPTO 60 DAYS IN JAIL, A FINE OF $100, OR BOTH. OPERATING A VEHICLE OR DANGEROUS INSTRUMENT WHILE UNDER THEINFLUENCE OF MARIHUANA WOULD BE A MISDEMEANOR PUNISHABLE BY UP TOONE YEAR IN JAIL, A FINE OF UP TO $1,000, OR BOTH, AND SUSPENSIONOF A PERMIT TO OPERATE SUCH A VEHICLE OR INSTRUMENT FOR UP TO 180DAYS. A PLEA OF MARIHUANA INTOXICATION SHALL NOT BE A DEFENSE TO ANYCRIMINAL ACT COMMITTED UNDER ITS INFLUENCE NOR SHALL PROOF OFSUCH INTOXICATION CONSTITUTE A NEGATION OF SPECIFIC INTENT. A PERSON WOULD BE ABSOLUTELY LIABLE IN CIVIL COURT FOR ANYDAMAGE TO PERSON OR PROPERTY WHICH HE CAUSED WHILE UNDER THEINFLUENCE OF THE DRUG. DISCUSSION OF FEDERAL RECOMMENDATIONS The recommended federal approach is really a restatement ofexisting federal policy. From official testimony and recordevaluation, we know that the federal law enforcement authorities,principally the Federal Bureau of Narcotics and Dangerous Drugsand the Bureau of Customs, do not concentrate their efforts onpersonal possession cases. The avowed purpose of both Bureaus isto eliminate major traffickers and sources of supply. For themost part, the federal agencies have left possession enforcementto the states. Underlying this approach is a need -to maximizethe use of enforcement resources for major priorities and allowthe states, in exercising their "police powers," toassume the responsibility for local activities, includingpossession for personal use. By withdrawing the criminal sanction from possession forpersonal use we are, in effect, codifying official policy. Inaddition, such a scheme follows the model chosen for alcohol inthe Volstead Act, and also revives the approach taken by Congressin the Drug Abuse Control Amendments (DACA) of 1965. We are inagreement with the original thrust of DACA, when Congress broughtpreviously uncontrolled drugs, LSD, barbiturates andamphetamines, under control but did not assess criminal penaltiesfor possession for personal use. Instead, Congress placed on the prosecution the burden ofproof that the possession was for purposes of sale. Regardless ofwhether or not Congress was wise in imposing a penalty in 1968for possession for personal use, a subject we will consider inour next Report, we think the original DACA concept isenlightened where marihuana is concerned. At the same time, present federal law classifies marihuana ascontraband, and this feature should be maintained. The contrabandconcept serves the discouragement policy in two ways: it assiststhe removal of supply from the market and it symbolizes acontinuing societal opposition to use. Accordingly, if a personis found in possession of marihuana in public and the governmentis unable to prove any intent to sell, it may nevertheless seizethe marihuana and confiscate it is contraband. The contraband provision would apply only to possession inpublic and would not extend to possession for personal use in thehome. During Prohibition, the Federal Government and most of thestates employed a similar statutory limitation. For example, theVolstead Act provided that a private dwelling could not besearched "unless it is being used for the unlawful sale ofintoxicating liquor. . . ." I The impact of this contrabandconcept is that marihuana possessed or found in public can besummarily seized by law enforcement officials and forfeited tothe state for subsequent destruction .2 The criminal justicesystem is not involved in the process. The individual receives norecord of any kind; he simply loses the economic value of themarihuana.3 With regard to the casual distribution of small amounts ofMarihuana for no remuneration or insignificant remuneration notinvolving a profit we are following the approach taken in theComprehensive Drug Abuse Prevention and Control Act of 1970 whichin essence treats such casual transfers as the functionalequivalent of possession. In doing so, Congress recognized thatmarihuana is generally shared among friends and that not allpeople who distribute marihuana are "Pushers."* ' 39. Unlawful P0ssession of liquor or property designed formanufacture thereof ; search warrants. It shall be unlawful tohave or possess any liquor or property designed for themanufacture of liquor intended for use in violating this chapteror which has been so used, and no property rights shall exist inany such liquor or property. A search warrant may issue asprovided in [sections 611 to 631 and 633 of Title 181 and suchliquor, the containers thereof, and such property so seized shallbe subject to such disposition as the court may make thereof. ifit is found that such liquor or property was so unlawfully heldor possessed, or had been so unlawfully used, the liquor, and allproperty designed for the unlawful manufacture of liquor, shallbe destroyed, unless the court shall otherwise order. No searchwarrant shall issue to search any private dwelling occupied assuch unless it is being used for unlawful sale of intoxicatingliquor, or unless it is in part used for some business purposesuch as a store, shop, saloon, restaurant, hotel, or boarding'house. 'Me term "private dwelling" shall be construedto include the room or rooms used and occupied not transientlybut solely as a residence in an apartment house, hotel orboarding house. The property seized on any such warrant shall notlie taken from the officer seizing the same on any writ ofreplevin or other like process. (Oct. 28, 1919, e. 85, Title 11, 25, 41 Stat. 315) 'The federal and state provisions presently in force regardingthe seizure and forfeiture of an automobile transportingmarihuana would no longer be applicable. They would still remainin force for other controlled drugs classified as contraband. 3 See the views of Commissioners Rogers, Carter, Ware, Hughesand Javits expressed in the footnote on pages 151-156. The accuracy of Congress' appraisal is underscored by theNational Survey. When people who had used marihuana were askedhow they first obtained the drug, 61% of the adults and 76% ofthe youth responded that it had been given to them. Only 4% ofthe adults and 8% of the youth said that they had bought it. Whenasked who their source had been, 67% of the adults and 85% of theyouth responded that it had been a friend, acquaintance or familymember. The close association between the concepts of casual transferand personal possession is also underscored by the fact that 56%of the prosecutors in our survey thought that the present law didnot deter casual transfer at all or deterred it only minimally. With regard to importation and exportation, we recommend nochange in existing law and make the following observations.First, the United States must maintain its international standingand, as a member of the community of nations, this country shoulddo everything in its power to restrict the exportation ofmarihuana to other countries and to penalize such internationaltraffic. As to importation of marihuana, the most effective way todiscourage use is to cut off supply at the top of the pyramid.Recognizing that most of the marihuana consumed in the UnitedStates comes from abroad, we feel that the Bureau of Customs atthe borders should have all necessary authority to halt andinterdict supplies intended for consumption in this country.There has been a long-standing practice of excepting ports andborders from procedural rules applying within the United States.One example is that Customs officials are allowed to searchwithout the showing of probable cause, even though such a showingis mandatory for searches conducted within the United States. Wecan see a legitimate reason for continuing this policy. *In considering this relationship, the Senate, in the Reportof the Committee on the Judiciary of the United States Senateregarding S. 3246 (a precursor bill to the new Federal law)stated: The language "distributes a small amount of marihuana forno remuneration or insignificant remuneration not involving aprofit" as contained in section 501 (c) (4) is intended tocover the type of situation where a college student makes aquasi-donative transfer of one or two marihuana cigarettes andreceives 50 cents or a dollar in exchange to cover the cost ofthe marihuana. Transfers of larger quantities in exchange for larger amountsof money, or transfers for profit, are not intended to be coveredby this section, but rather are to be covered by section 501 (c)(2) which deals 'with unlawful distribution. This languagesketches a prototype situation which the Committee had in mind;however, the wording of the Federal Act and of ourrecommendations is not intended to establish inflexible rules.The objective in both provisions is to distinguish betweencommercial sellers and casual distributors. Ultimately the courtswill have the responsibility of drawing this distinctionaccording to the evidence in individual cases. The recommendedprovision intentionally establishes a loose standard not tied tospecific amounts of marihuana or money. See also the views of Commissioners Rogers, Carter, Ware,Hughes and Javits expressed in the footnote on pages 151-156. DISCUSSION OF STATE RECOMMENDATIONS The states have primary responsibility for enforcing theexisting proscriptions against possession for personal use. Theirpresent efforts are designed mainly to keep marihuana usecontained, and in private. Such an enforcement policy isconsistent with our social policy approach, and is an appropriateexercise of the states' obligations to maintain public order. Sowhile we see no need for criminal sanctions against possessionfor personal use or against casual transfers, we recommend anumber of provisions for confining marihuana use to the home. The first point is that even marihuana possessed for personaluse is subject to summary seizure and forfeiture if it is foundin public. This concept is now applicable under federal law whichwe commend also to the states. In our view, the contrabandfeature symbolizes the discouragement policy and will exert a,major force in keeping use private. Another means of symbolizing the discouragement policy whichhas been suggested is the imposition of a civil fine on thosepossessing marihuana outside the home for personal use.* Undersuch an approach, a fine would be levied and processed outsidethe criminal justice system. Essentially, possession of marihuanawould be the equivalent of a traffic offense in thosejurisdictions where such an offense is not criminal. Such a scheme would accomplish little more than that achievedunder a partial prohibition scheme. Warrants would presumably notbe issued for searches of private residences, and possessionoffenses would be detected only by accident or if the offenderuses the drug in public. The more direct way to confront suchbehavior is a penalty against public use. A further problem with the civil fine approach lies in thearea, of non-payment of the fine. With traffic tickets, or withcivil fines levied against industrial polluters, society cancompel compliance by withdrawing its permission to engage inregulated activity. For example, it can revoke the motorists'license to drive or the polluters' license to do business withinthe state. In short, the state has remedies beyond the criminallaw to achieve its policy goal. The same would not be true forthe marihuana user and enforceability of the statute wouldultimately require court action. *See the views of Commissioners Rogers, Carter and Wareexpressed in the footnote on pages 151-153. As we have suggested, a central feature, of our statutoryapproach at the state, level would be a vigorously enforcedprohibition of public use. No intoxicant should be used inpublic, both because it may offend others and because the user isrisking irresponsible behavior if he should be under itsinfluence in public. Moreover, where marihuana is concerned,continuing societal disapproval requires that the behavior occuronly in private if at all. Public use, under the proposed scheme,would therefore be punishable by a fine of $100. We also recognize the need for some prophylactic measure foranticipating distribution, even though there may be no intent tosell for profit. To this end, and in order to deter public use,possession and transfer, we have drawn a line at one ounce ofmarihuana. Possession in public of more than this amount would bepunishable by a fine of $100. For these same reasons, we believe the states should prohibitall transfers outside the home, whether or not for remuneration.A transfer for profit would be a felony, as under present law. Acasual transfer of a small amount would be punishable by a fineof $100. Taken together, the contraband feature, the proscriptions ofpublic use and public possession of more than an ounce (even iffor personal use) and the prohibition of public transfers willreflect the discouragement policy underlying the entire, scheme. The remaining set of recommendations alms at irresponsiblebehavior under the influence of marihuana. Whatever the preciselegal scheme employed, these provisions should be included. First, the "drunk and disorderly" statutes presentlyin force in the states are useful tools for maintaining publicorder. We would suggest similar statutes in the case ofmarihuana, punishing offenders by up to 60 days in jail, a fineof $100, or both. Law enforcement authorities must have a meansto halt antisocial behavior exhibited incidental to marihuanause. The second aspect of irresponsible behavior is the operationof automobiles, other vehicles, or any potentially dangerousinstrument while under the influence of marihuana. Such behavioris gross negligence in itself, risking harm to othersunnecessarily. In addition to penalizing a person who"drives under the influence" as a serious misdemeanant,we would impose absolute civil liability on anyone who harms theperson or property of another while under the influence ofmarihuana. Finally, no one should be able to limit his criminalaccountability by alleging that he was under the influence ofmarihuana at the time of the crime. Under both federal and statelaw, the defendant should not be able to negate the mentalelement of "specific intent," which some offensescarry, by pleading that he was under the influence of marihuanaand was therefore unable to have formed such an intent. Unlikemany users of heroin, the user of marihuana is not physicallydependent on the drug. The use of the drug is usually a matter ofchoice. Although we believe on the basis of available evidencethat there is no causal connection between marihauna use andcrime, we would under no circumstances allow a person to escapethe consequences of his actions by hiding behind the cloak ofmarihuana use. DISCUSSION OF POTENTIAL OBJECTIONS Having discussed our recommended scheme at the federal andstate levels, we think it useful to answer some objections weanticipate will be raised. Possible objections are: 1. Partial prohibition is not a sufficient reflection of thediscouragement policy. 2. Partial prohibition is logically inconsistent. 3. A possession penalty is necessary for effective enforcementof sale proscriptions. 4. Partial prohibition won't "work" for marihuanaany more than it did for alcohol. 5. A possession offense is essential as a device for detectingproblem users. 6. Retention of a possession offense is required by ourinternational obligations. 7. A firm distinction should be drawn between less potent andmore potent preparations. 1. The Partial Prohibition Approach Is a SufficientReflection of the Discouragement Policy To those who would argue that a criminal sanction against useis a necessary implementation of an abstentionist policy, we needonly respond that this country has not generally operated on thatassumption. We would be astounded if any person who lived duringthe 1920's was not aware of a definite governmental policyopposed to the use of alcohol. Yet, only five states prohibitedpossession for personal use during Prohibition. The failure ofthe 18th Amendment, the Volstead Act and 43 state prohibitionacts to criminalize private possession certainly did not signifyofficial approval of or neutrality toward alcohol use. As we pointed out in Chapter 1, our nation has not generallyseen fit to criminalize private drug-related behavior; only inthe narcotics area was possession made a crime and marihuana wasbrought within the narcotics framework because of unfoundedassumptions about its ill effects. We think it is time to correctthat mistaken departure from tradition with respect to marihuana.As during Prohibition, the drug will remain contraband, and itsdistribution will be prohibited. Even as late as 1965, an abstentionist drug policy was notthought to require prohibition for personal use. At that time,Congress enacted the Drug Abuse Control Amendments, bringing LSD,amphetamines and barbiturates under federal control. Nationalpolicy was clearly opposed to use of the hallucinogens and thenon-prescription use of amphetamines and barbiturates, yetCongress did not impose a penalty for possession. Whether or notCongress' subsequent decision in 1968, to impose such a penaltywas appropriate is an issue we will cover in our next Reportafter analyzing the individual drugs controlled. The importantpoint now is that such a penalty is not a necessary feature of adiscouragement policy for marihuana, regardless of its, proprietyfor other drugs. The Partial Prohibition Approach Is Not Logically Inconsistent It will. be, argued that a law which permits a person toacquire and use marihuana but does not permit anyone to sell itto him for profit is logically unsound. We do not agree. If wehad recommended a social policy of approval or neutrality towarduse, partial prohibition would indeed have been illogical.However, under a discouragement policy, such a, scheme isperfectly consistent. Under partial prohibition, use is discouraged in three mainways. First, law enforcement authorities will make a concertedeffort to reduce the supply of the drug. If a person wishes touse marihuana, he will have to seek out a person to sell it tohim; and if his seller is in the business of distributingmarihuana for profit, the seller is violating the law. Second, the user will have to confine his disapproved behaviorto the home. If lie uses the drug in public, he has committed anoffense; if lie possesses it in public, it may be summarilyseized as contraband. Third, continuing efforts will be made by educators, publichealth officials, and official government spokesmen to discourageuse. Realizing that educational efforts are not alwayssuccessful, we would hope for a sound program. In any event, thelaw should be an ancillary rather than a focal consideration. There is nothing theoretically Inconsistent about a schemewhich merely withdraws the criminal sanction from a behaviorwhich is not immoral but which is disapproved. The individual isbeing allowed to make his own choice. Hopefully, he will choosenot to use marihuana. If he chooses to do so, however, he willhave to do so discreetly and in private. Apart from its ultimatepossession by the user, however, all marihuana-related activityis prohibited. The drug is contraband from its initial growth,through its harvest and distribution. It ceases to be contrabandonly when possessed and used in the home. 3. Prohibition of All Possession Is Not Essential toProhibition of Sale The other side of the "inconsistency" objection isthe argument by law enforcement officials that they cannotadequately enforce proscriptions against sale without apossession penalty. We disagree. We have already explained thatenforcement of a possession offense to some extent impedes theeffort to reduce supply. Possession cases are generally regardedin the law enforcement community and by judges and prosecutors as"cheap" cases. Few seriously contend that prosecutionof possessors reduces supply. Some persons argue in response that the law should remain onthe books as a tool not against the possessor but against theseller. They say that a possession offense is helpful in threeways. First, a prosecution can be used as a bargaining tool toencourage the possessor to reveal his source; this is called"turning an informant." Second, the police may knowthat a person is a seller, but may not be able to prove eithersale or intent to sell, so they can at least charge suchsuspected sellers with simple possession. Third, a corollary of the second argument is that thepossession offense provides a useful tool in the "pleabargaining" process. That is, a seller may plead guilty tothe lesser offense of possession, now generally a misdemeanor,instead of running the risk of trial and conviction of the moreserious offense of sale, generally a felony. The prosecution mayaccept such a "bargain' if it is uncertain of the strengthof the case, to avoid delay in sentencing, to reduce judicialbacklog or in return for information from the defendant. From an institutional standpoint, we do not find thesearguments persuasive. First, if a possession offense is on thebooks, possession is a criminal activity. We oppose criminalizingconduct when its purpose and intent is directed not toward thatconduct but toward another behavior. In answer to the informant argument, the marihuana user (andthis may not be true of other drugs) is simply too low in thedistributional chain to help very much. As indicated earlier, theNational Survey shows most users receive their marihuana fromtheir friends or acquaintances either as a gift or at cost.Rarely is the time spent on him or on his "source" afruitful allocation of the law enforcement official's time. Also,it is institutionally improper to hold the criminal sanction overa person to force him to talk, when we otherwise would beunwilling to use that sanction. As to the "lack of proof" and "pleabargaining" arguments, we believe they challenge afundamental tenet of our criminal justice system. That is, underour law, a person is not guilty just because the police think heis guilty; his offense must be proven beyond a reasonable doubtto a judge or jury. If a possession offense were not on thebooks, the police would have to gather enough evidence to convictthe seller of sale or of possession with intent to sell, and theprosecution would have to convince the judge beyond a reasonabledoubt. The defendant, suspected seller or not, is entitled to dueprocess of law. The "lack of proof" argument is nothing more than aplea for an "easy out" when the police do not haveenough evidence. This simply represents an admission that lawenforcement officials want a possession offense which they canapply selectively, to people whom they think, but cannot prove,are sellers. Such a notion is inconsistent with the basic premiseof our system of equal treatment under the law. If"simple" possession is not an offense for some, it isnot an offense for all. A "known seller" is entitled tothe same rights as anyone else: criminal conduct must be provedbeyond a reasonable doubt. We do not favor coddling criminals. Wedo insist, as did the framers of the Constitution, that suspectedcriminal behavior be proved. 4. That Partial Prohibition Did Not "Work" ForAlcohol Doesn't Mean It Won't For Marihuana Prohibition failed to achieve its avowed purpose ofeliminating the use of intoxicating liquors from American life.Risking an oversimplification, we think two reasons wereessentially responsible for this failure: the unwillingness of asubstantial minority, and probably a majority, of the Americanpublic to discard a habit deeply ingrained in their lives; andthe inability of the law enforcement community to eliminate thebootlegging traffic which catered to this continuing demand. As we have repeatedly noted, one of the reasons for adoptionof a partial prohibition approach is uncertainty about the extentto which marihuana use is ingrained in American culture. Indeed,adoption of partial prohibition is the best way to find out forsure. If the social interest turns out to be only transient, thispolicy will prove particularly appropriate. Similarly, an increase in marihuana use may be prevented by aconcerted effort to eliminate major trafficking, the scope ofwhich is presently only a small fraction of Prohibitionbootlegging. We do not pretend that supply of a plant so easilygrown can be eliminated. However, an intensive effort toeliminate commercial criminal enterprise should have some impacton the extent of use. 5. The Possession Offense Is Not Required as a DetectionDevice In addition to their deterrent and symbolic functions, thedrug possession laws serve a third function not shared by mostother criminal laws. Like laws against public drunkenness, theyfacilitate societal detection of drug-dependent persons. Ideally,such persons, although apprehended by law enforcementauthorities, may be detained for purposes of treatment andrehabilitation. Whatever the merits of such an argument for the opiates andalcohol, such an argument does not apply to marihuana. Only avery small percentage of marihuana users are drug-dependent orare in need of treatment. Their dependence is generally uponmultiple drug use, not on marihuana. In any event, the existenceof such a small population does not justify retention of thepossession offense as a detection device. 6. International Obligations Do Not Require Maintenance ofa Possession Penalty Some have raised the possibility that removal of simplepossession criminal penalties would contravene this country'sobligations under the Single Convention on Narcotic Drugs (1961),to which it became a signatory in March, 1967. We do not believethe provisions of that Convention compel the criminalization ofpossession for personal use. Nowhere in the Convention are its Parties expressly requiredto impose criminal sanctions on possession for personal use.Article 4 requires Parties to "take such legislative andadministrative measures as may be necessary . . . . to limitexclusively to medical and scientific purposes the production,manufacture, export, import, distribution of, trade in, use andpossession of drugs." Penal sanctions are not necessarilyincluded in this formulation. Article 36, which deals specifically with penal provisions,requires each party to adopt "such measures as willensure" that the listed activities, including possession,"shall be punishable offenses." Some have argued thatthis provision requires prohibition of personal use. However, from a comprehensive study of the history of theConvention, the Commission has concluded that the word"possession" in Article 36 refers not to possession forpersonal use, but to possession as a link in illicit trafficking.This interpretation is bolstered also by the failure to include"use" in Article 36 even though it has been included inArticle 4. Finally, we must consider Article 33, which provides that"the Parties shall not permit the possession of drugs exceptunder legal authority." This Article also does not requirethe imposition of any sanctions on possession for personal use.Experts consulted by the Commission have indicated that thisArticle may, nevertheless, require that the Parties to limitpossession and use to medical and scientific purposes. Toaffirmatively allow drugs to remain in the possession of personsfor non-medical use would in this view contravene Articles 4 and33 to read together. From this perspective our internationalobligations may require the classification of marihuana, ascontraband. For this reason, together with a desire to symbolizeour discouragement policy in a clear way, we have included thecontraband feature in our legal implementation scheme. In conclusion, our reading of the Convention is that a Partymay legitimately decide to deal with non-medical use andpossession of marihuana through an educational program andsimilar approaches designed to discourage use. 7. No Potency Distinction is Necessary at the Present Time Following the approach taken in the Comprehensive Drug AbusePrevention and Control Act of 1970, we have drawn a line betweenthe natural cannabis plant and the synthetictetrahydrocannabinols. "Marihuana" is defined as anyand all parts of the natural plant. That we choose this approachfor purposes of statutory implementation does not mean that weare unaware of the difference between the less potent and morepotent preparations of the natural plant. As noted in Chapters 11 and III, the highest risk of cannabisuse to the individual and society arises from the very long-term,very heavy use of potent preparations commonly called hashish. Nosuch pattern of use is known to exist in the United States today. The predominant pattern of use in the United States isexperimental or intermittent use of less potent preparations ofthe drug. Even when hashish is used, the predominant patternremains the same. In addition, whatever the potency of the drugused, individuals tend to smoke only the amount necessary toachieve the desired drug effect. Given the prevailing patterns of use, the Commission does notbelieve it is essential to distinguish by statute between lesspotent and more potent forms of the natural plant. Reinforcingthis judgment are the procedural and practical problems attendingan effort to do so. If the criminal liability of ail individual user is dependenton the THC content of the substance, neither lie nor thearresting officer will know whether he has committed a crimeuntil an accurate scientific determination is made. Even if suchaccurate determinations were feasible on a large scale, which isnot now the case, such after-the-fact liability is foreign to ourcriminal laws. Under present circumstances, then, a statutory line based onpotency is neither necessary nor feasible. We emphasize also thatany legal distinction is an artificial reflection of theCommission's major concern: the heavy use of the drug over a longterm. The most emphatic element of official policy should be todiscourage such use, especially of the more potent preparations.Unfortunately precise legislative formulations regarding theamount of the drug presumed to be for personal use do not assistthis effort at all. Whether it is lawful to possess one ounce ofhashish or a proportionate amount based on potency (for example,one-fourth ounce), an individual prone to use the drug heavilywill do so. Society's resources should be committed to the taskof reducing supply of the drug and persuading our citizens not touse it. Expenditure of police time and financial resources in anattempt to ascertain the THC content of every seized substancewould make little, if any, contribution to this effort. A Final Comment In this Chapter, we have carefully considered the spectrum ofsocial and legal policy alternatives. On the basis of ourfindings, discussed in previous Chapters, we have concluded thatsociety should seek to discourage use, while concentrating itsattention on the prevention and treatment of heavy and very heavyuse. The Commission feels that the criminalization of possessionof marihuana for personal is socially self-defeating as a meansof achieving this objective. We have attempted to balanceindividual freedom on one hand and the obligation of the state toconsider the wider social good on the other. We believe ourrecommended scheme will permit society to exercise its controland influence in ways most useful and efficient, meanwhilereserving to the individual American his sense of privacy, hissense of individuality, and, within the context of ailinteracting and interdependent society, his options to select hisown life style, values, goals and opportunities. The Commission sincerely hopes that the tone of cautiousrestraint sounded in this Report will be perpetuated in thedebate which will follow it. For those who feel we have notproceeded far enough, we are reminded of Thomas Jefferson'sadvice to George Washington that "Delay is preferable toerror." For those who argue we have gone too far, we noteRoscoe Pound's statement, "The law must be stable, but itmust not stand still." We have carefully analyzed the interrelationship betweenmarihuana the drug, marihuana use as a behavior, and marihuana asa social problem. Recognizing the extensive degree ofmisinformation about marihuana as a drug, we have tried todemythologize it. Viewing the use of marihuana in its widersocial context, we have tried to desymbolize it. Considering the range of social concerns in contemporaryAmerica, marihuana does not, in our considered judgment, rankvery high. We would deemphasize marihuana as a problem. The existing social and legal policy is out of proportion tothe individual and social harm engendered by the use of the drug.To replace it, we have attempted to design a suitable socialpolicy, which we believe is fair, cautious and attuned to thesocial realities of our time. CliffSchaffer's Home Page Contents | Feedback | Search DRCNet Library | Schaffer Library | Major Studies Marihuana, A Signal of Misunderstanding WT01-B25-32IA031-000651-B021-11http://206.61.184.43:80/schaffer/LIBRARY/studies/nc/ncrec1.htm 206.61.184.43 19970122123137 text/html 5993HTTP/1.0 200 OKDate: Wednesday, 22-Jan-97 12:31:27 GMTServer: WebSitePro/1.1f (S/N wpo-0deb)Allow-ranges: bytesContent-type: text/htmlLast-modified: Saturday, 28-Dec-96 06:55:26 GMTContent-length: 5776 Drugs And Social Responsibility Contents | Feedback | Search DRCNet Library | Schaffer Library | Major Studies Marihuana, A Signal of Misunderstanding Marihuana, A Signal of Misunderstanding The Report of the National Commission on Marihuana and DrugAbuse Chapter V marihuana and social policy DRUGS AND SOCIAL RESPONSIBILITY "The difficulty in life is the choice." George Moore (1900) A constant tension exists in our society between individualliberties and the need for reasonable societal restraints. It iseasy to go too far in either direction, and this tendency isparticularly evident where drugs are concerned. We have guided our decision-making by the belief that thestate is obliged to justify restraints on individual behavior.Too often individual freedoms are submerged in the passions ofthe moment, and when that happens, the public policy may bedetermined more by rhetoric than by reason. Our effort has beento minimize the emotional and emphasize the rational in thisReport. Drugs In a Free Society A free society seeks to provide conditions in which each ofits members may develop his or her potentialities to the fullestextent. A premium is placed on individual choice in seekingself-fulfillment. This priority depends upon the capacity of freecitizens not to abuse their freedom, and upon their willingnessto act responsibly toward others and toward the society as awhole. Responsible behavior, through individual choice, is boththe guarantor and the objective of a free society. DRUGS AND SOCIAL RESPONSIBILITY The use of drugs is not in itself an irresponsible act.Medical and scientific uses serve important individual and socialneeds and are often essential to our physical and mentalwell-being. Further, the use of drugs for pleasure or othernon-medical purposes is not inherently irresponsible; alcohol iswidely used as an acceptable part of social activities. We do think the use of drugs is clearly irresponsible when itimpedes the individual's integration into the economic and socialsystem. A preference for individual productivity and contributionto social progress in a general sense still undergirds theAmerican value structure, and we emphasize the policy-maker'sduty to support this preference in a public policy judgment. At the same time, in light of the emerging leisure ethic andthe search for individual meaning and fulfillment noted inChapter 1, we cannot divorce social policy from the questionsraised by the recreational use of drugs. Productivity andrecreation both have a place in the American ethical system. Theyare not inconsistent unless the individual's use of leisure timeinhibits his productive role in society. Drugs should be servants, not masters. They become masterswhen they dominate an individual's existence or impair hisfaculties. To the extent that any drug, including alcohol,carries with it risks to the well-being of the user and seriouslyundermines his effectiveness in the society, that drug becomes amatter of concern for public policy. An essential step in the process of policy-formation is adetermination of the circumstances under which use of any givendrug' poses such risks. For some drugs, the risks may be so greatthat all permissible measures should be taken to eliminate use.For other drugs, such risks may be present only under certainspecific circumstances, in which case society may defer toresponsible individual choice on the matter of recreational usebut take appropriate steps to minimize the incidence andconsequences of dysfunctional use. In our Report next year, forwhich studies are already underway, we will consider from thisperspective the whole range of drugs now used for non-medicalpurposes. Contents | Feedback | Search DRCNet Library | Schaffer Library | Major Studies Marihuana, A Signal of Misunderstanding WT01-B25-33IA031-000651-B021-42http://206.61.184.43:80/schaffer/LIBRARY/studies/nc/ncrec2.htm 206.61.184.43 19970122123204 text/html 18684HTTP/1.0 200 OKDate: Wednesday, 22-Jan-97 12:31:52 GMTServer: WebSitePro/1.1f (S/N wpo-0deb)Allow-ranges: bytesContent-type: text/htmlLast-modified: Saturday, 28-Dec-96 06:54:53 GMTContent-length: 18466 A Social Control Policy for Marihuana Marihuana, A Signal of Misunderstanding The Report of the National Commission on Marihuana andDrug Abuse Chapter V marihuana and social policy A Social Control Policy for Marihuana A Social Control Policy for Marihuana In formulating a Marihuana policy, our strongest concern iswith irresponsible use, whether it be too often, too much,indiscriminate, or under improper circumstances. The excessive orindiscriminate use of any drug is a serious social concern; andthis is particularly true of marihuana since we still know verylittle about the effects of long term, heavy use. We have littledoubt that the substantial majority of users, under any socialcontrol policy, including the existing system, do not and wouldnot engage in irresponsible behavior. In identifying the -appropriate social control policy formarihuana, we have found it helpful to consider the followingpolicy options: I Approval of Use. II Elimination of Use. III Discouragement of Use. IV Neutrality Toward Use. APPROVAL OF USE Society should not approve or encourage the recreational useof any drug, in public or private. Any semblance of encouragementenhances the possibility of abuse and removes, from apsychological standpoint, an effective support of individualrestraint. For example, so long as this society (not only thegovernment, but other institutions and mass advertising as well)in effect approved of the use of tobacco, the growing medicalconsensus about the dangers of excessive use did not make asignificant impression on individual judgment. With the SurgeonGeneral's Report on Tobacco in 1964, Smoking and Health, a veryreal change has occurred in the way society now thinks aboutcigarettes. The institutions of society definitely add their influencesto the variety of social pressures which persuade individuals touse any kind of drugs. Rational social policy should seek tominimize such social pressures, whether they come from peers,from the media, from social custom, or from the user's sense ofinadequacy. Official approval would inevitably encourage somepeople to use the drug who would not otherwise do so, and wouldalso increase the incidence of heavy or otherwise irresponsibleuse and its complications. On this basis we reject policy optionnumber one, approval of use. ELIMINATION OF USE For a half-century, official social policy has been not onlyto discourage use but to eliminate it (option number two). Withthe principal responsibility for this policy assigned to lawenforcement, its implementation reached its zenith in the late1950's and early 1960's when marihuana-related offenses werepunishable by long periods of incarceration. This policy grew outof a distorted and greatly exaggerated concept of the drug'sordinary effects upon the individual and the society. On thebasis of information then available, marihuana was not adequatelydistinguished from other problem drugs and was assumed to be asharmful as the others. The increased incidence of use, intensive scientificreevaluation, and the spread of use to the middle and uppersocioeconomic groups have brought about the informal adoption ofa modified social policy. On the basis of our opinion surveys andour empirical studies of law enforcement behavior, we areconvinced that officialdom and the public are no longer aspunitive toward marihuana use as they once were. Now there exists a more realistic estimate of the actualsocial impact of marihuana use. School and universityadministrators are seldom able to prevent the use of marihuana bytheir students and personnel and are increasingly reluctant totake disciplinary action against users. Within the criminaljustice system, there has been a marked decline in the severityof the response to offenders charged with possession ofmarihuana. In our survey of state enforcement activities, only 11% ofall marihuana arrests resulted from active investigativeactivity, and most of those were in sale situations. For the mostpart, marihuana enforcement is a haphazard process; arrests occuron the street, in a park, in a car, or as a result of a phonecall. Among those arrested, approximately 50% of the adults and70% of the juveniles are not processed through the system; theircases are dismissed by the police, by the prosecutors or by thecourts. Ultimately less than 6% of all those apprehended areincarcerated, and very few of these sentences are for possessionof small amounts for personal use. In the law enforcement community, the major concern is nolonger marihuana but the tendency of some users to engage inother irresponsible activity, particularly the use of moredangerous drugs. Official sentiment now seems to be a desire tocontain use of the drug as well as the drug subculture, and tominimize its spread to the rest of the youth population. Lawenforcement policy, both at the Federal and State levels,implicitly recognizes that elimination is impossible at thistime. The active attempt to suppress all marihuana use has beenreplaced by an effort to keep it within reasonable bounds. Yetbecause this policy still reflects a view that marihuana smokingis itself destructive enough to justify punitive action againstthe user, we believe it is an inappropriate social response. Marihuana's relative potential for harm to the vast majorityof individual users and its actual impact on society does notjustify a social policy designed to seek out and firmly punishthose who use it. This judgment is based on prevalent, usepatterns, on behavior exhibited by the vast majority of users andon our interpretations of existing medical and scientific data.This position also is consistent with the estimate by lawenforcement personnel that the elimination of use isunattainable. In the case of experimental or intermittent use of marihuana,there is room for individual judgment. Some members of oursociety believe the decision to use marihuana is an immoraldecision. However, even during Prohibition, when many people wereconcerned about the evils associated with excessive use ofalcohol, possession for personal use was never outlawed federallyand was made illegal in only five States. Indeed, we suspect that the moral contempt in which some ofour citizens hold the marihuana user is related to other behavioror other attitudes assumed to be associated with use of the drug.All of our data suggest that the moral views of the overwhelmingmajority of marihuana users are in general accord with those ofthe larger society. Having previously rejected the approval policy (option numberone), we now reject the eliminationist policy (option numbertwo). This policy, if taken seriously, would require a greatincrease in manpower and resources in order to eliminate the useof a drug which simply does not warrant that kind of attention. DISCOURAGEMENT OR NEUTRALITY The unresolved question is whether society should try todissuade its members from using marihuana or should deferentirely to individual judgment in the matter, remaining benignlyneutral. We must choose between policies of discouragement(number three) and neutrality (number four). This choice is adifficult one and forces us to consider the limitations of ourknowledge and the dynamics of social change. A number ofconsiderations, none of which is conclusive by itself, point atthe present time toward a discouragement policy. We will discusseach one of them separately. 1. User Preference Is Still Ambiguous Alcohol and tobacco have long been desired by large numberswithin our society and their use is deeply ingrained in theAmerican culture. Marihuana, on the other hand, has only recentlyachieved a significant foothold in the American experience, andit is still essentially used more by young people. Again, theunknown factor here is whether the sudden attraction to marihuanaderives from its psychoactive virtues or from its symbolicstatus. Throughout this Commission's deliberations there was arecurring awareness of the possibility that marihuana use may bea fad which, if not institutionalized, will recede substantiallyin time. Present data suggest that this is the case, and we donot hesitate to say that we would prefer that outcome. To theextent that conditions permit, society is well advised tominimize the number of drugs which may cause significantproblems. By focusing our attention on fewer rather than moredrugs, we may be better able to foster responsible use anddiminish the consequences of irresponsible use. The more prudent course seems to be to retain a social policyopposed to use, attempting to discourage use while at the sametime seeking to deemphasize the issue. Such a policy leaves uswith more options available when more definitive knowledge of theconsequences of heavy and prolonged marihuana use becomesavailable. 2. Continuing Scientific Uncertainty Precludes Finality In 1933 when Prohibition was repealed, society was cognizantof the effects of alcohol as a drug and the adverse consequencesof abuse. But, because so many people wished to use the drug,policy-makers chose, to run the risk of individual indiscretionand decided to abandon the abstentionist policy. There are manytoday who feel that if the social, impact of alcohol use had thenbeen more fully understood, a policy of discouragement ratherthan neutrality would have been adopted to minimize the negativeaspects of alcohol use. Misunderstanding also played an important part when thenational government adopted an eliminationist, marihuana policyin 1937. The policy-makers knew very little about the effects orsocial impact of the drug; many of their hypotheses werespeculative and, in large measure, incorrect. Nevertheless, the argument that misinformation in 1937automatically compels complete reversal of the action taken atthat time is neither reasonable nor logical. While continuingconcern about the effects of heavy, chronic use is not sufficientreason to maintain an overly harsh public policy, it is still asignificant argument for choosing official discouragement inpreference to official neutrality. 3. Society's Value System Is In a State of Transition As discussed in Chapter 1, two central influences incontemporary American life are the individual search for meaningwithin the context of an increasingly depersonalized society, andthe collective search for enduring American values. In ChapterIV, we noted that society's present ambivalent response tomarihuana use reflects these uncertainties. For the reasons discussed in the previous Chapters, a suddenabandonment of an official policy of elimination in favor of oneof neutrality toward marihuana would have a profoundreverberating impact on social attitudes far beyond the one issueof marihuana use. We believe that society must have time toconsider its image of the future. We believe that adoption of adiscouragement policy toward marihuana at this time wouldfacilitate such a reappraisal while official neutrality, underpresent circumstances, would impede it. 4. Public Opinion Presently Opposes Marihuana Use For whatever reasons, a substantial majority of the Americanpublic opposes the use of marihuana, and would prefer that theirfellow citizens abstain from using it. In the National Survey,64% of the adult public agreed with the statement that"using marihuana is morally offensive` (40% felt the sameway about alcohol). Although this majority opinion is not by any meansconclusive, it cannot be ignored. We are well aware of theskeptics in with which marihuana user, and those sympathetic totheir wishes, view the policy making process; and we areparticularly concerned about the indifference to or disrespectfor law manifested by many citizens and particularly the youth. However, we are also apprehensive about the impact of a majorchange in social policy on that larger segment of our populationwhich supports the implications of the existing social policy.They, too, might lose respect for a policy-making establishmentwhich appeared to bend so easily to the wishes of a"lawless" and highly vocal minority. This concern for minimizing cultural dislocation must, ofcourse, be weighed against the relative importance of contraryarguments. For example, in the case of desegregation in theSouth, and now in the North, cult-Lire shock had to be acceptedin the light of the fundamental precept at issue. In the, case.of marihuana, there is no fundamental principle supporting theuse of the drug, and society is not compelled to approve or beneutral toward it. The opinion of the majority is entitled togreater weight. Looking again to the, experience with Prohibition, when anabstentionist policy for alcohol was adopted on the nationallevel in 1918, its proponents were not blind to the vociferousopposition of a substantial minority of the people. By the late1920's and early 1930's, the ambivalence of public opinion towardalcohol use and the unwillingness of large numbers of people tocomply with the new social policy compelled reversal of thatpolicy. Even many of its former supporters acknowledged itsfutility. With marihuana, however, the prevailing policy of eliminatinguse had never been opposed to any significant degree until themid-1960's. Unlike the prohibition of alcohol, which had been thesubject of public debate off and on for 60 years before it wasadopted, present marihuana policy has not until now engaged thepublic opinion process, some 50 years after it first began to beused. Majority sentiment does not appear to be as flexible as itwas with alcohol. 5. Neutrality Is Not Philosophically Compelled Much of what was stated above bespeaks an acute awareness bythe Commission of the subtleties of the collective consciousnessof the American people, as shown in the National Survey. There isa legitimate concern about what the majority of the non-usingpopulation thinks about marihuana use and what the drugrepresents in the public mind. The question is appropriatelyasked if we are suggesting that the majority in a free societymay impose its will on an unwilling minority even though, as itis claimed, uncertainty, speculation, and a large degree ofmisinformation form the basis of the predominant opinion. If wehave nothing more substantial than this, the argument goes,society should remain neutral. To deal with this contention, one must distinguish betweenends and means. Policy-makers must choose their objectives with asensitivity toward the entire social fabric and a vision of thegood society. In such a decision, the general public attitude isa significant consideration. The preferred outcome in ademocratic society cannot be that of the policy-makers alone; itmust be that of an informed public. Accordingly, the policy-makermust consider the dynamic relationship between perception andreality in the public mind. Is the public consensus based on areal awareness of the facts? Does the public really understandwhat is at stake? Given the best evidence available, would thepublic consensus remain the same? Assuming that dominant opinion opposes marihuana use, thephilosophical issue is raised not by the goal but by how it isimplemented. At this point, the interests of the unwilling becomeimportant. For example, the family unit and the institution ofmarriage are preferred means of group-living and child-rearing inour society. As a society, we are not neutral. We officiallyencourage matrimony by giving married couples favorable taxtreatment; but we do not compel people to get married. If itshould become public policy to try to reduce the birth rate, itis unlikely that there will be laws to punish those who exceedthe preferred family size, although we may again utilizedisincentives through the tax system. Similarly, this Commissionbelieves society should continue actively to discourage peoplefrom using marihuana, and any philosophical limitation isrelevant to the means employed, not to the goal itself. FOR THESE REASONS, WE RECOMMEND TO THE PUBLIC AND ITSPOLICY-MAKERS A SOCIAL CONTROL POLICY SEEKING TO DISCOURAGEMARIHUANA USE, WHILE CONCENTRATING PRIMARILY ON THE PREVENTION OFHEAVY AND VERY HEAVY USE. We emphasize that this is a policy for today and theimmediate future; we do not presume to suggest that this policyembodies eternal truth. Accordingly, we strongly recommend thatour successor policy planners, at an appropriate time in thefuture,, review the following factors to determine whether analtered social policy is in order: the state of public opinion,the extent to which members of the society continue to use thedrug, the developing scientific knowledge about the effects andsocial impact of use of the drug, and the evolving socialattitude toward the place of recreation and leisure in awork-oriented society. In our second Report next year, we willcarefully review our findings to see if our perceptions havechanged or if society has changed at that time. CliffSchaffer's Home Page WT01-B25-34IA031-000651-B021-63http://206.61.184.43:80/schaffer/LIBRARY/studies/nc/ncaddend.htm 206.61.184.43 19970122123214 text/html 21264HTTP/1.0 200 OKDate: Wednesday, 22-Jan-97 12:32:07 GMTServer: WebSitePro/1.1f (S/N wpo-0deb)Allow-ranges: bytesContent-type: text/htmlLast-modified: Saturday, 28-Dec-96 06:55:47 GMTContent-length: 21046 Marihuana: A Signal of Misunderstanding - Addendum Contents | Feedback | Search DRCNet Library | Schaffer Library | Major Studies Marihuana, A Signal of Misunderstanding The Report of the National Commission on Marihuana and DrugAbuse Marihuana: A Signal of Misunderstanding Commissioned by President Richard M. Nixon, March, 1972 addendum The previous Chapter recommended a social policy orientedtoward the discouragement of marihuana use and presented a set ofproposals for the legal implementation of that policy. Inaddition to these legal recommendations for federal, and stateaction, the Commission believes certain other recommendationsshould be presented for action. Ancillary Recommendations These recommendations are presented in three categories: (1)legal and law enforcement, (2) medical, and (3) other. Some ofthese recommendations apply to other drugs as well and will bediscussed further in our second Report. However, we consider ituseful to make recommendations now so that policy planners can beinformed of the implications of what has been studied to date. Foremost among the Commission's conclusions is a need forconsistency between federal and state laws affecting marihuanadistribution and use, and uniformity of marihuana laws among thestates. The administration of all marihuana laws must be mutallyreenforcing so that total governmental response to marihuana isboth equitable and understandable. Legal and Law Enforcement Recommendations 1. Federal RECOMMENDATION: FEDERAL LAW ENFORCEMENT AGENCIES, ESPECIALLYTHE BUREAU OF NARCOTICS AND DANGEROUS DRUGS AND THE BUREAU OFCUSTOMS, SHOULD IMPROVE THEIR STATISTICAL REPORTING SYSTEMS SOTHAT POLICIES MAY BE PLANNED AND RESOURCES ALLOCATED ON THE BASISOF ACCURATE AND COMPREHENSIVE INFORMATION. In an effort to obtain information relating to enforcement ofthe marihuana laws including arrest, prosecution, sentencing andconviction data, the Commission found that sufficient informationwas available about prosecution and court action, but not aboutthe activities of the law enforcement agencies. We wereconfronted by and large with inadequate statistical informationand little or no in-depth evaluation. The statistical reporting procedures of the Bureau ofNarcotics and Dangerous Drugs and the Bureau of Customs are notuniform, making it extremely difficult to assess theeffectiveness of the two principal drug enforcement agencies ofthe Federal Government. The Bureau of Narcotics and DangerousDrugs keeps centralized files but the Bureau of Customs maintainsits files on a regional basis. In both Bureaus, statisticalinformation is kept only in its raw form; that is, number ofarrests, number of seizures and so on. Very little analysisexists of the procedures leading to arrest, of thecharacteristics of persons arrested, and of the law enforcementstrategies involved in the arrest. For law enforcement personnelto understand more fully how they are carrying out theirfunctions so that internal assessments of particular policies canbe made, sophisticated statistics must be maintained. Both the Bureau of Narcotics and Dangerous Drugs and theBureau of Customs are aware of these problems. Both wereextremely helpful to the Commission and its research staff inseeking useful information from the mass of raw statistics.However, the information from the available statistics isincomplete and of limited utility for policy planning purposes. In support of this priority recommendation, Congress is urgedto provide additional and adequate funding for this area, at thesame time requiring both agencies to utilize a common reportingsystem so that information can be more easily shared betweenthem. In addition, it is recommended that the Federal Bureau ofInvestigation, in its Uniform Crime Reports, requests the stateagencies to identify marihuana cases separately from narcoticcases and report them as a separate component. RECOMMENDATION: THE FEDERAL BUREAU OF NARCOTICS AND DANGEROUSDRUGS SH0ULD INCREASE ITS TRAINING PROGRAMS OF STATE AND LOCALPOLICE WITH SPECIAL EMPHASIS ON THE TRAINING IN THE DETECTION OFTRAFFICKING CASES. The Commission's interviews with state and local police,officials revealed a consistent desire to upgrade the quality oftheir investigations. Since the Federal Bureau of Narcotics andDangerous Drugs, through its National Training Institute, hasbeen performing this task well, it is recommended that the fundsbe granted by the Congress to extend the range of the educationalprogram offered and increase the number of persons trained. RECOMMENDATION: INCREASED BORDER SURVEILLANCE, A TIGHTENING OFBORDER PROCEDURES, AND A REALISTIC ERADICAT10N PROGRAM TODIMINISH THE SUPPLY OF DRUGS COMING INTO THE COUNTRY, COUPLEDWITH A MORE EFFECTIVE PROGRAM FOR DIMINISHING THE DOMESTICPRODUCTION AND DISTRIBUTION OF MARIHUANA, ARE REQUIRED. The Commission, as part of its mandate, studied drugtrafficking patterns along the borders of the United States. Ananalysis of border marihuana seizures was also made. The resultsof both studies indicated that proportionately larger seizureswere made along the borders at locations where, there were nomanned checkpoints. The Commission therefore recommends that morevigorous effort be made by federal agencies to interdictsmugglers along the entire border while continuing their effortsat the formal checkpoints. In discussions with representatives of other countries, acommon observation made by foreign officials has been thiscountry's somewhat indifferent attitude about the eradication ofour home-grown marihuana, an attitude that is not appreciated byother countries wider pressure from the United States to destroytheir crops. Since this Administration has wisely made illicittrafficking in all drugs a foreign policy priority, we recommendthat priority be supported by an equally assiduous effort toeradicate marihuana within our borders. We recommend further that preclearance procedures beeliminated so that Customs personnel may more effectively controlsmuggling of marihuana and other drugs. Preclearance is aprocedure whereby passengers and their baggage destined for theUnited States are inspected by U.S. Customs, Immigration andAgriculture officials prior to departure from a foreign location.This practice is in effect in Bermuda, Montreal, Nassau, Toronto,Vancouver, Winnipeg and the Virgin Islands. Other locations arepetitioning for the same privilege. An inherent weakness in the preclearance procedure is thatCustoms personnel stationed outside the United States have noauthority for search, seizure and arrest. This fact is well-knownto the professional smuggler who uses it to his advantage. Sincewe have been informed that preclearance creates a gap in Customs'interdiction process, reason dictates that the procedure beeliminated in the interest of tighter control. H. State RECOMMENDATION: ALL STATES SHOULD ADOPT THE UNIFORM CONTROLLEDSUBSTANCES ACT TO ACHIEVE UNIFORMITY WITH REGARD TO MARIHUANA ANDOTHER DRUG LAWS, WITH THE EXCEPTION THAT THE LEGAL RESPONSE TOPOSSESSION FOR ONE'S OWN USE BE UNIFORMLY ADOPTED IN ACCORDANCEWITH OUR RECOMMENDATION IN CHAPTER V OF THIS REPORT. As noted earlier, one of the greatest needs in the entire drugarea is uniformity of state laws with regard to structure andpenalties. While this recommendation applies to all drugs and notjust marihuana, we feel it essential to make this recommendationnow to help deemphasize the marihuana problem. Significantdifferences in penalties among the states constitute a validsource of irritation and conflict among various segments of ourpopulation. In an age of high mobility, it is unconscionable thatpenalties should vary so greatly in response, to the samebehavior. RECOMMENDATION: EACH STATE SHOULD ESTABLISH A CENTRALIZEDCOMPULSORY REPORTING AND RECORD-KEEPTNG AUTHORITY SO THATADEQUATE AND ACCURATE STATISTICS OF ARRESTS, SENTENCES ANDCONVICTIONS ON A STATEWIDE BASIS ARE AVAILABLE. Several states have systems for maintaining records of drugarrests on a statewide basis. Accurate reporting and compilationof these cases permit the state to assess accurately the impactof law enforcement on drug offenders. The Law EnforcementAssistance Administration of the Department of Justice shouldassist the states to establish compulsory statistical reportingcenters so that individual state needs are met and a clearerpicture of the national trends can be, ascertained. Efficientstate record-keeping will have an additional benefit ofincreasing the reliability of the Uniform Crime Reports compiledby the Federal Bureau of Investigation. RECOMMENDATION: THOSE STATES REQUIRING PHYSICIANS TO REPORTDRUG USERS SEEKING MEDICAL ASSISTANCE SHOULD CHANGE SUCHREQUIREMENTS TO INSURE THE CONFIDENTIALITY OF THE DRUG USER'SIDENTITY, SO THAT PERSONS NEEDING MEDICAL HELP WILL FEEL FREE TOSEEK IT. Seventeen states* currently require physicians to report to agovernment agency information on those persons treated by themwho are dependent on, or are habitual users of drugs. No commonpattern emerges among these states. *California, Connecticut, Hawaii, Idaho, Iowa, Massachusetts,Michigan, Montana, Nebraska, New Jersey, New Mexico. New York,North Carolina, Pennsylvania, Vermont, Virginia, Washington. After reviewing these statutes, the Commission believes thatthe disadvantages of maintaining such reporting systems outweighthe benefits to society or the individual. Fear of disclosure tothe police discourages many persons front seeking needed medicalhelp. Furthermore, the requirement makes the physician aninformant and an agent of law enforcement. While a need exists for reliable statistics regarding thenumber and nature of those persons being treated, the Commissiondoes not feel that identification of the individual user isnecessary. We again emphasize that society should encouragepersons in need of medical attention to seek out authorizedpractitioners without having to fear legal repercussions for suchaction. III. International RECOMMENDATION: IF THE UNITED STATES SHOULD BECOME A SIGNATORYOF THE PROPOSED PSYCHOTROPIC CONVENTION, WE RECOMMEND THATCANNABIS BE REMOVED FROM THE EXISTING SINGLE CONVENTION ANDCONSIDERATION BE GIVEN TO LISTING IT IN THE PSYCHOTROPICCONVENTION AMONG DRUGS WHICH HAVE SIMILAR EFFECTS. Under the Single Convention on Narcotic Drugs, 1961, of whichthe United States became a signatory in 1967, cannabis, with theexception of its leaves and stems, is included with narcoticdrugs and cocaine. While that categorization had somejustification in 1961 when knowledge about marihuana was more,limited, this justification no longer exists. More importantly,tetrahydrocannabinol (THC), the psychoactive ingredient incannabis, is not included in the Single Convention and isproposed for inclusion in the Psychotropic Convention. The Commission sees little sense in having the potentpsychoactive ingredient in cannabis covered in one Convention andthe natural supplying data from its major foreign studies ofchronic cannabis users in Jamaica and Greece. For medicalresearch purposes, an analysis of data derived from populationsin other countries with 10, 20 or 30 years of experience withheavy marihuana use will provide useful information aboutprobable consequences if the, incidence of marihuana use in theUnited States were to continue and increase, and if more peopleengaged in heavy, long term use. IV. Therapeutic Uses RECOMMENDATION: INCREASED SUPPORT OF STUDIES WHICH EVALUATETHE EFFICACY OF MARIHIUANA TN THE TREATMENT OF PHYSICALIMPAIRMENTS AND DISEASE IS RECOMMENDED. Historical references have been noted throughout theliterature referring to the use of cannabis products astherapeutically useful agents. Of particular significance forcurrent research with controlled quality, quantity andtherapeutic settings, would be investigations into the treatmentof glaucoma, migraine, alcoholism and terminal cancer. TheNIMII-FDA Psychotomimetic Advisory Committee's authorization ofstudies designed to explore the therapeutic uses of marihuana iscommended. V. Community-Based Treatment RECOMMENDATION: COMMUNITY-BASED TREATMENT FACILITIES SHOULD BEPROMOTED IN CARlNG FOR PROBLEM DRUG USERS UTILIZING EXISTINGHEALTH CENTERS WHEN POSSIBLE AND APPROPRIATE. In studying marihuana, the Commission has obtained informationabout a number of treatment centers and services. The wide rangeof agencies and the variety of goals and techniques present aconfusing array of services available to drug users, varyingwidely in their effectiveness. Uniform criteria for evaluatingthe "success" of these programs is urgently needed. The medical members of the Commission believe that some of thetechniques being used may pose as much potential harm as good.Many young people who are experiencing profound difficultiesresulting from the use of drugs may suppose they are beingtreated and helped, when in reality they are not. In some cases,the short-term benefit may be disruptive to the long-term welfareof the individual. In the rush to provide treatment facilities,many programs have been given impressive credentials withoutmeeting minimal medical standards. It is essential that treatmentfacilities have, as their primary orientation, the well-being ofthe individual under treatment. VI. Training Programs RECOMMENDATION: PUBLIC HEALTH COURSES ON THE SOCIAL ASPECTS OFDRUG USE SHOULD BE INCLUDED IN THE CURRICULA OF THE SCHOOLS OFTHE HEALTH PROFESSIONS. The Commission recommends that schools of the healthprofessions include in their curricula courses on the social,public health and therapeutic aspects of drug use as appropriateto the educational purpose of the individual school. The NationalSurvey indicated that the public views the family physician as animportant source of information about drugs. Next to schoolpersonnel, physicians were mentioned most often in thisconnection. Persons involved in the health professions must beprovided with information about nonmedical as well as the medicalaspects of drug use. Other Recommendations 1. Reclassification of Cannabis RECOMMENDATION: THE COMMISSION RECOGNIZES THAT SEVERAL STATELEGISLATURES HAVE IMPROPERLY CLASSIFIED MARIHUANA AS A NARCOTIC,AND RECOMMENDS THAT THEY NOW REDEFINE MARIHUANA ACCORDING TO THESTANDARDS OF THE RECENTLY ADOPTED UNIFORM CONTROLLED SUBSTANCESLAW. Scientific evidence has clearly demonstrated that marihuana isnot a narcotic drug, and the law should properly reflect thisfact. Congress so recognized in the Comprehensive Drug AbusePrevention and Control Act of 1970, as did The Conference ofCommissioners on Uniform State Laws in the Uniform ControlledSubstances Law. In those states where the Uniform Controlled Substances Lawhas not yet been adopted, twelve of which continue to classifymarihuana as a "narcotic", the Commission recommendsthat the legislatures distinguish marihuana from the opiates andlist it in a separate category. The consequence of inappropriatedefinition is that the public continues to associate marihuanawith the narcotics, such as heroin. The confusion resulting fromthis improper classification helps to perpetuate prejudices andmisinformation about marihuana. II. Information RECOMMENDATION: A SINGLE FEDERAL AGENCY SOURCE SHOULDDISSEMINATE INFORMATION AND MATERIALS RELATING TO MARIHUANA ANDOTHER DRUGS. THE NATIONAL CLEARINGHOUSE FOR DRUG ABUSEINFORMATION SHOULD BE CHARGED WITH THIS RESPONSIBILITY. A great proliferation of drug information materials hasoccurred in recent years. These, materials are currentlydistributed by a number of federal agencies. Some of thesematerials conflict with each other. The result is a confusion anduncertainty on the part of the, public about the accuracy of allthese statements. The public should have one federal source fromwhich to obtain drug information. The National Clearinghouse forDrug Abuse Information appears best suited to perform this task. III. Education RECOMMENDATION: THE SPECIAL ACTION OFFICE FOR DRUG ABUSEPREVENTION IN THE WHITE HOUSE SHOULD BE RESPONSIBLE FOR THECOORDINATION, DEVELOPMENT AND CONTENT REVIEW OF ALLFEDERALLY-SUPPORTED DRUG EDUCATIONAL MATERIALS ANT) SHOULD ISSUEA REPORT AS SOON AS POSSIBLE, EVALUATING EXISTING DRUG EDUCATIONMATERIALS. The Commission has studied many programs of drug educationthroughout the country. Some are irrelevant, others are poorlydesigned, still others are misleading, and a good many of themare, of questionable value. A few are excellent. The FederalGovernment must provide assistance to the states and schooldistricts in this matter, and should provide the leadership indeveloping sample programs in cooperation with educationalsystems. An evaluation of existing programs by The Special ActionOffice for Drug Abuse Prevention of the White House could be veryhelpful in improving the standards of drug education. IV. Voluntary Sector Participation RECOMMENDATION: THE COMMISSION NOTES THE SIGNIFICANT ROLEPLAYED BY THE VOLUNTARY SEC TOR OF THE AMERICAN COMMUNITY ININFLUENCING THE SOCIAL, RELIGIOUS AND MORAL ATTITUDES OF OURNATION'S CITIZENS AND RECOMMENDS THAT THE VOLUNTARY SECTOR BEENCOURAGED TO TAKE AN ACTIVE ROLE IN SUPPORT OF OUR RECOMMENDEDPOLICY OF DISCOURAGING THE USE OF MARIHUANA. Already very active in drug education and preventionactivities, the social agencies, service clubs, church groups,and other non-governmental bodies have, been extremely helpful inattending to the difficult problems of drug abuse. The local andpersonal nature of such organizations gives them an advantageover state and federal governments in the development ofattitudes by our citizens. The policy which we here recommend, indeed any policy whichmight be recommended, will inevitably encounter widespread andearnest objections. The fullest efforts of all citizens of goodwill be required to attend to the, massive problem of drug abusein a calm, just, responsible and effective manner. The help ofthe voluntary agencies in working toward this end is earnestlyinvited and urgently needed. Contents | Feedback | Search DRCNet Library | Schaffer Library | Major Studies Marihuana, A Signal of Misunderstanding WT01-B25-35IA031-000651-B021-79http://206.61.184.43:80/schaffer/LIBRARY/studies/nc/nc1let.htm 206.61.184.43 19970122123220 text/html 3760HTTP/1.0 200 OKDate: Wednesday, 22-Jan-97 12:32:14 GMTServer: WebSitePro/1.1f (S/N wpo-0deb)Allow-ranges: bytesContent-type: text/htmlLast-modified: Saturday, 28-Dec-96 06:58:33 GMTContent-length: 3543 National Commission on Marihuana and Drug Abuse - Letter Contents | Feedback | Search DRCNet Library | Schaffer Library | Major Studies Marihuana, A Signal of Misunderstanding National Commission on Marihuana and Drug Abuse 801 19th Street N.W. Washington, D.C. 20006 March 22, 1972 To The President and Congress of the United States: As Chairman of the National Commission on Marihuana and DrugAbuse, I am pleased to submit to you our first year Report inconformance with the mandate contained in Section 601 of PublicLaw 91-513, The Comprehensive Drug Abuse Prevention and ControlAct of 1970. This Report "Marihuana, A Signal ofMisunderstanding" is an all-inclusive effort to present thefacts as they are known today, to demythologize the controversysurrounding marihuana, and to place in proper perspective one ofthe most emotional and explosive issues of our time. We on theCommission sincerely hope it will play a significant role inbringing uniformity and rationality to our marihuana laws, bothFederal and State, and that it will create a healthy climate forfurther discussion, for further research and for a continuingadvance in the development of a public social policy beneficialto all our citizens. Whatever the facts are we have reported them. Wherever thefacts have logically led us, we have followed and used them inreaching our recommendations. We hope this Report will be afoundation upon which credibility in this area can be restoredand upon which a rational policy can be predicated. By Direction of the Commission Raymond P. Shafer The President The President of the Senate The Speaker of the House Contents | Feedback | Search DRCNet Library | Schaffer Library | Major Studies Marihuana, A Signal of Misunderstanding WT01-B25-36IA031-000651-B021-100http://206.61.184.43:80/schaffer/LIBRARY/studies/nc/ncstaff.htm 206.61.184.43 19970122123230 text/html 5120HTTP/1.0 200 OKDate: Wednesday, 22-Jan-97 12:32:22 GMTServer: WebSitePro/1.1f (S/N wpo-0deb)Allow-ranges: bytesContent-type: text/htmlLast-modified: Saturday, 28-Dec-96 06:56:06 GMTContent-length: 4903 National Commission on Marihuana and Drug Abuse -- Staff Contents | Feedback | Search DRCNet Library | Schaffer Library | Major Studies Marihuana, A Signal of Misunderstanding National Commission on Marihuana and Drug Abuse Members and Staff COMMISSION MEMBERS The Honorable Raymond Philip Shafer, Chairman Dana L. Farnsworth , M.D., Vice Chairman Henry Brill, M.D. The Honorable Tim Lee Carter, U.S. Representative, Kentucky Mrs. Joan Ganz Cooney Charles 0. Galvin, S.J.D. John A. Howard , Ph. D. The Honorable Harold E. Hughes, U.S. Senator, Iowa The Honorable Jacob K. Javits, U.S. Senator, New York The Honorable Paul G. Rogers, U.S. Representative, Florida Maurice H. Seevers, M.D., Ph. D. J. Thomas Ungerleider, M.D. Mitchell Ware, J.D. COMMISSION STAFF Executive Director Michael R. Sonnenreich Deputy Director Louis P. Bozzetti, M.D. Suzanne Baumgartner Glenn Gilman John Helm Paulette Hodges Roberta Hollander Anthony J. Roccograndi Ralph M. Susman Michel D. Silva Richard J. Bonnie Emery F. Bacon Lenore R. Kupperstein Jack D. Blaine, M.D. Delores E. Mack, Ph. D. Maryann L. Urban Sol J. Silverman Andrea Maharam Corcoran Peter J. Jessen Evelyn Miller Cynthia Rose Carol Simons Sally M. Boyd Mary K. Ryan Ethel McIntosh Basil M. Johnson Support Staff Cynthia Freeman Judith Herbert Christine Jones Maryann M. Kowalczyk Theresa Lewis Youth Consultants Kathryn E. Aasen John D. Arterberry Bren L. Buckley Robert Donfeld Ann Frame Eric A. Goldstein Terry J. Houle Milton J. Nichols Student Researchers Samuel H. Bayless Theodore M. Becker Karen Bonnie Richard D'Amico Linda Dubuclet John T. Golden James Kimble William King Sharon Payne Mary Povich Cornelia Reister Carlton Thompson Deloris West Michael S. Pauley Andrew D. Pike Ellen B. Rouse Terri J. Siegel Richard L. Taylor Sarah C. Tefft Patricia A. Wallace Dianne L. Williams Daniel Lipman Gerald F. Murray Joel S. Ostrow Stephen H. Pugh Michael W. Russell William Sharek Kenneth S. Starkey Michael Stein Michael J. Valentine Notice: Former staff members: Maureen E. Biner, Valerie Boyle,Hugh E. Flaherty, Roy E. Kinsey, Sherrill gasser and John Williams. Contents | Feedback | Search DRCNet Library | Schaffer Library | Major Studies Marihuana, A Signal of Misunderstanding WT01-B25-37IA031-000651-B021-126http://206.61.184.43:80/schaffer/LIBRARY/studies/nc/nc1p.htm 206.61.184.43 19970122123243 text/html 6556HTTP/1.0 200 OKDate: Wednesday, 22-Jan-97 12:32:36 GMTServer: WebSitePro/1.1f (S/N wpo-0deb)Allow-ranges: bytesContent-type: text/htmlLast-modified: Saturday, 28-Dec-96 06:58:30 GMTContent-length: 6339 Marihuana: A Signal of Misunderstanding -- Preface Contents | Feedback | Search DRCNet Library | Schaffer Library | Major Studies Marihuana, A Signal of Misunderstanding Marihuana: A Signal of Misunderstanding The Technical Papers of the First Report of the NationalCommission on Marihuana and Drug Abuse March, 1972 Preface Congress created the Commission on Marihuana and Drug Abuse toseparate fact from fiction, reality from myth, and to achieve abalanced judgment on the marihuana issue. The first report of theCommission is an attempt to clarify the essential issues andconcerns of our society regarding marihuana and to extrapolateour findings and conclusions into a reasonable societal response. In an effort to present these complex issues with a maximum ofclarity, comprehension, and readability, the Commission Reportdoes not include references. This Appendix, however, fullydocuments the methodological and substantive, issues presented inthe Report. In addition to the technical data, the Appendix alsocontains the historical and philosophical matrix of the Report. The papers of the Appendix are divided into six major parts.Part One deals with the biosocial aspects which relate tomarihuana's effect on individuals as well as to the largersociety. It includes an historical survey of two types of marihuanause, medicinal and intoxicant, which constitutes a review ofmarihuana use in many parts of the world. An analysis of theaccepted sociocultural parameters helps to put the Americanmarihuana, user into perspective. Part One also presents detailed and current reviews of thebotanical, psychopharmacologic, physiologic, and behavioraleffects of marihuana on man. Part Two, the social aspects of marihuana use, discussespatterns of the individual user as well as the relationship ofmarihuana use to violent and non-violent crime. One of the most controversial issues in the study of marihuanais its relationship to other drugs. The second chapter of PartTwo deals specifically with this issue and explores, in depth andwith careful consideration, the hypothesis that marihuana useleads to other drugs, especially heroin. Part Three is concerned with the legal aspects of themarihuana controversy. In order to place marihuana, apsychoactive drug, in proper perspective, a history of thecontrol of marihuana, alcohol and tobacco is presented. This section of the Appendix also reviews the currentmarihuana laws at the international, federal and state levelsincluding statutes that require physicians to report drugaddiction. The section concludes with a description oftrafficking and distribution patterns of the drug. Part Four, the response of the criminal justice system,analyzes law enforcement behavior with respect to marihuana use.The relationship between the opinions held by officials in thecriminal justice system and their behavior toward marihuanaoffenders is also discussed. Part Five presents the findings of the Commission-sponsoredNational Survey of public attitudes and behavior towardmarihuana, other drug use and related social issues. Part Six discusses the marihuana issue with respect tosociolegal policy practices and decisions. Included in thesection is a discussion of the constitutional dimensions whichform the basis for alternative models for the control ofmarihuana. A nationwide study of marihuana education presentspolicies and programs on a state-by-state basis and includesdescriptions of ongoing marihuana education programs. The Appendix concludes with a presentation of future researchrecommendations as suggested guidelines for various agencies,institutions and individuals engaged in research on marihuana. Each of the papers contained herein represents the compositeeffort of the Commission members and staff, consultants,contractors and youth consultants. Of necessity, space limitations precluded the publication infull of many excellent papers; many works are presented either inabridged form or integrated into the Commission's ownpresentation. A list of all papers submitted to the Commission is presentedat the conclusion of the Appendix. Should any reader wish toobtain a copy of a particular work, the request should be sentdirectly to the author and not to the Commission. Contents | Feedback | Search DRCNet Library | Schaffer Library | Major Studies Marihuana, A Signal of Misunderstanding WT01-B25-38IA031-000651-B021-150http://206.61.184.43:80/schaffer/LIBRARY/studies/nc/nc1a.htm 206.61.184.43 19970122123254 text/html 41557HTTP/1.0 200 OKDate: Wednesday, 22-Jan-97 12:32:45 GMTServer: WebSitePro/1.1f (S/N wpo-0deb)Allow-ranges: bytesContent-type: text/htmlLast-modified: Saturday, 28-Dec-96 06:58:52 GMTContent-length: 41339 History of Marihuana Use: Medical and Intoxicant Contents | Feedback | Search DRCNet Library | Schaffer Library | Major Studies Marihuana, A Signal of Misunderstanding History of Marihuana Use: Medical and Intoxicant From: Marihuana, A Signal of Misunderstanding, theReport of the US National Commission on Marihuana and Drug Abuse,1972 The term "marihuana" is a word with indistinctorigins. Some believe it is derived from the Mexican words for"Mary Jane"; others hold that "marihuana"comes from. the Portuguese word marigu-ano which means"intoxicant" (Geller and Boas, 1969: 14). This chapteroutlines the many and varied uses of marihuana through history,and deals with its use in medicine and its use as an intoxicant. The experience of the 1960's might lead one to surmise thatmarihuana use spreads explosively. The chronicle of its 3,000year history, however, shows that this "explosion" hasbeen characteristic only of the contemporary scene. The plant hasbeen grown for fiber and as a source of medicine for severalthousand years, but until 500 A.D. its use as a mind-alteringdrug was almost solely confined in India. The drug and its usesreached the Middle and Near East during the next severalcenturies, and then moved across North Africa, appeared in LatinAmerica and the Caribbean, and finally entered the United Statesin the early decades of this century (Snyder, 1970: 129). Meanwhile it had been introduced into European medicineshortly after the invasion of Egypt by Napoleon and had a minorvogue as an intoxicant for a time in France. Regardless of which parts of the world are discussed, many of thesame problems and concerns about cannabis are common to all,including the United States. Understanding its various usesduring many centuries in diverse countries and continents canperhaps lead to a better understanding of marihuana in general. History of the Medical Use The history of cannabis products and their use has been long,colorful and varied. "To the agriculturist, cannabis is afiber crop; to the physician, it is an enigma; to the user, aeuphoriant; to the police, a menace; to the trafficker, a sourceof profitable danger; to the convict or parolee and his family, asource of sorrow" (Mikuriya, 1969: 34). The fact is thatcannabis has been held simultaneously in high and low esteem atvarious times throughout recorded history, particularly in ourown times. The volume of information available on the medical applicationof cannabis is considerable. Occasionally certain references havebeen condensed or deleted, but this should not detract from thecompleteness of the report. This historical survey of the medical uses of marihuana isintroduced by abroad overview of its use, including brief noteson current and projected research, and then considers specifichistorical settings and circumstances in ancient China, moving onto Egypt, India, Greece, Africa, and the Western World. Cannabis sativa has been used therapeutically from theearliest records, nearly 5,000 years ago, to the present day(Mikuriya, 1969: 34) and its products have been widely noted fortheir effects, both physiological and psychological, throughoutthe world. Although the Chinese and Indian cultures knew aboutthe properties of this drug from very early times, thisinformation did not become general in the Near and Middle Eastuntil after the fifth century A.D., when travelers, traders andadventurers began to carry knowledge of the drug westward toPersia and Arabia. Historians claim that cannabis was first employed in thesecountries as an antiseptic and analgesic. Other medical uses werelater developed and spread throughout the Middle East, Africa,and Eastern Europe. Several years after the return of Napoleon's army from Egypt,cannabis became widely accepted by Western medical practitioners.Previously, it had had limited use for such purposes as thetreatment of burns. The scientific members of Napoleon's forceswere interested in the drug's pain relieving and sedativeeffects. It was used during, and to a greater extent, followinghis rule in France, especially after 1840 when the work of suchphysicians as O'Shaughnessy, Aubert-Roche, and Moreau de Toursdrew wide attention to this drug. With the rise of the literary movement of the 1840-1860 periodin France (Gautier, Baudelaire, Dumas, etc.), cannabis becamesomewhat popular as an intoxicant of the intellectual classes. In the United States, medical interest in cannabis use wasevidenced in 1860 by the convening of a Committee on CannabisIndica of the Ohio State Medical Society, which reported on itstherapeutic applications (McMeens, 1860: 1). Between the period1840-1890, Walton states that more than 100 articles werepublished recommending cannabis for one disorder or another. Concern about cannabis as an intoxicant led the government ofIndia to establish the India Hemp Commission of 1893-94 toexamine the entire question of cannabis use in India. Paralleling the question over cannabis use in the latter halfof the 19th century was the growing medical use of othermedications superior to cannabis in their effects and more easilycontrolled as to dose. Consequently, medical use of cannabisdeclined and cannabis began to lose support of the medicalprofession. During the years between 1856-1937, cannabis lost its image asa medicine and was left with a disreputable image as anintoxicant. Strong public reaction coupled with a campaign in thepublic press led to a federal anti-marihuana law in 1937. (Thedrug was illegal in many states before 1937.) The issue ofmedical use remained active, however, and Dr. William C.Woodward, Legislative Counsel to the AMA, an opponent of cannabisuse and the only physician to be a witness at the Taxation ofMarihuana hearings, stated: There are exceptions in treatment in which cannabis cannotapparently be successfully subsituted for. The work of Pascalseems to show that Indian Hemp has remarkable properties inrevealing the subconscious; hence, it can be used forpsychological, psychoanalytic and psychotherapeutic research(Hearings, House of Representatives, 1937: 91). Although cannabis drugs are generally regarded as obsolete andrarely used in "western" medicine today, cannabis is"still used extensively in the Ayruvedic, Unani and Tibbisystems of medicine of the Indian-Pakastani subcontinent"("The Cannabis Problem, 1962: 27). The Pharmacopoeias ofIndia mention cannabis use in the recent past. Two preparationsof cannabis, a liquid extract and a tincture, are listed in the1954 and 1966 Pharmacopoeias of India which contain descriptionsof cannabis and its extract and how it is made (Chopra &Chopra, 1957: 9). A more recent source makes reference to the fact that "incontemporary India and Pakistan, there continues to be widespreadindigenous medical, 'quasi-medical,' and illicit use of bothopium and cannabis" (Chopra & Chopra, 1957: 12-13).Bouquet notes that hemp resin is occasionally used in the nativemedicines of the countries where it is collected. He pointsespecially to India where, "the medical systems . . . makemuch use of cannabis as a sedative, hypnotic, analgesic,anti-spasmodic and anti-hemorrhoidal" (Bulletin onNarcotics, 1962:27). According to the Canadian Commission of Inquiry into theNon-Medical Use of Drugs: There is no currently accepted medical use of cannabis inNorth America outside of an experimental context. Althoughcannabis has been reported to produce an array of possibly usefulmedical effects, these have either not been adequatelyinvestigated, or can be replaced by using other more readilyavailable and convenient drugs. The natural product's variabilityin potency and instability over time are among the factors whichhave led to its disfavor in Western 20th century medicine....cannabis has often been employed in the past, and is currentlyused illicitly in North America, to reduce the secondary symptomsand suffering caused by the flue and the common cold. These . . .alleged therapeutic properties of cannabis have not beenadequately studied in a scientific context, and their generalmedical potential remains a matter of conjecture (1970: 74). Similar statements regarding cannabis are to be found inMarijuana, edited by Erich Goode, and in the textbookPharmacological Basis of Therapeutics by Goodman and Gilman(1970: 300). Concerning therapeutic uses, the latter states: Although cannabis was once used for a wide variety of clinicaldisorders and has even been demonstrated to have antibacterialactivity, there are at present no well substantiated indicationsfor its use. It is no longer an official drug. Preparations arerarely available (cannabis preparation and synthetic THC areobtainable only for research purposes), and prescriptions areregulated by special tax laws. Hollister (1971: 27) lists a few difficulties of thetherapeutic use of cannabis: The onset of the action of oral doses of THC is often rather slow, contrary to that of conventional sedative-hypnotics. Doses high enough to produce a marked hypnotic effect are almost always accompanied by some degree of psychotomimetic-like perceptual disorders, which many patients might find disagreeable. The fine titration of dose required to provide sedative effects is likely to be difficult. The drug does not have novel effects compared with other sedative-hypnotics. The Department of Health, Education, and We] fare report toCongress in 1971, Marihuana and Health, repeats the statement ofthe Canadian Interim Report of Inquiry into the Non-Medical Useof Drugs, and states: "There is no currently acceptedmedical use of cannabis in the United States outside of anexperimental context" (DHEW: 1971: 27). Allen Geller andMaxwell Boas (1969: 4) think that cannabis' "unsavoryreputation has largely stymied further research." Despite the many statements discounting cannabis' therapeuticusefulness, some authorities maintain that its medical valuemight be reborn through further research and/or use. DavidSolomon, in his foreword to The Marihuana Papers (1968: xxi)argues that: Marihuana should be accorded the medical status it once had in this country as a legitimate prescription item. After 1937, with the passage of the Marihuana Tax Act and subsequent federal and state legislation, it became virtually impossible for physicians to obtain or prescribe marihuana preparations for their patients. Thus, the medical profession was denied access to a versatile pharmaceutical tool with a history of therapeutic utility going back thousands of years. In a 1970 article, "Pot Facing Stringent ScientificExamination ," reference is made to Dr. Par who states thatthere are three areas in which "chemical and animalexperiments are under way:" (1) Analgesia-mood elevation plus analgesic power may makeuseful drug. (2) Blood pressure reduction-hypertension may be helped by newdrugs which lower the blood pressure by what seems to be actionon the central nervous system. (3) Psychotherapeutic-new compounds are antidepressants andantianxiety drugs (Culliton: 1970). Mikuriya cites it studies concerning cannabis funded by theNational Institute of Mental Health in 1961. The studies were"either specialized animal experiments, part of anobservational sociologic study of a number of drugs, orexplorations of chemical detection methods" (Mikuriya, 1969:38). Feinglass has pointed to four general categories into whichthe clinical studies of marihuana could be divided (1968:206-208). They are: Anticonvulsant effects-treatment of tetanus, convulsions of rabies, epilepsy, and infant convulsions. Psychotherapeutic actions - appetite-stimulation, treatment of depression, and as a sedative and hypnotic in reducing anxiety; treatment of addiction. Antibiotic properties. Pain-affecting power. Grinspoon suggests: Very little research attention has been given to the possibility that marihuana might protect some people from psychosis. Among users of the drug, the proportion of people with neuroses or personality disorders is usually higher than in the general population; one might therefore expect the incidence of psychoses also to be higher in this group. The fact that it is not suggests that for some mentally disturbed people, the escape provided by the drug may serve to prevent a psychotic breakdown (1969: 24). Mikuriya lists many possible therapeutic uses of THC andsimilar products in his paper "Marihuana in Medicine: Past,Present and Future." He includes: Analgesic-hypnotic, appetite stimulant, antiepileptic,antispasmodic, prophylactic and treatment of the neuralgias,including migraine and tic douloureaux,antidepressant-tranquillizer, anti-asthmatic, oxytocic,anti-tussive, topical anesthetic, withdrawal agent for opiate andalcohol addiction, child birth analgesic, and antibiotic (1968:39). China The oldest known therapeutic description Of cannabis was bythe Emperor Shen-Nung in the 28th century B.C. in China, wherethe plant had long been grown for fiber. He prescribed cannabisfor beri-beri, constipation, "female weakness," gout,malaria, rheumatism and absentmindedness (Bloomquist, 1968: 19). Egypt In Egypt, in the 20th century B.C., cannabis was used to treatsore eyes. Additional medical usage was not reported until muchlater. India Prior to the 10th century B.C., bhang, a cannabis preparation,was used as an anesthetic and antiphlegmatic in India. In thesecond century A.D., a Chinese physician, Hoa-Tho, prescribed itas an analgesic in surgical procedures (Mikuriya, 1969: 34). From the 10th century B.C. up to 1945 (and even to the presenttime), cannabis has been used in India to treat a wide variety ofhuman maladies. The drug is highly regarded by some medicalpractitioners in that country. The religious use of cannabis in India is thought to havepreceded its medical use (Blum and Associates, II, 1969: 73;Snyder, 1970: 125). The religious use of cannabis is to help"the user to free his mind from worldly distractions and toconcentrate on the Supreme Being" (Barber, 1970: 80). Cannabis is used in Hindu and Sikh temples and at Mohammedanshrines. Besides using the drug as an aid to meditation, it isalso used to overcome hunger and thirst by the religiousmendicants. In Nepal, it is distributed on certain feast days atthe temples of all Shiva followers (Blum & Associates, 1969,11: 63). The Hindus spoke of the drug as the "heavenlyguide," "the soother of grief." Considered holy,it was described as a sacred grass during the Vedic period (Fort,1969: 15). A reference to cannabis in Hindu scriptures is thefollowing: To the Hindu the hemp plant is holy. A guardian lives in bhang... Bhang is the joy giver, the sky filer, the heavenly guide,the poor man's heaven, the soother of grief ... No god or man isas good as the religious drinker of Mang. The students of thescriptures of Benares are given bhang before they sit to study.At Benares, Ujjain and other holy places, yogis take deepdraughts of Mang that they may center their thoughts on theEternal . . . By the help of Mang ascetics pass days without foodor drink. The supporting power of Mang has brought many a Hindufamily safe through the miseries of famine (Snyder, 1970: 125). Greece In ancient Greece, cannabis was used as a remedy for earache,edema, and inflammation (Robinson, 1946: 382-383). Africa Cannabis was used in Africa to restore appetite and to relievepain of hemorrhoids, its antiseptic uses were also known tocertain African native tribes (O'Shaughnessy, 1842: 431). Variousother uses, in a number of countries, included the treatment oftetanus, hydrophobia, delirium tremens, infantile convulsions,neuralgia and other nervous disorders, cholera, menorrhagia,rheumatism, hay fever, asthma, skin diseases, and protractedlabor during childbirth. The 19th Century Documents of the 19th century report on the use of cannabis tocontrol diarrhea in cholera and to stimulate appetite. In hisreports of the late 1830's and early 1840's, O'Shaughnessy (1842:431) stated that tetanus could be arrested and cured when treatedwith extra large doses of cannabis. John Bell, M.D., Boston, reported enthusiastically in 1857,about the effects of cannabis in the control of mental andemotional disorders as opposed to the use of "moraldiscipline" to restrain the mentally ill. Similarly, in1858, Moureau. de Tours reported several case histories of manicand depressive disorders treated with hashish (Walton, 1938: 3). The Ohio State Medical Society's Committee on Cannabis Indica,convened in 1860, reported that their respondents claimedcannabis successfully treated neuralgic pain, dysmenorhea,uterine hemorrhage, hysteria, delirium tremens, mania, palsy,whooping cough, infantile convulsions, asthma, gonorrhea, nervousrheumatism, chronic bronchitis, muscular spasms, tetanus,epilepsy and appetite stimulation (McMeens, 1860: 1). The India Hemp Commission (1894: 174) likewise was informed ofsimilar medicinal uses for cannabis. Specific reports includedthe use of cannabis as an analgesic, a restorer of energy, ahemostat, an ecbolic, and an antidiaretic. Cannabis was alsomentioned as an aid in treating hay fever, cholera, dysentery,gonorrhea, diabetes, impotence, urinary incontinence, swelling ofthe testicles, granulation of open sores, and chronic ulcers.Other beneficial effects attributed to cannabis were preventionof insomnia, relief of anxiety, protection against cholera,alleviation of hunger and as an aid to concentration ofattention. MEDICAL USES IN THE 20TH CENTURY Despite the fact that marihuana was made illegal in the UnitedStates in 1937, research has continued on the medical uses ofmarihuana. The findings include various possible medicalapplications of cannabis and its chemical derivatives. One of the most recent and interesting findings (Frank, 1972)concerns the effect of cannabis in reducing intraocular pressure.It was found that as the dose of marihuana increased, thepressure within the eye decreased by up to 30%. This occurred innormal persons as well as in those with glaucoma, a disease ofthe eye in which increased intraocular pressure may causeblindness. Much more research is necessary in connection withthis experimental clinical finding before final judgment can bepassed on such a possible therapeutic value. During the past 20 years in western medicine, marihuana hasbeen assigned antibiotic activity; as a result, several studiesrelating to this possibility have been undertaken. H. B. M.Murphy (1963: 20) reported investigations in Eastern Europe. Hestated that "it is alleged to be active against grampositive organisms at 1/100,000 dilution, but to be largelyinactivated by plasma, so that prospects for its use appear tobe, confined to E. N. T. (ear, nose and throat) and skininfections." Dr. J. Kabelikovi (1952: 500-503) and his coworkers carriedout tests on rats, which were similar to tests carried out withpenicillin in vitro. The alcohol extract of cannabis wasbacterially effective against many gram-positive and onegram-negative microorganisms. It was also found that a paste formof external application was successful. According to Kabelikovi,"from a study of 2,000 herbs by Czechoslovakian scientistsit was found that cannabis indica (the Indian Hemp) was the mostpromising in the realm of antibiotics." In a 1959 publication of Pharmacie, Krejci stated: "Fromthe flowering tips and leaves of hemp, cannabis sativa var indicabred in Middle Europe, were extracted a phenol and an acidfraction. From the acid fraction, two acids were obtained, ofwhich one preserved its antibiotic properties" (p. 349). Inanother Czechoslovakian publication, Krejci (1961: 1351-1353)referred to two additional samples with antibiotic activity. Sample I in Fig. 1 has been sufficiently identified ascannabidiolic acid and sample 9 as cannabidiol. Both fractionsshow antibiotic activity. The results of tests lead us toconclude that the antibacterial action of cannabis sativa is notidentical to the hashish effect found, for example, intetrahydrocannabinol. However, it was established that cannabissativa is effective as an antibiotic for local infections. Kabelik, Krejci, and Santavy (1960: 13) include in"Cannabis as a Medicant" the various microorganismsagainst which cannabis is effective. Proof could be furnished that the cannabis extracts produce avery satisfactory antibacterial effect upon the followingmicrobes: staphylococcus pyogenes aureus, steptococcus alphahaemolyticus, streptococcus beta haemolyticus, enterococcus,diplococcus pneumonia, B. anthracis, and corynebacteriumdiptheriae i.e., all of them gram-positive microorganisms.Noteworthy is the effect upon staphylococcus aureaus strains,which are resistant to penicillin and to other antibiotics. These authors also mentioned that E. coli (gramnegativebacteria) were tested and found to be resistant to the cannabisextract. One of the conclusions was "the possibility ofutilizing the antibiotics locally without any danger of producingresistant strains to other antibiotics administered at the sametime throughout treatment" (Kabelik, et al., 1960: 13). Veliky and Genest in "Suspension Culture of CannabisSativa," (1970) reported that "the ethanol extract ofcultured cells exhibited antibiotic activity against Bacillusmegatherium, staphlococcus aureaus and escherichia coli" (p.493). Other reports said that "a pronounced antibiotic effecthas been observed in South America, where fresh leaves, afterbeing ground, are used as a poultice for furuncles, and in folkmedicine in Europe for treatment of erysipelas" (Kabelik, etal., 1960: 8). This section on the -antibiotic uses of cannabis concludeswith a summary of several reports from various countries. InPharmacopee Arabe: "The ground-up seeds are mixed with breadfor people with tuberculosis" (Andrews and Vinkenoog, 1967:145). In Czechoslovakia: "A preparation from seed pulp was .. . introduced by Sirek to act as a roborant diet in treatment oftuberculosis" (Kabelik, 1960: 8). "In Southern Rhodesiathe plant is used as an African remedy for malaria, anthrax,sepsis, black water fever, dysentery, blood-poisoning, tropicalquinine-malarial haemoglobinuria, and a wart medicine"(Watt, 1961: 13). In Argentina: Cannabis is considered a real panacea for tetanus, colic,gastralgia, swelling of the liver, gonorrhoea, sterility,impotency, abortion, tuberculosis of the lungs and asthma ...even the root-bark has been collected in spring, and employed asa febrifuge, tonic, for treatment of dysentery and gastralgia,either pulverized or in form of decoctions. The root when groundand applied to burns is said to relieve pain. Oil from the seedshas been frequently used even in treatment of cancer . . .(Kabelik, 1960: 8). In 1949, Davis and Ramsey reported a study of the effect ofTHC on epileptic children. "The demonstration ofanticonvulsant activity of the tetrahydrocannabinol (THC)congeners by laboratory tests (Loewe and Goodman, FederationProc., 6: 3521 1947) prompted clinical trial in fiveinstitutionalized epileptic children" (David and Ramsey,1949: 284-285). Of these five children, all had severesymptomatic grand mal epilepsy with mental retardation; threealso had cerebral palsy; and three had focal seizure activity.The EEG tracings were reported to be grossly abnormal in all fivechildren. The results after treatment with homologues of THC,were reported as follows: Three children-responded at least as well as to previoustherapy. Fourth child-almost completely seizure free. Fifthchild-entirely seizure free. As a result of their study, David and Ramsey (1949: 284-285)felt that "the cannabinols herein reported deserve furthertrial in non-institutionalized epileptics." Dr. Vansim of Edgewood Arsenal has written in a recentlypublished book "Psychotomimetic Drugs," that thesynthetic preparations of cannabis are of interest. There arethree areas where they may be of definite use in medicine (Efron,1969: 333-334). One concerns the use of a cannabis analogue whichDr. Walter S. Loewe reported very effective in preventing grandmal seizures if given in small doses. The second use refers to cannabis as an antidepressant. Straub(Walton, 1938: 3), Adams (1942: 726-727), and Stockings (1947,920-922) point to the possible use of cannabis and cannabisanalogues in relieving dysphoria in depressed patients. Otherauthors (Parker and Wrigley, 1950: 278-279) had lesser successbut recommended further research in this field. A report from London in 1968 suggests that cannabis treats thesymptoms and not the cause by focusing the user's attention onhis anxieties and pains without helping him to resolve them(Report by the Advisory Committee, 1968: 11). The third use is described by Douthwaite, who used hashish in1947 "for reducing of anxiety and tension in patients withduodenal ulcer" (Pond, 1948: 279). A report in a 1965 issue of Medical News ("CardiacGlycocides," p. 6) suggests cannabis as treatment for aspecific form of malignancy. Cannabis is recognized as an appetite stimulant, whichsuggests that the drug might be useful in the treatment ofpathological loss of appetite known as anorexia nervosa(Grinspoon, 1969: 21). Similar symptoms exist in terminal cancerpatients who, when treated with cannabis over a short period oftime, demonstrated stimulation of appetite, euphoria, increasedsense of well-being, mild analgesia and an indifference to painwhich reduced the need for opiates (DHEW, 1971: 11). Cannabis has been recently proposed as an adjunct in thetreatment of alcoholics and drug addicts. Roger Adams (1942:726-727) and Todd Mikuriya (1970a: 187-191) noted that thesubstitution of smoked cannabis for alcohol may haverehabilitative value for certain alcoholics. Regarding the use of cannabis analogue in the treatment ofdrug, alcohol and depressive state withdrawal, Thompson andProctor (1953: 520523) report the following: Depressive States: 20 cases of neurotic depression-4 improved (20%) 6 cases of psychotic depression-none improved (00%) Post-Alcoholic Cases: 70 cases--59 reported clinical alleviation of symptoms (84%) Drug Cases: 6 cases of barbiturate addiction-4 reported amelioration ofsymptoms (66%) 4 cases of dilaudid addiction-3 reported alleviation (75%) 2 cases of pantopan and one paregoric addiction-all reportedsmooth withdrawal (100%) 12 cases of Demerol addiction-10 withdrawals in one week (83%) 6 cases of morphine addiction-2 withdrawals without unpleasantsymptoms (33%) The doctors concluded that "Pyrahexyl (a syntheticcannabis-like drug) and related compounds are beneficial in thetreatment of withdrawal symptoms from the use of alcohol to amarked degree, and in the treatment of withdrawal symptoms fromthe use of opiates to a less marked, but still significantdegree" (Thompson & Proctor, 1953:520-523). Drs. Allentuck and Bowman (1942) undertook a study of the useof marihuana in the morphine abstinence syndrome. They stated: A series of cases were selected from among drug addictsundergoing treatment. . . . Comparative results were charteredfor the gradual withdrawal, total withdrawal, and marihuanaderivative substitution, as methods of treatment. . . . 49subjects were studied. The results in general, although stillinconclusive, suggest that the marihuana substitution methodameliorated or eliminated (the symptoms) sooner, the patient wasin a better frame of mind, his spirits elevated, his physicalcondition was more rapidly rehabilitated, and he expressed a wishto resume his occupation sooner (p. 250). In his study of the medical application of cannabis for MayorLaGuardia's committee, Dr. Samuel Allentuck reported"favorable results in treating withdrawal of opiate addictswith tetrahydrocannabinol (THC), a powerful purified product ofthe hemp plants" (Mikuriya, 1969: 38). Roger Adams' detailed studies, as reported by Dr. C. K.Himmelsbach in his 1944 article "Treatment of the MorphineAbstinence Syndrome with a Synthetic Cannabis-Like Compound"(1944:26), indicated that "withdrawal manifestations wereconsidered to be mild. The reported therapeutic value ofmarihuana was attributed to improved appetite, greater sleep,euphoria, and a reduction of the intensity or elimination ofabstinence phenomena." Himmelsbach, however, had lessersuccess when he studied the effect of a "pyrahexyl"compound on the morphine abstinence syndrome, as noted by hisconclusions that: (1) Pyrahexyl compound appears to possess considerablecannabis-like effect when administered orally, but little or nonewhen given intramuscularly. (2) When given by mouth In definitely effective amountspyrahexyl compound had no appreciable ameliorative effect on theopiate abstinence syndrome (P. 29). The New York City Mayor LaGuardia's Committee on Marihuana(1944: 147-148) reported two possible therapeutic applications ofmarihuana: The first is the typical euphoria-producing action which mightbe applicable in the treatment of various types of mentaldepression; the second is the rather unique property whichresults in the stimulation of appetite. In the light of thisevidence and in view of the fact that there is a lack of anysubstantial Indication of dependence on the drug, It was reasonedthat marihuana might be useful in alleviating the withdrawalsymptoms in drug addicts. However, the studies here describedwere not sufficiently complete to establish the value of suchtreatment . . . . A study was then undertaken at Riker's Island (N.Y.)Penitentiary involving 56 morphine or heroin addicted inmates.Two groups were equally matched according to age, physicalcondition, length and intensity of habit, etc. One group receivedno treatment or Magendie's solution, and the other received 15mg. of THC and/or placebo. "The impression was gained that those who receivedtetrahydrocannabinol had less severe withdrawal symptoms thanthose who received no treatment or who were treated withMagendie's solution" the report stated. However, the reportfurther said that this alleged therapeutic use of marihuanashould be "investigated under completely controlledconditions" before meaningful conclusions can be developed(New York City Mayor, AU: 147-148). Some reports indicate that cannabis helps relieve labor pains.Such uses are reported among native tribes in South Africa andSouthern Rhodesia: "The Suto tribe fumigates the parturientwoman to relieve pain;"the Sotho women of Basutoland"are reported as smoking cannabis to stupefy themselvesduring childbirth," and have also been known to"administer the ground-up achene with bread or mealiepap toa child during weaning" (Watt, 1962:13). The use of cannabis in the treatment of leprosy has beendescribed in a 1939 dictionary of Malayan medicine: "Seedsof Hydnocarpus anthelmintim ... form the basis of the Tai FoonChee treatment of leprosy. After crushing and sieving, they aremixed with cannabis indica in the proportion of two parts of theseeds to one of Indian hemp" (Andrews and Vinkenoog, 1967:146). Likewise, Watt and Breyer-Brandwijk quote Pappe that"the early colonist employed a decoction in the treatment ofchronic cutaneous eruptions, possibly in leprosy (Andrews andVinkenoog, 1967: 146). Kabelik, Krejci, and Santavy have reported favorable results"in stornatitis aphtosa, gingivitis, and in paradentoseswith a mouthwash of the following composition: Tinct. Cannabis20.0, Tinct. Chamomillae, Tinct. jernmarum populi (or another tanfor example, Tinct. Gallarum) aa 10.0 to be applied in the formof sprays or linaments to the inside of the mouth" (Kabeliket al., 1960: 13). In reference to the use of cannabis, Chopra and Chopra (1957:12-13) listed some preparations used in the practice ofindigenous medicine in India in 1957. They summarize theirarticle "The Use of the Cannabis Drugs in India" (1957:12-13) by saying: . . . with regard to the use of cannabis in Indian indigenousmedicine at the present time, it may be said that It was andstill is fairly extensively used in both the Ayurvedle (Hindu)and Tibbi (Mohammedan) systems of medicine as an anodyne,hypnotic, analgesic and antispasmodic, and as a remedy forexternal application to piles. It is also used in the treatmentof dysmennorhoea, rheumatism, chronic diarrhoea of the spruetype, gonorrhoea, malaria and mental diseases on the advice ofitinerant practitioners of Indigenous medicine as well as quackswho roam about the country. For medicinal purposes the drug isadministered by mouth and hardly ever by smoking. The use of cannabis drugs in indigenous medicine has greatlydeclined during recent years for two reasons-firstly, because ofthe rapid deterioration of the potency of cannabis drugs instorage, the specimens available on the market being often Inertand quite useless; secondly, because a number of potent andeffective drugs of the type used In western medicine are nowavailable on the market and are used quite extensively by thepractitioners of indigenous medicine in place of cannabis, forthe anodyne, sedative and hypnotic effects. In the rural areas ofIndia, however, the practitioners of indigenous medicine stilluse cannabis quite extensively In their practice. The same article lists a variety of uses in which cannabis isemployed therapeutically in veterinary medicine. Dr. R. N. Chopra (1940: 361) reports the following medicinalhousehold uses of Indian Hemp: The hemp drugs are popularly used as household remedies in theamelioration of many minor ailments. A mild beverage made frombhang leaves is believed to sharpen appetite and to helpdigestion. Indian hemp Is commonly used as a smoke and as a drinkfor its supposed prophylactic value against marihuana inmalarious tracts. Bhang beverages form one of the popularhousehold remedies for gonorrhoea and dysuria. On account oftheir mild diuretic and sedative properties these drinks probablygive a certain amount of symptomatic relief. Likewise, the use ofbhang for dysmenorrhea, asthma, and other spasmodic conditions isnot uncommon. A poultice made from fresh leaves is a commonhousehold remedy for painful affections of the eyes,conjunctivitis, swollen joints, orchitis, and other acuteinflammatory conditions. Tuberculosis, anthrax, tetanus, and menstrual cramps are amongthe miscellaneous medical uses of cannabis reported. Reports fromMexico indicate the use of marihuana smoking "to relax andto endure heat and fatigue" (Mikuriya, 1969: 37). Kabelik et al. (1960: 13) also discuss other varied uses ofcannabis. In human therapy the best results have been obtained with thefollowing medicaments combined with substances derived fromcannabis: dusting powder together with boric acid (otitis),ointment (staphylococcus infected wounds, staphylodermia and soon), ear drops (otitis chron.), alcohol solutions with glycerine(treatment of rhagades on the nipples of nursing women-preventionof staphylococcic mastitis,) aqueous emulsions (sinusitis),dentin powder with the IRC (Isolated Resin from Cannabis)(caries). The preparations mentioned above have been alreadytested clinically, and will eventually be made available forproduction. . . . the experiments made in clinical practice,particularly in stomatology, otorhinolaryngology, gynecology,dermatology, phisiology, with some pharmaceutical preparationscontaining antibacterial substances from cannabis have beenreported. Attention has been drawn to the advantageousutilization of the active substances from cannabis in veterinarymedicine, and particularly in preventive medicine foranthropozoonoses. Murphy (1963: 20) refers to an article by Lang,"Treatment of Acute Appendicitis with a Mixture of MaJen," which says "the drug has apparently been used inChina for the treatment of appendicitis." The Xosa tribe inSouth Africa "employs it for treatment of inflammation ofthe feet" (Kabelik et al., 1960: 7), while the Mfengu andHottentot use the plant as a snake-bite remedy (Watt, 1962: 13). Other therapeutic uses attributed to marihuana are for thetreatment of migraine headaches, as an analgesic, and as ahypnotic. Hollister (1971: 28) stated that "other uses whichhave been proposed for marihuana include the treatment ofepilepsy, as prophylaxis for attacks of migraine or facialneuralgia, or as a sexual stimulant." Contents | Feedback | Search DRCNet Library | Schaffer Library | Major Studies Marihuana, A Signal of Misunderstanding WT01-B25-39IA031-000651-B021-179http://206.61.184.43:80/schaffer/LIBRARY/studies/nc/nc1b.htm 206.61.184.43 19970122123305 text/html 25027HTTP/1.0 200 OKDate: Wednesday, 22-Jan-97 12:32:56 GMTServer: WebSitePro/1.1f (S/N wpo-0deb)Allow-ranges: bytesContent-type: text/htmlLast-modified: Saturday, 28-Dec-96 06:58:41 GMTContent-length: 24809 Marijuana -- History of the Intoxicant Use Contents | Feedback | Search DRCNet Library | Schaffer Library | Major Studies Marihuana, A Signal of Misunderstanding National Commission on Marihuana And Drug Abuse Marihuana: A Signal of Misunderstanding History of the Intoxicant Use The preceding history of the medical use of marihuana hasprovided an outline of how marihuana has been alleged to carediseases and relieve pain. This section discusses the non-medicaluse of cannabis. The survey includes a discussion of marihuanause in India, the rest of Asia, Africa, Europe, and the UnitedStates; and a concluding analysis of the intoxicant use incontemporary times. Assessing marihuana's use as an intoxicant is difficultbecause for many people around the world, its importance as anintoxicant has been secondary to its use as a folk medicine or aceremonial adjunct (Grinspoon, 1971: 173-174). Caffeine andnicotine apart, cannabis is second in worldwide popularity onlyto alcohol. India Marihuana was probably first used as an intoxicant in Indiaaround 1000 B.C., and soon became an integral part of Hinduculture (Snyder, 1970: 125). In China, where the marihuana planthad been used to make cloth and certain medicines for centuries,it was not recorded as an intoxicant. Explanations are unclear asto why marihuana was used as an intoxicant in India but not inChina. Marihuana was also used as an intoxicant in other parts of theworld prior to 500 A.D. but was not as well documented as the useof opium. The drug "nepenthe" in Homer's Odyssey isbelieved by a number of scholars to have been a brew in which themost active ingredient was hemp (Brotteaux, 1967: 10). Galenwrote in the second century that it was customary to promotehilarity and happiness at banquets by giving the guests hemp(Reininger, 1967: 14-15). Cannabis is used in three different preparations in India(Snyder, 1970: 27). The first is called bhang, comparable inpotency to marihuana in the United States. It is made from theleaves and stems of uncultivated plants and blended into apleasant tasting liquid concoction. The second is ganja, morepotent than bhang, made from the tops of cultivated plants. Thethird and most potent preparation, charas, is similar to hashishor "hash" and is obtained by scraping the resin fromthe leaves of the cultivated plants. Hard blocks are pressed fromthis material which are converted for smoking. High-caste Hindus are not permitted to use alcohol. But theyare allowed bhang at religious ceremonials, and also employ it asan intoxicant at marriage ceremonies and family festivals. Bhangis used by laborers in India in much the same way as beer is usedin the United States (Barber, 1970: 80). The lower classes of India use either a few pulls at a ganjapipe or sip a glass of bhang at the end of the day to relievefatigue (Grinspoon, 1971: 173), to obtain a sense of well-being,to stimulate appetite, and to enable them to bear more cheerfullythe "strain and monotony of . . . daily routines"(Geller and Boas, 1969: 5). These types of users and objectivesare frequently the reverse of those in the United States wheremarihuana users consider themselves an exclusive and advanced"in-group" (Andrews and Vinkenoog, 1967: iii). A majorintoxicant use in India is for religious purposes. Asia and the Middle East Cannabis spread from India to other parts of Asia, to theMiddle East and then to Africa and South America, although somebelieve it may have originated independently in the latter twocontinents (Fort, 1969: 15). Cultural values may have played apart in determining its use. Opium and cannabis were equallyavailable in pre-Communist China; but cannabis had no vogue as anintoxicant (Barber, 1970: 80). The Chinese spoke of the plant asthe "Liberator of Sin." In India, it was called. the"Giver of Life" (Fort, 1970: 15). One author proposedthat temperament may have also played a role in thisdetermination, suggesting that perhaps the placid, practicalChinese did not appreciate the euphoria produced by cannabis(Snyder, 1070: 125). Additional evidence of mid-Asian use comes from cuneiformtablet interpretations that ascribe use in Persia circa 700-600B.C. and of the time of Ashurbanipal's Assyrian reign, 669-626B.C. (Blum. and Associates, 1969, 1: 62). The drug's popularity as an intoxicant spread to the MiddleEast and thoroughly permeated Islamic culture within a fewcenturies (Geller and Boas, 1969: 5). Because alcohol wasprohibited to the followers of Mohammed, cannabis was accepted asa substitute. The Myth of the Assassins Two Muslim myths, one from the 10th century A.D. and the otherfrom the 13th century A.D., have been the sources of some of thecontemporary attitudes about the drug. The first myth deals withhashish as a magical eastern drug brought by the Arabs into Spainin the 10th century. These invaders confined its use primarily tothemselves, taking it back to Africa when they left Spain.Although it did not become a European habit, some beliefs aboutthe drug were left behind. The existence of this "magical eastern drug" wasprobably known to Marco Polo, the Venetian traveler of the 13thcentury A.D. before he left on his journey to the East. MarcoPolo returned to Europe with his own tale of cannabis which, inthe potent form of hashish, was said to be used as an intoxicantby Hasan-I-Sabbah to send his ruthless followers on missions ofmurder. The word "assassin" was said to be derived fromthe word "hashish," or from Hasan (Geller and Boas,1969: 6). Marco Polo had written about how this "Old Man ofthe Mountain" sent his men out on their missions with allthe color and pageantry that Europeans associated with the East.As Marco Polo described: In the territory of the Assassins there were deliciouswalled gardens in which one can find everything that can satisfythe needs of the body and the caprices of the most exactingsensuality. Great banks of gorgeous flowers and bushes coveredwith fruit stand amongst crystal rivers of living water....Trellises of roses and fragrant vines cover with their foliagepavilions of jade and porcelain furnished with Persian carpetsand Grecian embroideries. Delicious drinks in vessels of gold or crystal are servedby young boys or girls, whose dark unfathomable eyes cause themto resemble the Houris, divinities of that Paradise which theProphet promised to believers. The sound of harps mingles withthe cooing of doves, the murmur of soft voices blends with thesighing of the reeds. All is joy, pleasure, voluptuousness andenchantment. The Grand Master of the Assassins, whenever he discovers ayoung man resolute enough to belong to his murderous legions . .. invites the youth to his table and intoxicates him with theplant "hashish." Having been secretly transported tothe pleasure gardens the young man imagines that he has enteredthe Paradise of Mahomet. The girls, lovely as Houris, contributeto the illusion. After he has enjoyed to satiety all the joyspromised by the-Prophet to his elect, he falls back to thepresence of the Grand Master. Here he is informed that he canenjoy perpetually the delights he has just tasted If he will takepart in the war of the Infidel as commanded by the Prophet (Gellerand Boas, 1969: 6). Another translation (Kitti, 1967: 24) begins the tale thisway: Now no man was allowed to enter the Garden save those whom heintended to be his ASHISHIN. In reality, this was a religious situation and scholars havelong since exposed Marco Polo's tale as being a myth, at best animaginative embellishment of tales he had heard. Africa Use of cannabis in most parts of Africa developed slowly, mostof it during the past 100 years (Blum and Associates, 1969, I:73). A report from Africa in 1891 (Reininger, 1966: 141-142),dealt with a tribe that used hemp as an intoxicant in their newlyformed religion and in preparation for battle. A similar use isdescribed in the Congo, when Simba warriors in 1964 were said touse a cannabis-alcohol mixture in preparation for battle, torouse themselves for the battle and to magically guaranteeimmunity from harm. In Morocco, marihuana, called kif, has been used as anintoxicant by adult males for centuries; that custom continuestoday even though the drug is illegal (Mikuriya, 1970: 122-123). Although moderate use appears to be tolerated in the areas ofIndia, North Africa and the Middle East, excessive use isgenerally viewed as indicative of serious personality problems(Geller and Boas, 1969: 7). Europe One of the more suggestive parallels between 19th centuryFrance and the United States today is the fact that the Frenchinterest in cannabis at that time was aroused by the returningFrench soldiers and scientists of Napoleon's army in Egypt, asource of the drug. A similar interest occurred in the UnitedStates after the Korean conflict, and has intensified sinceVietnam (Geller and Boas, 1969: 7). During the 19th century, European interest in the drug wasaided by two scientific reports, the first by W. B. O'Shaughnessyin 1839, and the second report by Queen Victoria's physician,Russell Reynolds. Both men recommended its medical use for avariety of ailments and as a mild euphoriant (Grinspoon, 1971:56). Cannabis received highly laudatory testimonials from themedical profession of that day and was readily available withoutprescription (Snyder, 1970: 121). Interest in cannabis was further kindled by popular writerswho used and spoke of hashish enthusiastically, including CharlesBaudelaire, Arthur Rimbaud, and Pierre Gautier. Gautier andBaudelaire, in fact, were members of the Club des Hachischins, inwhich a number of writers and intellectuals gathered andexperimented with hashish (Geller and Boas, 1969: 13). Although the public delighted to read of the French writers'drug experiences, the public did not care to engage in the samekind of activity; to them the experiences were frightening andrepugnant. "As a result, the smoking of hashish remained thesub-rosa province of a few European artists until the recenttrans-Atlantic phenomenon of the American drug culture"(Geller and Boas, 1969: 8). United States The, events surrounding the introduction of cannabis use tothe New World are entirely unclear. Some historians say theSpaniards brought the plant with them in the 16th century, othersay marihuana smoking came in with the slave trade or with theAsian Indian migration of the late 18th century. The hemp plant was cultivated in the United States forcenturies, apparently without general knowledge of itsintoxicating properties (Grinspoon, 1971: 10). Cannabis was anoften used medicine in the United States in the 19th century. Itwas easily available without a prescription and was also widelyprescribed by physicians (Snyder, 1970: 26). Hemp was used by thepioneers to cover their wagons. The plant was a major crop inKentucky, Virginia, Wisconsin and Indiana, and was one of themore important southern agricultural products, after cotton.. Itis still used to make rope, twine and textiles, while the seed isused as bird food (Geller and Boas, 1969: 16). Marihuana use as an intoxicant in the United States beganslowly in the early part of this century. Puerto Rican soldiers,and then Americans who were stationed in the Panama Canal Zone,are reported to have been using it by 1916. American soldiersfighting Pancho Villa circa 1916 also learned to use it. Thisfollows the first reported use in Mexico in the 1880's (Blum andAssociates, 1969, 1: 69-70). Intoxicant use in the United Statesis also traced to the large influx of Mexican laborers in the1910's and 1920's (Geller and Boas, 1969: 14). The 1933 Report of the "Military Surgeon" stated,regarding marihuana use among the soldiers in the Canal Zone,that: Marihuana as grown and used on the Isthmus of Panama is amild stimulant and intoxicant. It is not a "habitforming" drug in the sense that the derivatives of opium,cocaine, and such drugs, are as there are no symptoms ofdeprivation following its withdrawal. Delinquencies due to marihuana smoking which result intrial by military court are negligible in number when comparedwith delinquencies resulting from the use of alcohol drinks,which is also classed as a stimulant and intoxicant (Gellerand Boas, 1969: 147). The report went on to say that marihuana presented no threatto military discipline, and "that no recommendations toprevent the sale or use of marihuana are deemed advisable." Cannabis has been rejected in various societies on asceticgrounds. In such puritanical societies such as the Wahabil ofArabis and the Senussis of Libya, no smoking of any kind wastolerated, nor was coffee. In North Africa, social rank dictateduse: the aristocratic Moors scorned both hemp and tobaccosmoking, preferring instead, as compatible with high status,opium eating (Blum and Associates, 1969, 1: 73). One statement highlighting this kind of value conflict comesfrom a Nigerian journalist (Davies, 1966: 299-300) attempting toexplain the 15-year prison sentences of foreign tourists forgrowing and smoking marihuana: There is a growing trend in the more economically advancedcountries to indulge at leisure in the exploration of thepersonality. At a certain stage of development, there is lessneed to produce and more time to spend consuming. This ishealthy. If used properly, marihuana could be helpful at thisstage of development. However, countries which are only beginningto develop a more complex economic structure must channel alltheir energies into creating a new system. This means that theymust sacrifice more of their pleasure. People who smoke hemp seemon the whole to be less aggressive than people who drink alcohol.Hemp smoking may have a positive value for certain socialfunctions.... One of the first acts of the Military Government was toissue a decree making it punishable by death to grow marihuana,and by up to twenty years of prison for merely being inpossession of it . . . meantime, we Nigerian have to stop gettinghigh for a while and develop our country. In the United States, the decade of the 1960's has seen aspectacular and unprecedented spread of the use of marihuana,chiefly among the youth. An estimated 24 million persons haveused marihuana and approximately 3.4 million are current users.The numbers involved and the fact that use spans all age groupsand social classes in American life has produced marked publicreaction and a need for more information on the drug. References Adams, P.: "Marihuana," Bulletin of the New YorkAcademy of Medicine (1942). Allentuck, S. and Bowman, K. M.: "The Psychiatric Aspectsof Marihuana Intoxication," American Journal of Psychiatry,99(2) (September 1942). Andrews, G. and Vinkenoog, S. (eds.) : The Book of Grass: AnAnthology on Indian Hemp, London: Peter Owen Limited (1967). Barber, T. X.: LSD, Marihuana, Yoga, and Hypnosis, Chicago:Aldine Publishing Company (1970). Bloomquist, E. R.: Marijuana, Beverly Hills: Glencoe Press(1968). Blum, R. H. and Associates: Drugs I: Society and Drugs: Socialand Cultural Observations, San Francisco: Jossey-Bass Inc.(1969). Blum, R. H. and Associates: Drugs II: Students and Drugs:College and High School Observations, San Francisco: Jossey-BassInc. (1969). "The Cannabis Problem: A Note On The Problem and TheHistory of International Action," Bulletin onNarcotics,14(4) (1962). "Cardiac Glycocides Found Cytotoxic," Medical News(London) March 26 (1965). Chopra, 1. C. and Chopra, R. N.: "The Use of the CannabisDrugs in India," Bulletin on Narcotics, 9(l) (1957). Chopra, R. N.: "Use of Hemp Drugs in India," TheIndian Medical Gazette, (June 1940). Commission of Inquiry into the Non-Medical Use of Drugs:Interim Report, Ottawa (1970). David, J. P. and Ramsey, H. H.: "Antiepileptic Action ofMarihuana-active Substances," Federation Procedures, 8(1949). Davies, A.: "Nigeria Whispers," Andrews, G. andVinkenoog, S. (ed&) : The Book of Grass: An Anthology onIndian Hemp, London: Peter Owen Limited (1967). Department of Health, Education and Welfare: Marihuana andHealth, A Report to the Congress from the Secretary, Departmentof Health, Education and Welfare (March 1971). Efron, D. H. (ed.) : Psychotomimetic Drugs, New York: RavenPress (1969). Feinglass, S. J.: "Marijuana: Standardization,Characterization and Potential Therapeutic Uses," Journal ofSecondary Education, 43 (May 1968). Fort, J.: The Pleasure Seekers: The Drug Crisis, Youth andSociety, New York: Grove Press, Inc. (1969). Frank, Ira, University of California, Los Angeles, School ofMedicine, Personal Communication, September 1971. Geller, A. and Boas, M.: The Drug Beat, New York: Cowles BookCompany, Inc. (1969). Goode, E.: Marijuana, Chicago: Atherton Press (1969).Grinspoon, L.: "Marihuana," Scientific American, 221(6)(December 1969). Grinspoon, L.: Marihuana Reconsidered, Cambridge: HarvardUniversity Press (1971). Hearings before the Committee on Ways and Means, U.S. House ofRepresentatives, Taxation of Marihuana, 75th Congress, 1stSession on H.R. 6385 (1937). Himmelsbach, C. J.: "Treatment of the Morphine AbstinenceSyndrome with a Synthetic Cannabis-Like Compound," SouthernMedical Journal, 37 (January 1944). Hollister, L. E.:"Marihuana in Man: Three Years Later." Science, 172(April 2, 1971). Indian Hemp Drugs Commission: Marijuana, Report of the IndianHemp Drugs Commission, Government Central Printing Office, Simla(1894). Kabelik, J.: "Hemp (Cannabis sativa)-AntibioticDrug," Pharmazie, 121 (1957). Kabelik, J., Krejci, Z., and Santavy, F.: "Cannabis as aMedicant," Bulletin on Narcotics, 12(3) (July-September1960). Kabelikovi, J.: "Antibacterial Action of CannabisIndica," Lekarske Listy, 15 (7) (1952). Kitti, Phillip K.: "The Assassins," Andrews, G. andVinkenoog, S. (eds.) : The Book of Grass: An Anthology of IndianHemp, New York: Grove Press, Inc. (1967). Krejci, Z.: "Onthe Problem of Substances with Antibacterial and Hashish Actionin Hemp (Cannabis Sativa L.)," Casopis8 Lekaru Ceskych(1961). Krejci, Z., Horak, M., and Santavy, F.: "Hemp (Cannabissativa)-Antibiotic Drug, 3rd Report," Pharmazie, 14 (1959). Loewe, S. and Goodman, L. S.: "Anticonvulsant Action ofMarihuana-Active Substances," Federation Procedures, 6(1947). Mikuriya, T. H.: "Cannabis Substitution. An AdjunctiveTherapeutic Toot in the Treatment of Alcoholism," MedicalTimes, 98 (4) (April 1970). Mikuriya, T. H.: "Marihuana in Morocco," Aaronson,B. & Osmond, H. (eds.) : Psychedelics, The Uses andImplications of Hallucinogenic Drugs, Garden City: Doubleday& Company, Inc. (1970). Mikuriya, T. H.: "Marihuana In Medicine: Past, Presentand Future," California Medicine, 110 (January 1969).Murphy, H. B. M.: "The Cannabis Habit: A Review of RecentPsychiatric Literature," Bulletin on Narcotics, 15(l)(1.963). McMeens, R. R.: "Report of the Committee on CannabisIndica," Transactions of the Fifteenth Annual Meeting of theOhio State Medical Society, Columbus, Ohio: Follett, Foster andCo. (1860). New York City Mayor LaGuardia's Committee on Marihuana, TheMarihuana Problem in the City of New York: Sociological, Medical,Psychological and Pharmacological Studies, Lancaster,Pennsylvania: The Jaques Cattell Press (1944). O'Shaughnessy, W. B.: "On the Preparations of the IndianHemp, or Gunjah," Trans. Med. and Psy. SOC., Bengal (1838-40and 1842). Parker, C. S. and Wrigley, F. "Synthetic CannabisPreparations in Psychiatry: (I) Synhexyl," Journal of MentalSciences, 96 (1950). Reininger, W.: "Historical Notes," Solomon, D. (ed.)The Marihuana Papers, New York: The New American Library, SignetBooks (1966). Reininger, W.: "Remnants From Historic Times,"Andrews G. and Vinkenoog, S., (eds.) The Book of Grass: AnAnthology on Indian Hemp, London: Peter Owen Limited (1967). Robinson, V.: "Concerning Cannabis Indica "I CibaSymposia, 8 (Augus-September, 1946). Snyder, S.: Uses of Marijuana, New York: Oxford UniversityPress (1970). Snyder, S.: "What We Have Forgotten About Pot-APharmacologist's History," New York Times Magazine, (NewYork, New York) (December 13, 1970). Solomon, D. (ed.) : The Marihuana Papers, New York: NewAmerican Library (1968). Stockings, G. T.: "A New Euphoriant for Depressive MentalStates," British Medical Journal, 1 (10,47). Thompson, L. J. and Proctor, R. C.: "The Use of Pyrahexylin the Treatment of Alcoholic and Drug WithdrawalConditions," North Carolina Medical Journal, 14 (October,1953). Veliky, I. A. and Genest, K.: "Suspension Culture ofCannabis Sativa," Lloydia, 33(4) (December, 1970). Walton, R. P.: Marihuana: America's New Drug Problem,Philadelphia: J. B. Lippincott (1938). Watt, J. M.: "Dagga in South Africa," Bulletin onNarcotics, 13(3) (1961). Watt, J. M. and Breyer-Brandwijk, M. G.: The Medicinal andPoisonous Plants of Southern and Eastern Africa, 2nd edition,Edinburgh and London: E. and S. Livingstone, Ltd. (1962). Contents | Feedback | Search DRCNet Library | Schaffer Library | Major Studies Marihuana, A Signal of Misunderstanding WT01-B25-40IA031-000651-B021-204http://206.61.184.43:80/schaffer/LIBRARY/studies/nc/nc1c.htm 206.61.184.43 19970122123316 text/html 15678HTTP/1.0 200 OKDate: Wednesday, 22-Jan-97 12:33:05 GMTServer: WebSitePro/1.1f (S/N wpo-0deb)Allow-ranges: bytesContent-type: text/htmlLast-modified: Saturday, 28-Dec-96 06:55:22 GMTContent-length: 15460 II. Biological Effects of Marihuana II. Biological Effects of Marihuana Botanical and Chemical Considerations Cannabis sativa is one of man's oldest and most widely useddrugs. The substance has been used in various ways as long asmedical history has been recorded and is currently used as amultipurpose drug throughout the world (Adams, 1942; Adams,1941-1942; Grinspoon, 1969; Indian Hemp, 1969; Walton, 1938). During the past few years, a resurgence of the use ofmarihuana by western society, its increased importance as asocial issue and the development of more precise compounds andanalytic techniques have sparked dormant scientific interest inthe substance. However, this effort has added little to what wasalready known about the clinical syndrome produced by cannabis(Hollister, 1971) and described by investigators during the last100 years (Hollister, 1971; Beaudelaire, 1861; Moreau, 1845;Lewin, 1964; Indian Hemp, 1969; Mayor's Committee, 1944). Strongly held, diametrically opposed opinions exist aboutwhether the ultimate effects of cannabis use are harmful,harmless, or beneficial to human functioning (Pillard, 1970). Despite these conflicting opinions, from a scientificperspective, the literature on marihuana is as clear, if notclearer, than for many other botanical substances consumed byman. Most of the older reports suffer from multiple scientificdefects such as biased sampling, lack of adequate controls,unsophisticated techniques, and use of unstandardized marihuanaof unknown potency. Nevertheless, much is known about the use ofcannabis by man. Marihuana has a unique position in the multitudeof pharmaceuticals in that human experimentation has been greaterthan laboratory animal experimentation. The crucial experiments about social effects from chronic usewill be settled by close observation of those who use the drug.The issues of potential therapeutic utility; mechanisms of mentalfunction alteration; and the relationship to mental illness willrequire more extensive laboratory experimentation (Hollister,1971). Botanical and Chemical Considerations In the past several years considerable progress has been madein adding to the understanding of marihuana as a complex drugcontaining botanical substance. Much important information hasbeen obtained from intensive investigation of marihuana ofworldwide origin cultivated under Government contract by theUniversity of Mississippi (Doorenbos et al., 1971). Marihuana is a preparation derived from the hemp plant,Cannabis sativa. This plant is an annual which either iscultivated or grows freely as a weed around the world, includingmost of the United States. When cultivated in temperate climates,plantings are made in May to June. The seeds germinate in lessthan a week. in moist soil. After thinning, the plants grow asrapidly as two feet a week during the peak growing season. Theycan reach a height of up to 18 feet at maturity, approximatelythree to five months after planting. Growth is greatly inhibitedby inadequate light, water or soil nutrients. Marihuana is produced by cutting the stem beneath the lowestbranches, air drying, and stripping seeds, bracts, flowers,leaves and small stems from these plants. Stems and seeds arevariably removed using a mesh screen producing manicuredmarihuana. Hashish is produced by scraping the thick resinousmaterial secreted by the flowers (Doorenbos et al., 1971). Many morphological variations in branching and leaf structureare observed among plants produced by different seed types. Thecharacteristic leaf is palmately-compound and contains an oddnumber of coarsely serrated leaflets. Plants of a given seed typegenerally grow at similar rates and resemble each other. Thus,botanists believe, Cannabis sativa represents a single specieswhich has not stabilized and has many variations (Doorenbos etal., 1971). Cannabis Sativa is a dioecious species with separate male andfemale plants, both producing flowers. Some monoecious variantsare reported. Pollination appears to be accomplished by aircurrents. Bees are attracted by male flowers but not by femaleflowers. Sex cannot be established until flowering begins and thestructure of the male and female flower is distinct. Male plantsbegin shedding leaves shortly after flowering, shied their pollenand die. Female plants lose their older leaves as the seedmatures. After shedding their seed, they die. Contrary to popularbelief, there is no significant difference in drug contentbetween male and female plants at equivalent states of maturity(Fetterman et al., 1970; Ohlsson et al., 1971). Male plantsmature earlier than the females, shed their pollen and die whilethe female plant is continuing to mature. The drug content of the plant parts is variable. Generally,the, drug content decreases in the following order: bracts,flowers, leaves. Practically no cannabinoids are found in thestems, roots and seeds. Obviously, fluctuations in pharmacologicactivity of a sample of Marihuana, depend on the mixture of theseplant parts which is determined by the manicuring process(Fetterman et al., 1970). Different variants of the plant contain different amounts ofpsychoactive drug. Variants of cannabis Sativa cover a spectrumof drug contents. Generally, they can be classified as eitherdrug or fiber genotype. Drug type is high in THC and low incannabidiol and the fiber type is the converse. This type isdetermined genetically and transmitted by the seed. Thus, seeds from different geographical areas produce plantswith a wide range of drug content. For example, when grown undersimilar conditions, plants grown from seeds from Mexico maycontain 15 times more psychoactive drug than those grown fromseeds from Iowa. Of course, individual plants of the same variantoften contain greatly different drug content (Fetterman, et al.,1970). Environmental factors are not as important as heredity indetermining type, but they influence to some degree the drugcontent. However, environmental factors, including type of soil,water, growing space, temperature and light do play an importantrole in determining the size and vitality of the plant (Doorenboset al., 1971; Ohlsson et al., 1971; Phillips et al., 1970). This notorious variability of cannabis preparations causesmany disadvantages for detailed and reproducible biological work.Consequently, much effort has been expended to provide a firmchemical basis in order to provide pure and well-definedsubstances for research. The major naturally occurring active component of cannabis,1-delta 9-trans tetrahydrocannabinol, was not isolated in a pureform and its structure illucidated until 1964 (Gaoni andMechoulam, 1964; Mechoulam and Gaoni, 1967; Mechoulam et al.,1970). In addition, the A' isomer, which is usually present insmall quantities in the natural product representing less than10% of the combined THC content, has a similar spectrum ofactivity (Hively et al., 1966). These two chemicals, available byindustrial synthesis (Fahrenholtz et al., 1967; Petrzilka andSikemeier, 1967) or by extraction from the natural plant, canapparently reproduce fully the effects of the crude drug inanimals and man. More than 20 natural cannabinoids have beenidentified in the plant (Figure 1) (Mechoulam, 1970; Shani andMechoulam, 1970; Doorenbos et al., 1971). All but Delta 11 and Delta 9 THC are inactivepsychopharmacologically and do not seem to exert potentiating orother effects. However, new compounds, cannabinoids andnon-cannabinoids, are being isolated from the plant and requirefurther investigation. Several studies may indicate that somematerial present in natural marihuana may act synergisticallywith THC and potentiate its psychological effect Leniber (1972)Paton and Pertwee (1971) suggest cannabidiol may play this role. The chemical nomenclature of tetra-hydrocannabinols is in astate of confusion due to the existence of two numbering systems.The dibenzopyran or formal system treats the compound assubstituted dibenzopyrans ( Delta 9 THC) while the monoterpenoidsystem considers them as substituted terpenes (Al THC). Theformal system will be used hereafter (Figure 2). Many of the natural cannabinoids are present in the plant asacids. These acids are believed to be psychopharmacologicallyinactive. However, they are converted rapidly when heated, andslowly when stored into their respective active neutralcomponents (Figure 3) (Waller, 1971). This conversion(decarboxylation) does not apparently occur when the acids areabsorbed after oral consumption (Mechoulam, 1970). The proposed biogenesis (Figure 4) of All THC appears toproceed through cannabidiol (CBD). Cannabis variates of the fibertype apparently do not perform this conversion. Thus, cannabidiolis the cannabinoid present in the largest percentage in thenon-drug variety (Phillips et al., 1970). Marihuana appears tolose its potency over time due to conversion of THC to cannabinol(CBN) (Mechoulam, 1970) and this also apparently occurs morequickly for hashish implying the presence of a stabilizingsubstance in the whole plant (Figure 5). Recently, the n-propyl homologue, of Delta 9 THC has beenisolated from crude marihuana. It has about 20% of the activityof Delta THC in mice, and probably makes only a smallcontribution to the total marihuana effect (Gill, 1971). Merkus(1971) and Vree et al. (1971) have recently identified propyl andmethyl cannabinol homologues in hashish in extremely smallquantities. In addition, numerous other non-cannabinoids have beenidentified in the natural material. Most of these have little orno psychoactivity (Gill et al., 1970; Bercht et al., 1971).Recently, waxes. starches, oils, terpenes and simple nitrogenouscompounds including muscarine, choline and trigonelline as wellas volatile low-molecular weight piperdines have been isolated. Additionally, four more complex nitrogenous containingcompounds of the generally-accepted alkaloid type have beenreported in marihuana leaves in minute concentrations (average0.002%). These produced decreased activity but no acute toxicityin mice (Klein et al., 1971). Another laboratory has isolated two steroids and triterpenesfrom. marihuana as well as tyramine amide derivatives from theroots (Doorenbos et al., 1971). Analysis of the smoke obtained from marihuana has beeninvestigated. As in the case of any combustible plant, a gas andparticulate phase is produced. Both these phases are delivered tothe lung. Both the gas and particulate phase consist of compoundspresent in approximately the same percentages as other burnedcellulose containing materials except for the cannabinoidfraction. This includes carbon dioxide, carbon monoxide, andhydrogen cyanide gases. (Truitt et al. , 1970) The remainder, the smoke condensate, consists of a complexmixture of relatively non-volatile compounds. Included in thismixture are the cannabinoids (16%), carbohydrates and alcohols(8%), fatty and aromatic acids (11%), polybasic acids (7%),aliphatic amines (1%), aromatic phenols (27%), aliphatic phenols(6%), tannin (6%), unidentified compounds (18%) (Truitt et al.,1970). Another group of investigators (Magus and Harris, 1971)compared the tar collected from combustion of marihuanacigarettes with the tar yielded from tobacco cigarettes. Theyreported that the total tar yield from marihuana was slightlyless than half that produced by an equal weight of tobacco. Thetar contained similar constituents based on typical changesproduced on skin of mice. In addition, there a multitude of synthetic compounds relatedto the naturally occurring Delta 9 THC derivatives and much morepotent (Figure 6). A large number of bomologues have beenprepared all with similar activity but differing widely in theirpotency. In general, the activity of these compounds increasesdramatically over that of A' THC by lengthening the 3 alkyl sidechain to 6 and 7 carbons, with additional branching in the alphaand beta positions. The dimethylheptyl analogue (EA1476 or DMHP)is the most active having 50 times the activity of A' THC. The1-methyloctyl substitution (MOP, EA1465) is the next most potent,compound. The 1,2-dimethylortyl substitution resulted in a 251fold decreased activity from DMHP. (Domino et al., 1972; Sim andTucker, 1963) Numerous variations of the basic structures in thecyclohexene moeity of the molecule, as well as the replacement of-both methyl groups-by-hydrogen resulted in partial and evencomplete, loss of activity (Domino et al., 1972; Sim and Tucker,1963). Mechoulam. (1971) has summarized the investigations relatedto the structure activity relationships of the cannabinoids asfollows: (1) The pyran ring with a hydroxyl group at 1 position and analkyl group at the 3 position is an essential requirement forpsychotomimetic activity, eg., cannabidiol is inactive. (2) The aromatic hydroxyl group has to be f reo or esterifiedfor activity. (3) The presence of a carboxyl, acetyl or carbomethoxyl groupin position 2 or 4 renders the compound inactive. Substitutionwith an alkyl ,group at position 2 retains activity. (4) Dextrorotary (+) delta-9-THC is inactive whereas itsoptical isomer levorotary (-) delta9-THC is active. (5) Maximal activity is seen if the double bond is in thedelta-9 or delta-8 position. The delta,-6a, 10a-THC is relativelyinactive. 9 (6) The activity of the delta-6a, 10a-THC can beincreased by replacement of the pentyl side chain with a hexylside chain to form synhexyl which is an active compound.Branching of the side chain may lead to considerable increase inpotency. The substitution of a dimethyllheptyl side chain for thepentyl side chain in the delta-6a, 10a analogue of THC to formDMHP or EA1476 results in a marked increase in pharmacologicactivity. (7) Substituents at the 9 and 10 position have to be in theplane of the ring (that is equatorial) in order that highactivity be retained. More detailed information on materials, chemistry, bioassays,analytical methods, and methodology for detecting THC or itsmetabolites in biological fluids may be obtained from TheMetabolism of the Tetrahydrocannabinols (Lemberger, 1972) and TheSecretary of Health, Education and Welfare, 1972 Report onMarihuana and Health. CliffSchaffer's Home Page WT01-B25-41IA031-000651-B021-239http://206.61.184.43:80/schaffer/LIBRARY/studies/nc/nc1d.htm 206.61.184.43 19970122123333 text/html 53265HTTP/1.0 200 OKDate: Wednesday, 22-Jan-97 12:33:17 GMTServer: WebSitePro/1.1f (S/N wpo-0deb)Allow-ranges: bytesContent-type: text/htmlLast-modified: Saturday, 28-Dec-96 06:55:16 GMTContent-length: 53047 Marijuana -- Factors Influencing PsychopharmacologicalEffect Factors Influencing Psychopharmacological Effect A renewed interest in marihuana studies has been prompted bythe recent clarification of the complexities of its chemistry,new techniques to quantity the amounts of active drug in naturalmaterials, and the availability of purifiedtetrahydrocannabinols. These advances allow more precisescientific research on psychiopharmacological effect. DOSE-RESPONSE RELATIONSHIP A major advance has been a quantification of dose of THC inrelation to clinically observable phenomena. This has beenextensively studied over a wide dose range for marihuana (Rodinand Domino, 1970; Melges et al., 1970; Tinklenberg et al., 197O;Weil et al., 1968; Meyer et al., 1971; Clark and Nakashima, 1968;Clark et al., 1970; Jones and Stone, 1970; Mayor's Committee,1944; Manno et al., 1970) and Delta 9 tetrahydrocannabinol(Isbell et al., 1967; Waskow et al., 1970; Hollister et al.,1968; Perez-Reyes and Lipton, 1971; Lemberger et -al., 1971;Dornbush and Freedman, 1971). Investigations by Isbell et al. (1967), Kiplinger et al.(1971) and Renault et al. (1971) have clearly demonstrated thatwhen reliable quantities of smoked marihuana or THC are deliveredto the subject, a reproducible linear dose-dependent effectoccurs on indices of physiologic, psychomotor, and mentalperformance as well as on mood and subjective experiences over adose range of 12.50 to 200 micrograms of Delta 9 THC per kilogramof body weight. In a 154 pound man this is comparable to consuming 0.88 to17.5 milligrams of Delta 9 THC or 88 to 150 milligrams ofmarihuana containing one percent Delta 9 THC. It is generallyassumed that good quality marihuana available in the UnitedStates contains 1% Delta 9 THC and an average marihuana cigaretteconsists of 500 milligrams of marihuana; thus, 5 milligrams ofDelta 9 THC (Hollister, 1971). As with most drugs, the larger the dose taken, the greaterthe psychopharmacologic effect. Isbell et al. (1967) noted thatclinical syndromes vary from a mild euphoric feeling ofrelaxation at low doses (25 micrograms per kilogram) to anintensive hallucinogenic-like experience at high doses (250micrograms per kilogram). DOSE-TIME RELATIONSHIP Similar time-action curves have been demonstrated for smokedDelta 9 THC and equivalent quantities of smoked marihuana(Hollister et al.,1968; Isbell et al., 1967 Renault et ai., 1971Kiplinger et al., 1971). Symptoms began almost immediately aftersmoking (2-3 minutes). At lower doses, the peak effect is seen at10 to 20 minutes and the duration of effect is 90 minutes to twohours. At higher doses, symptoms persist for three to four hours. Therefore, as with most drugs, the larger the dose taken, thelonger the action. The subjective symptoms experienced by thesubject appear to parallel in time the subjective effects andsome physiological indices such as pulse rate (Isbell et al.,1967; Hollister, 1968 - Renault and Schuster, 1971; Kiplinger etal., 1971; Galanter et al., 1972; Lemberger et al., 1971). Otherssuch as reddening of the eyes have a delayed peak response andlonger duration (Kiplinger et al., 1971). ROUTE OF ADMINISTRATION A second factor which influences the effect experienced bythe user is the manner in which the substance is consumed. Thatis, whether it is smoked, swallowed or injected. Isbell et al. (1967) demonstrated that smoked material is twoand a half to three times as effective as orally consumedmarihuana in the form of a 95% ethanolic solution in producingequivalent physiologic and subjective effects. In addition, the oral time-action curve is extended withonset of symptoms one-half to one hour after administration. Apeak effect is reached in two to three hours and the effectpersists for three to five hours at low doses and six to eighthours at larger doses (Hollister et al., 1968; Isbell, et -al.,1967; Lemberger et al., 1971; Perez-Reyes, and Lipton, 1971). In general, the effects produced by ingested THC or ingestedmarihuana extract are comparable to those produced by nearlyone-third the amount of smoked and inhaled THC or marihuana(Hollister, 1971). Recent work has been reported which clarifies these findings.Lemberger et a]. (1971) studied absorption into the bloodutilizing radioactive labeled THC by three routes ofadministration: smoked, ingested in 95% ethanolic solution incherry syrup, and intravenously injected. The first appearance ofthe drug into the, blood was immediate intravenously; almostimmediate, by inhalation; and delayed for 15 to 30 minutes wheningested. Perez-Reyes and Lipton (1971) using labeled AO THCdemonstrated that rate of absorption by the gastrointestinaltract, and the duration of action is greatly influenced by thevehicle used to ingest the drug. Speed and completeness ofabsorption varied when the THC was dissolved in 100% ethanol orsesame oil or emulsified with a bile salt (sodium glycocholate),and administered to a subject who had fasted 12 hours. With thebile salt vehicle, the physiologic and subjective effects werenoted between 15 to 30 minutes after ingestion and lasted two tothree hours. In contrast, the effects, with ethanol or sesameoil, appeared after one ,hour and lasted four to six hours. Hollister and Gillespie (1970) hypothesized that this delayedgastrointestinal absorption of THC might be accounted for by thenonpolar vehicle required to dissolve TUC or marihuana extracts. Furthermore, Perez-Reyes and Lipton (1971) found that thepeak levels and duration of radioactivity in the plasmaparalleled the physiologic and subjective effects, although theplasma levels remained high for a longer period of time than theeffect. Subjects receiving the drug emulsified in sodiumglycocholate or dissolved in sesame oil had three times higherplasma levels of radioactivity with much less excreted in thefeces than those receiving the drug dissolved in ethanol. These results indicate that the THC was poorly absorbed fromthe gastrointestinal tract when given in all alcoholic solution.The sesame oil solution and the glycocholic acid preparationallowed more complete absorption and the latter preparation wasmuch faster. It is of interest that the degree of subjective highafter ingestion of 37 milligrams Delta 9 THC also parallels theplasma radioactivity. Thus, the subjects reported their experience, as intense andunpleasant both with the bile salt and the sesame oil, and asmoderate and entirely pleasant with ethanol. (Perez-Reyes andLipton, 1971) This correlates well with earlier findings ofHollister et a]. (1968). QUANTIFICATION OF DOSE DELIVERED The problem in quantifying the THC dose delivered bydifferent routes of administration has been clarified by severalstudies using radioactive compounds. However, until a method fordetermining the THC blood concentration is developed, onlyestimates oil amount delivered are possible. Radioautographic studies clearly demonstrate that intravenousinjection gives the, most complete and consistent delivery(Lemberger et a]., 1971; Me Isaac et M., 1971; Ho et a]., 1971;Kennedy and Waddell, 1971; Idanpaan-Heikkila, 1971). Theseinvestigators have demonstrated that THC is poorly absorbed fromthe injection site after intraperitoneal or subcutaneousinjection. As discussed earlier, the completeness of absorption ocurringafter oral administration of THC appears to depend upon thevehicle. Judged by radioactivity levels, almost completeabsorption of the THC occurs with an oil or bile acid vehicle,but absorption is incomplete with an alcohol vehicle.(Perez-Reyes et al., 1971) Recent animal studies performed for NIMH indicated that theoral dose necessary to produce comparable gross behavioralchanges in lab animals is about three times higher than theintravenous dose (Marihuana and Health. 1971: 171). Ferraro(1971) demonstrated the comparability of effective oral doses ofTHC in chimpanzees and humans. Furthermore, preliminary workperformed in the laboratories of M. Isaac (1971) and Harris(1971) and Mechoulam (1971) appear to indicate that theintravenously administered dose of Delta 9 THC necessary toproduce detectable behavioral changes in monkeys (20 to 50microgram/ kg) on conditioned learning tasks is comparable tothat in man. (Kiplinger et a]., 1971; Lemberger et al., 1971). The dose of THC absorbed from natural marihuana extractsingested orally is uncertain. THC is present as an acid invariable quantities in natural marihuana. THC acid has notpresently been proven to be active. Claussen and Korte (1968)reported that the THC carboxylic acid is converted to free THCduring the smoking process. Whether these, acids are activethemselves; are absorbed from the gastrointestinal tract orconverted there into THC; or are decarboxylated in the, body isunknown presently. Because inhalation is the most widely used route ofadministration of marihuana, several laboratories haveinvestigated the effect of combustion and smoking oil marihuana.Because techniques and conditions varied between laboratories,precise quantification of the delivery to the smoker's lungs isuncertain. Manno, et al. (1970) calculated that about 50% of the THCcontained in a marihuana cigarette would be delivered to thesmoker's lungs for absorption if the entire cigarette were smokedin 10 minutes and each inhalation was retained for 30 secondswith no sidestream loss. Truitt (1971) and co-workers (Foltz etal., 1971) found that 50%c of THC was pyrolyzed and 6% was lostin the side stream while noting that almost 21% of the THCremained in the butt when three-fourths of the cigarette isconsumed. Agurell and Leander (1971) studied the transfer of THC usingactual smoking subjects where only the main stream smoke wascollected. They found that 14-29%% of the THC was transferred inthe mainstream smoke for a cigarette and 45% for a pipe. However,they stated that this amount transferred would be comparable ifno butt was left. Agurell and Leander found that the amount transferred was noteffected by depth of inhalation but that smokers using deepinhalation retained 80% of the transferred THC while those usingsuperficial inhalation tended to exhale more than 20% of thetransferred THC. Mikes and Waser (1971) also found about 22% inthe mainstream smoke. These divergent data appear to be comparable when correctedfor loss to sidestream and retention in the unsmoked portion.Thus, the efficiency of delivery of THC by smoking and inhalationusing good techniques, and smoking the entire cigaretteapproximates 40-50% of the original THC contained. A smallfraction is lost in the uninhaled sidestream smoke, about 50% isdestroyed during pyrolysis and a variable amount is exhaled fromthe respiratory dead space. In apparent confirmation, Lemberger et al. (1971, 1972),using radiolabeled THC added to a marihuana cigarette, found thatthe initial plasma level of radioactivity after smoking was aboutonehalf the level after intravenous injection. Oraladministration of the same dose of THC in an alcohol vehicleproduced about one-half the peak level as smoking. However,Galanter et al. (1972) noted marked variability in the amount ofTHC absorbed using a standardized routine of inhaling,breath-holding and finishing the cigarette within a set timeperiod. EFFECT OF PYROLYSIS ON THE CANNABINOIDS Several investigators have studied the effect of pyrolysis onthe cannabinoids. Most have concluded that only negligiblechanges occur in the original cannabinoid fraction of marihuanaexcept for decarboxylation of the acids to the cannabinoids. Noevidence was found for isomerization of Delta 9 THC or Delta 8THC nor the formation of any new pyrolysis products (Manno etal., 1970; Coutselinis & Miras, 1970; Claussen and Korte,1968; Foltz et al., 1971; Agurell and Leander, 1971). Mikes andWaser (1971) suggested that a small percentage of cannabidiol wasconverted to Delta 9 THC, but this observation was not confirmedby the other groups. Coutselinis and Miras (1970) noted that less THC wasdestroyed during smoking when Delta 9 THC was the onlycannabinoid present rather than when a resin or a mixture ofcannabinoids were present. This was believed to be at leastpartially accounted for by the distribution of THC in thecigarette. More destruction occurred when the THC was evenlydistributed in the cigarette than when it was present in awell-defined lump. SET AND SETTING A most important variable encountered when evaluating theeffect of marihuana is the interaction of the drug with thenon-drug factors, set and setting. Set refers to the drug-taker'sbiological make-up including personality, past drug experiences,personal expectations of drug effect, and mood at the time of thedrug experience. Setting refers to the external surroundings andsocial context in which the individual takes the drug. Set andsetting exert their largest effect on psychoactive drugs, likemarihuana, with subtle subjective mental effect and minimalphysiological effect. Set and setting exert a variable but oftenmarked influence on the potential drug effects (Waskow et al.,1970; Wickler, 1970). The results of a series of experiments by Jones (1971)suggests the subjective state produced by "a sociallyrelevant dose of smoked marihuana.... 9mg THC" is determinedmore by set and setting than by the THC content of the marihuana. In one experiment, a greater variety and more intensepleasurable symptoms occurred in a fourman group allowingunstructured interpersonal interaction than in unstructuredsolitary test situations. Contrasting behavioral patterns wereobserved by the investigator and reported subjectively by theindividuals. Subjects tested individually demonstrated a relaxed,slightly drowsy, undramatic state as they read, listened to theradio, or sit doing nothing. In the group setting there waselation, euphoria, uncontrolled laughter, a marked lack ofsedation and much conversation. (Jones, 1971) This strongly emphasizes the importance of setting in themarihuana experience. The reason is apparent why marihuana isusually used with other people. However, most investigatorsstudying its effects evaluate their subjects alone, inwell-controlled, sterile, scientific laboratories. The importance of the placebo effect (the subject experiencesa drug effect from an inert material) to the "socialhigh" obtained from marihuana was studied in anotherexperiment (Jones and stone, 1970; Jones, 1971). Misjudgments ofthe pharmacologic potency of both the smoked placebo (marihuanawithout THC) and active marihuana were commonly made by thesubjects although physiologic and performance indices routinelymatched the distinction correctly. The smoking of a material thatsmells and tastes like marihuana by individuals with marihuanaexperience appeared to produce a mental state that is interpretedas being high if combined with the expectation of becoming high. The importance of learning to get high was demonstrated whenindividuals who smoked marihuana less than twice a month werecompared with those who used marihuana at least seven times aweek. Although both groups rated the active marihuana equallypotent, the frequent users rated the placebo equally to theactive drug, while the infrequent users experienced significantlyless high from the placebo. The infrequent users' experiences appears to reflect mainlypharmacologic factors with moderate set-setting influence.However, the frequent users' response to the placebo appears toreflect mainly learned set-setting influence and minimalpharmacologic factors. (Jones, 1971) Smith and Mehl (1970) call learning to get high "reverse tolerance." During the early exposures to marihuanathe individual learns to appreciate the subtle drug effect withrepeated experience with the drug. Consequently, less drug may berequired to experience the desired high in the early stages ofmarihuana use. Further evidence for this is seen when the familiar smokingroute and smell and taste cues are made ineffective by giving theactive and inactive material by the oral route (Jones and Stone,1970). Both groups of users can significantly distinguish theintoxication produced by 25mg of active material. But thefrequent user rates this high significantly poorer than hissmoking high while the infrequent user rates them correctly. TOLERANCE The development of tolerance is another important factor thatmay influence the psychophysiological effects of marihuana.Although tolerance occurs with many drugs and the process hasbeen studied for over a century, the mechanism of this complexphenomenon is not completely known. Kalant et a]., (1971) haveextensively discussed tolerance to the psychotropic drugs. Tolerance has two different connotations. The first, termed"initial tolerance," is an expression of the dose ofthe drug which the subject must receive at his first exposure toproduce a designated degree of effect. These authors state that avariety of congenital and environmental factors contribute to thewide range of differences in "initial tolerance"observed among different individuals, sexes, species, age groupsand so on. The second meaning of tolerance is that of an "acquiredchange in tolerance" within the same individual as a resultof repeated drug exposures so that an increased drug dose isrequired to produce the same specified degree of effect, or thesame dose produces less effect. In this chapter, tolerance willbe used synonymously with "acquired increase intolerance." -Tolerance can only be discussed for eachspecific drug action and not for all the actions of a given drugon the body. That is, tolerance occurs at different rates forsome of the various effects of the same drug on the body and maynot occur for other effects of the same drug. The relationshipbetween "initial tolerance" and "acquired changein tolerance" has not been clearly established. There are two classes of tolerance based on possiblemechanisms. The first, dispositional tolerance refers to changesin absorption, distribution, excretion and metabolism whichproduce a reduction in the intensity and duration of contactbetween the drug and the target tissue on which it acts. The second, functional tolerance includes changes in theproperties and functions of the target tissue making it lesssensitive to the same dose of the drug. Physiological toleranceimplies a, change in the target organ while psychological or"learned tolerance" implies the acquisition of newskills or functions to replace those changed in the target tissue(Kalant et al., 1971). Considerable evidence is accumulating which demonstrates thattolerance does develop in numerous animal species (pigeons, rats,dogs, monkeys, chimpanzees, mice) to the behavioral andphysiological effects of marihuana and THC in doses many timeslarger (from 1 mg. to 500 mg./ kg/day) than the minimal activedose (Carlini, 1968; Silva et al., 1968; McMillan et al., 1970,1971; Frankenheim et al., 1971; Carlini et al., 1970; Thompson etal., 1971; Pirch et al., 1972; Ferraro, 1971; Elsinore, 1970;Cole et al., 1971). Lipparini et al. (1969) were not able to demonstratetolerance in the rabbit. Tolerance, appears to develop rapidly to high doses even wheninjections are spaced up to about a week apart. Tolerance to highdoses appears to be long-lasting with little loss of toleranceeven after a month. But at low doses in the behavioral range,tolerance appears to completely dissipate in a few days after asingle dose. The magnitude of tolerance development can be large.After repeated exposure, a dose of over one hundred times theoriginal produces little effect (McMillan et al., 1971). The development of tolerance to THC in animals occurs forsome effects but not for others (McMillan et al., 1971; Pirch etal., 1972; Thompson et al., 1971 ). This differential developmentof tolerance may explain why tolerance to certain effects studiedhas not been demonstrated (Masur and Khazan, 1970; McMillan etal., 1971; Barry and Kubena, 1971; Kubena et al., 1971). Lomax (1971) and Thompson et al. (1971) have noted that thedevelopment of tolerance to one effect of the drug (hypothermiaor sedation) may allow the expression of the opposite effect(hyperthermia or stimulation) to which tolerance does notdevelop. Cross tolerance has been demonstrated between delta-9-THC,delta-8-THC and its synthetic analogues. Cross tolerance, has notbeen demonstrated between THC and lysergic acid diethylamide(LSD), mescaline or morphine (McMillan et al., 1970). Preliminary work performed by McIsaac (1971) and Harris etal., (1972) demonstrated a reduction in the duration and qualityof response on a conditioned learning task by monkeys on theseeond intravenously administered dose of THC. Tolerancedeveloped extremely rapidly so that no effect on behavior wasseen after five days. After a. two-week period without THC, theanimals were retested and the same degree of tolerance hadpersisted. The researchers believe these observations mightindicate a rapid behavioral adaption or "learned"functional tolerance. However, evidence indicates that dispositional toleranceand/or physiological type of functional tolerance also plays arole at least at higher doses. Tolerance develops to the centralnervous system depressant effects, hypotherma hypopnea (Thompsonet al., 1971) and the EEG effects (Pirch et al., 1971) of thedrug. McMillan et al., (1971) have demonstrated that tolerance tothe effects of THC on behavior can be blocked by the hepaticmicrosomal enzyme inhibitor, SKF-525-A which has been shown to bea potent inhibitor of THC metabolism (Dingell et al., 1971).Methodological techniques must be, developed which will allowmicrodistribution studies to be performed in tolerant animalswith low doses of THC before the mechanism of tolerancedevelopment can be clarified. Evidence for the development of marked tolerance by man hasbeen suggested by studies of heavy daily very long term users ofhashish, charas or ganja in foreign countries. Reports from the,Eastern literature (Chopra and Chopra, 1939; Dhunjibhoy, 1930;Ewans, 1904) and more recently from Greece (Miras, 1965; Fink etal., 1971) and Afghanistan (Weiss, 1971) relate daily consumptionof enormous quantities of potent cannabis preparation estimatedto contain up to about one gram of THC per day. Weiss (1971) has noted that daily charas smokers start withsmall doses and then in order to achieve the same effectgradually increase their daily dose about 5-6 times over a 20 to30 year period. Generally, most reach their maximum dose by age40 and then gradually decrease their daily dose by 50% usuallyceasing use by their 60's. Some smokers have been noted to raisetheir original daily dose up to a maximum of 10 times within thefirst two years. Others have noted that moderate use for many years does notnecessitate increased doses (Sigg, 1963). At least part of the increase in daily amount of drug used isaccounted for by the finding that the duration -of theintoxication becomes shorter over the years so that the veryheavy smoker must consume the drug more frequently to remainintoxicated. Additionally, smokers report that they have onoccasion discontinued use for days or months after which theyexperienced similar effects at smaller doses (Weiss, 1971). Fink et al. (1971) noted that as hashish users total dailydose was decreased by more than half over the years, thefrequency of use per day declined correspondingly. Rubin and Comitas (1972) noted that very long term Jamaicanganja smokers generally consumed an average of seven spliffsdaily (a ganja cigarette several times the size of an Americanmarihuana cigarette) with a maximum of 24. Further evidence for the development of tolerance, at leastto certain of the depressant effects, is that these very longterm smokers apparently tolerate the extremely high doses wellwithout dysphoria or decreased ability to perform their usualactivities (Weiss, 1971; Fink et al., 1971; Rubin and Comitas,1972). Smith and Mehl (1970) noted the, accumulating Americananecdotal evidence of mild tolerance development after heavydaily use for a number of years. Jones (1971) and Meyer et a].(1971) have suggested diminished effect on physiologic andpsyochomotor performance, that is, little or no impairment offunction in daily users compared with infrequent, intermittentusers of marihuana. Additionally, several investigators havenoted that frequent users had little or no impairment onpsychomotor performance tasks while marihuananaive individualsgiven the same dose had impaired function. (Clark et al., 1968,1970; Jones and Stone, 1970; Mayor's Committee, 1944; Weil etal., 1968). Subsequently (Mendelson et al., 1972) repetitive daily (freeaccess) use over a 21-day period by groups of long-termintermittent (average 7.7 sessions per month) and moderate,marihuana users (daily average, 33 smoking sessions per month)was studied. The development, of tolerance was strongly suggestedto the physiological pulse rate and general depressant effect onactivity as well as psychological effects which impair recentmemory, time estimation and psychomotor coordination. No tolerance development occurred to the subjective effectsof marihuana for experienced users over the 21-day period (global"highness", somatic, perceptual, awareness, feeling,control, friendliness, ambivalence and altered thinking).Furthermore, with the exception of a higher ambivalence ratingfor the daily riser group, there were no differences in thesubjective reports of the daily users or intermittent users.(Mendelson et al., 1972). The ambivalence score is believed (Katzet al., 1968) to be the best measure of "psychedelic effects" of hallucinogenic drugs. In a prior study (Meyer et al., 1971) found that while theheavy smokers experienced more profound subjective effects soonafter smoking, they were less intoxicated than the intermittentusers one hour later. These findings suggest to the investigators that the qualityof the "high" may be different for heavy andintermittent users and may change with heavy use. Tolerance, tothe subjective effects of marihuana may occur predominantly tothe depressant effects so that the stimulatory effects (orhallucinatory-like) would be predominant in the heavy users. Theintermittent users who smoked marihuana several times daily inthe, current study showed no increase in the ambivalence, rating. The increased daily frequency of marihuana use by both groupsover time by shortening the interval between smoking sessionsappears consistent with earlier observations (Meyer et al., 1971)that the duration of the desired "high" is shorter inheavy users than in intermittent users. Fink et al. (1971) confirmed several of these findings in astudy in which intermittent users smoked a fixed dose (14 mg. ofTHC) of marihuana. They noted a suggestion of development oftolerance to pulse rate, short-term memory, digit symbolsubstitution but not to the subjective high or EEG changes.However, the subjects did feel that the duration of theintoxication shortened progressively during the second half ofthe experiment. Schuster and Renault (1971) administered twice daily fixeddoses of marihuana (smoke from 430 mg. of marihuana with 1.5% THCcontent) to intermittent users over a 10-day period. A peaktachycardia, of 20 to 30 beats per minute and a usual social highwere produced. Preliminary observations revealed the developmentof tolerance to time estimation in a few days, but no evidencefor tolerance to the tachycardia, orthostatic blood pressure, orrating of the high. Hollister (1971), in preliminary studies found no significantevidence of tolerance after five daily oral doses of 20 mg. ofTHC. Clinical responses measured were subjective judgment of thehigh, mood, pulse rate, reading comprehension or excretion ofurinary metabolites. REVERSE TOLERANCE Smith and Mehl's (1970) clinical observations of manymarihuana smokers suggest a J-shaped time curve of tolerance tomarihuana. A novice marihuana smoker often reports feeling nohigh or requiring considerably more drug to get high on his firstfew trials with the drug than after he obtains more experiencewith the drug. This phenomenon has been called "reversetolerance." These clinicians believed this represented"learning to get high" or acquiring the ability toappreciate or become sensitive to the subtle aspects of theintoxication. Goode (1971) found that more frequent and term marihuanasmokers tend to require fewer "joints" to get high butdifferences were not statistically significant. Weil et al. (1968) reported that experienced users ofmarihuana achieved a "high" after being given the samedose as naive (non-users) persons who did not experience a highbut did demonstrate objective physiologic and psychomotor drugeffects. Meyer et al. (1971) found that heavy marihuana, users (dailyfor three years) were most sensitive to the "high" andrequired less marihuana to achieve a social high than infrequentintermittent users (use one to four times per month for less thantwo years). Phillips et al. (1971) reported an increase in severity ofsymptoms after repeated administration of THC to rats. This"sensitization" may be a correlate of reversetolerance. Lemberger et al. (1971) supplied additional evidence forreverse tolerance based on the intravenous administration of 0.5mg of THC to experimental subjects. Naive subjects experienced noeffect from this small dose. However, daily marihuana users, whowere told they were receiving a non-pharmacologically active doseof THC, reported a "marihuana high," which lasted up to90 minutes. Lemberger et al. (1971, 1972) and Mechoulam (1970) suggestedthe possibility that enzymes necessary to convert THC to a moreactive compound require prior use of marihuana. Reverse tolerance appears to be a complex phenomenon. Jones(1971) presented evidence which stressed the importance ofexpectation, setting and prior drug experience on learning to get"high." As the user gains more experience withmarihuana, the more the individual's mind is able to respond tothe expectation of the "high" by actually becoming highwhen given an inert material which smells and looks likemarihuana. Weil (1971) believes that the capacity to get"high" is an inherent characteristic of eachindividual's mind. He, believes that marihuana facilitates theuser's abilitv to achieve this altered state of consciousness,that is, learn how to get high. Mendelson et al. (1972) did not find evidence for reversetolerance. In fact, the daily users were more likely than theintermittent users to smoke two cigarettes per occasion. Bothgroups had had an average of five years of marihuana use. Severalother investigators did not obtain any evidence of reversetolerance after repetitive daily use in experienced subjects(Hollister, 1971; Schuster and Renault, 1971; Fink et al., 1971). METABOLISM Metabolism of the drug by the body exerts an importantinfluence on the psychopharmacologic effect of marihuana. Manylaboratories in many countries have been examining themetabolism, of the cannabinoids using in vitro liver microsomalenzyme preparations. With the recent availability of radiolabeled Delta 9 andDelta l THC, cannabinol and cannabidiol much activity hasoccurred in vivo in animals. A comprehensive review of theseareas including studies of absorption, disposition, excretion,metabolism and stimulation-inhibition of metabolism is beyond thescope of this report. Readers interested in further details inthis area are referred to an excellent comprehensive review byLemberger (1972). From animal and in vitro studies it appears that the liverrapidly changes Delta 9 and Delta 11 THC in a similar manner byhydroxylation to 11-OH THC. This compound appears to be as potentor possibly more potent pharmacologically than the parentcompounds This metabolite appears to be, rapidly hydroxylated to8-11 dihydroxy Delta 9 THC (7-11 dihydroxy All THC) which isinactive. The 8-OH Delta THC appears to be a minor activemetabolite (Christensen et al., 1971; Burstein et 1970; Ben-Zviet al., 1970; Foltz et al., 1970; Wall et al., 1970,71; Nilssonet al., 1970). These metabolites are excreted primarily into the bile andthen to the feces. Some evidence exists for an enterohepaticcirculation returning the drug to the blood. (Miras andCoutselinis, 1970; Klausner and Dingell, 1971) Another metabolic pathway appears to be present resulting ina series of acidic metabolites excreted primarily in the urine(Agurell et al, I., 1970). Recently, Burstein and Rosenfeld(1971) isolated and identified a majo r rabbit urinarymetabolite, 11-carboxy-2'-hydroxy-Delta 9 THC. They postulatethat other acidic metabolites might be esters or amides of thiscompound (Figure 7). Recently, Nakazawa and Costa (1971) demonstrated that A' THCwas metabolized by lung microsomes forming two unidentifiedproducts not found in liver homogenates. Lemberger et al. (1970, 1971, 1972) and Galanter et al.(1972) have performed metabolic studies in mail usingintravenous, oral and smoked Delta 9 THC. These studies indicatethat the THC disappears from the plasma in two phases. The initial rapid phase has two components and representsmetabolism by the liver and redistribution from the blood to thetissues. The slower second phase represents tissue retention andslow release and subsequent metabolism. The plasma 1/2 life of THC was significantly shorter in dailyusers than nonusers at both the first component of phase one (10minutes versus 13 minutes) and phase two (27 hours versus 56hours). Tissue distribution was similar in daily and nonuser (1/2life 2 hours). Therefore, immediate metabolism of THC and subsequentmetabolism is more rapid for daily user than the non-userimplying specific enzyme induction. THC persists in the plasmafor a considerable period of time, at least three days, with ahalf life of 57 hours for nonusers and 28 hours for daily users. The presence of 11-hydroxy THC and more polar metabolites inthe plasma of both users and nonusers within 10 minutes indicatesthat the metabolite probably accounts for the pharmacologicalactivity of marihuana, not THC. Further metabolism of the 11-hydroxy THC to more polarinactive 8-11 dihydroxy A' THC metabolite occurs more rapidly inusers than nonusers. During the first few hours after injection,unchanged THC, its polar metabolites and nonpolar metabolites inthe plasma, decline rapidly and then level off as they aredistributed to the tissues. THC persists in the plasma, for atleast three days, and both users and non-users excretemetabolites in the urine and feces for more than a week. Delta-9-THC is extensively metabolized to more polar compoundswhich were excreted in the urine and feces. Urinary excretion andbiliary excretion (reflected a day later in the feces) wasgreatest during the initial 24 hours, then gradually tapered off.All THC is metabolized since no unchanged THC was excreted in thefeces or urine. No difference in total cumulative excretion wasobserved but a significantly larger percentage of the metaboliteswere excreted in the urine of users than nonusers. About 40-45%of the metabolites were collected in the feces in both groups inone week. Urinary excretion in this period accounted for 30% indaily users and 22% in nonusers. (Lemberger et al., 1970, 1971,1972) Perez-Reyes et al. (1971) found a similar pattern ofexcretion of metabolites after oral administration. Urine contained no Delta 9 THC, only a small quantity (3%) of11-hydroxy THC and 90% more polar acidic compounds as yetunidentified. (Lemberger, 1971). Preliminary studies by Bursteinand Rosenfeld ('1971) suggest that these human acidic urinarymetabolites are identical to the 11-carboxy-2' hydroxy THC foundin rabbits. In man, Lemberger et al. (1971, 1972) found that 11-OH THCand 8-11-OH THC were primarily excreted in the feces. Twenty-twopercent of the metabolites in the feces were unchanged 11-hydroxyTHC and slightly less were 8-11-dihyd-roxy THC. The remainderwere unidentified more polar compounds, perhaps conjugates ofthese metabolites. All user subjects (Lemberger et al., 1970, 1971, 1972) but nonon-user noted a high after intravenous injection of the 0.5 mgdose of Delta 9 THC. This would be a dose range of 5 to 7micrograms/kg. Highs have been noted by Kiplinger et al. (1971)with smoking THC to deliver a dose of 6.25 micrograms/kg. Thehigh for some lasted up to 90 minutes. Thus, the plasma levels ofDelta 9 THC and its metabolites seen after intravenous injectionsuggest that psychopharmacologic effects are seen in the firstcomponent of the rapid phase and terminated by redistribution andmetabolism after the initial phase. The 11-hydroxy Delta 9 THCwould be present at this early phase and is probably responsiblefor the activity of Delta 9 THC in marihuana. Further evidence that the 11-OH Delta 9 THC is responsiblefor marihuana's effect was seen in oral and inhalation studies.By the oral route, blood levels of unchanged THC were relativelylow compared to the radioactivity levels of the metabolicproducts at the time of peak subjective effect. While the bloodlevel of unchanged THC at the peak oral effect was identical tothat after intravenous injection of the 0.5 mg. dose, thepsychologic, effect was much more pronounced after oraladministration of the larger 20 mg. dose of THC. Again afterinhalation, the plasma levels of the metabolites correlatetemporally with the subjective effects but the plasma levels ofunchanged Delta 9 THC do not. (Lemberger, 1970, 1971, 1972;Galanter, 1972) PATTERN OF USE The drug effect of marihuana can only be realisticallydiscussed within the context of who the user is, how long he hasused, how much and how frequently he uses and what is the socialcontext of the use. In general, for virtually any drug theheavier the use pattern, that is the longer the duration, themore frequently the use and the larger the quantity used on eachoccasion, the greater the risk for either direct or indirectdamage. Tolerance development is only one of a variety of occurrenceswhich are related to the repetitive use of marihuana. Anydiscussion of drug effect must take into account the time periodover which the drug is used (duration of use). This is necessaryin order to detect cumulative effects or more subtlegradually-occurring changes. Of course, the issue of causality isquite complex because of the multitude of factors other thanmarihuana use that have a direct or indirect effect on theindividual over a period of years. For the purposes of this report, immediate or acute effectswill refer to those drug effects which occur during the drugintoxication or shortly following it. Short-term or sub-acutewill arbitrarily refer to periods of less than two years;long-term, from two to 10 years; and very long term (or chronic),greater than 10 years. Frequency of use, will arbitrarily be designated in thefollowing manner: experimental use refers to use of marihuana atleast one time but not more than once a month; intermittent userefers to use more than once a month but not more than 10 times amonth (several times a week) ; moderate use refers to use of thedrug more than 10 times a month but not more than once a day;heavy use designates use more than once, daily and very heart userefers to use many times a day, usually with potent preparations(high THC content), producing almost continual intoxication sothat the smoker's brain is rarely drug free. AMOUNT OF DRUG CONSUMED Relatively little actual data are available on the amount ofmarihuana, smoked per occasion or per day by current users in theUnited States. (McGlothlin, 1971, 1972). Estimates of thequantity of THC consumed are difficult because of the variabilityof potency as well as weight and size of the marihuana cigarette("joint") and the degree of cleaning of stems and seedsfrom the dried leaves manicuring"). The analytic data available indicates most of the marihuanaused in the United States is of Mexican origin and averages aboutI % THC per dry cleaned weight of marihuana (Lerner and Zeffert,1968; Jones, 1971). Subjective ratings by experienced marihuanausers appear to substantiate the data that marihuana containing1% THC is of average quality (Jones and Stone, 1970; Weil et al.,1968). Marihuana cigarettes are estimated (McGlothlin, 1971, 1972)to average about 0.5 g in weight and, therefore, contain about 5mg of THC. Cigarettes used in the eastern states are generallysmaller than those, rolled in the west (McGlothlin, 1971; NewYork Police Department, 1969, 1970) Most data indicates that for the large majority of usersone-half to one cigarette (2.5 to 5 mg THC) is sufficient to"get high" in intermittent moderate users, althoughoften two or more cigarettes were smoked to achieve additionaleffect (Nisbet and Vakil, 1972; Shean and Fechtmann, 1971;McGlothlin et al., 1970- McGlothlin, 1972; Jones, 1971; Goode,1970). Current American daily users appear to consume one to twocigarettes per occasion (Jones, 1971) although some usersestimate they smoke three to five cigarettes per occasion(McGlothlin et al., 1970). Goode (1971), however, foundpractically no relationship between amount required to get highand frequency of use (daily to less than monthly) or duration ofuse (less than two years to six or more years). In fact, theheavy and longer term users were less likely to require more"joints." Thus, the estimated 15 mg THC for current daily users isabout one-half that estimated for confirmed regular users 30years ago in the United States (Mayor's Committee, 1944; Charenand Perelman, 1946) and one-third to one-fourth the median dailyconsumption of daily users in North Africa and India. The maximum daily consumption of 10 cigarettes (50 mg THC)for current heavy U.S. marihuana smokers (Jones, 1971;McGlothlin, 1972) is about the same as the average amountconsumed by daily chronic users in other countries, and aboutone-fourth or less of the maximum in these countries (Soueif,1967; Sigg, 1963; Indian Hemp Drug Commission's Report,1893-1894; Chopra, 1940; Chopra and Chopra, 1939). Studies of American military in Vietnam (U.S. Congress, 1971;Colbach and Crowe, 1970; Forrest, 1970), and Germany (Tennant etal., 1971) described the daily use of quantities of hashish orpotent marihuana comparable to amounts consumed by regularchronic users in other countries. Experimental data appear to confirm these estimates ofquantity of THC consumed. Isbell et al. (1967) and Jones (1971)found that most subjects reported a normal "high" aftersmoking 5-10 mg of THC. Meyer et al. (1971) found that a"very high" state was attained by ad libitum smoking of3.12 mg THC by daily users and 3.78 mg THC by intermittent users. In experiments by Johnson and Domino (1971), subjects wereurged to smoke until they were as high as they had ever been onmarihuana and felt they could not smoke any more. These subjectssmoked from one to four cigarettes containing 8.7 mg of THC toreach this level of intoxication. The range was from 8.7 to 30 mgof THC with a mean of about 20 mg THC. Intermittent and daily users were allowed to smoke marihuanaon a free choice basis over a 21day period in studies byMendelson et al. (1972). Each cigarette contained one gram ofmarihuana of approximately 2% THC content, or about 20 mg of THC. Subjects were asked to rate their high on a 10 point scalewith 10 corresponding to highest ever; five as moderately highand zero, no effect. Ratings for the daily user group ranged fromzero to nine with an average of about six for all cigarettesrated. Individual means ranged f rom three to about seven. Onalmost all occasions, subjects in both groups smoked the entirecigarette. Kiplinger et al. (1971) and Lemberger, et al. (1971) notedthat daily long-term users were able to detect effects of the"high" at doses calculated to deliver as low as 5-7micrograms/kg THC (equivalent to smoking about 100 mgs. ofmarihuana containing 1 % THC). Perhaps this explains the findingthat many users are able to "get high" smoking USwild-growing marihuana containing front near zero to 0.5% THC(Lerner, 1969; Phillips et al., 1970; Fetterman et al., 1971). Several ad libitum experiments were performed with marihuanaof unknown composition (Williams et al., 1946; Siler et al.,1933) using "confirmed regular marihuana users"confined over a 39 and six-day period. The users, who generallyconsumed three cigarettes per day, under these rather artificialconditions of the, experiment consumed means of 17 (range nine to26) and five (range one to 20) cigarettes per day respectively. Miras and Coutsilinis (1970) reported recent experimentaldata on chronic Greek hashish users who routinely use, singlesmoked doses of hashish containing 100 mg of THC. Under adlibitum conditions, these users averaged 150-350 mg of THC perday over a 30-day period. The subjects studied during a 21-day period of free choiceMarihuana consumption by Mendelson et al. (1972) generallyconsumed all of one cigarette containing 20 mg of THC per smokingsession. 'The subjects who were previously daily users were morelikely during the experiment to consumer more, than one,cigarette per session than the, previously intermittent users. Individual consumption by the intermittent users ranged froman average of about one-half to six cigarettes per day (group mean three) while the daily usersconsumed an average of three-anda-half to nine cigarettes per day(group mean six-and-a-half). Reasons given by the subjects forthe dramatic shift in the frequency of marihuana use includedboredom, testing the limits of their endurance, demonstrating itsharmlessness to the research staff, and subtle social pressure. DURATION OF USE Very little American data exists on the duration of marihuanause. Practically no data exists which demonstrates the extentthat persons who initiated marihuana use some 20-40 years agohave continued its use. Robins and Murphy (1967) in a follow-upstudy of St. Louis black males noted that 20% of those who hadtried marihuana by age 24 were still using it to some degree 15years later. McGlothlin et a]. (1970, 1971) reported on a sampleof predominantly white adults who began using, marihuana inadolescence and had continued infrequent use for more than 20years. In the case of Western and particularly middle class Americanuse of marihuana, the rapid climb to prominence of the phenomenonsince the midsixties raises the question of whether the entiredrug movement is transient or permanent. Certainly, the majorityof the youthful users and many of the adults have used the drugless than 10 years and probably less than five years. One 1970 survey (Lipp, 1970) revealed that 77% of thosestudents who initiated marihuana use four to five years earlierwere still using it to some degree. A recent study (Walters eta]., 1972) indicates that students who first used marihuanabefore entering college in September 1965 and had continued useof marihuana in February 1969 ("old user") differedfrom the, vast majority of users who began their drug use incollege ("new user"). The old user is more likely to experiment with a wide varietyof drugs, to be extremely active in radical politicalorganizations, to be alienated from American society, to be lessdefinite about career plans, and to have more heterosexualactivities. The Commission-sponsored National Survey indicated thatmarihuana use by both youth (12-17 years of age) and adults (18and over) is experimental in approximately 75% of those who haveever used marihuana. These individuals have, either stopped usingit (66% of adults and 57% of youth) or are, using, it once, amonth or less. In contrast, 13% of the ever used subsample (12%adults, 16% youth) use marihuana once a week or more. In other non-Western countries, cannabis use frequentlypersists for long periods. Especially in the East, persons usingit for 20-40 years or more are not uncommon. In other cultures,initiation is most common in adolescence. Once the habit isestablished it is likely to continue on a daily basis for manyyears and frequently continues as a lifetime practice (Weiss,1971; Sigg, 1963; Soueif, 1967; Watt, 1936; Chopra and Chopra,1939; Bouquet, 1951; VN, 1957). Probably the duration of use will vary considerably dependingon cultural acceptance or rejection (McGlothlin, 1972). INTERACTION WITH OTHER DRUGS Little experimental work has been done on the interactionbetween marihuana and other drugs used socially or medicallyalthough this will become an important area as usage increases. Marihuana is often used with sweet wines to enhance itseffect. Some evidence for an additive effect of marihuana andalcohol on motor and mental performance and subjective effect hasbeen seen experimentally (Manno et al., 1971; Jones and Stone,1970). Some degree of additive effects would be expected withbarbiturates based on their similarity to alcohol. A morecomplex, mixed pattern of effect might be expected withamphetamines and hallucinogens. These latter combinations arerarely used socially (Hollister, 1971). CliffSchaffer's Home Page WT01-B25-42IA031-000651-B021-263http://206.61.184.43:80/schaffer/LIBRARY/studies/nc/nc1e.htm 206.61.184.43 19970122123349 text/html 47310HTTP/1.0 200 OKDate: Wednesday, 22-Jan-97 12:33:38 GMTServer: WebSitePro/1.1f (S/N wpo-0deb)Allow-ranges: bytesContent-type: text/htmlLast-modified: Saturday, 28-Dec-96 06:55:04 GMTContent-length: 47092 Acute Effects of Marijuana (Delta 9 THC) The Report of the National Commission on Marihuana andDrug Abuse Acute Effects of Marihuana (Delta 9 THC) SUBJECTIVE EFFECTS Descriptive accounts of marihuana intoxication have beenwritten by noted authors, Beaudelaire (1961), scientists, Moreau(1945), and common users Tart, 1970, 1971; Isbell et al., 1967;Report by Advisory Committee, 1968). Adequate description of thestate of mind produced by low doses is difficult because it isnot approximated in the usual states of consciousness or by othercommonly used drugs. The closest non-drug approximation may bethe altered state of consciousness experienced in the hypnotictrance or transcendental meditation or the, transition zonebetween waking and sleep (Weil, 1971). Due to the highlysubjective nature of the experience, there is much individualvariation in the effects described. Tart (1970, 1971) studied the range of potential commoneffects in an extensive survey of 150 users. Changes noted bythese studies at low doses (usually smoked dose about five mg.THC) include euphoria, with restlessness and mild mentalconfusion. Sensory perception of the external environment. isaltered. Users often perceive an overestimation or slowing ofelapsed time and expansion of space, enhanced sense of tactile,olfactory, gustatory perceptions and often a feeling of hunger.Visual alterations reported are more vivid imagery and seeingforms and patterns in objects that are usually amorphous.Increased awareness of subtle qualities of sound such as purity,distinctness or rhythm are characteristically perceived by users.A dreamy, relaxed state and disinhibition, with uncontrollablelaughter is reported and users often believe that interpersonalrelations are altered, and act to potentiate social interaction. At moderate doses intensifications of changes experienced arereported. Users' reports include disturbed associations, dullingof attention, vivid visual imagery, fixed ideas, rapidly changingpositive and negative emotions, fragmentation of thought, flightof ideas, impaired immediate memory, altered sense of identity,increased suggestibility and a feeling of enhanced insight. Athigher doses, interpersonal relations are dulled and the userfeels less social and more withdrawn. At larger doses psychotomimetic (hallucinogenic-like)phenomena are experienced in a wavelike fashion. These includedistortion of body image, depersonalization, visual illusions anddistortions, synesthesia, dream-like fantasies and vividhallucinations. Data from Isbell et a]. (1967) and Perez-Reyes et al. (1971)have indicated that the hallucinogenic oral dose is in the rangeof 0.4 to 0.5 mg./kg Delta 9 THC. Thus, the hallucinogenic doseis 80 times larger than the delivered dose of smoked marihuanaproducing minimal subjective effects (five micrograms/kg.) orabout 11 to 14 times larger than the usual smoked dose. LETHALITY There is no conclusive evidence that short-term marihuana usealone directly results in any physical damage to man. A fewscattered fatalities associated with marihuana use areoccasionally reported. Most are from 19th century Indianexperiences with large oral doses of charas (Deakin, 1880;Bouquet, 1951; Ewens, 1904, Walton, 1938; Indian Hemp Drugs,1893). Brill et al. (1970) and Smith (1968) have noted that therehave not been any reliable reports of human fatalitiesattributable purely to marihuana, although very high doses havebeen administered by users. A frequently cited recent report from Belgium by Heyndrickxet al. (1970) describes an essentially negative pathological andtoxicological study of a 23-year-old man found dead in thepresence of marihuana, and hashish. A cannabinoid was detected inhis urine. However, this finding in no way inculpates marihuanaas the responsible agent. There are many possible causes ofsudden death which are not toxins and do not produce observablepathology; e.g. anaphylactic reactions, insulin shock, cardiacarhythmias, etc. A case report (Nahas, 1971) of an attempted suicide bysmoking hashish, recently in France is even more anecdotal. Anindividual was reported to have smoked consecutively ten pipes ofhashish containing approximately 200 mg of Delta 9 THC eachbefore losing consciousness. But recovery occurred aftersupportive treatment. Another case report (Hughes et al., 1970) relates severediabetic coma with ketoacidosis after the ingestion of hugeamounts of marihuana by a mental patient. However, it appearsthat the pronounced vomiting secondary to the marihuana ingestioncaused a severe electrolyte imbalance and alkalosis. Possibly avulnerable glucose-regulating system responded to the severestress inappropriately. Retrospectively, there was no history ofdiabetes noted previously but this was not confirmed or ruled outby lab tests prior to the episode. Several case reports (Henderson and Pugsley, 1968 King andCowen, 1970; King et al., 1970; Lundberg et al., 1971; Gary andKeylon, 1970) noted acute severe, physiological disturbances andacute collapse (shock, chills and fever) subsequent tointravenous injection of suspensions of marihuana. These symptomsmay have been due to an allergic reaction to injected foreignplant material, to a bacteremia and/or to the injection ofinsoluble particles which are filtered by the organs. Thesymptoms may be considered a complication of the mode of use,rather than results of the drug. Although a median lethal dose has not been established in man(Brill et al., 1970), one has been found in laboratory animals.Earlier reports (Lowe, 1946; Joachimoglu, 1965) used materials ofuncertain potency and composition. Recent studies utilizedcarefully quantified materials. One group, Phillips et al.(1971), utilizing THC extracted from marihuana, demonstrated thefollowing LD50 (the dose that causes death in 50% of the animals)in units of mg/kg of Delta 9 THC from mice,/rats: oral 481.9/666,intraperitoneal 454-9/ 372.9, intravenous 28.6/42.47. Thompson et al. (1971) under contract to the NationalInstitute of Mental Health have recently carried out extensivestudies in rats, dogs and monkeys in order to define the range oftoxicity of the drug. The group used synthetic Delta 9 and A' THCand a crude marihuana extract (CME) of carefully definecomposition. Delta 9 THC was more potent than Al THC. CME wasless potent than a similar quantity of A' THC. Acute toxicity was studied using intravenous, intraperitonealand oral routes of administration in rats. An LD50 similar tothat reported by Phillips et al. (1971) was found by theintravenous route (20 mg/kg of THC) and intraperitoneal route(400 mg/kg) but higher values were noted with oral administration(1140 mg/kg). Interestingly, the LD50 for males was 1400 mg/kgwhile for females it was 700 mg/kg by the oral route. The minimallethal dose orally was between 225 and 450 mg/kg. An LD50 was not attainable in monkeys and dogs by the oralroute. Enormous dose levels (over 3000 mg/kg of Delta 9 THC) wereadministered without lethality to most animals. A dose of about1000 mg/kg THC was the lowest dose which caused death in anyanimals The completeness of intestinal absorption of THC at thesehigh doses is unknown. Behavioral changes in the survivorsincluded sedation, huddled posture, muscle tremors,hypersensitivity to sound and hypermobility. The cause of death in the rats and mice subsequent to oralTHC was profound central nervous system depression leading todyspnea, prostration, weight loss, loss of Fighting reflex,ataxia, and severe fall in body temperature which led tocessation of respiration from 10 to 46 hours after single doseoral administration. No consistent pathological changes wereobserved in any organs. The cause of death when it rarelyoccurred in the higher species did not appear to be related tothe same mechanism as in the rats. Using intravenous administration, the acute one dose LD50 forDelta 9 THC was 100 mg/kg in dogs and 15.6 to 62.5 mg/kg inmonkeys depending on concentration of the solution. The minimallethal intravenous dose for dogs, also depending uponconcentration, was 25 to 99 mg/kg and for monkeys 3.9 to 15.5mg/kg. In contrast to the delayed death observed in rats after oraladministration, lethality in rats, dogs and monkeys afterintravenous injection occurred within minutes after injection.When sublethal amounts were injected, central nervous systemdepression with concomitant behavioral changes similar to thoseobserved after oral doses were observed. However, their onset wasmore rapid and the intensity of effect more severe withanaesthesia, and convulsions noted after injection. The monkeysand dogs that survived the intravenous injection of THC recoveredcompletely within five to nine days. The only consistent pathological changes were noted in theanimals which succumbed. Pulmonary changes including hemorrhage,edema, emphysema and generalized congestion were found and deathresulted from respiratory arrest and subsequent cardiac failure.The investigators presumed one mechanism possibly accounting forthese findings was due to the concentration of the THC solutionand its insolubility in water. Presumably, when these highlyconcentrated solutions mixed with the blood, the THC precipitatedout of solution. The precipitated foreign material then formedaggregates (or emboli) that were filtered out in the lungcapillaries causing a physical blockage of pulmonary blood flow. Subsequently, intravenous studies were repeated using Delta 9THC emulsified in a sesame oil-Tween 80-saline vehicle at 15mg/ml or 40 mg/ml. The emulsions were administered at a uniformrate of 2 ml/15 sec. Doses administered were 1, 4, 16, 64,92,128, 192 and 256 mg/kg. All monkeys injected with 92 mg/kg orless survived and completely recovered from all effects with twoto four days. All monkeys injected with 128 mg/kg or moresuccumbed within 30 minutes for all but one (180 minutes). Histopathological changes found in the lungs of the deceasedmonkeys were like those described after the, previous intravenousexperiment. All the monkeys that died exhibited severerespiratory depression and bradycardia within five minutes afterthe injection. Respiratory arrest and subsequent cardiac failureoccurred within minutes. Behavioral changes preceding death weresalivation, prostration, coma and tremors. Behavioral and physiological changes described clinically inthe surviving monkeys followed a consistent developmentalsequence and were roughly dose related in severity and duration.Onset was 15 minutes following injection and duration was up to48 hours. Huddled posture and lethargy were the most persistentchanges. Constipation, anorexia and weight loss were noted.Hypothermia, bradycardia and decreased respiratory rate generallywere maximal two to six hours post injection. Tremors with motionbut not at rest were believed to be caused by peripheral muscleinadequacy. In summary, enormous doses of Delta 9 THC, All THC andconcentrated marihuana extract ingested by mouth were unable toproduce death or organ pathology in large mammals but did producefatalities in smaller rodents due to profound central nervoussystem depression. The non-fatal consumption of 3000 mg/kg A THC by the dog andmonkey would be comparable to a 154-pound human eatingapproximately 46 pounds (21 kilograms) of 1%-marihuana or 10pounds of 5% hashish at one time. In addition, 92 mg/kg THCintravenously produced no fatalities in monkeys. These doseswould be comparable to a 154-pound human smoking at one timealmost three pounds (1.28 kg) of 1%-marihuana or 250,000 timesthe usual smoked dose and over a million times the minimaleffective dose assuming 50% destruction of the THC by smoking. Thus, evidence from animal studies and human case reportsappears to indicate that the ratio of lethal dose to effectivedose is quite large. This ratio is much more favorable than thatof many other common psychoactive agents including alcohol andbarbiturates (Phillips et al. 1971, Brill et al. 1970). PHYSIOLOGICAL EFFECTS Much research has been reported on the effect of single dosesof marihuana or THC on a wide variety of indices of physiologicfunction in animals. Most animalt studies involved large dosesa-rid produced profound changes similar in nature but less inmagnitude than those described in the previous paragraphs. Thesehave been comprehensively reviewed elsewhere (Secretary HEW 1972,Forney, 1971; Secretary HEW, 1971) and should be consulted ifmore detailed information is required. Similarly, much research has been done in man. As discussedin the previous section on factors influencing thepsychopharmacological effect in man, an acute dose-responserelationship has been clearly defined over a dose range relevantto human usage patterns for these effects. Thus, with increasingdose, the larger the effect on the index being observed and thelonger the effect persists. However, there is a wide variationbetween individuals' responses but each individual is quiteconsistent. The most consistent physiological sign is an increased pulserate (Mendelson et al., 1972; Johnson and Domino, 1971; Renaultet al., 1971; Galanter et al., 1972; Domino, 1970; Hollister etal., 1968 Manno et al., 1970; Mayor's Committee 1944; Waskow etal., 1970; Isbell and Jasinski, 1969; Meyer et al., 1971; Weil etal., 1968; Jones and Stone, 1970; Clark and Nakashima, 1968).This does not appear to be a direct drug effect on the heart(Manno et al., 1970). Instead, the drug appears to cause complexchanges in the autonomic nerves regulating heart rate. Thus,Kiplinger et al. (1971) demonstrated that the increase producedby marihuana in heart rate is prevented by pretreatment with aBeta-sympathetic nervous system blocking agent, propranolol. Acomparable increase rate was produced by treatment withisoprotemol, a Beta-sympathetic like drug. One subject developedan abnormal bigeminal rhythm after both marihuana andisoproternol. Renault et al. (1971) noted a consistent effect of marihuanaon the cardiac rhythm which also produced an increased heartrate. The effect was the suppression of the normal sinusarrhythmia usually produced by respiration. Respiration usuallyproduces a slowing of heart rate mediated by the vagalparasympathetic nerve supply. This depression of normal vagaltone was further evidenced by the absence of heart rate slowingduring forced expiration against a closed glotis (valsalvamaneuver). This effect seemed to wax and wane over severalminutes producing alternate periods of rapid and slowed heartrate. Both autonomic nervous systems seem to be affected bymarihuana; the sympathetic is stimulated while theparasympathetic is inhibited. Kiplinger et al. (1971) clearly demonstrated that the amountof increase in _pulse rate was directly related to the dose ofTHC administered as did Renault et al. (1971) and Johnson andDomino (1971) over a wide range of doses. Both experienced andinexperienced marihuana smokers demonstrated increases regardlessof the subjective state described. Tachycardia is noted rapidlyand reaches a peak about 15 to 20 minutes after finishingsmoking. The pulse rate returns to normal within one toone-and-a-half hours. Other than the one report of bigeminy (Kiplinger et al.,1971), little or no alteration of normal heart rhythm were notedby electrocardiogram (Isbell et al., 1967; Mayor's Committee,1944) other than sinus tachycardia (Mendelson et al., 1972).Johnson and Domino (1971) noted premature ventricularcontractions in a few of their subjects, but they felt thiseffect was more likely produced by the smoking itself rather thanby the drug. Conjunctival injection, reddening of the eyes due toincreased prominence of the conjunctival blood vessel anddilation of the scleral vessels, (Hepler et al., 1971; Kiplinger,et al., 1971) is another highly consistent occurrence (Mendelsonet al., 1972, Allentuck and Bowman, 1942; Ames, 1958; Hollister,et al., 1968; Isbell et al., 1967; Manno et al., 1970; Waskow etal., 1979; Weil et al., 1968) produced by orally ingested andsmoked al., 1968). This finding is produced by orally ingestedand smoked marihuana (or THC). And thus the effect must be adirect drug effect and not caused by irritation from smoke(Perez-Reyes and Lipton, 1971). Kiplinger et al. (1971) notedthat this finding was dose-related although it develops slowlyreaching a maximum about one hour after smoking. Reported effects on blood pressure are inconsistent. Someinvestigators find lowered pressure (Hollister et al., 1968;Isbell et al., 1967; Waskow, et al., 1970) while others report aslight increase (Johnson and Domino, 1971; Domino, 1970; Mayor'sCommittee, 1944) and still others report increases and decreases(Mendelson et al., 1972; Perez-Reyes et al., 1971). Preliminary results of a carefully performed study of thecardiovascular effects (Weiss, 1971) demonstrated orthostatic,hypotension in the erect position and hypertension when supine. Little or no effect has been demonstrated in humans on a widevariety of parameters investigated. Body temperature is unchanged(Mendelson et al., 1971; Hollister et al., 1968; Isbell et al.,1967; Brooks, 1896) as is respiratory rate (Domino, 1970; Isbellet al., 1967; Weil et al., 1968), lung vital capacity and acutebronchospasni (Mendelson et O., 1972) and basal metabolism(Mayor's Committee, 1944). Several studies (Mendelson et al., 1972; Mayor's Committee,1944; Personal Communication, 1970) have examined changes inblood cells and blood chemistry. No acute effects weredemonstrated on red blood cell number, or structure; differentialand total white blood cell count; platelet count; reticulocyte,count; serum electrolyte concentrations; calcium and phosphorousserum levels; liver function tests; uric acid concentration; typeor quantity of serum proteins. Although increased frequency ofurination is often reported, increased urine volume has not beendemonstrated (Ames, 1958; Mayor's Committee, 1944) and noalteration of kidney function identified (Personal Communication,1970; Hollister et al., 1968; Mayor's Committee, 194-4; Mendelsonet al. 1972). Reports of increased hunger, especially for sweets (Allentuckand Bowman, 1942; Ames, 1958; Manno et al., 1970; Mayor'sCommittee, 1944), have focused attention on blood sugar and foodintake. No consistent significant change in blood sugar has beendemonstrated (Dornbush and Freedman, 1971; Hollister, 1971;Hollister et al., 1968; Isbell et al., 1967; Manno et -al., 1970;Personal Communication, 1970; Weil et al., 1968) with someinvestigators finding decreases (Beringer et al., 1932;Lindemann, 1933-1934), others finding increases (Manno, 1970;Mayor"s Committee, 1944), still others finding bothincreases and decreases (Miras, 1965). Podolsky (1971) found that although fasting blood glucose wasunchanged by smoking marihuana, higher 30 and 60 minute glucoselevels were noted after a standard dose of glucose. Nocorresponding alteration in insulin or growth hormone levels wasdemonstrated. Hollister and Gillespie (1970) found an increased total foodintake when the drug was administered after breakfast but notafter an overnight fast. Half the subjects reported subjectiveincreased hunger. Subjects' free fatty acid levels and bloodglucose remained unchanged while the placebo controls' free fattyacid values decreased. Another study suggested increased appetiteand food intake but was without adequate controls (PersonalCommunication, 1970). An investigation of physiological parameters of stress aftermarihuana (Hollister, 1969; Hollister et al., 1970) revealed onlya minimal increase in white blood cells and a minimal decrease incosinophils but no changes in serotonin, cortisol level andurinary catecholamines. However, another investigator (Chopra,1969) demonstrated increased catecholamine excretion especiallythose from the adrenal medulla. Hepler and Frank (1971) and Frank et, al(1971) have carefullystudied ophthalmological changes produced by marihuana. Swellingof the eyelids (Ames, 1958), ptosis (Isbell et al., 1967),photophobia and nystagmus (Allentuck and Bowman, 1942) anddilated, sluggish reacting pupils (Mayer-Gross et al., 1960;Mayor's Committee, 1944) were all mentioned in earlierdiscussions but were not demonstrated (Hepler et al., 1971). Findings which were quantifiable (Hepler et al., 1971) were aslight pupillary constriction with normal responsiveness to lightand accommodation and an increase in glare recovery time. Nochange was evident on near and far visual acuity, fundiscopicexam, visual field acuity and depth and color perception.However, a decrease in tear secretion and an increase inconjunctival injection was demonstrated. Hepler and Frank (1971) reported an average of about 25%decrease in the intraocular pressure of most normal subjectsafter smoking marihuana. A preliminary trial in one patient withglaucoma demonstrated similar findings (Frank, 1971). No objective impairment of improvement invisual acuity orbrightness perception (Caldwell et al., 1970; Caldwell et al.,1969) nor effect on depth perception and duration of after image(Clark and Nakashima, 1968) was noted in other studies. Neurological examinations have consistently revealed no majorabnormalities during marihuana intoxication. (Mayor's Committee,1944; Rodin and Domino, 1970; Rodin et al., 1970; PersonalCommunication, 1970). Subjects often report muscle weakness.Minimal decreased leg, hand and finger maximum muscle strengthhave been demonstrated objectively (Fere, 1901; Hollister et al.,1968; Mayor's Committee, 1944). However, electromyography wasreported to be normal (Personal Communication, 1970 A slightly increased briskness in the knee jerk has beendetected (Domino, 1971 - Rodin and Domino, 1970) while no changein threshold or elicitation of deep tendon reflexes is usually,reported (Hollister et al., 1968; Isbell et al., 1967). Incoordination, fine tremor and ataxia are often experiencedby the user (Ames, 1958; Beringer et al., 1932; Clark et al.,1970; Mayor's Committee, 1944). The presence of a fine tremor anddecrements in hand steadiness and static body equilibrium leavebeen demonstrated with refined measuring devices when they arenot grossly observable (Manno et al., 1970; Mayor's Committee,1944; Mendelson et al., 1972). Kiplinger et al. (1971) usingsensitive apparatus demonstrated these fine hand tremors andchanges in body equilibrium are also dose related. Cranial nerve function and somatic sensation have not beensignificantly impaired or improved. Subjective reports ofincreased auditory sensitivity contributing to greater estheticappreciation of music (Winick, 1960) have been generallyunconfirmed in objective tests of auditory acuity and pitch,frequency or intensity or threshold discrimination (Aldrich,1944; Caldwell et al., 1970; Caldwell et al., 1969; Clark andNakashima 1968; Mayor's Committee, 1944; Meyers and Caldwell,1969). Objective improvement in auditory acuity in severalsubjects was noted (Walton, 1938; Williams et al., 1946). Similarly, improvement in visual acuity and discriminationand altered depth perception reported by users has beenunconfirmed objectively (Caldwell et al., 1970; Caldwell et al.,1969; Clark and Nakashima, 1968; Mayor's Committee, 1944;Hollister and Gillespie, 1970; Jones and Stone, 1970; Frank etal., 1971). A slight improvement in vibratory sensation (Rodin andDomino, 1970), no change in touch or two-point discrimination(Rodin and Domino, 1970; Williams et al., 1946) nor olfactory andgustatory senses (Williams et al., 1946) have been demonstrated.Decreased sensitivity to pain has been objectively demonstrated(Personal Communication, 1970) which corroborates its pasttherapeutic use as an analgesic. One of the most frequently reported subjective effects ofmarihuana intoxication is a distortion of time sense (Tart,1971). Actual elapsed time is overestimated or perceived as beinglonger than actual clock time. Thus, present events are perceivedas prolonged when intoxicated and isolated from the past andfuture. They are in the "hereand-now" (Melges et al.,1971). Many have confirmed this experimentally (Ames, 19,58;Clark et al., 1970; Mendelson et al., 1972; Dornbush and Freeman,1971; Hollister and Gillespie, 1970; Weil et al., 1968; Williamset al., 1946). The over-estimate is much greater during periodslit which the subject is performing a task than for unfilledtime, and the error is (greater as the time period is longer(Clark et al., 1970). Melges et al. (1971) have demonstrated that marihuanaintoxication induces temporal distortions with a greaterconcentration on the present and a shortening of span ofawareness into the past and future. They believe that under thedrug's influence, as the, subject becomes less able to integratepast, present and future, his awareness becomes more concentratedon present events. These present events are experienced asprolonged or timeless because they no longer appear to theintoxicated individual as transitions from the past to thefuture. Melges and Bowlby (1969) have described habitual marihuanasmokers who specifically use the drug to achieve the"here-and-now" orientation. These smokers claim thisfocus on the present permits them to be more open to immediateexperience while being less troubled by past and future concerns.This focus may also explain the belief that perceptions duringintoxications are both unexpected and never experiencedpreviously. The effect of intoxication on the restingelectroencephalogram are still unclear but generally have beenminimal, inconsistent and within normal limits. In early studies(Wikler and Lloyd, 1945; Williams et al., 1946) a decrease inalpha activity was noted. More recently (Ames, 1958) noted adelayed alpha increase with concomitant increases in beta andtheta activity. Rodin and Domino (1971) reported a slight shifttoward slower alpha frequencies. Three other studies (Jones and Stone, 1970; Hollister et al.,1971; Rickles et al., 1970), failed to find consistent changesbut noted increased alpha frequency, increased synchronizationand occasional paroxysmal activity. These effects were ascribedto relaxation and drowsiness. Two investigators (Chopra, 1935; Miras, 1969) reporteddecreased fast activity and other variable effects. Mostrecently, Volavka et al. (1971) and Fink et al. (1971), reporteda significant rapid onset effect occurring during the five-minutesmoking period and of short duration (less than 30 minutes) incontinuously alert individuals. The principal changes detected bycomputer analysis were a dose related increase in percent alphatime and an associated reduction in theta and beta hands. Roth et al. (1972), demonstrated that auditory evokedresponses were decreased in amplitude by marihuana and THCparticularly during the first few minutes of stimulation. Theseresults may indicate that the intoxicated individual may receiveexternal auditory stimuli differently during the intoxicationperiod. The prominent and frequently reported sedative effects ofmarihuana and the dreamlike states occurring during intoxicationdirected several investigators to study the effects of marihuanaon sleep. Fragmentary data from one sleep laboratory (Pivik etal., 1969) indicated decreased rapideye-movement (REM) sleeptime. Another sleep lab (Rickles et al., 1970), in preliminarywork demonstrated an increase in REM sleep time. Fink et al.(1971) noted that EEG defined sleep (stages one and two) weredose dependent but THC did not act like a classical sedative. Theoccurrence of EEG sleep was much more frequent in the placebo andlow dose (10 mg THC) conditions than in the high dose condition(20 mg THC). Mendelson et al. (1972) noticed an increased amount of totalsleep as well as an increase in discrete episodes of sleeprelated to marihuana smoking. These findings correlate well withquestionnaire data (Tart, 1970) indicating that at moderatedoses, users found it easier to induce sleep and that sleep wasconsidered to be more refreshing, while at higher doses bothaspects were impaired. In summary, marihuana containing Delta-9-THC is apharmacologically active drug with minimal acute physiologicaleffects at the low to moderate doses used by man. Based on its few consistently observed physiological effects,marihuana is a rather unexciting compound of negligible acutephysiological toxicity at the usual doses consumed by man. Thesubjective state characteristically described by the intoxicateduser is far more interesting to both the user and the scientistthan the objective one observed by the investigator. EFFECTS ON MENTATION AND PSYCHOMOTOR PERFORMANCE Characteristically, intoxication with psychoactive materialseffect psychomotor and mental functions. It is apparent from thesubjective assertions of users and a wide range of experimentalstudies that marihuana is no exception (Clark and Nakashima ,1968; Clark et al., 1970; Dornbush and Freedman, 1971; Hollisterand Gillespie, 1970; Manno et al., 1970; Mayor's Committee, 1944;McGlothlin et al., 1971; Melges et al., 1970; Meyer et al., 1971;Weil and Zinberg, 1969; Weil et al., 1968; Volavka et al., 1971;Galanter et al., 1972; Kiplinger et al., 1971; Mendelson et al.,1972; Dornbush et al., 1971). Psychomotor tasks which have been tested include tappingspeed, handwriting and free-hand writing and free handdrawing,simple and complex reaction time, pursuit rotor and trackingtasks and continuous performance tests. Cognitive tasksfrequently tested are simple arithmetic problems, serial additionor subtraction, fine judgment tasks, 'digit-symbol substitutiontest, digit-code memory, reading comprehension, speech or verbalout-put, forward and backward digit spans, goal directed complexserial subtractions and additions to reach a set end sum, andshort-term or immediate memory functions. In general, Kiplinger et al. (1971) have clearly demonstratedthat the degree of impairment is dose related and varies indegree during the period of intoxication exerting its maximaleffect at the peak intoxication. Naive subjects commonly demonstrate greater decrement inperformance than experienced users but report less subjectiveeffect (Weil et al., 1968). Experienced users appear to bettercompensate to the effect of the drug especially for ordinaryperformance at lower doses (Clark and Nakashima, 1968; Clark etal., 1970; Crancer et al., 1969; Jones and Stone, 1970; Meyer etal., 1971; Weil and Zinberg, 1969; Jones, 1971; Mendelson et al.,1972). Performance of simple or familiar tasks (i.e. simplereaction time) during intoxication is minimally effected.However, on unfamiliar or complex tasks (i.e., complex reactiontime), performance decrements occur (Weil and Zinberg, 1969;Dornbush et al., 1971; Moskowitz et al., 1970). Performance decrements are further enhanced when verbal tasksare performed during delayed auditory feedback (Kiplinger et al.,1971). Also marked individual differences in performance arenoted between similar subjects. (Clark and Nakashima, 1968; Clarket al., 1970; Manno et al., 1970; Kiplinger et al., 1971). Acyclical waxing and waning of the intensity of the intoxicationand concomitant performance occurs periodically (Clark et al.,1970; Melges et al., 1970). Finally, when subjects concentrate on the task beingperformed at "normal social high," objective evidenceof intoxication is not apparent and the individual may performbetter than when drug free (Rodin and Domino, 1970; Mendelson etal., 1972). Obviously, these observations raise practical doubtsregarding the intoxicated individuals' ability to function atjobs requiring memory, concentration, and organization ofthinking. THE INTOXICATED MENTAL STATE Several investigators have suggested that shortterm memory isthe mental function most significantly affected by marihuana andcontributes to the subtle alterations of mental functioningnoted. Generally an impairment of recent or short term memory isdemonstrated (Abel, 1970,1971; Dornbush et al., 1971; Menges,1970-71; Tinklenberg, 1970; Clark et al., 1970; Weil et al.,1968). Thus, mental tasks requiring immediate informationacquisition (Abel, 1971) and/or retrieval (Weil et al., 1968) areeffected. Abel (1971) recently showed that marihuana blocks theacquisition process involved in the storage of new interfereswith the retrieval of already stored information. Decrements areproduced in decisions requiring recent memory or sustainedalertness (Clark et al., 1970) ; conversation (Well et al., 1968); calculations, or reading which requires retention, coordinatingand indexing sequential information termed temporaldisintegration (Melges et al., 1970, 1971). Melges eta]. (1970, 1971) theorizes that episodic impairmentof immediate memory produces voids which are filled withperceptions and thoughts extraneous to the organized mentalprocesses. He suggests that this leads to temporal disintegrationproducing a fragmented and disorganized temporal experience inwhich past and future time frames are blurred and the present isexperienced as prolonged or boundless. Thus, depersonalizationoccurs as the individual experiences himself temporally in astrange and unreal manner during marihuana intoxication. UNPLEASANT REACTIONS: "TOO STONED" AND"NOVICE-ANXIETY" These substantial cognitive and psychomotor effects areprobably responsible for many of the acute adverse reactions tomarihuana. One, of the most common is the heavy, drugged feelingwhere the individual feels mentally and physically sluggish sothat every motion and thought seems to require extreme effort(Smith and Mehl, 1970). This probably reflects impaired cognitivefunction and psychomotor retardation from getting "toostoned." This most frequently occurs after oral ingestion ofa large dose of drugs or in inexperienced smokers who have, notlearned to selftitrate their dose to achieve the desired high. In these instances, depression, anxiety, fatigue, short-termmemory loss, dizziness, nausea, incoordination, palpitations areexperienced as generalized discomfort, and ill-being. "Novice anxiety reactions" or panic reactionsaccount for a majority of acute toxic reactions to marihuana(Baker and Lucas, 1969; Baker-Bates, 1935; Gaskill, 1945;Grossman, 1969; Persyko, 1970; Bialos, 1970; Sonnenreich andGoes, 1962; Sigg, 1963; Dally, 1967; Hamaker, 1891; Marten, 1969;Smith and Mehl, 1970; Walton, 1938). When dosage, set and setting are optimal the distortion ofself (depersonalization) and temporal disintegration(timelessness of the present moment) common to marihuanaintoxication is recognized by the individual as time-limited anddrug-induced. It is usually experienced as pleasurable. But, ifdose, set and setting are not optimal the experience may causethe intoxicated individual to fear that loss of his identify andself control may not end or that he is dying or losing, his mind.Acute, anxiety or panic results (Mel et al., 1970). Non-drug factors of set and setting play a most importantrole in these, reactions. Of course, the great variability ofindividuals makes the effect of marihuana on any specificindividual rather unpredictable. The large majority of these anxiety reactions occur innovices who have intense underlying anxiety surrounding marihuanause such as fears of arrest, of disruption of family andoccupational relations and of possible physical and mentaldangers. Also, individuals with relatively rigid personalitystructures, whose values are more in line with those of the"straight"society and have little desire for new anddifferent experiences, appear to experience these, anxietyreactions much more frequently than those, individuals who aremembers of the "counterculture" (Smith and Mehl, 1970). In addition, simple episodes of neurotic depression may beobserved in these, same types of individuals during periods ofunusual psychological stress (Well, 1970). Both of these types ofreactions are transient and abate as the drug effects wear offover a few hours. Treatment should consist of gentle butauthoritative. reassurance that nothing is seriously wrong andthat the drug effects will wear off and the individual will feelnormal" again (Smith and Mehl, 1970; Well, 1970). ACUTE PSYCHOSES Rare cases of full-blown acute psychotic episodesprecipitated by marihuana use are reported in individuals withhistories of mental disorder, with marginal psychologicaladjustments or with poorly developed personality structures andego defenses (Talbott, 1968; Heiman, 1968; Kaplan, 1971; Pernot,1969; Keeler, 1968; Defer and Diehl, 1968; Wurniser et al., 1969;Allentuck and Bowman, 1942; Bromberg, 1939; Bromberg, 1934;Curtis and Wolfe, 1939; Hughes et al., 1970; Isbell et al., 1967;Keup , 1970; Keeler, 1967; Talbott and Teague, 1969 Mayor'sCommittee, 1944). Marihuana intoxication may hinder the ability of these,individuals to maintain structural defenses to existing stresses,or, alternatively produce a keener awareness of personalityproblems or existing stresses (Smith, 1968). Psychotherapy andantipsychotic medications are useful in controlling andpreventing this reaction (Weil, 1970). Exceptionally rare reports from North America of nonspecifictoxic psychosis or actite brain syndrome have occurred afterextremely high drug dose consumption, although such reports are,more common in the eastern countries. These conditions areself-limited and clear spontaneously as the drug effect abates(Weil et al., 1968; Bartolucei et al. 1969 Ames, 1958; Isbell etal., 1967; Mayor's Committee, 1944; Williams et al., 1946). Finally, marihuana intoxication may trigger delayed anxietyreactions or psychotic episodes in a small percentage of personswho have prior experience with hallucinogenic drugs (Ungerleideret al., 1968; Ungerleider, 1969; Weil et al., 1968; Favazza andDomino, 1969). In summary, the acute psychomotor-cognitive effects ofmarihuana intoxication are, interesting academically to gainunderstanding of normal and abnormal mental function. Also, forpractically determining the danger-risk factor for the individualincluding determination of his functional level personally,vocationally and socially in this society. The effect onpersonal-social-vocational function is highly individualized anddifficult to predict at present. Although reports of anxiety attacks and psychotic episodesare more frequent as marihuana use spreads, they are stillexceedingly rare and their incidence appears to be decreasing asuse becomes more acceptable to more diverse populations. Forexample, during the nine-year period of 1961 to 1969, out of701,057 admissions to Los Angeles County Hospital, located in a,city with very high marihuana use, only three patients requiredhospitalization for psychic sequelae of marihuana smoking(Lundberg, et al., 1971). In contrast, many cases are being seen in Vietnam soldierswhere a extremely potent material is available and daily stressesare high, but, these probably represent only a small fraction ofmarihuana, users (Talbott and Teague, 1969; Talbott, 1968;Heiman, 1968). During the, academic year 1968 and 1969, eight students wereseen in the mental hygiene division of a private EasternUniversity student population (8,500) with acute anxietyreactions (Bialos, 1970). The frequency of marihuana-associatedacute adverse, anxiety reactions requiring attention at BostonUniversity Student Health Service (student population 20,000) isbetween five and seven yearly (Pillard, 1970). In a recent survey of newly admitted patients to a largemental hospital, marihuana was the direct cause of thehospitalization in only 0.9 per thousand admissions (Keup, 1970). PERSISTENT EFFECTS AFTER ACUTE DOSE Investigators have not noted persistent effects after smokingmarihuana for periods of more than three to five hours (Fink etal., 1971; Weil et al., 1968; Pillard, 1970). Users report only minimal hangover effects (Mayor'sCommittee, 1944; Haines and Green, 1970; McGlothlin et al., 1971)after very heavy use. Feelings of lassitude and heaviness of thehead, lethargy, irritability, headaches and loss of concentrationare reported especially when associated with lack of sleep(Chopra and Chopra, 1939; Indian Hemp, 1893). This may be relatedto preliminary data (Rickles et al., 1970) suggesting a subtleincrease in REM sleep time primarily seen in the last one-thirdof the night in individuals who smoked one to two cigarettes perday usually at night for at least a year. EFFECTS OF MARIHUANA USE ON CONCOMITANT BEHAVIOR Mendelson et al. (1972), under contract to the Commission,analyzed the effects on behavior of acute marihuana intoxicationon an extensive variety of assessine nts including a simpleoperant task, mood states, individual and group observationsbefore, during and after smoking and clinical psychologicalevaluations. Sleep-inducing properties were confirmed. Increased amountsof total sleep were observed in both number and length of shorterand longer blocks of consecutive hours of sleep related tomarihuana smoking. Examination of mood assessments prior, during and aftermarihuana smoking indicates that the acute effects were areduction of negative moods (anxiety, hostility, and guilt-shame)and an increase in the positive moods (carefreeness andfriendliness). Examinations of the mood prior to smoking revealedthat the subjects tended to smoke marihuana when they reportedgenerally positive moods. The effect of the drug was to increasethis positive mood. One paradoxical finding was that the subjectsalso reported feeling more depressed after smoking. Acute effects of marihuana on cognitive and motor functionswere studied with a battery of tests sensitive to brain function(Halstead Category Test, Tactile Performance Test, SeashoreRhythm Test, Finger Tapping Test, Trail Making Test and theWeschler Adult Intelligence Scale). No alterations in performanceas a result of acute intake of marihuana were noted in any ofthese. The acute effect of marihuana smoking on social behavior wasinvestigated, by observing the individual and his interaction insmall groups. The data indicated very strongly that marihuanasmoking, in addition to being a subjective drug experience, isalso a social activity around which verbal interaction and othertypes of social behavior are centered. Although marihuana smoking tended to be, a group activity,subjects did not always engage in verbal communication whilesmoking. Subjects often were observed withdrawing from the socialinteraction and then participating in some type ofnoncommunicative passive activity, such as watching television,listening to music, reading or staring at objects or people. Thisdecrement in total interaction appeared to be a drug effect. Heavy marihuana users tended to be more withdrawn than theintermittent users, often listening to the stereo and focusing onthe personal effects of the drug. The intermittent users tendedto watch television which provided group entertainment, thusenhancing the social effects of the drug. Verbal interaction in formal task-oriented discussion groupsdiminished when several group members were simultaneouslyintoxicated. How-ever, groups engaged in problem-solving tasksperformed more efficiently because less suggestions anddiscussion ensued before proposing a workable solution. Thegroups tended to become more convivial and less task-orientedalthough none failed to arrive, at the goal. Marihuana did notappear to increase hostility during these sessions andfurthermore tended to change the nature of hostile communicationfrom direct criticism to indirect sarcasm. Assessment of risk-taking behavior revealed that under theinfluence of marihuana, users tend to become more conservative inthe decision making. In summary, it appears that marihuana does exert subtleeffects on measurable components of social behavior andinteraction. CliffSchaffer's Home Page WT01-B25-43IA031-000651-B021-290http://206.61.184.43:80/schaffer/LIBRARY/studies/nc/nc1f.htm 206.61.184.43 19970122123410 text/html 23096HTTP/1.0 200 OKDate: Wednesday, 22-Jan-97 12:33:56 GMTServer: WebSitePro/1.1f (S/N wpo-0deb)Allow-ranges: bytesContent-type: text/htmlLast-modified: Saturday, 28-Dec-96 06:58:17 GMTContent-length: 22878 Marijuana -- Effects of Short-Term or Subacute Use Contents | Feedback | Search DRCNet Library | Schaffer Library | Major Studies Marihuana, A Signal of Misunderstanding The Report of the National Commission on Marihuana and DrugAbuse Effects of Short-Term or Subacute Use ANIMAL STUDIES (PRECLINICAL) Studies have only begun in this area in the last 10 years.Subacute toxicity studies in rats involving 30 dailyintraperitoneal injections of up to 30 mg/kg THC were recentlyreported by Phillips et al. (1971). No fatalities were observed.Total body and organ weight (rains were significantly retardedover the period. However, no significant differences in organhistology were detected although in a few animals there weresuggestions of change in liver and testicular cells. Aninteresting phenomena also observed was a suggestion of increasedsensitivity to effects of Delta 9 THC occurring after two weeksof daily treatment. Thompson et al. (1971) under contract to NIMH studied thetoxicity in rats treated daily for seven, 28, 91 and then 119days with oral Delta 9 THC, A" THC and crude marihuanaextract at doses from 50 to 500 mg/kg. The findings weregenerally similar for all three preparations although A"effect was greater than All THC which in turn was greater thanCME. A bimodal pattern of behavorial toxicity was exhibited by thecannabinoids for all time periods of dosing ranging from five to119 days. Initially, a dose-related generalized central nervoussystem depression was noted. This was characterized by huddledposture, inactivity, drowsiness, slow movements, unkemptappearance, loss of appetite, wide stance, constipation, weightloss, depressed respiration and heart rate and fall in bodytemperature. Tolerance gradually developed to the initialdepressant effects starting after two to five doses and continuedat different rates for different parameters. Concomitant to the development of tolerance, rats exhibitedprogressively more hyperactivity, manifesting increasedexploratory behavior, grooming and motor activity. The dailyduration of the altered behavior progressively shortened.Tolerance to the hyperactivity was not seen in the rats. Later,in the experimental period, the rats became hyper-irritable andexhibited fighting behavior, especially at lower doses.Additionally, tremors and later chronic convulsions occurred insignificant numbers of rats. The onset and frequency of chronic convulsions weredose-related and the severity increased as the duration of dosagewas extended. Cumulative toxicity, as evidenced by increasedmortality, was observed in the rats but most deaths and maximaltoxicity (central depression) occurred 36 to 72 hours followingfirst treatment. Drug dose-related histopathological changes inall treated rats (in addition to decreased body and organ weightgains) were hypocellularity of the spleen and bone marrow,vacuolization of the adrenal gland and degeneration of the testes(seminiferous tubules) or ovarian stronia. Extended doses fromfive to119 days were not significantly more toxic except to theadrenals. No evidence of abstinence syndromes were noted uponabrupt cessation of these doses. Similar behavorial and clinical findings were observed inmonkeys given 50-500 mg oral Delta 9 THC, All THC and equivalentCME for up to 91 days. Cumulative toxicity was less severe andall monkeys survived the initial moderately severe centralnervous system depression. Tolerance to the depression occurredand the monkeys returned to their undrugged behavior. Mildhyperactivity was noted only in several of the median dosedanimals. Three of 28 monkeys studied became moribund on days 10, 14 and16 respectively. These were sacrificed and the onlyhistopathology seen was severe hemorrhagic and probablydrug-related enterocolitis. The bone marrow and kidney changesseen probably were due to severe electrolyte imbalance resultingfrom the intestinal lesion. The thymus lesion is consistent withstress due to this electrolyte imbalance. Pancreatic atrophy wasdue to weight changes. Eight additional monkeys were sacrificedat 28 days in fair-to-good condition and no histopathology wasdemonstrable. Several other monkeys had bloody diarrhea, butrecovered spontaneously without demonstrable histopathology. The remaining 17 monkeys were all in fair-to good condition at28 days and hyperactivity was no longer observed. They weretreated at the same dose for an additional 63 days. Tolerance tothe central depression continued to develop so that the effectslasted only one to two hours at 91 days. No additional monkeyfatalities were recorded -and the remaining 17 monkeys werenormal histopathological at autopsy. Urine and ophthalmologicalexaminations were all within normal limits. Hematological andblood chemical changes after 28 and 91 days were minor and littleaffected in the surviving monkeys. Thus, a. minimal toxicity in monkeys, either physical orbehavorial, is evident after 91 daily doses orally of enormousamounts of Delta 9 THC. However, significant cumulative toxicity,primarily a generalized central nervous system depression, isevident in the first few days but tolerance rapidly develops tothese effects. A dose-related hemorrhagic enterocolitis occurredwhich may lead to electrolyte imbalance and death in a fewmonkeys. This probably is a direct irritative phenomena. Again, the enormous daily doses of THC that were administeredto these animals cannot, be compared to the daily doses used inman even by the heaviest users. The effects were observed of 28 daily administrations tomonkeys of intravenous Delta 9 THC in sesame oil-Tween 80-salinevehicle at doses of 5, 15 and 45 mg/kg. Behavioral, clinical,hematological and hemochemical changes were similar for monkeysgiven single or repeated injections. However, the duration wasextended in the 28-day groups and tolerance gradually developed.Delayed death indicative of cumulative toxicity occured on dayseight and 19 in two of four animals given the largest dose. Histopathological changes, noted in the two animals whichsuccumbed and in one of the highdose monkeys, were acutehemorrhagic pneumonia resembling the finding in thesingle-intravenous studies at doses of 128 mg/kg or greater.Additionally in the repeated dose study, edema, ulceration andfibrosis at the injection sites probably contributed to minorhematological and hemachemical alterations. In summary, the 1972 Marihuana and Health Report to theCongress from the Secretary of HEW noted that these doses wereemployed in rodents and mammals to test the limits of toxicity.The doses are much higher than those used by man and the routesof administration substantially dif ferent. These studies haveshown that the margin of safety between the lethal dose and thepharmacologically active doses of Delta 8 and All THC and crudemarihuana extract is large. Consequently, it has been determinedthat these compounds could be safely administered to man forPhase I and early Phase II clinical studies (Secretary of HEW,Feb. 11, 1972, p. 158-160). HUMAN EXPERIMENTS (CLINICAL) Only a few investigators have studied the subacuteadministration of marihuana to man. Marihuana cigarettes ofunknown potency were made available to 34 military prisoners inPanama by Siler et al. (1933). The mean daily consumption wasfive cigarettes (range one to 20). The usual behavior effectsassociated with marihuana use were noted. No ill effects wereobserved nor abstinence syndrome seen. Williams et al. (1946) made available marihuana cigarettes ofunknown potency to six prisoner addicts who were experiencedmarihuana users in the Public Health Service Lexington Hospital.The subjects were permitted to freely consume the drug in anyquantity desired. The number of cigarettes consumed increasedonly slightly over a 39-day period. The daily range was from nineto 26 per day with a mean of 17. Only minimal evidence oftolerance was seen. There was no evidence of physical dependence;that is, no observable abstinence, syndrome was observed afterabrupt termination of the drug. In general, the following observations were made on thesesubjects: daily rectal temperature increased slightly; pulse,rate increased for three weeks, then returned to normal; nochange was noted in respiratory rate, coordination, or rotememory ; increase was noted in sleep and body weight whilecaloric intake initially increased then progressively decreased;mild confusion was observed; general intelligence tests wereslightly impaired while psychomotor tests were performed fasterbut less accurately; EEG showed inconsistent changes but returnedto normal five days after cessation; and mood was euphoric forseveral days followed by general lassisitude and indifference. In a recent uncontrolled preliminary study (PersonalCommunication, 1970), marihuana extract was administered daily toeight terminal cancer patients from four to 13 days (mean 8.5days). Daily doses were purposefully raised by the investigatorfrom 7.5 mg (mean daily dose 19.8 mg THC). The total dose perindividual patient averaged 168 mg with a range from 75-210 mgs. Euphoria was experienced by all eight subjects and one had atransient anxiety episode at a high dose. Three subjectsdemonstrated decreased-opiate analgesic needs indicating ananalgesic-effect of the drug. Five subjects reported improvedappetite and five, of six tested, demonstrated objectiveimprovement in depression on Back scale. No new changes were seenin physiological parameters, neurological status, blood cell andchemistry values or urine examination. During the period of drugeffect, drowsiness was common but not lethargy, lassitude orindifference. In fact, all became more active on the ward. Noevidence of abstinence symptoms were seen after abruptdiscontinuation of the drug. Volavka et a]. (1971) in preliminary experiments administeredtwo marihuana cigarettes daily (13 mg Delta 9 THC) to fourdetoxified heroin addicts. Pleasant effects peaked during thesecond week and then leveled off. Prominent dysphoric effects anddepressive reactions with paranoid thoughts appeared during thethird to sixth days and persisted causing cessation of the studyby one subject after 10 days and after 17 days by another. Theother two subjects completed the entire planned 22 days. Again no abstinence syndrome was seen and the dysphoricsymptoms disappeared within five days after the last dose.Consistent electroencephalogram changes developed in three offour subjects indicating increased synchronization. Their EEGchanges first appeared immediately after smoking. In two of the f our subjects they were detectable, in thepresmoking records after days 12 and eight, and did not begin tosubside until 48 hours after the last dose in two subjects andpersisted for the entire 72 hours follow-up in a third subject. Fink et al. (1971) subsequently studied five medical andgraduate students who had been almost daily marihuana smokers incollege and were currently weekend smokers. Each subject smokedunder laboratory conditions one marihuana cigarette containing 14mg of THC each morning daily for 21 days. No subject reported any adverse effects from smoking. Thesubjects were generally able to conduct their usual dailyactivities including jobs. However, they reported they did notfunction completely up to par during the several hour duration ofthe acute drug effect. There were no effects which persisted formore than three to five hours and cumulative effects were notnoted day to day. No persistent decrements were seen in behavior,mental status, EEG, heart, rate, short-term memory, orpsychomotor function tests. In sum, daily marihuana smoking for21 days was well tolerated by well-adjusted graduate students. Mendelson et al. (1972) performed a Commission-sponsored studyof the biological and behavioral concomitants of 21 days repeateddoses of marihuana. Subjects were individuals whose life style,activities, values and attributes were more characteristic of theunconventional youthful subculture than most of their peers inthe general population. Their mean age was 23. Based on I.Q.testing they were superior intellectually although they hadcompleted, on the average, two-and-a half years of college. Theirjob histories were rather erratic and characteristic of a patternof itinerant living. Their family background was a middle orlower-middle socioeconomic status. In addition alcohol use wasinfrequent while use of drugs, especially hallucinogens andamphetamines, was significant. Two groups of 10 subjects each were investigated over separate31-day periods of confinement on a comfortably furnished researchward equipped with an array of recreational materials. A large,open yard was available for outdoor recreational activities. Theresearch period was divided into three periods: a pre-drug periodof five days during which the subjects were drug free; a,subsequent 21-day period when marihuana, could be earned byperforming a, work-contingent operant task, then purchased andsmoked on a free-choice basis; and a five-day post-drug periodwithout access to marihuana. All attempts were made to not interfere in any way withperformance of the operant task or free choice marihuana smokingalthough the subjects were under constant observation. A vastarray of behavioral and biological assessments were made duringthe experimental period to determine any effect of repeat dosesof marihuana over this time. Two groups of subjects, studied separately, differed primarilyin the frequency of marihuana smoking over the past year. Bothgroups had averaged about five years of marihuana use (range twoto 17 years). The first group studied, referred to as the"casual" users by the authors, reported an averagefrequency of marihuana use, of 7.7 occasions per month (rangethree to 15 occasions). The second group studied, referred to asthe "heavy" users by the authors, reported almost dailyuse of marihuana (average 33 sessions per month; range 20+ to 75,including one substitute subject to fill the group who onlysmoked about 10 times a month). During the first 20 days of the smoking period, the casualgroup's consumption averaged three cigarettes daily (individualaverage was one-half to six) while that of the heavy usersaveraged six-and-a-half cigarettes daily (individual averagethree to eight-and-a-half). Both groups demonstrated a,progressive trend toward increased daily consumption during theexperiment. Close examination of the consumption patterns forindividual subjects showed that the trend toward increased useoccurred in the subjects who were initially the heaviest users.Several subjects who were initially the least frequent users didnot increase their use of marihuana over the course of the study. Subjects in both groups tended to smoke practically all ofeach cigarette including the butt. Each cigarette contained about20 mg- Delta 9 THC. Therefore, the heavy users average dailyintake was 130 mg of THC or a total of almost, Joni- -grams ofTHC over the 21-day period. The casual users average intake wasslightly less than half this amount. No abstinence syndrome or physical dependence was observedafter abrupt termination of smoking. Signs of mild to moderatepsychological dependence. were possibly seen in the heavy groupbut no evidence of psychological dependence was seen in thecasual users. No consistent clinically significant physiological orbiochemical changes were demonstrated during or after the periodof repeated use of marihuana. Urinalysis, complete blood counts, cell morphologies anddifferentials, and blood chemistry determinations (calcium,phosphorous, glucose, blood urea nitrogen, uric acid,cholesterol, total protein, albumen, total bilirubin, alkalinephosphatase, lactic dehydrogenase, and serum glutamic oxalacetictransaminase) were unaffected. Weight gain occurred in all but one subject. Maximal gain wasseen during the marihuana smoking period. The subjects were notjudged to be clinically malnourished prior to the experiment. Normal body temperature was not altered. No significantchange, in pulmonary function (decreased. vital capacity or acutebroncho spasm) was observed during the marihuana smoking period. Variable inconsistent changes in upright blood pressure werenoted. Effects on pulse rate were related only to acute drugadministration and were more pronounced during the initialsmoking phases. This suggests that tolerance developed todrug-induced tachycardia. No significant electrocardiographicchanges were observed. Marihuana smoking had no apparent effecton exercise related cardiac vascular function. Physical examinations revealed only the development ofpersistent conjunctival injection, lateral gaze nystagmus andfine, finger tremors. These findings were believed to be acutedrug effects and of no clinical significance. No signs ofneurological abnormality were observed. No cumulative effect ofmarihuana to cause, impairment of cognitive function was noted ona battery of tests sensitive to organic brain function. An increased amount of sleep in both shorter and longer blocksof consecutive hours was observed. Also an increase in the numberof discrete episodes of sleep, especially one to three hourepisodes also occurred during the marihuana use period.Reappearance of pre-drug pattern was seen during the post-drugperiod. This reversion appeared to begin toward the end of thedrug period which may be indicative of tolerance, to the acutedepressant-like effects of marihuana. Generally, performances on short-term memory, psychomotorskills and time estimation suggests that repeated marihuanasmoking had no discernible effect on the ability to improveperformance with practice on these measures. Tolerance appearedto develop to the acute decrement in performance on thesemeasures. On the time estimation task, a tendency appeared forthe subjects to increasingly overcompensate for the acute drugeffect with repeated testing in the nonintoxicated state. Both casual and heavy users had a marked decrement in totalsocial interaction during the first portion of the marihuanasmoking period. Total interaction of the casual subjectscontinued to diminish subsequently. Heavy users subsequentlytended to exceed presmoking levels of interaction indicating theyaccommodated to the depressant effects of repeat doses ofmarihuana. Both groups became progressively more convivial and lesstask-oriented in group discussions. They offered less suggestionsin problem-solving tasks but continued to efficiently solve theproblem. Casual users reported general relative increases in negativedaily moods and decreases in positive daily moods during thecourse of the study. The trend began with the onset of smokingand persisted through the post-smoking period. This trend couldbe a sequelae of repeated marihuana use or related to non-drugvariables (set and setting). The heavy users did not evidence this trend toward relativeincreases in dysphoric mood until the post-smoking period. Againthis may be related to repeated marihuana use, reflectpsychological dependence or be related to set and settingvariables, such as boredom and tension associated with theprolonged study period. Finally, repeated use of marihuana over the 21day period didnot decrease motivation to engage in a variety of social andgoal-directed behaviors. Almost without exception, every subjectearned the maximum number of points every day throughout allnon-drug and drug periods. No consistent alteration in pattern ofwork could be related to repeated marihuana use. Subjects oftenperformed very high work output while they were smoking marihuanaand experiencing the maximum drug effects. Repeated marihuana use, did not decrease subject's motivationto complete the study. Nor was any noticeable effect observed oninterest and participation in a variety of personal activities,such as, writing, reading literature, keeping up with currentnational and world events, and participation in both athletic andesthetic endeavors. Contents | Feedback | Search DRCNet Library | Schaffer Library | Major Studies Marihuana, A Signal of Misunderstanding WT01-B25-44IA031-000651-B021-321http://206.61.184.43:80/schaffer/LIBRARY/studies/nc/nc1g.htm 206.61.184.43 19970122123422 text/html 56245HTTP/1.0 200 OKDate: Wednesday, 22-Jan-97 12:34:13 GMTServer: WebSitePro/1.1f (S/N wpo-0deb)Allow-ranges: bytesContent-type: text/htmlLast-modified: Saturday, 28-Dec-96 06:58:05 GMTContent-length: 56027 Effects of Long-Term Cannabis Use Contents | Feedback | Search DRCNet Library | Schaffer Library | Major Studies Marihuana, A Signal of Misunderstanding The Report of the National Commission on Marihuana and DrugAbuse Effects of Long-Term Cannabis Use Patterns of marihuana use in Western countries, particularlythe United States are primarily long term (two t o 10 years).Additionally, Western investigators have been able to observethose who use marihuana at most, daily and more often, moderatelyor intermittently. Consequently, observed effects are rare.Knowledge is incomplete but certain trends appear to be emergingin regard to American usage patterns. The relevance of Eastern reports of heavy hashish use isuncertain. Nutrition, disease prevalence and quality of medicalcare impose limits on transferring Eastern observations toWestern conditions of use. DEPENDENCE AND TOLERANCE Neither severe physical dependence, nor prominent withdrawalsymptoms after abrupt termination of very heavy usage issuggested by some overseas experience (Charen and Perelman, 1946;Fraser, 1949; Ludlow, 1857, Marcovitz and Myers, 1944; Siler etal., 1933; Walton, 1938). Other studies, however, suggest markedpsychological dependence from heavy use producing compulsive drugtaking in very heavy users (Indian Hemp, 1893; Chopra and Chopra,1957; Bouquet, 1944; Lambo, 1965). Psychosomatic abstinence syndromes often reported werephysical weakness, intellectual apathy, loss of appetite,flatulence, constipation, insomnia, fatigue, abdominal cramps andnervousness, restlessness, and headache. For most heavy users thesyndrome of anxiety and restlessness seem to be comparable tothat observed when a, heavy tobacco smoking American attempts toquit smoking. However, the psychological dependence appears to be severe asevidenced by the f act that one group of subjects were unable tocease their habitual use although the frequency of use, was onlyeight to 12 times per month (Soueif, 1967). This psychologicaldependence may have made some users claim physical dependence sothat the government did not terminate dispensing them their drug.Studies in the United States using must lower doses for shorterperiods of time have revealed little if any evidence ofpsychological dependence (Bromberg, 1934 Mayors Committee, 1944;Williams et al., 1946). Tolerance to the subjective and depressant effects of the drug(discussed in an earlier section) does probably occur in man,with heavy use. Thus, increasingly larger and more frequent dosesbecome necessary to experience the desired effects. Several investigators have recently studied the question ofphysiological and psychological dependence to Delta 9 THC inmonkeys using intravenous self-injection techniques. Deneau and Kaymakcalan (1971) demonstrated that no monkeyinitiated self-administration over a three-week period when giventhe opportunity to self-inject a behaviorly effective dose of 100micrograms per kilogram of Delta 9 THC in a Tween solution. Theresearchers subsequently administered to these monkeys this doseevery six hours. Tolerance developed to the behavioral effectswithin a few days. Dose administered was progressively increasedup to 400 micrograms per kilogram over the course of a month.When the injections were abruptly discontinued, all six monkeysshowed after twelve hours, behavioral and physiological changesdescribed by the researchers as mild abstinence signs. Two of thesix monkeys then initiated and maintained for several weeks theself-administration of THC. The investigators believe these findings are evidence for mildpsychological and physiological dependence on THC. However,vehicle controls were not included in the research design. Thus,the abstinence signs and subsequent behavior may possibly beaccounted for by the biological effects in of the Tween vehicle. Harris et al. (1972) utilized several procedures to maximizethe possible conditions necessary for developing self-injectionin monkeys. These procedures included: spontaneous Delta 9 THCself administration with no previous training to the technique;self-administration of A' THC after training, with cocaine aloneand a mixture of cocaine and Delta 9 THC. Doses utilized rangedfrom 20 to 500 micrograms per kilogram suspended inpolyvinylpyrrolidone. In all cases, monkeys failed to self-administer Delta 9 THC. The researchers conclude that A' THC lacks the reinforcingeffects of psychomotor stimulants and depressants which monkeysreadily self infuse with no auxiliary incentives. Also Delta 9THC lacks a reinforcing function even for monkeys that arewell-trained with cocaine and have experienced several days ofrather large quantities of Delta 9 THC during the early pleasesof extinction of the cocaine reinforced response. Finally, the results demonstrate that a two week period ofexposure to Al THC (in a mixed solution with cocaine) does notresult in the degree of homeostatic imbalance which occurs withmorphine, ethanol, barbiturates and sometimes the amphetamineswhich accounts for the continued self-administration of thesedrugs. PHYSIOLOGICAL EFFECTS Permanent congestion of the transverse ciliary vessels of theeye and accompanying yellow discoloration is the only physicaleffect firmly linked to long-term marihuana use (Ames, 1958;Chopra, and Chopra, 1957; Dhunjibhoy, 1928). Although there areseveral suspected or reported effects, none has been conclusivelydemonstrated in a valid study. Some (Chopra and Chopra, 1939;Indian Hemp, 1893) claim that bronchitis, asthma and otherrespiratory problems may be produced by chronic and excessive useof potent compounds in India. Eastern smoking, preparations areoften a mixture of tobacco and hashish. Indian users reportedly exhibit digestive tract abnormalities,weight loss and disturbed sleep (Chopra and Chopra, 1939; Soueif,1967). However, the contributing factors of poor livingconditions, malnutrition and prevalence of communicable diseasecould not easily be separated. A high percentage of heavy Moroccan users have developedobliterative arteritis of the lower extremities (Sterne, 1960)possibly related to the occurrence of tropic foot ulcers (Ganja-foot) (Miras, 1965). The progression of this abnormality isclaimed to parallel prolonged use of the drugs. Mendelson et al. (1972) were unable to demonstrate clinicallysignificant abnormalities in the extensive battery of testsperformed which could be attributed purely to the subjectslong-term use of marihuana. No histories were obtained ofneurological, hepatic, renal, pulmonary, cardiac,gastrointestinal, (renitourinary, or nutritional disorders. Nohistory of psychotic illness was given. All subjects were Judged to be in normal mental, health bypsychiatric interview and psychological tests (MMPI and EdwardsPersonality Preference Inventory). Three subjects were felt to beneurotic. Pre-drug complete physical exams, chest X-ray,electrocardiogram, urinalysis, complete blood count and bloodchemistry profile did not demonstrate, any clinically significantabnormalities. No subject showed evidence of poor nutrition. Pulmonary vital capacity and one second forced expiratoryvolume were reduced in 12 of the 20 subjects initially. Thesechanges were not correlated with either current cigarette smokingor f requency or duration of marihuana smoking. Histories of pastcigarette use, past patterns of marihuana use and past or presentcontact with environmental air pollutants were inadequate toattempt to account for these pulmonary findings. Many of the subjects were in fair to poor physical conditionas judged by a cardiac exercise tolerance test. Four of the 20 subjects' initial performance on a battery ofcognitive functions tests was poorer than would have beenpredicted by high average to superior I.Q. scores and educationalbackgrounds. One of the casual subjects demonstrated improvementwith retesting consistent with good brain function. Thus,behavioral impairment was present in three subjects. Whether the impairment is related to prior drug histories,particularly the excessive use of LSD by the two heavy users,cannot be ascertained. For the casual users, nothing in the casehistories possibly elucidated the reason for relatively poorperformance based on the exceptionally high I.Q., 139 and 128. Many Western investigators have suggested that smoking hashishor marihuana may possibly cause bronchitis, asthma orrhinopharyngitis (Bloomquist, 1967; Waldman, 1970; Tylden andWild, 1967; Schwartz, 1969). Tenant et al. (1971) described bronchitis, sinusitis, asthmaand rhinopharyngitis in 22 American soldiers in Germany whosmoked daily enormous quantities (100 grams or more) of hashishfor six to 15 months. These conditions, believed to be caused byirritation of the respiratory tract by hashish smoke, seemed toimprove, with diminished hashish use. Twenty-one of the subjects were tobacco cigarette, smokers andoccasionally smoked hashish rolled in a tobacco cigarette. Ninepatients had symptomatic bronchitis. Five of these subjectsunderwent pulmonary function tests while consuming their usualdaily amount of hashish and again three days after discontinuinguse. A mild obstructive pulmonary deficit was demonstrated whichwas at least partially corrected with diminished hashish intake.Hashish contributed to rbinopharyngitis in 12 of the patients andthis effect was not allergic in origin. Urticaria, acne, diarrheaand gastrointestinal cramps were less frequent complaints.Extensive hemotological and hentochemical studies including liverfunction tests were performed and were within normal limits. Mann et a]. (1970, 1971) and Finley (1971) studied the effectof marihuana smoking on the pulmonary function of eightnon-cigarette smoking marihuana smokers (20-27 years old).Marihuana smoking history was defined in marihuanacigarette-years, that is, one marihuana cigarette daily for oneyear or the equivalent over a longer or shorter period. The meanmarihuana cigarette years for the group was 11 and the range from2.5 to 26. Three of the marihuana users also used hashish. ChestX-ray, comprehensive spironietry deterinitiations, lung volumesand carbon monoxide diffusion studies were observed and retestedwith prednisone. Pulmonary functions were essentially normal forall of the non-cigarette smoking marihuana smokers andnon-smoking controls. These investigators were able to distinguish differences inquantity and structure and function in pulmonary macrophages andminor material between marihuana smokers and nonsmokers. Intobacco smokers more marked changes were noted. These changes donot indicate a diminution in defensive capacity of these cells. Kew et al. (1969) has suggested a possible hepatotoxic effectof marihuana. right persons who smoked marihuana for two to eightyears, at least six times a week, evidenced mild liverdysfunction by liver function tests and liver biopsy. Several ofthe patients admitted to the use of alcohol and oral amphetaminesbut denied use of intravenous drugs. The authors concluded thatthe findings were not unequivocally due to marihuana. Hochman and Brill (1971) noted abnormal liver function testsin 10 of 50 frequent marihuana users. However, all admitted tolong-term, regular and heavy use of alcohol. When these subjectsabstained from alcohol for one month but continued their usualmarihuana usage, evidence of disturbed liver function cleared innine out of 10 subjects. Recently, Liskow et al. (1971) reported the appearance of ananaphylactoid reaction in a 29year-old woman after smokingmarihuana for the first time. Skin tests were positive for anallergy to marihuana, constituents. Allergy to marihuana,especially in areas of the country where it grows wild, may bemore common than generally believed. Campbell et al. (1971) presented evidence of ventriculardilatation consistent with cerebral atrophy by airencephalography in 10 young males (average age 22) with historiesof consistent marihuana use for three to 11 years as well as lessfrequent use of LSD and amphetamines. The first four of thepatients had been referred originally for neurologicalinvestigation of behavioral change, memory loss or headache. Theremaining six subjects were selected from patients tindertreatment for drug abuse because of their long history ofmarihuana use and concomitant neurological and behavioralsymptoms. However, the patients showed personality behavioral and mentaldisorders, as well as histories of head trauma and psychomotor orgrand mal epilepsy that are commonly associated withventriculographic changes. Also alcoholism can be associated withthese findings. Additionally, the authors compared their subjectsventriculograms with those of normal young adults originallyreferred for loss of consciousness, syncope and headache withoutsubsequent development of neurological illness. Thus, the authors demonstrated dilation of the thirdventricle, of the frontal or temporal horn, or of the trigone ofthe lateral ventricle. All of these are commonly associated withpersonality and mental disorders such as these patients shelved.However, whether these changes are caused by marihuana is notproven because no specific neuropathological cause for thecerebral atrophy was identified. Further carefully designedstudies are required to clarify this finding. The LaGuardia Report (Mayor's Committee, 1944) indicated nodamage to the cardiovascular, digestive, respiratory and centralnervous system, nor the liver, kidney or blood in individuals whohad used from two to 18 cigarettes of unknown potency (averageseven) for a period of two-and a-half to 10 years (averageeight). However, this study was not up to modern standards as itlacked double-blind precautions and placebo controls and adequatestatistical analysis of the data. Bias was present in reporting.Small numbers of prisoners were used as subjects. Another less comprehensive American study of 310 individualswho used marihuana on the average of seven years was performed onsoldiers (Freedman & Rockmore, 1946). It did not demonstrateany evidence of physical or mental deterioration. Another team of investigators (Meyer et al., 1971; Mirin etal., 1970) examined a group of 10 male marihuana users (averageage 25) who had consumed the drug about 20 to 30 times a monthfor all average of 4.4 years (one-half to five year range) andhad smoked daily for three of the 4.4 years. Heavy use wascorrelated with psychological dependence, search for insight ormeaningful experience, multi-drug use, poor work adjustment,diminished goal directed activity, decreased ability to masternew problems, poor social adjustment and poorly establishedheterosexual relationship. No physical or neurological orpsychiatric abnormalities were noted in their work-up. Indeed, numerous American investigators have not reportedabnormalities in baseline, examinations of their experimentalsubjects who have various patterns of marihuana use from veryinfrequent to many times a day. GENETICS AND BIRTH DEFECTS Much concern about possible effects on the unborn generationshas arisen because of marihuana's use by persons in theirreproductive years. Presently, most studies are preliminary. There are three isolated case reports in man (Gelehrter, 1970;Carakiishansky et al., 1969; Heelit et al., 1968) of birthdefects in mail in the offspring of parents who had usedmarihuana and LSD. However, due to their complex gestationalhistories and the high level of birth defects seen in a"normal" population, a causal relationship cannot beattributed to cannabis or anything else. At present, there is nosubstantial evidence indicating that marihuana at the dosecommonly used is a teratogen in man. Marihuana has been implicated as a teratogen in animals byseveral groups at high doses. One study (Miras, 1965) showedreduced fertility in rats impregnated after being fed a dietcontaining marihuana extract for several months. However, theoffspring were normal. The reduced fertility may be related tothe finding of marked decrease rate of cellular division, butwithout chromosomal damage, -when Delta 9 or All THC is added towhite blood cell cultures (Neu et al., 1969 Martin, 1969). Dorrance et al. (1970) and Gilmore et al. (1970) detected nosignificant difference in lymphocyte chromosomes in groups ofusers and nonusers. No significant differences were, found inlymphocyte chromosomes between heavy, long-term. Jamaican ganjausers and matched nonusers. (Rubin and Comitas, 1972) Pregnant mice injected with cannabis resin on day six ofgestation caused stunted but not malformed offspring. Fetalreabsorption occurred when the dose was given on days one to six(Persand and Ellington, 1967). A second experiment using ratsinjected on days one to six produced a high frequency ofmalformed progeny. Another investigator (Geber, 1969; Geber andSchramm, 1969) demonstrated congenital malformations in fetalhamsters and rabbits after large multiple doses of cannabisextract. Another group (Pace et al., 1971) have administered a widerange of dosages of Delta 8 and Delta 9 THC and marihuana extractby subcutaneous, intraperitoneal and intravenous routes atvarying intervals pre- and post-conception to rats, hamsters andrabbits. Delta 9 THC up to 200 mg/kg in variety of dose schedulesproduced reduced average litter size and stunted pups at highdoses but no birth defects. A low incidence of abnormalitiesoccurred in rats and rabbits with marihuana extract, but a highincidence of neonatal deaths was observed apparently due toinadequate material lactation. Studies with radioactive labeled THC (Idanpaaiini-Heikkila etal., 1969) indicated that it did cross the placenta in highconcentrations early in gestation during the developmentallylabile phase. These studies suggest that Delta 9 THC itself is not ateratogen. Instead, perhaps some unidentified substance orsubstances in the plant extract may be causing the teratogeniceffect noted by this group and others when injected. It isuncertain whether this theoretical substance(s) volatilizesduring smoking or enters the pulmonary vasculature (Pace et al.,1971). Consequently, the following FDA label required of manycurrently prescribed psychoactive drugs warning about use inPregnant women and women of childbearing age, appeals indicated."Safe use of the drug during pregnancy and lactation has notbeen established; therefore, in administering the drug toPregnant patients, nursing mothers, or women of childbearingpotential, the potential benefits must be weighed against thepossible hazards. Animal reproduction studies have yieldedinconclusive results. . . . There have been clinical reports ofcongenital malformation associated with the use of this drug, buta causal relationship has not been confirmed." ORGANIC BRAIN DAMAGE Deterioration of mental functioning allegedly due to long-termuse of marihuana can be subdivided into four major categories:organic brain damage, mental illness-psychosis, amotivationalsyndrome, and recurrent-pnuenomenia. As with alcoholism, it isquite often impossible to distinguish whether the describedeffects result from drug use or represent personality traits orchanges which would have been present without the drug use. When marihuana consumption was irregular, mental deteriorationwas not evidenced (Freedman and Rockmore, 1946) in 310 users withan average history of seven years of use. Sixty-seven heavy usersin New York showed no evidence of dementia attributable to druguse although they did have underlying personality disorders.Another investigation (Mayor's Committee, 1944) of individualswho used a daily average of seven marihuana cigarettes (two to 18range) for average of eight years (two-and-a-half to 16 range)showed no evidence of brain damage or mental deterioration. Reports from India (Chopra, 1935; Chopra, 1940; Chopra andChopra, 1939; Chopra, Chopra, and Chopra, 1942) relate minorimpairment of judgment and memory, limited self -neglect andinsomnia, when potent preparations are consumed regularly inlarge amounts for many years. No evidence for mentaldeterioration or brain damage has been noted. Miras (1967) has described a Greek population of heavy hashishsmokers who appear as outcasts from the community after 15 to 20years of heavy hashish use. They appear mentally sluggish anddepressed. They are reported to exhibit laziness, psychicinstability, amorality and apparent lack of drive and ambition.Their speech and behavior has been described as -peculiar. Somedegree of responsibility is retained in that some do work tocover their living and drug purchasing expenses. Some of them arestill quite intelligent. Memory is not deteriorated except duringthe intoxication. They appear overly suspicious. Samples of theirelectroencephalograms were believed to demonstrate abnormalities. However, Miras believes that this effect is related to thequantity and frequency of hashish use. He describes threecategories of long-term hashish users. Type A uses low dosesintermittently and is socially and mentally unaffected. Type B1uses low doses daily and no interference is caused in function.Type B 2 uses high doses daily causing dependence and performancedecrements. Type C uses very high doses daily allegedly causingmental deterioration and abnormal behavior described above. Finkand Dornbush (1971) are currently intensively studying thispopulation. The results will be described in a later section. Non-differentiated psychosis noted in foreign populations mayalso be included within this diagnostic category. These will bediscussed with the psychosis. PSYCHOSIS The alleged connection between mental illness and cannabisderives from Africa, the Middle East and India. These areas arecurrently developing economically and scientifically, but formany years medical care and especially psychiatric care weregiven low priority. Many chronic illnesses still persist in thesecountries which may affect mental functioning. Furthermore,well-trained psychiatrists and methodologists are very rare inmental hospitals in these countries. Consequently, the findingsof earlier studies are questionable due to lack of controls,biased sampling and poor data collection and failure to accountfor variables like nutrition, living standard, cultural factorsand socioeconomic status. India's mental institutions were widely quoted to support the,connection between excessive cannabis consumption and insanity.The Indian Hemp Commission performed a thorough and objectiveinvestigation of this question, although methodologically it wasnot up to modern standards. The Commission was unconvinced of thereliability of hospital statistics, where often the diagnosis wasnot made by a psychiatrist but by a referring policeman. Therefore, the Commission examined all admissions to Indianmental hospitals for one year. They found that cannabis risecould not be considered a factor in more than seven to 13% of allcases of both acute and chronic psychosis. Chopra et al. (1942) carefully performed the same examinationof admission to Indian mental hospitals from 1928 through 1939when cannabis use was extremely high. They found 600 cases ofacute and chronic psychosis which could be traced to cannabisuse. Other reports from India have produced varying estimates ofthe incidence of cannabis psychosis (Peebles and Mann, 1914;Chopra, 1971; Dhunjibhoy, 1930 Evens, 1904). In Egypt 27% to 33%of mental hospital admissions were cannabis related (Ireland,1893; Warnock, 1903). Benabud (1957) reported that cannabis users comprised 68% ofall mental hospital admissions in Morocco but only 25% of theseadmissions could be called cannabis psychosis. Watt (1936 and1961) reported that 2% to 3% of mental hospital admissions inSouth Africa were due to the use of dagga (cannabis). Boroffka (1966) and Asuni (1964) reported that 14% ofpsychiatric admissions in Nigeria used cannabis. Toxic psychosisaccounted for half of these and cannabis was felt to aggravateunderlying schizophrenia in the remainder. Several statistical studies from other countries includingJamaica, Colombia, Algeria, Panama and Tunisia support this typeof data (Prince et al., 1970; Beaubrun, 1971 Allentuck andBowman, 1942; Bouquet, 1951; Chevers, 1870; Defer and Dielil,1968; Fraser, 1949; Freedman and Rockmore, 1946; Porst, 1942;Siler et al., 1933; Reales-Aroyco, 1953; Medical Staff, 1938). Very little information is available on the prevalence ofpsychosis in the overall population of cannabis users. Chopra andChopra (1939) classified 2% of the ganja and charas smokers and0.5% of the bhang drinkers in their sample of 1,200 as psychotic. Roland and Teste (1958) estimated that no more than 0.5% ofkif (cannabis) smokers in Morocco suffer from recurrent mentalconditions. Prince et al. (1970), in a study in Jamaica, noted that about20 patients per year are admitted to mental or general hospitalswith acute psychotic reactions allegedly precipitated by ganja.In one general and one mental hospital the, ganja smokerscomprised 20% of the psychiatric admissions. Furthermore, thepercentage of heavy ganja smokers in the community wassignificantly higher than 20%. Thus, a larger percentage ofpsychiatric admissions were, derived from non-ganja smokers in acomparable lower socioeconomic segment of the population. This finding contrasts with the 68% prevalence of cannabis useamong psychiatric admissions reported by Roland and Teste (1958)which is considerably higher than the prevalence of cannabis usein the general population of Morocco. Studies based on several hundred cases indicate that the largemajority of individuals hospitalized in mental institutions for"cannabis psychosis" have suffered acute toxicpsychoses associated with a sharp toxic overdose or massiveexcesses among habitual users. Occasional smokers and moderatehabitual users seldom had psychotic reactions and then only whenthere were substantial predisposing factors. The acute clinical picture seen in these delirium withconfusion, disorientation, terror, and subsequent amnesia is thatof a severe exogenous psychosis. It does not typically involvethe type of thought disorder characteristic of schizophrenia.Short recovery times ranging from a few days to six weeks areuniformly reported in sharp contrast to the lengthy recoveryperiod of functional psychoses (Chopra et al., 1942; Roland, andTeste, 1958; Defer and Diehl, 1968; Beaubrun , 1971; Stringaris,1939). Consequently, the psychiatric literature on cannabis-inducedchronic psychosis is quite confused. In general, it appears thatcannabis use probably produces a specific psychosis, but thismust be quite rare, since the prevalence of psychosis in heavycannabis users, world-wide, is only doubtfully higher than theprevalence in general populations (Murphy, 1963). However,incidence and prevalence data for these countries on psychosis ofusers and non-users of cannabis does not exist. A Morroccan investigator, Christozov (1965), studied 140chronic heavy hashish users hospitalized in a mental hospital.Their behavior was characterized by a confusional state ofconsciousness, an impulsivity, an irresponsible attitude, and aninstability of mood and character. The patients were oftenpsychotic with persistent hallucinations. Intellectual functionswere reduced in over half the cases although this was related toa low intellect prior to drug use. Electroencephalography showedno specific changes. In addition, it was noted that half of thepatients were also alcoholics. The majority of the patients were, sedated and showed a rapidimprovement, allowing them to be discharged and be employed,Although it appeared that these characteristics are reversible,the patient often returned to heavy drug use again causing returnof the syndrome. Thus, the existence of a more long lasting cannabis-relatedpsychosis is poorly defined. Some evidence indicates theexistence, of a, quite rare slow-recovery, residualcannabis-psychosis following heavy chronic use. Patients oftenexhibit schizophrenic-like withdrawal, mental confusion and mildresidual hallucinations; but there is little tendency for the,symptoms to become organized or proliferate. The symptoms developgradually and then subside gradually before proceeding tofull-blown psychotic symptoms. These may produce gradual psychicdeterioration in the habitual excessive user after prolongedperiods of time. Several authors theorized that the chronicpsychosis consists of recurrent acute attacks with gradualdeterioration in habitual excessive users (Roland and Teste,1958; Chopra, et al., 1942; Stringaris, 1939; Sigg , 1963). Most investigators, therefore, find it exceedingly difficultto distinguish a psychosis due to cannabis from other acute andchronic psychoses because, few, if any symptoms, are uniquelyfound in it and not observed in other psychoses. Often thediagnosis of cannabis psychosis is made because of the history ofheavy marihuana or hashish use. Several have suggested that acharacteristic cannabis psychosis does not exist and thatmarihuana will not produce a psychosis in a well-integrated,stable person (Allentuck and Bowman, 1942; Reales-Aroyco, 1953). In addition, alcohol often played a part in producing themental derangement (Medical Staff, 1938; Porst, 1942). Most datarefers to any form of psychosis in marihuana users; notspecifically cannabis psychosis. Although it is fairly well-established that cannabis useattracts the mentally unstable, the prevalence of major mentaldisorder among cannabis users appears to be little if any higherthan that in the general population. Therefore, true cannabispsychosis must be earlier, very rare or it must substitute forother forms of psychosis. Perhaps, cannabis use alternatively isprotecting some less stable individuals from a psychosis (Murphy,1963). Because of these many difficulties, the role of cannabis usein acute and especially chronic psychoses in these countries isimpossible to determine with certainty. Finally, the Eastern literature often mentions the existenceof a characteristic psychic degeneration among older habituesafter prolonged excessive use (Chopra et al., 1942; Christozov,1965; Indian Hemp Commission, 1893; Roland and Teste, 1958;Stringaris, 1939; Warnock, 1903). They are frequently describedas showing a single minded, carefree state, such as"Kif-happy vagabonds." Soueif (1967) administered psychomotor and cognitiveperformance tests to imprisoned hashish users and non-hashishusers in Egypt. Preliminary results indicate that, on most of thetests, the hashish sample scored 10% to 20% below the control,and differences were larger for those with higher educationallevels. These results do not necessarily indicate a causalrelationship. Assessment of the significance of these findingsmust await further description of the samples utilized. Experience in the U.S. and Western Europe has not involved alevel of marihuana use comparable to the above-mentionedcountries. Consequently, the associated chronic psychoticdisturbances have not been seen. In Western countries, Bromberg (1939) and Allentuck and Bowman(1952) reported on acute psychotic episodes with clear-cut onsetduring the marihuana intoxication. Most symptoms cleared within afew days although several had a, prolonged illness. These rareacute psychotic episodes, discussed earlier, have been describedrecently by a variety of authors in scattered countries (Smith,1968; Weil, 1970; Bialos, 1970; Keeler, 1967; Milman, 1971;Pesyko, 1970 Kaplan, 1971; Prince et al., 1970; Baker and Lucas,1969; Grossman, 1969; Beaubrim, 1971; Spencer, 1970). Some of these reported cases are quite transient and clearrapidly with support of others and may be more like acute panicreaction than psychosis. Still others appear to fit the pictureof transient toxic psychosis. A few cases of marihuana psychosis reported by Kaplan (1971)recovered very slowly after extensive psychotherapy. However, thehigh incidence of schizophrenia and borderline states describedin these patients and their families may indicate that marihuanause merely aggravated or precipitated an underlying psychosis inthese individuals. George (1970) reported a case in Britain in which an acuteepisode of confusion, disorientation, hallucination, anxiety,paranoia, agitation and memory loss related to cannabis use wasfollowed by a more chronic schizophrenic-like syndrome withthought disorder, incongruous affect and hallucinations. Thisindividual was experiencing considerable financial and maritalstress prior to these two separate acute episodes. The chroniccondition eventually responded to psychotherapy. Bernhardson. (1969) reported aggravation by cannabis ofschizophrenic conditions in several Scandinavian patients. Perna(1969) reported a case in which marihuana appeared to aggravatean extended psychosis for which the patient had requiredpsychiatric treatment prior to the use of marihuana. Keup (1970) reported 14 cases of prolonged psychotic symptomsrequiring hospitalization associated with the use of marihuana.He noted evidence for the existence of a, high level ofpsychopathology in many of them which predated their marihuanause. Kolansky and Moore (1971) in a widely publicized report ofcases of individuals ages 13-to-24 has claimed profound adversepsychological effects from smoking marihuana two or more times aweek. Of 38 individuals reported, all had decompensatedpersonalities, eight had psychoses (four attempted suicide) and13, according to the authors became sexually promiscuous due tomarihuana. These clinical impressions were, all based on, atmost, a few interviews with the, individuals who were referred tothese psychiatrists for consultation for problems (includingone-third by legal authorities after arrest for possession ofmarihuana). Unfortunately, the authors made sweeping generalizations toall young adolescent marihuana users from this biased andnon-representative sample. No attempt was made to interview otheryoung marihuana users who have not been referred for psychiatrichelp, and the high prevalence of promiscuity and psychopathologyin comparable adolescent populations was totally disregarded. Inaddition, case histories of previous mental health were obtainedintrospectively from the patient, their families or the referralsource. Thus, it is impossible, to state unequivocally, as the authorsdo, that since marihuana use and psychiatric problems occurred atthe same time the former is causative of the latter. Several authors have reported acute toxic psychosis followingmarihuana use by soldiers in Vietnam (Talbott and Teague, 1969;Colbach and Crowe, 1970, Bey and Zecchinelli, 1971). All these cases represented transient reactions and clearedrapidly with treatment. In many cases, personality disorders orborderline personality states appeared to be predisposing factorsin the development of the psychotic state. Often revealed wereproblems of identify diffusion, ego weakness, low self-esteem andinability to form close interpersonal relationships. Also thestressful conditions of the setting in which the drug was useddeserves emphasis. Halikas et. al. (1971, 1972) performed intensive psychiatricinterviews on a population of 100 regular marihuana users and acontrol group of 50 of their non-using or casually using friends.Half of each group met the criteria for some psychiatricdiagnosis. Psychiatric illness and antisocial behavior most oftenpreceded marihuana use. Some attempts have been made to estimate the incidence, ofpsychosis and other adverse reactions to marihuana in Westerncountries. Obviously, such estimates depend on how thesereactions are defined-one questionnaire study of 2,700psychiatrists, psychologists, internists and generalpractitioners in the Los Angeles area reported 1,887"adverse reactions" to marihuana in an 18-month period(Ungerleider et al., 1968). Adverse reactions were not defined bythe authors in the survey. Those reported ranged from mildlyunpleasant parental objections to use to severe anxiety or acutepsychosis. Keeler (1967) reported on "adverse reactions" tomarihuana (paranoid feelings, etc.) which are limited to theimmediate period of intoxication. These phenomena occasionallyoccur in such a light proportion of regular users that they areof little interest in the present discussion, e.g., 80% of usersreport they sometimes have paranoid reactions during themarihuana intoxication (Tart, 1970). Other estimates have been based on hospital admissions inwhich marihuana use was the recognized precipitating cause.Lundberg et al. (1971) reviewed the admission records for the LosAngeles County General Hospital for the period 1961-1969 andfound marihuana use was listed as the reason for admission inonly nine out of 700,000 cases, and five of these were forintravenous injections. Keup (1970) reports that 0.9 per 1,000 of the 1968 admissionsto a Brooklyn psychiatric hospital were directly related tocannabis use, and in another 1.9 per 1,000 it was found to be acontributory factor. In 1966, psychiatric hospitals in England listed 82 admissionsfor which cannabis use was considered a factor (Baker and Lucas,1969) in 1967, the number was 140 (George, 1970). For the 1966data, further analysis revealed that eight of the 82 cases wereacute psychotic reactions to cannabis, 20 were related to"cannabis addiction as a way of life," and cannabiscould not be established as a definite factor in the remainder(Baker and Lucas, 1969). Colbach and Crowe (1971) estimate that among a population of45,000 U.S. soldiers in Vietnam in 1969, some 40 to 50 per monthwere hospitalized for psychiatric reasons and about five of thesewere associated with (usually heavy) marihuana use. Among college populations, Pillard (1970) estimates five toseven marihuana-associated anxiety reactions are, seen per yearby the Boston University Health Service which cares for a studentpopulation of 20,000; and Bialos (1970) reported 11 cases duringa one-year period (1968-1969) for a student population of 8,500. If it is assumed that about one-third of the Vietnam andcollege populations are using marihuana to some degree, theannual incidence of hospitalized cases in Vietnam would be aboutfour per 1,000 users; the rate for student-health cases, 0.3 to1.3 per 1,000 users. The 1972 Secretary of Health, Education and Welfare's reporton Marihuana and Health prepared by the National Institute ofMental Health noted in summary that marihuana can clearlyprecipitate certain less serious adverse psychiatric reactions,such as simple depression and panic, particularly ininexperienced users. In these reactions, non-drug factors may be the most importantdeterminants. Psychotic episodes may also be precipitated inpersons with a preexisting borderline personality or psychoticdisorder or those persons under excessively stressful conditions.These acute psychoses appear to share considerable clinicalsimilarities with the acute toxic psychoses noted in the Easternliterature. Both these psychoses resemble an acute brain syndromein that they occur primarily after heavier than usual usage andare self-limited and short-lived after the drug is removed fromthe body. Some reports describing a prolonged psychotic course after aninitial acute episode cannot rule out the role of pre-existingpsychopathology. At the present time evidence that marihuana is asuf ficient or contributory cause of chronic psychosis is weakand rests primarily on temporal association. This issue may beclarified by extensive epidemiological and controlled clinicalstudies. (Secretary, HEW, 1972) AMOTIVATIONAL SYNDROME Another type of possible mental deterioration or subtlepersonality and behavioral changes associated with heavylong-term cannabis use is the amotivational syndrome. This syndrome has been described world-wide in its extremeform when the most potent preparations are, used (Miras, 1967;Chopra. and Chopra, 1957; Chopra et aL, 1942; Christozov, 1965;Indian Hemp, 1893; Benabud, 1957; Warnock, 1903). Its mostextreme form depicts a loss of interest in virtually allactivities other than cannabis use. The resultant lethargy socialand personal deterioration and drug preoccupation may becomparable to the skid row alcoholics' state. Benabud (1957) describes the occurrence of this syndrome inindividuals chronically intoxicated with hashish. Theseindividuals are unlikely to show conventional levels ofmotivation. Also the time required to obtain and consume enoughdrug to maintain this state is not likely to leave much time forother pursuits. The passive user tends to lose interest in workand other long-term goals. The question of whether there exists a significant causal asopposed to an associative or correlational relationship, onlyattracted attention when the traditionally achievement-orientedWestern youth adopted cannabis use. The traits of passivity oramotivation are commonly described among heavy cannabis userthroughout the world. A number of Eastern authors have expressed the opinion thatthis is a result of organicity from chronic cannabis use in largeamounts, without objective studies being performed. Recently the term has been used to describe the behavior ofnumbers of young Americans who are for a variety of reasonsdropping out of school, refusing to prepare themselves fortraditional adult roles and smoking marihuana. This type of social maladjustment is not comparable inmagnitude to that described in other cultures. However, theindividual may lose the desire to work, to compete, to facechallenges. Old interests and concerns are lost and theindividual's life, becomes centered around his compulsive druguse. In addition, the individual may ignore personal hygiene,experience loss of sex drive and avoid social interaction (Mirinet al., 1970; Smith, 1968). West (1970) and McGlothlin and West (1968) have described aclinical syndrome as a result of observations of regularmarihuana users for four years. Their clinical impressions arethat these individuals show subtle changes in personality overtime which might represent an organic syndrome. These includediminished drive, lessened ambitious decreased motivation,apathy, shortened attention span, loss of effectiveness,introversion, magical thinking, derealization anddepersonalization, decreased capacity to carry out complex plansor prepare realistically for the future, a peculiar fragmentationin flow of thought, and a progressive loss of insight. Another psychiatrist, Powelson (1971), has also concluded onthe basis of over five years clinical experience with drug usersat the University of California, Berkeley, that the effects ofmarihuana are cumulative. He, feels that after a period ofprolonged use a disorder of thinking characterized by a lack ofcoherence and a pathological thinking process results. These disturbing findings are being reported more frequently,especially in adolescent and young-adult groups. Recently,tentative and preliminary data (Francois et al., 1970; White etal., 1970) has been presented on a group of 19 hospitalized14-to-20-year-old patients with behavioral disorders who had usedmarihuana and other drugs heavily. In addition to "amotivation," they showed primitiveand magical modes of thought and low frustration tolerance.Subtle EEG patterns were detected although this finding is notuncommon in adolescents with behavior problems. The researchers are presently carrying out a study innon-hospitalized adolescents without behavioral disorders whohave similar patterns of drug use in order to clarify theirfindings. Kornhaber (1971) believes that at least twice daily marihuanause for a year, in a 13-to-18-yearold population, has adeleterious effect upon the developing adolescent. Theintoxicated state facilitates a regression fromlogical-mathematical thought processes to a more primitiveconceptual mode of fantasy and magical thinking and impairslearning ability and judgment by decreasing attention andconcentration. Thus, the developing youth turns away from realitytoward fantasy and from structure and activity to passivedependency. Kornhaber suggests that marihuana facilitates the developmentof normal adolescent turmoil into a pathological state. However,he feels that the existence of the syndrome depends partially onthe individual's vulnerability to the drug influence. A possibly milder variation of this syndrome has beenclinically observed by Scher (1970) in individuals in the20-to-30 age group who have used marihuana daily for five yearswhile apparently functioning normally in society with good jobs,often creative ones. These individuals begin to experience avague sense of functioning at reduced efficiency level. Thus, thedisabilities experienced are personal and internal ,andconstitute a vague neurotic depressive-like syndrome,. In addition to the methodological problems of (Establishingcausative as opposed to associative relationships, it is alsovery difficult to obtain a sample of heavy cannabis users in theWest who have not had substantial experience, with other drugs,especially the strong hallucinogens. Koridiaber (1971) has described a sample of 50 adolescentpsychiatric patients who used marihuana daily and also took otherdrugs. He concluded that marihuana exercised a "chronic,tranquilizing, psychomotor-depressant effect" among thesepatients, and facilitated regression, fantasy and magicalthinking. School performance, participation in sports, andpersonal hygiene also declined. He reported improvement in schoolperformance, mood and the underlying depressive symptoms for manypatients four to six weeks after discontinuing marihuana use. Given there is a fairly strong tendency for heavy cannabisusers to be passive and apathetic, to emphasize the present overthe future, and to choose fantasy over rationality, there areseveral ways by which this relationship might come about(McGlothlin, 1972). First,, persons who already exhibit these, traits may simplybe attracted to the use of cannabis. Sociologists tend to favorthis explanation, arguing that the relationship between cannabisuse and various behavioral indicators is not causal, but simplyone manifestation of a general pattern of youthful deviance orrebellion (Goode, 1970). Utilizing a large sample, Johnson (1971) found that marihuanause is associated with impaired school performance and severalforms of deviance; however, other indicators such as premaritalsex and high school truancy predicted the dependent variable aswell or better. Tobacco and alcohol use were nearly as goodpredictors as marihuana. A second related explanation is that the illegal. context inwhich the drug is taken forces the adoption of a nonconforminglife style. The users is thus further alienated from the dominantculture through his close ties with the cannabis-using group. Third, cannabis use and associated activities may largelysubstitute for other interests. The individual may focus so muchof his time and energy on cannabis that he has little time forother endeavors. Fourth, heavy cannabis use may act pharmacologically toproduce a chronic tranquilized state. Although the acute phase ofintoxication is relatively short, there is some evidence of alethargic hangover effect (Haines & Green, 1976). Fifth, personality and behavior changes may result through theroutine process of learning via exposure. If an impressionableyouth spends a great deal of his time in the world of cannabisintoxication, he may learn to think in a similar manner when notintoxicated. In particular, he may learn to choose the drugfantasy as an alternative to solving personal problems and facingadult responsibility. A related explanation is that cannabis acts as a catalyst,creating a condition which facilitates change, providing othernecessary conditions are present. Cannabis, along with the stronghallucinogens, produces a kind of mind-loosening effect in whichmechanisms providing structure and stability to perception ofself-image, environment, time sense,, etc., are temporarilysuspended. The, more frequent users welcome this effect and reportutilizing the loosening effect of the drug to achieve furtherpersonality change in the direction of less conformity and morespontaneity, that is. the "hang-loose ethic" (Suchman,1968; Simmons and Winograd, 1966). In addition, the cannabis intoxication produces a heightenedsuggestibility which likely makes the user more amenable toadopting the attitudes and values of the subculture in which thedrug is taken. At a minimum, it may be concluded that the effectsof cannabis can reinforce and provide a rationalization forpreviously existing tendencies. Finally it is possible that chronic cannabis use can result inorganicity (Soueif, 1967). In summary, if cannabis use produces personality and behaviorchanges via one or more of the above mechanisms, the extent ofsuch changes is likely to be strongly related to the amountconsumed and the age of the user. According to evidence found inWestern literature, frequent use may be quite disruptive duringthe formative years of adolescence. On the other hand, the Eastern literature indicates that,although the very heavy user (200 mg. THC or more per day) islargely incapacitated, manual laborers often function adequatelywhile consuming amounts containing 30 to 50 mg. THC per day(Roland and Teste, 1958; Chopra and Chopra, 1939). Similarly,many musicians and entertainers in the United States have livedproductive lives while using marihuana (Winick, 1960). RECURRENT PHENOMENON Another poorly understood phenomenon is the spontaneousrecurrence of all or part of the drug intoxicated state (somaticand visual sensations) when not under the influence of the drug.This phenomenon has been called a "flashback" when itoccurs spontaneously or "a contact high" when it occursin the presence of others who are intoxicated. Flashbacks have been reported with marihuana use alone.However, these occurrences are apparently predominant inmarihuana users, who have taken hallucinogenic drugs previously.These marihuana, users occasionally find that marihuana highschange for them after their hallucinogenic. experiences. Forexample, a simple hallucination experienced previously mayreoccur while high on marihuana. These flashbacks may be interpreted as pleasant, even desiredexperiences by some but unwelcome and disturbing to others. Therecurrences are benign in most individuals and tend to disappearas the hallucinogenic experience recedes in time (Keeler, 1967;Smith, 1968; Weil, 1970; Bialos, 1970; Blumenfield, 1970). Truly vivid experiences which recapture most of the elementsof the original experience are extremely rare (Smith and Meld,1970). More often they resemble an anxiety state occurring afteran unpleasant high or the recurrence of a new perceptualawareness gained while high. It is difficult to differentiatethese recurrences from the not uncommon deja vu phenomenon inwhich a person has the illusion that a perceived situation hasoccurred before. These recurrences are intermittent and usuallyoccur within a few days to weeks following the use of marihuana. Contents | Feedback | Search DRCNet Library | Schaffer Library | Major Studies Marihuana, A Signal of Misunderstanding WT01-B25-45IA031-000651-B021-354http://206.61.184.43:80/schaffer/LIBRARY/studies/nc/nc1h.htm 206.61.184.43 19970122123433 text/html 90475HTTP/1.0 200 OKDate: Wednesday, 22-Jan-97 12:34:24 GMTServer: WebSitePro/1.1f (S/N wpo-0deb)Allow-ranges: bytesContent-type: text/htmlLast-modified: Saturday, 28-Dec-96 06:57:52 GMTContent-length: 90257 Investigations of Very Heavy, Very Long-Term CannabisUsers Contents | Feedback | Search DRCNet Library | Schaffer Library | Major Studies Marihuana, A Signal of Misunderstanding National Commission on Marihuana and Drug Abuse Investigations of Very Heavy, Very Long-Term Cannabis Users Proving a causal relationship between the use of any substanceand an associated illness or condition is extremely difficult.Ideally, prospective longitudinal studies on large populations ofboth substance users and nonusers matched for socioeconomic andpsycho-cultural variables should be performed for many years inorder to detect subtle or cumulative effects. Unfortunately, theenormous expenditures of research effort and finances that wouldbe required for a large scale investigation of this nature areprohibitive. Consequently, carefully designed and controlled, clinical andepidemiological studies of very heavy, very long-term cannabisusers in foreign countries must be relied upon to provideimportant data on possible effects because these populations arenot obtainable in the United States. GREECE Preliminary results (Freedman and Fink 1971, Fink and Dornbush1971, Fink 1971) from an intensive medical, neurological, andpsychiatric study of 31 male chronic hashish users in Greece,performed under contract to the National Institute of MentalHealth, have revealed few abnormalities in these individuals.Non-users matched for socioeconomic, and psycho-cultural factorsincluding life style, alcohol and tobacco consumption andnutrition and general health have not been studied. In collaboration with Professors Miras and Stefanis in Athens,Fink and co-workers are studying a population of chronic hashishusers that Professor Miras has known for many years. Thepopulation studied is composed of 31 male subjects ranging in agefrom 26 to 69 years with a mean of 46 years. The subjects report starting hashish use at 13 to 35 years ofage with a mean of 19. They have -used hashish from 10 to 49years, with a median of 28 years. In the past they used anaverage of eight grams of hashish daily with a range of 2 to 24:grams daily. (The hashish it estimated to contain 4% THC on theaverage. Therefore, average daily use was 320 mg. of THC). In the past, 27 of the subjects were daily -users and fourused every other day. Frequently of hashish use per day was: onceper day-2 subjects, twice per day-6 subjects, three times perday-14 subjects, four times per day-4 subjects, and five, or moretimes per day-5 subjects. The men reported a reduction in drug use with time ascribed toincreasing difficulty in obtaining adequate supplies due toincreased enforcement of the drug regulations. At present theyuse an average of three grams of hashish daily (320 mg. of THC)with a range of one to 10 grams daily. Twelve now use hashish daily, eight use, every other day and11 use less frequently. Frequency of daily hashish use is: onceper day-5 subjects, twice per day-12 subjects, three times perday-10 subjects, four times per day-2 subjects, and gve(sic) ormore times per day-2 subjects. The men are primarily hashish users. One has used opiates. Twoare heavy users of alcohol and six report occasional to frequentuse of alcohol at the present time. Tobacco is smoked by allsubjects averaging 40 cigarettes per day. Twenty-three of the subjects report periods of abstinence fromhashish averaging ten months but up to three years. Hashish useis primarily social by 20 subjects, and 15 subjects smoke insolitude. Pipes and cigarettes in which hashish is mixed with tobaccoare used interchangeably. The usual time of smoking is after work(21 subjects) but 12 subjects smoke before work and five smokeanytime. In this population, the median education is three-and-a-halfyears of school with a range of none to nine. Five of the men areilliterate. Twenty-one of the men are married, one is cohabiting,four are single and five are divorced or separated. All of the married men are employed and support theirfamilies. The subjects report changing their jobs frequently and11 had periods of unemployment from three to 120 months. Ten wereclassified as skilled workers and 21 as unskilled workers. Theirjobs include selling scrap metals, general labor, cartage,messenger, maintenance assistants, etc. Arrests are common and 19 report at least one non-hashishrelated arrest. Eighteen have been in regular military service,six were exempt because of hashish use and seven for otherreasons. Interestingly, 10 of the 15 wives interviewed prefer thebehavior and attitudes of their husbands when they are usinghashish compared to when they are drug-free. In regard to family and personal background 20 had refugeeparents, 13 had alcoholic or hashish using fathers, 26 had threeor more siblings, 19 had dominant mothers. Fifteen of 21 haddominant wives. Seven reported broken homes under age 16. Apparently, the subjects participation in society isconsistent with their lower socioeconomic background. No grossbehavioral deviation was detected I in this population. Psychiatric status was evaluated by history and psychiatricinterview. Nine have had psychiatric hospitalization of whichthree were in the military and related to hashish use. Two have,had psychiatric outpatient treatment. Eight had histories ofneurotic traits during childhood. In their psychiatricevaluation, three men are considered to have psychiatricpathology. Two of these were considered sociopaths on the basisof homosexuality and criminal behavior. The third was diagnosedas a schizophrenic. No overt signs of any organic mental syndromewere detected. None of the three men were believed to requirepsychiatric intervention. The schizophrenic, although suspiciousand withdrawal, is a successful business man and lives with hisfamily on weekends. Complete physical and neurological examination revealed threeprominent findings. All had very poor dentition which the menascribed to hashish smoking. Chronic bronchitis was detected in14 of the men and emphysema in three others. This finding is notsurprising because all subjects were tobacco cigarette smokersaveraging 40 cigarettes per day, in addition to their very heavyhashish consumption. Enlarged livers were also found in nine ofthe 31 subjects. Because no extensive psychological test battery has beendeveloped or standardized in Greece, American tests were used.These tests are not culture-free, and it is possible that certainitems or subtests were inappropriate for the subjects becausethey had not acquired the type of knowledge or skills requireddue to their poor level of education. The Wechsler-Bellevue I.Q. tests were translated into Greekand administered. Because of these, factors, comparison of levelof performance between these subjects and white middle classAmericans is meaningless. The mean I.Q. is 86 with a range of 69 to 109. The mean verbalis 90.3 and the mean performance was 83.6. The group of subjectsperformed lower than expected on digit symbol, digit span andsimilarities but higher than expected on comprehension,arithmetic, vocabulary and picture completion. The RavensProgression Matrices showed a similar pattern and mean I.Q. Thesignificance of these findings will depend on a comparison with amatched nonuser population. Resting electroencephalograms were obtained in 30 subjects andevaluated independently by four experts. Twenty-five were withinnormal limits. Testing was incomplete in one record. One record in a subjectwho had a head injury within the prior three months showed focalslowing. Two of the four experts judged the remaining three, records asshowing low degrees of average to low voltage theta activityindicative of cerebral dysfunction. The remaining two expertsjudged these records as within normal limits. This medical and psychological data suggests some effects ofvery long term, very heavy hashish use. Without a matchedcomparison group, factors independent of hashish use, such asage, socioeconomic conditions, or environmental conditions, mayaccount for the observed changes. However, the researchers note that these men have survivedchronic hashish use in high doses without gross behavioraldeviation. JAMAICA Another foreign investigation (Ruben et al., 1972) conductedin Jamaica (under contract for the National Institute of MentalHealth) studied chronic cannabis users and matched nonusercontrols. Preliminary findings have shown little evidence ofsignificant differences between the two groups in the extensiveanthropological, medical, psychiatric and psychologicalinvestigations. Ganja use is widespread and endemic in the Jamaican lowestsocioeconomic strata, and in particular in a millenial-religioussect known as the Rastafarians. More than 50% of all maleJamaicans are estimated to use some form of cannabis, andprobably about 20% are regular heavy users of ganja. The drug was brought to Jamaica from India over 130 years agoby indentured East Indian laborers. However, presently theheaviest ganja users are Afro-Jamaicans who comprise 90% of thepopulation. The Rastafarian religious sect, founded by Marcus Garvey,preach a "Back to Africa" destiny and claim HaileSelassie to be God. The Rastafarians have always worn. long hairand beards and dressed eccentrically. They believe that "theherb" was given them by God to help them to understand hiswisdom exemplified in their greeting, "Peace and Love." The Rastas reject the values of the dominant society andregard the government as "the powers of Babylon". Theyhave, chosen to opt out of conventional society and instead workand live in a communal existence in poverty. They emphasize thevalue of ganja in achieving a new level of meaning in thisexistence. The Rastafarians add ganja to their infant first bath andstart feeding the drug to their infants from the time of weaningin an infusion known as ganja tea. They continue to smoke anddrink the drug throughout life. They, like many other Jamaicans, believe in its medicinalproperties especially for asthma and indigestion and promotion ofhealing; that it gives protection from evil spirits; that itcleanses the skin and purifies the blood; that it promotes sexualvigor; that it gives energy for work and relieves fatigue andprovides relaxation after work. Extensive in-depth studies have been carried out by a team ofanthropologists from The Research Institute for the Study of Manin conjunction with The Departments of Psychiatry, Pathology,Physiology and Medicine, of the University of the West Indies.Anthropology field workers lived for extensive periods of time infive rural communities (including fishing, farming and canecutting areas) and two urban districts. Over 2,000 people were observed and studied in thesecommunities. Overall life styles of the ganja users were notnotably different from nonusing individuals in the Jamaicanlowest socioeconomic strata. Users are working, maintainingstable families and homes, and actively participating in theirsociety. No evidence was noted of crime or aggressive behavior ordrug use other than alcohol related to ganja use. No evidence ofphysical dependence was demonstrated. Minimal psychologicaldependence was observed but no drug craving was expressed. Thirty long-term ganja smokers and 30 nonusers matcheddemographically to control factors other than ganja use, werechosen as representative of this functioning lower socioeconomicpopulation and selected for intensive hospital study in order todetermine, differences between the two groups. The mean age of the subjects was 33 with a range of 23 to 51.The primary occupation of one-third of the subjects was farming.The next most common occupations were, fishing, skilled andsemiskilled laborers. Half practiced no formal religion, fivewere Rastafarians and the remainder practiced a wide variety oftraditional religious. Almost three-fourths of the males hadstable "marriages" and the remaining single subjectswere predominantly the younger ones. The subjects were divided into three groups. Twenty-three werenonganja smokers, 28 were regular daily ganja smokers and 9 wereoccasional ganja smokers using the drug several times a we orless. Three types of regular ganja smokers were delineated: lightsmokers using one to four spliffs daily moderate smokers usingfour to seven spliffs daily; and heavy smokers using eight ormore spliffs per day. Age of first use ranged from 8-36 years of age. Regular use ofganja occurred at a median age of 16 years with a range of 9-25years. All ganja smokers had used the drug at least 7 years andsome up to 37 years with a mean of 17.5 years. The ganja users consumer on the average seven spliffs of ganjadaily with a range of one to 24 per day. The typical ganjacigarette or cigar, termed a spliff is roughly a four-inch-longpaper cone and contains about two to three grams of ganja with adelta 9 THC content of about 2.9% on the average (range of0.7-10.3%) mixed with about half of a Tobacco cigarette. Alsomany smoke ganja in a Chillum pipe using very deep inhalation tofill their lungs with smoke. They consume 14 pipe fulls per weekon the average, with a range of 1-25 per week. No significant differences in neurological abnormalities,electroencephalographic abnormalities, hemochemical changesincluding liver function, urinalysis, chest X-ray abnormalitiesor chromosome damage in lymphocytes were found in the users orcontrols. One user had a long history of bronchial asthma and anotherhad a mild case of Jamaican neuropathy, but nothing suggeststhese disabilities were in any way related to ganja use. Minorelectrocardiographic abnormalities were present in aboutone-third of both users and controls. This may be related to asyndrome of unknown etiology known as Jamaican cardiomiyopathy. Thorough physical examination and hematological studiesrevealed only minimal significant differences between ganjasmokers and non-ganja smoking controls. Comprehensive evaluationof red blood cell indices revealed that the ganja smokers hadsignificantly higher hemoglobin levels and packed red cellvolumes (hematocrit) than the non-ganja smokers. These hematologic findings are compatible with those reportedrecently (Sangan and Balberzak, 1971) for heavy tobacco cigarettesmokers. The authors noted that cigarette smoking causes afunctional tissue hypoxia due to deficits in lung func tionwithresultant arterial oxygen unsaturation. Thus, an increased demandis placed on the bone marrow to provide more red blood cells toincrease the oxygen carrying capacity of the blood. In addition to the heavy smoking of ganja in spliffs andpipes, 27 of the 30 ganja smokers were tobacco smokers, andseveral have smoked tobacco cigarettes heavily. 19 of the 30non-ganja smokers were tobacco cigarette smokers and tended to belight tobacco cigarette smokers. Thus, the data appears to suggest that a combination offactors including number of years and quantity of cigarettesmoking, ganja spliff smoking and ganja chilum pipe smoking issignificantly correlated with the hematological changesindicative of functional hypoxia. However, pulmonary functionstudies did not demonstrate significant decrements correlatedwith ganja or tobacco smoking. No significant differences were found between groups by athorough psychiatric and psychological examination. All subjectswere judged to be in normal mental health. Subjects wereadministered a battery of standardized reliable Americanpsychological tests known to be sensitive to impairment in brainfunction. These tests were not culture free so that comparison ofperformance, between Jamaicans and Americans is meaninglessNineteen tests evaluating 47 variables were performed includingone personality test, three tests of intelligence and verbalabilities, and 15 neuropsychological tests. Two of 47 variables had statistically significant differencesbetween ganja smokers and non-smokers. The smokers scored higheron the digit span subtest of the Wechsler Adult IntelligenceScale and bad a more centralized personality organization on theLowenfeld Mosaic Test. Non-smokers had the best performance on the number of edgecontacts with the non-dominant hand on the Holes Test. These fewsignificant differences were considered chance findings by theinvestigators. In general no consistent differences were found on thesepsychological tests between ganja smokers and non-smokers. Thedata clearly indicate that the long-term ganja use by these mendid not produce demonstrable intellectual or ability deficitswhen they were without the drug for three days. No evidence inthese results suggest permanent brain damage. The alleged role of ganja in producing personality change inthe direction of a loss of competitive striving and anunwillingness to work, termed the amotivational syndrome was alsoinvestigated. Based on clinical impressions gained from careful sociologicaland psychological techniques, the investigators noted that thechronic ganja smoker differed little in work habits or recordfrom his matched control. No evidence of an amotivationalsyndrome was found. In fact, the subjects believe ganja has afunctional value as a work adjunct. It provides energy for workand helps them do arduous boring jobs. In the Jamaican culture, ganja may produce a"motivational syndrome". In an objective videotapeevaluation of work energy output and ganja smoking, ganja use didnot lower productivity on simple repetitive tasks, such aswoodcutting which requires compulsive concentrated effort. A study of cultivators points up the relationship ofpopulation, land, and economic pressures to ganja use. In thearea studied land resources are scarce, farms small andcultivation difficult on the hilly slopes. Market conditionsdetermine income from cash crops and restrictions on migrationmaintain population pressures on limited resources. For these farmers, the researchers suggest that ganja use,decreases total cultivated acreage and consolidates productionwhile disruption of competition and social cohesiveness among thefarmers is avoided. These data may indicate that heavy ganja use duringcultivation in farming situations with limited alternatives mayserve to maintain the status quo. However, it is possible thatthe compulsive concentrated effort experienced by the cultivatorswith heavy ganja use may be productive in areas with good soiland climatic conditions where systematic weeding can increasecrop yields. As a result of the extensive anthropological study, theinvestigators believe that ganja use in Jamaica is a culturallydetermined phenomenon. A "ganja complex" exists whichconsists of closely related, learned patterns of behaviormanifested by the members of the society. The ganja complex appears to be functional for theworking-class Jamaican. Various elements Of the complex includingeconomic, social and personal are interrelated in ways thatcontribute to operation of the whole culture. AFGHANISTAN Dr. Salamuddin Weiss (1971) studied 1011 chronic hashish usersin Kabul in order to obtain a general picture of the charas habitin Afghanistan. Cannabis is cultivated in this tropical country. Aconcentrated product, charas, the resin obtained from theflowering tops of the female plant, is the preparation generallyused. The most common method of smoking charas is in a clay waterpipe called a Chelum. Next most commonly used is a pipe or needleand straw. Infrequently, charas is smoked in tobacco cigars orcigarettes. Chewing the leaves or drinking a charas mixture as aconfection is quite rare. Although charas smokers are found throughout society, they arepredominantly found in certain groups. The ages of the subjectsstudied ranged from 13 to 70 years old. More than 75% were,married. Almost all were males. Socioeconomic status was as follows: 70%, lower, 28% middleand 2% upper. 82% are illiterate, 27% had a primary schooleducation and less than 1% had any higher education. Most smoking occurs in groups of two to 20 friends in quietout of the way places. Most users smoke several times a day. Thelonger one has smoked charas, the shorter the duration of thehigh and the more often the individual can smoke each day. Weakness, sexual difficulties and physical impotence arecommonly reported by smokers. Most report they have a goodappetite and eat more than normal, but malnutrition is common. One hundred chronic smokers were selected at random andexamined medically: 93 were malnourished; no evidence of illnesswas found in 79 subjects; 13 showed signs of respiratory illness(bronchitis) ; 7 showed sleep disturbances and one had pulmonarytuberculosis. No deaths have been reported from charas overdose.One subject out of the 1,011 was known to be chronicallypsychotic. A review of over 150,000 outpatient and inpatient psychiatricvisits per year over the past 10 years revealed 20 short-termpsychotic episodes yearly involving charas alone and 16,short-term psychotic episodes yearly involving both charas andother drugs. An absence of chronic mental illness related tocharas use was noteworthy. Most charas smokers commence use during their teens, graduallyincreasing their use about five or six times until they reachtheir highest dose between the ages of 20 to 40 years. At the extreme, smokers have raised their daily dosage up to10 times their starting dose within the first two years. Theythen gradually decrease their daily requirement by about 50% uponreaching their 60's. Generally, most smokers cease charas useafter their 60's, but some. use extremely low doses for the restof their lives. I These patterns of use are consistent with the development oftolerance. Additionally, chronic smokers note they are able touse larger doses than they did when they began use without anysignificant signs of intoxication. Also after stopping charas usefor a few days or months, the users report they restart use atsmaller doses to achieve the desired effect. No physical dependence was noted. Marked psychologicaldependence was present which makes it difficult to stop theirhabitual use. Discontinuation of charas use produced mildpsychologic abstinence signs. These signs, generally includerestlessness loss of appetite, sleeplessness, nervousness,headache, and gastrointestinal upset. Most smokers after discontinuation of use are quite able tolive with their families and perform their jobs withoutdiscomfort. Most chronic smokers return to charas use within daysor months. Out of a group of 100 randomly selected ex-smokers whohad used for eight to 22 years, 42 have not returned to charasuse, 16 use occasionally and 42 have returned to daily use withinone to 13 months. Most common explanation given by the subjects for restartinguse were to continue close relationships with charas usingfriends and lack of a busy job. A group of 100 opium addicts were selected at random from thecommunity; 51 of these started their drug use with charas andlater substituted opium for charas. Generally, charas smokers report that they become faster intheir daily jobs, but observation reveals a slowness in theseactivities. The ability to perform a non-complicated job iscomparable to non-charas smokers. They tend to be cooperative butlazy persons. They tend to be more theoretical than practical andavoid making decisions. They do not demonstrate creativity orcontribute significantly to the improvement of their community. Summary Marihuana has been used by man in countries around the worldfor many centuries. Scientifically, more is known aboutmarihuana's effects than many other botanical substances consumedby man. Marihuana is one of several preparations from the plant,cannabis sativa. The plant contains many different chemicals, buttetrahydrocannabinol appears to be the major activepsychopharmacologic ingredient. The potency of the preparation isdetermined by the THC content, which varies according to theorigin of the seed, the conditions of cultivation, and the extentof manicuring. Several important factors exert significant influences on thepsychopharmacological effect. These include dose, method of use,set and setting, and pattern of use including frequency andduration of use. The acute subjective experience is dose-dependent. At lowdoses commonly used in this country a mild intoxication occurs,but at higher doses psychotomimetic experiences can occur. Fewconsistent physiological effects are noted. No pathologic bodilychanges have been conclusively demon, strafed from acute use.Subtle effects on recent memory, psychomotor function, and socialbehavior have been demonstrated. The margins of safety between the effective dose and the toxicdose is quite large. No human fatalities have been noted in thiscountry caused by marihuana. The most common adverse reactionsare becoming too intoxicated, and the acute anxiety panicreaction. Both of these are transient and related to doseconsumed as well as set and setting factors. Acute psychotic, reactions are quite rare. They usually last afew days to weeks and occur in predisposed persons either withpreexisting mental disorders or borderline personalitiesespecially under stressful conditions. Transient acute brainsyndrome or toxic psychosis is possible at extremely large doses. Evidence has accumulated which indicates that differentialtolerance does develop at least, in persons who smoke largeamounts of marihuana several times a day. Development oftolerance to the depressant effects on behavior appears toprecede development of tolerance to the intoxicant effect. Physical dependence has not been demonstrated. Little, if any,psychological dependence is present in most intermittentmarihuana users. Moderate psychological dependence occurs inmoderate to heavy users and marked psychological dependence hasbeen described in very heavy chronic users. Some detrimental effects have been conclusively linked toshort- and long-term marihuana use for very heavy users. The mostfrequently reported change in the heavy, long-term smokers oflarge quantities of potent preparations is chronic bronchitiscomparable to that developed by a heavy, long-term tobaccocigarette smoker. A chronic cannabis psychosis probably occursrarely in heavy chronic, hashish smokers in Eastern countries.Most psychotic episodes are the acute variety and clear in a fewdays to weeks. No objective evidence has been demonstrated thateven very heavy, long-term hashish use causes organic braindamage. Objective studies of chronic, heavy smokers of potentpreparations have not causally linked this drug with theamotivational syndrome which has been described by manyclinicians. Almost all chronic, heavy hashish smokers areindistinguishable from their peers in the lower socioeconomicstrata of their respective societies in social behavior, workperformance, mental status and overall life style. REFERENCES ,Abel, E: "Marihuana and Memory," Nature, 227 (5263)1151-1152 (1970). Abel, E. L.: "Effects of Marihuana on the Solution ofAnagrams, Memory and Appetite," Nature, 231: 260-261 (1971). Abel, E. L. "Marihuana and Memory: Acquisition orRetrieval," Science, 173: 1038-1040 (1971). Abel, E. L.: "Retrieval of Information After Use ofMarihuana, " Nature, 231 (5297) : 58 (1971). Abelson, H. Cohen, R. and Sehrayer. D.: Public AttitudesToward Marihuana, Princeton: Response Analysis (1972). Adams R.: "Marihuana," Bulletin of the New YorkAcademy of Medicine, 18: 705-730 (1942). Adams, R.: "Marihuana," Harvey Lectures, Series 37:16,8-197 (1941-1942). Advisory Committee on Drug Dependence, Cannabis (WoottonReport), London: Her Majesty's Stationery Office (1968). Agurell, S. and Leander, K.: "Stability, Transfer andAbsorption of Cannobinoid Constituents of Cannabis (Hashish)During Smoking," Acta Pharmaceutica, Succica, 8: 685 (1971). Aldrich, C. K.: "The Effect of a Synthetic Marihuana-LikeCompound on Musical Talent as Measured by the SeashoreTest," Public Health Reports, 59 (13) : 431-433 (1944). Allentuck, S. and Bowman, K. M.: "The Psychiatric Aspectsof Marihuana Intoxication," American Journal of Psychiatry,99: 248-251 (l942). Ames, F.: "A Clinical and Metabolic Study of AcuteIntoxication With Cannabis Sativa and Its Role in the ModelPsychoses," Journal of Mental Sciences, 104 (437): 972-999(1958). Asuni, T.: "Socio-Psychiatric Problems of Cannabis inNigeria," United Nations Bulletin on Narcotics, 16 (2) 17-28(1964). Aubin, J.: "Le Test Evolutif dans l'IntoxicationChronique per le Kif," Algerie Med (1944). Baker, A. A. and Lucas, E. G.: "Some Hospital AdmissionsAssociated With Cannabis," Lancet, 1 (7580) : 148 (1969). Baker-Bates, E. T.: "A Case of Cannabis IndicaIntoxication," Lancet, I: 811 (1935). Barry, H. and Kubena, R. K.: "Repeated High Doses ofDelta-l-Tetrahydrocannabinol Enhance Acquisition of ShockAvoidance in Rats," Proceedings 79th Annual Convention ofthe American Psychological Association, 749-750 (1971) Bartolucci, G. Fryer, L., Perris, C. and Shagass, C.:"Marihuana Psychosis: A Case Report," CanadianPsychiatric Association Journal, 14 (1) 77-79 (1969). Baudelaire, C.:In: Ebin, D. (Ed.) The Drug Experience. FirstPerson Accounts of Addicts, Writers, Scientists and Others, NewYork: The Allon Press (1961), pp. 1640. Beaubrun, M. H.: "The Pros and Cons of Cannabis Use inJamaica," Prepared by the Department of Psychiatry,University of the West Indies as a Working Paper for Panel onYouth and Drugs, Costa Rica (January 8, 1971). Benabud A.: "Psychopathological Aspects of the CannabisSituation in Morroco: Statistical Data for 1956," UnitedNations Bulletin on Narcotics, 9(4) : 1-16 (1957). Ben-Zui, Z., Mechoulam, R. and Burstein, S.:"Identification Through Synthesis of an Active A' (6)Tetrahydrocannabinol Metabolite,," Journal of American,Chemical Society, 92 (11) : 3468-3469 (1970). Bercht, C. A. L., Kuppers, F. J. E. M., Lousberg, R. J. J. Ch.and Kalemink, C. A.: "Constituents Volatiles du CannabisSativa L.," United Nations ST/SOA/SER .5/29: 1-11 (July22,1971). Beringer, K., et al.: "Zur Klinik desHashisclirausches," Der Nervenarzt, 5 (7) : 337-350 (1932). Bernhardson, G.: "Cannabis Psychosis," SvenskaLakartidn, 66: 1230-1234 (1969). Bey, D. R., and Zecchinelli, V. A.: "Marihuana as aCoping Device in Vietnam," Military Medicine, 136 (5) :448-450 (1971). Bialos, D.: "Adverse Marihuana Reactions: A CriticalExamination of the Literature with Selected Case Material,"American Journal of Psychiatry, 127 (6) : 119-123 (1970). Bloomquist, E. R.: "Marihuana: Social Benefit or SocialDetriment?" California Medicine, 106: 346-353 (1967).Blumenfield, M.: "Flash-back Phenomena in Basic Trainees whoEnter the U.S. Air Force," Presented 17th Annual Conferenceof Air Force Behavioral Scientists, School of Aerospace Medicine,San Antonio (January 1970). Roroffka, A.: "Mental Illness and Indian Hemp inLagos," East African Medical Journal, 43 (9) : 377-384(1966). Bouquet, J.: "Cannabis," United NationsBulletin on Narcotics, 2 (4) : 14-30 (1950) ; 3 (1) : 22-45(1951). Bouquet, J.: "Marihuana Intoxication (letter),"Journal of the American Medical Association, 124: 1010-1011(1944). Bright, T. D., Kiplinger, G. F., Brown, D. Phillips, J. andForney, R. B.: "Effects of Beta Adrenergic Blockade onInduced Tachycardia," Committee on the Problem of DrugDependence, II: 1737-1744 (1971). Brill, N. 0. Crumpton, E., Frank, 1. M., Hochman, J. S.,Lomax, P., McGlothlin, W. H. and West, L. J.: "The MarihuanaProblem," Annals of Internal Medicine, 73 (3) : 449-465(1970). Bromberg, W.: "Marihuana, A Psychiatric Study,"Journal of the American Medical Association, 113: 4-12 (1939). Bromberg, W.: "Marihuana Intoxication, A Clinical Studyof Cannabis Sativa Intoxication," American Journal ofPsychiatry, XCI (2) : 303-330 (1934). Burstein S. and Rosenfeld, J.: "The Isolation andCharacterization of a Major Metabolite of Delta 9-THC," ActaPharmaceutica, Suecica, 8: 699-700 (1971). Burstein, S. H., Alenezes, F., Williamson, E. and Mechoulam,R.: "Metabolism of Delta 9-Tetrahydrocannabinol. An ActiveMarihuana Constituent," Nature, 225: 87-88 (1970). Caldwell, D. F., Myers, S. A., Domino, E. P. and Merriam, P.E.: "Auditory and Visual Threshold Effects of Marihuana inMan," Perceptual and Motor Skills, 29: 755759 (1969). Caldwell, D. F., Myers, S. A., Domino, E. F. and Merriam, P.E.: "Auditory and Visual Threshold Effects of Marihuana inMan," Addendum, Perceptual and Motor Skills, 29: 922 (1969). Caldwell, D. F., Myers, S. A., Domino, E. F. and Merriam, P.E.: Psychotomimetic Drugs, New York: Raven Press(1970),pp.299-321. Campbell, A. M. G., Evans, Al., Thomson, J. L. G. andWilliams, M. J.: "Cerebral Atrophy in Young CannabisSmokers," Lancet, II: 1219-1226 (1971). Carakushansky, G., Neu, R. F. and Gardner, L. I.:"Lysergide and Cannabis As Possible Teratogens in Man,"Lancet, 11: 150-151 (1969). Carlini, E., Hanaoni, A., Bieniek, D. and Korte, F.:"Effects of (-)Delta 9-Trans-Tetrahydrocannabinol and aSynthetic Derivative on Image Performance of Rats,"Pharmacology, 4 (6) : 359-368 (1970). Carlini, E. A.: "Tolerance to Chronic Administration ofCannabis Sativa (Marihuana) in Rats," Pharmacology 1:135-142 (1968). Charen, S. and Perelman, L.: "Personality Studies ofMarihuana Addicts," American Journal of Psychiatry, 102:674-682 (1946). Chopra, G. S.: "Alan and Marihuana." InternationalJournal of the Addictions, 4 (2) : 215-247 (1969). Chopra, G. S.: "Marihuana and Adverse PsychoticReactions," U.N. Bulletin on Narcotics, 23 (3) :15-21(1971). Chopra, 1. C. and Chopra, R. N.: "The Use of theCannabis Drugs in India," United Nations Bulletin onNarcotics, 9 (1) : 4-29 (1957). Chopra, R. N.: "Drug Addiction in India and ItsTreatment," Indian Medical Gazette, 70 (3) : 121 (1935).Chopra, R. N.: "Use of Hemp Drugs in India," IndianMedical Gazette, 75 (6) : 356-367 (1940). Chopra, R. N. andChopra, G. S.: "The Present Position of Hemp-Drug Addictionin India," Indian Medical Besearch Memoirs, (31) : 1-119(1939). Chopra, R. N., Chopra, G. S. and Chopra, 1. C.: "CannabisSativa. in Relation to Mental Diseases and Crime in India,"Indian Journal of Medical Research, 30 (1) 155-171 (1942). Christensen, H. D., Freudenthal, R. I., Gidley, J. T.,Rosenfeld, R., Boegli, G., Testino, L., Brine, D. R., Pitt, C. G.and Wall, .M. E.: "Activity of A' and Delta9-Tetrahydrocannabinol and Related Compounds in the Mouse,"Science, 172 (3979) : 165-l67 (1971.). Christozov, C. : "Morrocan Aspects of CannabisIntoxication in the Light of Studies on Chronic MentalPatients," Maroc Medical, 44: 630-642, 866-889 (1965).Clark, L. D., Hughes, R. and Nakashima, E. N.: "BehavioralEffects of Marihuana: Experimental Studies," Archives ofGeneral Psychiatry, 23 (3) : 193-198 (1970). Clark, L. D. andNakashima, E. N.: "Experimental Studies of Marihuana,"American Journal of Psychiatry, 125: 379-384 (1968). Claussen, U. and Korte, P.: "Haschisch XV," LiebigsAnnals of Chemistry, 713: 162-165 (1968). Colbach, E. Al. and Crowe, R. R.: "Marihuana AssociatedPsychosis in Vietnam," Military Medicine, 135 (7) : 571573(1970). Cole, J. Al., Pieper, W. A. and Rumbaugh, D. M.: "Effectsof Delta-9-Tetrahydrocannabinol on Spaced Responding in GreatApes," Communications in Behavioral Biology, 6: 1-9 (1971). Curtis, H. C. and Wolfe, J. R.: "Psychosis Following theUse of Marihuana with Report of Cases," Journal of theKansas Medical Society, 40: 515-517, 526-528 (1939). Dally, P.: "Undesirable Effects of Marijuana,"British Medical Journal, 367 (1967). Deakin, S.: "Death from Taking Indian Hemp," IndianMedical Gazette, 71 (1880). Defer, B. and Diehl, M. L.: "Les Psychoses CannabiquesAigues: A Propose de 560 Observations," Annales MedicoPsychologiques, 126 (2) : 260-266 (1968). Deliyannakis, E. C., Paragopoulos, C. and Huott, A. D.: "The Influence of Hashish on the Human EEG,"Clinical EEG, 1: 108-117 (1970). Deneau, G. A. and Kaymakcalan, S.: "Physiological andPsychological Dependence to Synthetic Delta9-Tetrahydroeannabinol (THC) in Rhesus Monkeys," ThePharmacologist, 13 (2) :246 (1971). Dhunjibhoy, J. E.: "A Brief Resume of the Types ofInsanity Commonly Met With in India With a Full Description of'Indian Hemp Insanity' Peculiar to the Country," Journal ofMental Science, 76: 254-264 (1930). Dhunjibhoy, J. E.: "The Role of 'Indian Hemp' InCausation of Insanity in India," Far Eastern Association ofTropical Medicine, Transactions of 7th Session, I : 400407(1928). Dingell, J. W., Wilcox, H. G. and Klausner, H. A.:"Biochemical Interactions of Delta9-Tetrahydrocannabiol," The Pharmacologist, 13: 296 (1971). Domino, E. F.: "Human Pharmacology of MarijuanaSmoking," Presented 71st Annual Meeting of American Societyfor Clinical Pharmacology and Therapeutics (1970). Domino, E. F.: "Neuropsychopharmacologic Studies ofmarihuana : Some Synthetic and Natural THC Derivatives in Animalsin Man," Annals of the New York Academy of Science, 191:166-191 (1971). Domino, E. F., Hardman, H. F. and Seevers, Al. H.:"Central Nervous Systems Actions of Some SyntheticTetrahydrocannabinol Derivatives," Pharmacological Review(in press 1972). Doorenbos, N. J., Fetterman, 11. S., Quinby, M. W. and Turner,C. E.: "Cultivation, Extraction and Analysis of Cannabissativa L.," Annals of the New York Academy of Science, 191:3-14 (1971). Dornbush, R. L., Fink, M. and Freedman, A. M.:"Marijuana, Memory and Perception," American Journal ofPsychiatry, 128 (3) : 194-197 (1971). Dorrance, J., Janiger, 0. and Teplitz, L.: ".In VivoEffects of Illicit Hallucinogens on Human LymphocyteChromosomes," Journal of the American Medical Association,212 (9) : 1488-1491 (1970). Dott, A. B.: "Effect of Marihuana on Risk Acceptance inan Automotive Simulator," Prepared by the U.S. Public HealthService, Injury Control Research Laboratory, Providence, RhodeIsland: Contract No. ICRL-RR-71-3 (June 1971). Elsmore, T. P.: "Some Behavioral Effects ofDelta-9Tetrahydrocannabinol," Current Trends in Army MedicalSciences Psychology, 12-19 (1970). Ewens, G. P. W.: "Insanity Following the Use of IndianHemp," Indian Medical Gazette, 39: 401-413 (1904). Fahrenholtz, K. E., Lurie, M. and Kierstead, R. W.: "TheTotal Synthesis of Delta 9-Tetrahydrocannabinol and Four of ItsIsomers," Journal of the American Chemical Society, 89:5934-5941 (1967). Fahrenholtz, K. E., Lurie, M. and Kierstead, R. W.:"Total Synthesis of Delta 9-Tetrahydrocannabinol and ofdl-Y.Tetrahydrocannabinol, Racemates of Active Constituents ofMarihuana," Journal of the American Chemical Society, 88:2079-2080 (1966). Favazza, A. and Domino, E. F.: "Recurrent LSD Experience(Flashbacks) Triggered by Marihuana," University of MichiganMedical Center Journal, 35: 214-216 (1969). Fere, C.: "Note sur l'Influence du Haschisch sur leTravail," Comptes Rendus Hebdomadaires des Seances de laSociete de Biologic, (Ileme serie), 3: 696-700 (1901). Ferraro, D. P., Grilly, 1). AL and Lynch, W. C.:"Behavioral Effects of Small Doses of Marihuana Extract inChimpanzees," Prepared for the National Institute of MentalHealth, Contract No. HSM 42-21-75, Department of Psychology,University of New Mexico, Albuquerque (November 1971). Ferraro, D. P., Grilly, D. M. and Lynch, W. C.:"Comparison of Behavioral Effects of Synthetic Delta9-Tetrahydrocannabinol and Marihuana Extract inChimpanzees," Prepared for the National Institute of MentalHealth, Contract No. HSM 42-21-75, Department of Psychology,University of New Mexico, Albuquerque (November 1971). Ferraro, D. P., Grilly, D. M. and Lynch, W. C.: "Study ofLong-Term Effects of Marihuana in Chimpanzees," Prepared forthe National Institute of Mental Health, Contract No. HSM42-21-75, Department of Psychology, University of New Mexico,Albuquerque (November 1971). Fetterman, P. S., Keith, E. S., Waller, C. W., Guerrero, O.,Doorenhos, N. J. and Quimby, M. W.: "MississippiGrownCannabis Sativa 1: Preliminary Observation on Chemical Definition'of Phenotype and Variation in Tetrahydrocannabinol ContentVersus Age, Sex, and Plant Part," Journal of PharmaceuticalSciences, 60 (8) :1240-1249 (1971). Fink, M.: "The Biology of Cannabis; The State of OurKnowledge, 1970," Presented at American Public HealthSymposium on Cannabis, San Francisco (May 1970). Fink, M.: "Summary Report: Marihuana Study Program278M7C," Prepared for the National Institute of MentalHealth, (November 1971). Fink, M., Professor of Psychiatry and Dornbush, R. L.,Assistant Professor of Psychiatry, Personal Communication, NewYork Medical College, December 30, 1971. Fink, M., Stefanis, C. and Staffs: "Interim Report: Studyof Marihuana Users in Greece," Prepared for the NationalInstitute of Mental Health, Contract No. HSM 42-70-98, Departmentof Psychiatry, New York Medical College (October 1971). Finley, T. N., Personal Communication, Director, PulmonaryLaboratory, 'Mount Zion Hospital and Medical Center, SanFrancisco, California, December 13, 1971. Foltz, R. L., Fentinan, A. F., Leighty, E. G., Walter, J. L.,Drewes, 11. R., Schwartz, W. E.. Page, T. P. and Truitt, E. B.:"Metabolite of Trans-Delta 8-Tetrahydrocannabinol:Identification and Synthesis," Science, 168: 844-845 (1970). Foltz, R. L., Kinzer, G. W., Mitchell, R. I., and Truitt, E.B.: "The Fate of Cannabinoid Components of Marihuana DuringSmoking," to be published (1972). Forney, It. B.: "Toxicology and Pharmacology ofMarihuana," Presented at New York Academy of Science, (May1971). Forrest, D. V.: "Marihuana to Heroin . . . A MissingLink?" American Journal of Psychiatry, 127 (5) : 164165(1970). Francois, G. R., Barrat E., Russel, G.. Barker, T. and White,R. B.: "The Marihuana Dilemma-A Clinical and ExperimentalApproach," Presented at Annual Meeting of the AmericanPsychiatric Association, (May 1970). Frank, 1. M., Hopler, R. S., Stier, S. and Rickles, W. H.:"Marihuana, Tobacco and Functions Affecting Driving,"Presented at Annual Meeting of the American PsychiatricAssociation, (May 1971). Frank, 1. R., Assistant Professor of Psychiatry and Hepler, R.S., Assistant, Professor of Opthmalogy, Personal Communication ofPreliminary Data, University of California, School of Medicine,Los Angeles, California, September 1971. Frankenhein, J. M., McMillan, D. E. and Harris, L. S.:"Effects of I-Delta 9 and I-Delta 8Trans-Tetrahydrocannabinol on Scheduled Controlled Behavior ofPigeon," Journal of Pharmacology Experimental Therapeutics,178: 241-252 (1971). Fraser, J. D.: "Withdrawal Symptoms in Cannabis IndicaAddicts," Lancet, II: 747-748 (1949). Freedman, A. M. and Fink, M.: "Cannabis Psychosis,"Presented at Symposium on Biochemical and Pharmacological Aspectsof Dependence and Reports on Marihuana Research, Amsterdam(October 1971). Freedman, H. L. and Rockmore, M. J.: "Marihuana, a Factorin Personality Evaluation and Army Maladjustment," Journalof Clinical Psychopathology, 7: 765-782 (Part 1) ; 8: 221-236(Part H) (1946). Galanter, M., Wyatt, It. J., Weinberger, L., Weingartner, H.,Vaughan, T. B. and Roth, W. T.:"Delta-9-Trans-Tetrahydrocannabinol Administered by Smoking:Studies of Blood Levels, Pulse and Subjective Effects,"Science, (in press 1972). Gaoni, Y. and Mechoulani, R.: "Isolation, Structure, andPartial Synthesis of an Active Constituent of Hashish,"Journal of the American Chemical Society, 86: 16461647 (1964). Gary, N. E. and Keylon, V.: "Intravenous Administration-of Marihuana," Journal of the American Medical Association,211 (3) : 501 (1970). Gaskill, 11. S.: "Marihuana, An Intoxicant,"American Journal of Psychiatry, 102: 202-204 (1945). Geher, W. F.: "Effects of Marihuana Extract on PetalHamsters and Rabbits," Toxicology and Applied Pharmacology,14: 276-282 (1969). Geber, W. F. and Schramm, L.: "Teratogenicity ofMarihuana Extract as Influenced by Plant Origin and SeasonalVariation," Archives Internationales de Pharmacodynamie etde Therapie, 177 (1) : 224-239 (1969). Gelehrter, 1. D.: "Lysergic Acid Diethylamide (LSD) andEstrophy of the Bladder," Journal of Pediatrics, 77:1065-1066 (1970). George, H. R.: "Two Psychotic Episodes Associated WithCannabis," British Journal of Addiction, 65: 119-121 (1970). Gill, E. IV.: "Propyl Homologue of Tetrahydrocannabinol: Its Isolation from Cannabis, Properties and Synthesis,"Journal of the Chemical Society Organic, (3) : 579-582 (1971). Gill, E. W., Paton, W. D. M. and Pertwee, R. G.:"Preliminary Experiments on the Chemistry and Pharmacologyof Cannabis," Nature, 228: 134-136 (1970). Gilmour, D. G., Bloom, A. D., Leli, K. P., Robbins, E. S. andMaximilian, C.: "Chromosomal Aberrations in Users ofPsychoactive Drugs," Archives of General Psychiatry, 24:268-272 (1971). Goode, E.: "Drug Escalation: Marihuana Use as Related tothe Use of Dangerous Drugs," (October 1971). Goode, E.: The Marihuana Smokers, New York: Basics Book, Inc.(1970). Grinspoon, L.: "Marihuana," Scientific American,221: 1725 (1969). Grossman, W.: "Adverse Reactions Associated With CannabisProducts in India," Annals of Internal Medicine, 70 (3) :529-533 (1969). Haines, L. and Green, W.: "Marihuana Use Patterns,"British Journal of Addiction 65 (4) : 347-362 (1970). Halikas, J.A., Goodman, D. W. and Guze, S. B.: "Marihuana Effects: ASurvey of Regular Users," Journal of the American MedicalAssociation, 217: 692-694 (1971). Halikas, J. A., Goodman, D. W. and Guze, S. B.:"Marihuana Use and Psychiatric Illness," Department ofPsychiatry, Washington University School of Medicine, St. Louis,Missouri, (submitted for publication 1972). Hamaker, S. T. A.: "Case of Overdose of CannabisIndica," Therapeutic Gazette, 7: 808 (1891). Harris, R. T., Personal Communication, Psychological Research,Texas Research Institute of Mental Sciences, Houston, August,1971. Harris, R. T., Watters, W. H. and Henderson, G.:"Evaluation of Abuse Potential A' THC in RhesusMonkeys," (unpublished) 1972). Harris, R. T., Watters, W. H. and McLendon, D.:"Behavioral Effects in Rhesus Monkeys of RepeatedIntravenous Doses of Marihuana Extract Distillate,"(unpublished 1972). Hecht, F., Beals, R. K., Lees, M. H., Jolly, H. and Roberts,P.: "Lysergic-Acid-Diethylamide and Cannabis as PossibleTeratogens in Man," Lancet, II: 1087 (1968) Heiman, E. M.: "Marihuana Precipitated Psychosis inPatient Evacuated to CONUS," USARU Medical Bulletin, 40 (9):75-77 (1968). Henderson, A. H. and Pugsley, D. J.: "Collapse AfterIntravenous Injection of Hashish," British Medical Journal,3: 229-230 (1968). Hepler, R. S., Frank, I. A. and Ungerleider, J. T.: "TheEffects of Marijuana Smoking on Pupillary Size,"(unpublished 1971). Heyndrickx, A., Scheiris, C. and Schepens, P.:"Toxicological Study of a Fatal Intoxication in Man Due toCannabis Smoking," Journal de Pharmacie de Belgigue, 24:371-376 (1969). Hively, R. L., Mosher, W. A. and Hoffmann, F. W.:"Isolation of Trans-Delta 9-Tetrahydrocannabinol FromMarijuana," Journal of the American Chemical Society, 88:1832-1833 (1966). Ho, B. T., Fritellie, G. E., Englert, L. F., McIsaac, W. M.and Idanpaan-Heikkila, J. E.: "Marihuana: Importance of theRoute of Administration," Journal of Pharmacy andPharmacology, 23: 309--310 (1971). Hochman, J. S. and Brill, N.: "Chronic Marihuana Usageand Liver Function," Lancet, 11 (7728) : 818 (1971). Hollister, L. E.: "Human Pharmacological Studies onCannabis," Acta Pharmaceutica Suecica, 8: 673 (1971). Hollister, L. E.: "Hunger and Appetite After Single Dosesof Marihuana, Ethanol and Dextroamphetainine," ClinicalPharmacology and Therapeutics, 12 (1) : 44-49 (1971). Hollister, L. E.: "Marilhuana in Man: Three YearsLater," Science, 172: 21-29 (1971). Hollister, L. E.: "Status Report on Clinical Pharmacologyof Marihuana," Annals of the New York Academy of Science,191: 132-141 (1971). Hollister, L. E.: "Steroids and Moods: Correlations inSchizophrenics and Subjects Treated with Lysergic AcidDiethylamide (LSD), Mescaline, Tetrahydrocannabinol, andSynhexyl," Journal of Clinical Pharmacology, 9: 24-29(1969). Hollister, L. E. and Gillespie, H. K.: "Marihuana,Ethanol and Dextroamphetamine: Mood and Mental FunctionAlterations," Archives of General Psychiatry, 23 (3) 199-203(1970). Hollister, L. E.. Moore, F., Kanter, S. and Noble E.: "Delta-l-Tetrahydrocannabinol, Synhexyl and MarihuanaExtract Administered Orally in Man: Catecholamine Excretion,Plasma Cortisone Levels and Platelet Serotonin Content,"Psychopharmacologia (Berlin), 17 (4): 354-360 (1970). Hollister, L. E., Richards, R. K. and Gillespie, H. K.:"Comparison of Tetrahydrocannabinol and Synhexyl inMan," Clinical Pharmacology and Therapeutics, 9 (6) 783-791(1968). Hollister, L. E., Sherwood, S. L. and Cavasino, A.:"Marihuana and the Human Electroencephalogram,"Pharmacological Research Communications, (in press 1971). Hughes, J. E., Steahly, L. 11. and Bier, M. M.:"Marihuana and tile Diabetic Coma,"Journal of theAmerican Medical Association, 214 (6) : 1113-1114 (1970). IdinpiRin-Heikkila, J., Fritchie, G. E., Englert, L. F., Ho,B. T., and McIsaac, IV. 'M.: "Placental Transfer ofTritiated (l)-NO-Tetrahydrocannabinol," New England Journalof Medicine, 281: 330 (lW9). Iddanpaan-Heikkila, J. E., McIsaac, W. M. and Ho, B. T.: ",A' THC Distribution in Monkeys, Mice andHamsters," Presented at the International Symposium on theChemistry and Biological Activity of Cannabis, Stockholm (October1971). Indian Hemp Drug Commission Report 1893-1894, Silver Spring:Thomas Jefferson Publishing Company (RAprinted 1969), 1). 3281. Isbell, H., Gorodetzsky, C. W., Jasinski, D. R., Claussen, U.,Von Spulek, F. and Korte, F.: "Effects of (-)-Delta9-Trans-Tetrahydrocannabinol in Man,"Psychopharmacologia (Berlin), 11 184-188 (1967). Isbell, H. and Jasinski, D. R.: "A Comparison of LSD-25With (-)-Delta-9-Trans-Tetrahydrocannabinol (THC) and AttemptedCross Tolerance Between LSD and THC," Psychopharmacologia,14: 115-123 (1969). Isbell, H., Jasiuski, D. R., Gorodetsky, C. W., Korte, P.,Claussen, U., Haage, M., Sieper, H. and Von Spulak, F.:"Studies on Tetrahydrocannabinol," Bulletin, Problemsof Drug Dependence, National Academy of Science, Division ofMedical Science, 4832-4846 (1967). Joachlinoglu, G.: Ciba. Foundation Study Group 21, 10, (1965). Johnson, B. D.: "',social Determinants of the Use of'Dangerous Drugs' by College Students," Columbia University,Doctorial Thesis (.June, 1971). Johnson, S. and Domino, E. F.: "Some CardiovascularEffects of Marihuana Smoking oil Normal Volunteers,"Clinical Pharmacology and Therapeutics, 12 (5) : 762768 (1971). Jones, R. and Stone, G.: "Psychological Studies ofMarihuana and Alcohol in Man," Psychopharmacologia (Berlin),18 (1) : 108-117 (1970). Jones, R. T.: "The Marihuana Induced 'High': Influence ofExpectation, Setting and Previous Drug Experience,"Presented at Annual Meeting of the Federations of AmericanSocieties for Experimental Biology, Chicago (April 1971). Jones, R. T.: "Tetraliydrocannabinol and the MarihuanaInduced Social 'High' or The Effects of the Mind onMarihuana," Annals of the New York Academy of Scienee, 191:155-165 (1971). Kalant, N., LeBlanc, A. E. and Gibbins, R. J.: "ToleranceTo, and Dependence On Some Non-Opiate Psychoactive Drugs,Pharmacological Reviews, 23 (3): 135-491 (1971). Kaplan, H. S.: "Psychosis Associated withMarihuana," New York State Journal of Medicine, 71 (4) : 433-435 (1971). Katz, M. Al., Waskow, 1. E., Almon, J.: "Characterizingthe Psyehological State Produced by LSD," Journal ofAbnormal Psychology, 73: 1-14 (1968). Keeler, 11. H.: "Adverse Reaction to Marihuana,"American Journal of Psychiatry, 124: 674-677 (1967). Keeler, M. H.: "Alarihuana Induced Hallucinations," Diseases of the Nervous System, 29: 314-315 (1968). Keeler, M.H. and Reifler, C. B.: "Grand Alai Convulsions Subsequent toMarihuana Use: Case Report," Di8eam of the Nervous System,28: 474-475 (1967). Keeler, M. H., Reifler, C. B. and Liptzin, M. B.:"Spontaneous Recurrence of Marihuana Effect," AmericanJournal of Psychiatry, 125: 384-386 (1968). Kennedy, J. S. and Waddell, W. J.: "Whole BodyAutoradiography of the Pregnant Mouse After Administration ofC14-Delta 9-Tetrahydrocannabinol. (Delta 9-THC)," FederationProceedings, 30: 279 (1971). Keup, W.: "Psychotic Symptoms Due to CannabisAbuse," Diseases of the Nervous System, 31 (2) : 119-126(1970). Kew, Al. C., Bersohn, L. and Siew, S.: "PossibleHepatotoxicity of Cannabis," Lancet, 1: 578-579 (1969). King, A. B. and Cowen, D. L.: "Effect of IntravenousInjection of Marihuana," Journal of the American MedicalAssociation, 210 (4) : 724-725 (1969). King, A. B., Pechet, G. S. and Pechet, L.: "IntravenousInjection of Crude Marihuana," Journal of the AmericanMedical Association, 214: 30 (1970). Kiplinger, G. F., Manno, J. E., Rodda, B. E. and Forney, R.B.: "Dose-Response Analysis of the Effects ofTetrahydrocannabinol in Alan," Clinical Pharmacology andTherapeutics, 12 (4) : 650-657 (1971). Klausner, H. A. and Dingell, J. V.: "The Metabolism andExcretion of Delta-9-Tetrahydrocannabinol in the Rat," LifeScience, 10: 49-59 (1971). Klein, F. K., Rapoport, H. and Elliott, H. W.: "CannabisAlkaloids," Nature, 232: 258-259 (1971). Kolansky, H. and Moore, W. T.: "Effects of Marihuana onAdolescents and Young Adults," Journal of the AmericanMedical Association, 216 (3) : 486-492 (1971). Kornhaber, A.: "Marihuana in an Adolescent PsychiatricOut Patient Population," Journal of the American MedicalAssociation, 215 (12) : 1988 (1971). Kubena, R. K., Perlach, J. L. and Barry, H.:"Corticosterone Elevation Mediated Centrally byDelta-1-Tetrahydrocannabinol in Rats," European Journal ofPharmacology, 14: 89-92 (1971). Lambo. T. A.: "Medical and Social Problems of DrugAddiction in West Africa, With Special Emphasis on PsychiatricAspects," United Nations Bulletin on Narcotics, 17 (1) :3-13 (1965). Lemberger, L.: "The Metabolism of theTetrahydrocannabinols," Advances in Pharmacology andChemotherapy, 10: (in press 1972). Lemberger, L., Axelrod, J. and Kopin, I. J.: "ClinicalStudies on the Disposition and Metabolism of A' THC and TheirCorrelation With Its Pharmacological Effects." ActaPharmaceutical Suecica, 8: 692 (1971). Lemberger, L., Axelrod, J. and Kopin, J.: "Metabolism andDisposition of A' Tetrahydrocannabinol in Man,"Pharmacological Review, 23: 371-380 (1971). Lemberger, L., Alexrod, J. and Kopin J.: "The Metabolismand Disposition of Delta-9-Tetrahydrocannabinol in Man,"Federation Proceedings, 30: (1971). Lemberger, L., Axelrod, J. and Kopin, J.: "Metabolism andDisposition of Delta-9-Tetrahydrocannabinol in Naive Subjects andChronic Marihuana Users," Annals of New York Academy ofScience, 191: 142-154 (1971). Lemberger, L., Silberstein, S. D., Axelrod, J. and Kopin, 1.J.: "Marihuana studies on the Disposition and Metabolism ofDelta-9-Tetrahydrocannabinol in Man," Science, 170 (3964) :1320-1322 (1970). Lemberger, L., Tamarkin, N. R., Axelrod, J. and Kopin, L:"Delta-9-Tetrahydrocannabinol: Metabolism and Disposition inLong Term Marihuana Smokers," Science, 173 (3991) : 72-74(1971). Lemberger, L., Weiss, J. L., Watanake, A. Al., Galanter, 1.M., Wyatt, R. J. and Cardon, P. V.:"Delta-9-Tetrahydrocannabinol's Temporal Correlation of thePsychological Effects and Blood Levels After Various Routes ofAdministration," New England Journal of Medicine (March1972). Lerner, P.: "The Precise Determinations ofTetrahydrocannabinol Isomers in Marihuana and Hashish," U.N.Bulletin on Narcotics, XXI(3) : 39-42 (1969). Lewin, L.: Phantastica, Narcotic and Stimulating Drugs, NewYork: E. P. Dutton and Co., Inc. (1964), pp. 107122. Lindemann, E.: "The Neurophysiological Effects ofIntoxicating Drugs," American Journal of Psychiatry, 90:1007-1037 (1933-1934). Lipp, M. R.: "Marihuana Use By Medical Students,"American Journal of Psychiatry, 128: 208-212 (1971). Lipparini,F., Decarolis, A. and Longo, U. A.: "NeuropharmacologicalInvestigation of Some Tetrahyrocannabinol Derivatives,"Physiology and Behavior, 4 (4) 527-532 (1969). Liskow, B., Liss, J. L. and Parker, C. W.: "Allergy toMarihuana," Annals of Internal Medicine, 75: 571-573 (1971). Loewe, S.: "Studies on the Pharmacology and AcuteToxicity of Compounds With Marihuana Activity," Journal ofPharmacology and Experimental Therapeutics, 88: 154-161 (1946). Lomax, P.: "Acute Tolerance to the Hypothermic Effect ofMarihuana in the Rat," Research Communications, ClinicalPathology and Pharmacology, 2: 159-167 (1971). Ludlow, F.: The Hasheesh Eater: Being Passages from the Lifeof a Pythagorean, New York: Harper and Brothers (1857). Lundberg, G. D., Adelson, J. and Prosnutz, E. H.:"Marihuana Induced Hospitalization," Journal ofAmerican Medical Association, 215 (1) : 121 (1971). Magus, R. D. and Harris, L. S.: "Carcinogenic Potentialof Marihuana Smoke Condensate," Federation Proceedings, 30(2) : 277 (1971). Mann, P. E. G., Cohen, A. B., Finley, T. N. and Ladman, A. J.:"Alveolar Macrophages. Structural and Functional DifferencesBetween Non-Smokers and Smokers of Marihuana and Tobacco,"Laboratory Investigation, 25 (2): 111-120 (1971). Mann, P. E. G., Finley, T. N. and Ladman, A. J.:"Marihuana Smoking: A Study of Its Effects on AlveolarLining Material and Pulmonary Macrophages Recovered byBronchopulmonary Lavage," Journal of ClinicalInvestigations, 49 (6) : 60a-61a (1970). Manno, B. R., Manno, J. E., Kilsheimer, G. S. and Forney, R.B.: "Response of the Isolated Perfused Rat Heart toDelta-9-Tetrahydrocannabinol (THC)," Toxicology and AppliedPharmacology, 10: 98 (1970). Manno, J. E.: "Clinical Investigations With Marihuana andAlcohol," Department of Pharmacology and Toxicology, IndianaUniversity, Doctoral Thesis (1970). Manno, J. E., Kiplinger, G., Bennett, 1. F., Haine, S. E. and Forney, It. B. : "Comparative Effects of SmokingMarihuana On Motor and Mental Performance lit Humans,"Clinical Pharmacology and Therapeutics, 11 (6) : 808--815 (1970). Manno, J. E., Kiplinger, G., Scholz, N. E., Forney, R. B., andHaine, S. E, : "The Influence of Alcohol and Marihuana onMotor and Mental Performance," Clinical Pharmacology andTherapeutics, 12: 202-211 (1970). Marcovitz, E. and Myers, H. J.: "The Marihuana Addict inthe Army," War Medicine, 6: 382-391 (1944). Marten, G. W.: "Case Report: Adverse Reaction to the Useof Marihuana," Journal of the Tennessee Medical Association,62 (7) : 627-630 (1969). Martin, P. A.: "Cannabis and Chromosomes," Lancet,I: 370 (1969). Masur, J. and Khazan, N.: "Induction by Cannabis Sativa(Marihuana) of Rhythmic Spike Discharges Overriding REM SleepCortigram in Rats," Life Sciences, 9 (1) 1275-1280 (1970). Mayer-Gross, W., et al.: Clinical Psychiatry, London: Cassell(1960). Mayor's Committee on -Marihuana: The Marihuana Problem in theCity of New York: Sociological, Medical, Psychological andPharmacological Studies, Lancaster: Cattell Press (1944). McGlothlin, W. H.: "Marihuana: An Analysis of Use,Distribution and Control," Prepared for the Department ofJustice, Washington, D.C. (June 1971). McGlothlin, W. H.: "Use and Effects of Cannabis,"Prepared for the National Commission on Marihuana and Drug Abuse,Washington, D.C. Department of Psychology, University ofCalifornia, Los Angeles (January 1972). McGlothlin, W. H., and Arnold, D. O.: "LSD Revisited: ATen-Year Follow-Up of Medical LSD Use," Archives of GeneralPsychiatry, 24: 35-49 (1971). McGlothlin, W. H., Arnold, D. O., and Rowan, P. K.:"Marihuana Use Among Adults," Psychiatry, 33: 433443(1970). McGlothlin, W. H. and West, L. J.: "The MarihuanaProblem: An Overview," American Journal of Psychiatry, 125:126-134 (1968). McIsaac, W., Personal Communication, Director, Texas ResearchInstitute, Houston, Texas, October 28, 1971. McIsaac, W., Harris, R. T. and Ho, B. T.: "BehavioralCorrelates of Brain Distribution of Tetrahydrocannabinol,"Acta Pharmaceutica Suecica, 8: 703 (1971). McMillan, D. E., Dewey, W. L. and Harris, L. S.:"Characteristics of Tetrahydrocannabinol Tolerance,"Annals of the New York Academy of Science, 191: 83-99 (1971). McMillan, D. E., Harris, L. S., Frankenbeim, J. M., andKennedy, J. S.: "(I)-Delta 9 Trans-TetrahydrocannabinoI inPigeons: Tolerance to the Behavioral Effects," Science, 169:501-503 (1970). Mechoulam, R.: "Marihuana Chemistry," Science, 168(3936): 1159-1166 (1970). Mechoulam, R., Personal Communication, Professor, School ofPharmacy, Hebrew University, Jerusalem, October 28, 1971. Mechoulam, R.: "Recent Advances in CannabinoidChemistry," Acta Pharmaceutica Suecica, 8: 675-676 (1971).Mechoulam, R. and Gaoni, Y.: "The Absolute Configuration ofDelt 1-Tetrahydrocannabinol, The Major Active Constituent ofHashish," Tetrahedron Letters, 12: 1109-1111 (1967). Mechoulam, R., Shani, A., Edery, H. and Grunfeld, Y.:"Chemical Basis of Hashish Activity," Science 169:611-612 (1970). Medical Staff, Pretoria Mental Hospital: "Mental SymptomsAssociated With the Smoking of Dagga," South African MedicalJournal, 12: 85 (1938). Melges F. T., Tinklenberg, J. R., Hollister, L. E. andGillespie, H. K.: "Marihuana and TemporalDisintegration," Science, 168 (3935) :1118-1120 (1970). Melges, F. T., Tinklenberg, J. R., Hollister, L. E. andGillespie, H. K.: "Marihuana and the Temporal Span ofAwareness," Archives of General Psychiatry, 24: 464-567(1971). Melges, F. T., Tinklenberg, J. R., Hollister, L. E. andGillespie, H. K.: "Temporal Disintegration andDepersonalization During Marihuana Intoxication," Archivesof General Psychiatry, 23: 204--210 (1970). Mendelson, J. H., Meyer, R. E., Rossi, A. M., Bernstein, J.,Patch, V. D., Babor, T., O'Brien, J., Sagotsky, G., Reid, H.,Salzman, C., Koehansky, G. E., Porrino, L., Becker, D., DeRubis,E., Cambria, T. J., Gallimore, P. B., Klinkert, C. E., Pope, S.,Savitsky, J. B., Thompson, J.: "Behavioral and BiologicalConcomitants of Chronic Marihuana Smoking by Heavy and CasualUsers," Prepared for the National Commission on Marihuanaand Drug Abuse, Department of Psychiatry, Boston City Hospital(January 1972). Merkus, F. W. H. M.: "Cannabivarin andTetrahydrocannabivarin, Two New Constituents of Hashish,"Nature, 232: 579 (1971). Meyer, R. E., Pillard, R. C., Mirin, S. M., Shapiro, L.S.:"Administration of Marihuana to Heavy and CasualUsers," American Journal of Psychiatry, 128 (3) : 198204(1971). Meyers, S. A. and Caldwell, D. F.: "Effects of Marihuanaon Auditory and Visual Sensation," Research Bulletin, 20-22(1969). Meyers, S. A. and Caldwell, D. F.: "Effects of Marihuanaon Auditory and Visual Sensation, A Preliminary Report," TheNew Physician, 18: 212-215 (1969). Mikes, P. and Waser, P. G.: "Marihuana Components:Effects of Smoking of Delta 9-Tetrahydrocannabinol andCannabinol," Science, 172: 1158-1159 (1971). Milman, D. H.: "Adverse Effects of Cannabis," NewYork State Journal of Medicine, 71 (13) : 1675 (1971). Miras, C. J.: "Some Aspects of Cannabis Action" In:Hashish: Its Chemistry and Pharmacology, Ciba Foundation GroupNo. 21, London: J. & A. Churchill (1965). Miras, C. J.: Drugs and Youth, Springfield: C. C. Thomas(1969), pp. 191-198. Miras, C. J.: Hashish, Its Chemistry and Pharmacology, Boston:Little, Brown & Co. (1965), pp. 37-52. Miras, C. J.: "Marihuana and Hashish," UCLA lecture,(September 11, 1967). Miras, C. J. and Coutselinis, A.: "The Distribution ofTetrahydrocannabinol in Humans," Report No. 24, UnitedNations Secretariat publication ST/SOA/SER. S/24 (November 1970). Miras, C. J. and Coutselinis, A.: "The Presence ofCannabinoids in the Urine of Hashish Smokers," Report No.25, United Nations Secretariat publication ST/SOA/ SER. S/25(November 1970). Mirin, S. M., Shapiro, L. M., Meyer, R. E., Pillar, R. C.,Fisher, S.: "Casual Versus Heavy Use of Marihuana, ARedefinition of the Marihuana Problem," American Journal ofPsychiatry, 127: 11.134-1140 (1971). Moreau, J.: "Du Hachisch eit de I'Alientation,Mental," Etudes Psychologiques, 34: Libraire de Fortin,Masson, Paris (1845). Nahas, G. C.: "Lethal Cannabis Intoxication," NewEngland Journal of Medicine, 284: 792 (1971). Nakazawa, K. and Costa, E: "Induction by Mothyloholan.threne of Delta 9 Tetrahydrocannabinol (A-THC) Metabolism in RatLung,11 Pharmacologist, 13: 297 (1971). Neu, R. L., Powers, H. O., King, S. and Gardner, L. I.:"Cannabis and Chromosomes," Lancet, I-675 (1969). New York Police Department, Annual Reports 1969 and 1970, Cityof New York (1969, 1970). Nilsson, L. M., Agurell, S., Leander, K., Nilsson, J. L. G.and Widman, M.: "Cannabidiol: Structure of Three MetabolitesFormed in Rat Liver," Acta Pharmaceutica Suecica, 8: 701(1971). Nisbet, C. T. and Vakil, F.: "Some Social and EconomicCharacteristics of UCLA Marihuana Users," Social ScienceQuarterly (in press 1971). Ohlsson, A., Abou-Chaar, C. I., Agurell, S., Nilsson, 1. M.,Olofsson, K. and Sandberg, F.: "Cannabinoid Constituents ofMale and Female Cannabis Sativa," Bulletin on Narcotics, 23(1) : 29-32 (1971). Osinger, 0. and Fulginiti, S.: "Effects of CannabisSativa On Learning in Rats," Pharmacology, 3: 337-344(1970). Pace, H. B., Davis, '.%I. W., Borgen, L. A.:"Teratogenesis and Mariliuana," Annals of the New YorkAcademy of Science, 191: 123-131 (1971). Paton, W. D. M. and Pertwee, R. G.: "The GeneralPharmacology of Cannabis," Acta Pharmaceutica Suecica, 8:691 (1971). Peebles, A. S. M. and Mann, H. W.: "Ganja as a Cause ofInsanity and Crime in Bengal," Indian Medical Gazette, 49:395-396 (1914). Perez-Reyes, M. and Lipton, M. A.: "The Rate ofAbsorption and Excretion of Orally Administered Delta 9Tetrahydrocannabinol to Man," Prepared for the NationalInstitute of Mental Health, Contract #HSM 4269-62, Department ofPsychiatry, University of North Carolina (July 1971). Perez-Reyes, M., Lipton, M. A. and Wall, M. E.: "TheMetabolism of Delta-9-Tetrahydroeannabinol in HumanSubjects," Paper presented at the 5th World Congress ofPsychiatry, Mexico City (December 1971). Perna, D.: "Psychotogenic Effect of Marihuana,"Journal of American Medical Association, 209: (7) 1085-1086(1969). Persaud, I. and Ellington, A.: "A Teratogenic Activity ofCannabis Resin," Lancet, 11 (7564) : 406-407 (1968).Persaud, 1. and Ellington, A.: "Cannabis in EarlyPregnancy," Lancet, II: 1306 (1968). Personal Communication To The Food and Drug Administration,Rockville, .Md., of Preliminary Experimental data-names withheldby request of the investigators, unpublished (1970). Persyko, T.: "Marihuana Psychosis," Journal of theAmerican Medical Assocation, 212 (9) : 1527 (1970). Petrzilka, T. and Sikemeier, C.: "Uber Inlialtsstoffe desHashish II," Helvitia Clinica Acta, 50: 1410-1419 (1967). Petrzilka, T. and Sikemeier, C.: "Uber Inlialsstoffe desHashish III," Helvitia Chinica Acta, 50: 2111-2113 (1967). Phillips, R. N., Turk, R. F. and Forney, R. B.: "AcuteToxicity of A' Tetrahydrocannabinol in Rats and Mice,"Proceedings of Society for Experimental Biology and Medicine,136(l) :260-263 (1971). Phillips, R., Turk, R., Manno, J., Jain, N. and Forney R.:"Seasonal Variations in Cannabinolic Content of IndianaMarihuana," Journal of Forensic Sciences, 15(2) 191-200(1970). Phillips, R. N., Brown, D. J., Martz, R. C., Hubbard, J. D.and Forney, R. B.: "Subacute Toxicity of WaterSuspended(-)Delta-9-Tetrahydrocannabinol in Rats, Toxicology and AppliedPharmacology, 19(2) : 414 (1971). Pillard, R. C.: "Marihuana," New England Journal ofMedicine, 283(6) : 294-303 (1970). Pirch, J. H., Colin. R. A., Barnes, P. R. and Barrett, E. S.:"Tolerance to EEG and Behavioral Effects of Marihuana inRats," The Pharmacologist, 13(2) : 246 (1971). Pivik, T., Zareone, V. Hollister, L. E. & Dement, W.:"The Effects of Hallucinogenic Agents on Sleep,"Paychophysiology, 6(2) : 261 (1969). Podolsky, S., Pattavina, C., and Amaral. M.: Effects ofMarihuana on Glucose Tolerance Test (G.T.T.)," Annals of theNew York Academy of Science, 191: 54-6 (1971). Porot, A: "Le Cannabisme," AnnalesMedico-Psychologique8z 1(1) : 1-24 (1942). Powelson, H. D., Personal Communication, Chief Psychiatrist,University of California, Berkeley, "Clinical Notes on theUse of Marihuana," (1970). Prince, R., Greenfield, R. and Marriott: "Ganja: TheBenevolent Alternative? Observations on Use of Cannabis andAlcohol in Jamaica," Mental Health Institute, Montreal,unpublished manuscript 1970). Reales-Orozeo, et al.: "Aspectos Generales de laIntoxicacion Por Marihuana y Sus Manifestaciones Psiquiatricas enBarranquilla," Revista de Medicina Legal de Colombia, 13:142-148 (1953). Renault, P. P., Schuster, C. R., Heinrich, R. and Freedman, D.X.:"Marihuana: Standardized Smoke Administration and DoseEffect Curves on Heart Rate in Humans," Science, 174 (4009): 589-591 (1971). Rickles, W. H., Kales, A., and Hanley, J.: "Effects ofMarihuana on Evoked Heart Rate and Skin ConductanceResponses," Presented at Society for PsychophysiologicalResearch Meeting, New Orleans (November 22, 1970). Rickles, W. H., Kales, A., and Hanley, J.:"Psychophysiology of Marihuana," Presented to LangleyPorter Nueropsychiatrie Institute, San Francisco (May 1970). Robins, L. N. and Murphy, G. E.: "Drug Use in a NormalPopulation of Young Negro Men," American Journal of PublicHealth, 57 (9) :1580-1596 (1967). Rodin, E. and Domino, E. F.: "Effects of Acute MarihuanaSmoking in the Electroencephalograms,"Electroencephalography and Clinical Ncurophysiology, 29: 321(1970). Rodin, E., Domino, E. P., and Porzak, J. P.: "TheMarihuana-Induced 'Social High'-Neurological andElectroencephalographic Concomitants," Journal of theAmerican Medical Association, 213 (8) : 1300-1302 (1970). Roth, W. T., Galanter, M., Weingartner, H., Vaughan, T. B.,and Wyatt, R. J.: "The Effect of Marihuana and Syntheticdelta-9-THC on Auditory Evoked Response and Background EEG inHumans," Laboratory of Clinical Pharmacology, NationalInstitute of Mental Health, Bethesda, Maryland (unpublished1972). Rubin, V. and Comitas, L.: "A Study of the Effects ofChronic Ganja Smoking in Jamaica," Research Institute forthe Study of 'Man, New York, in preparation for tration and DoseEffect Curves on Heart Rate in Huthe National Institute of MentalHealth, Contract No. 11811 42-70-77 (1972). Sagone, L., Laurence, T. and Balcerzak, S. P.: "SmokingACause of 'Spurious' Polyeythemia," Blood: The Journal ofHematology, XXXVIII (6) : 118 (1971). Scher, J. M.: "The Marihuana Habit," Journal of theAmerican Medical Association, 214 (6) : 1120 (1970). Schuster, C.R. and Renault, P. F.: Personal Communication, Department ofPsychiatry, School of Medicine University of Chicago, January1972. Schwartz, C. J.: "Toward a Medical Understanding ofMarihuana," Canadian Psychiatric Association Journal 14:591400 (1969). Secretary of Health, Education, and Welfare: "Marihuanaand Health," A Report to the Congress (January 1971). Secretary of Health, Education, and Welfare: "Marihuanaand Health," A Report to the Congress (February 1972). Shean, G. D. and Fetchtman. P.: "Purpose in Life Scoresof Student Marihuana Users," Journal of Clinical Psychology,27 (1) :112-113 (1971). Sigg, B. W.: "Le Cannabisme Chronique. Fruit (le SonsDevelopment et du Capitalisnie: Etude Socio-Econo que etpsycho-pathologique," Algiers (1963). Siler, J. P., Sheep, W. L., Bates, L. B., Clark, G. F., Cook,G. W. and Smith, W. A.: "Marihuana Smoking in Panama,"The Military Surgeon, 73 (5) : 269-280 (1933). Silva, M. T. A., Carlini, E. A., Claussen, U. and Korte, F.:"Lack of Cross-Tolerance in Rate Among (-) Delta9-TransTetrahydrocannabinol (Delta 9-THC), Cannabis Extract,Mescaline and Lysergic Acid Diethylamide (LSD-25),"Psychopharmacologia, 13: 332-340 (1968). Sim, V. M. and Tucker, L. A.: "Summary Report on EA 1476and EA 2233," U.S. Army Chemical Research and DevelopmentLaboratories, Special Publication 1-44 (1963). Simmons, J. L. and Winograd, B.: It's Happening: A Portrait ofthe Youth Scene Today, Santa Barbara: MarcLaird Publications(1966). Smith, D. E.: "Acute and Chronic Toxicity ofMarihuana," Journal of Psychedelic Drugs, 2: 37-41 (1968). Smith, D. E. and Mehl, C.: The New Social Drug, EnglewoodCliffs: Prentice-Hall, Inc. (1970), pp. 63-77. Sonnenreich, C., and Goes, J. P.: "Marihuana and MentalDisturbances," Neurobiologia, 25: 69-91 (1962). Soueif, M. I.: "Hashish Consumption in Egypt with SpecialReference to Psychological Aspects," UN Bulletin onNarcotics, 19 (2) : 1-12 (1967). Spencer, J. D.: "Cannabis Induced Psychosis,"British Journal of Addiction, 651: 369-372 (1970). Sterne, J. and Ducastaing, C.: "Les Arterites du CannabisIndica," Archives des Maladies du Coeur et des Vais8eaux,53: 143-147 (1960). Stringaris, M. G.: "Zur Klink der Hashchischpsychosen(Nach Studien in Griechenland)," Archiv fur Psychiatric andNervenkranhheiten, 100 (4) : 522-532 (1933). Suchman, E. A.:"The 'hang-Loose' Ethic and the Spirit of Drug Use,"Journal of Health and Social Behavior, 9: 146-155 (1968). Talbott, J. A. - "Pot Reactions," USARMY MedicalBulletin, 40-41 (1968). Talbot, J. A., and Teague, J. W.: "Marihuana, Psychosis:Acute Toxic Psychosis Associated With the Use of CannabisDerivatives," Journal of the American Medical Association,210 (2) :299--302 (1969). Tart, C. T.: "Marihuana Intoxication, CommonExperiences," Nature, 226 (5247) : 701-704 (1970). Tart, C.T.: "Marihuana Intoxication: Reported Effects On Sleep andDreams," Presented Association for Psychophysiological Studyof Sleep, Santa Fe (1970). Tart, C. T.: On Being Stoned, PaloAlto: Science and Behavioral Books (1971). Tennant, F. S., Preble, It., Prendergast, T. J. and Ventry,P.: "Medical Manifestations Associated With Hashish,"Journal of the American Medical Association, 216 (12) 1965-1969(1971). Thompson, G. R., Rosencrantz, 11. and Brande, M. C.:"Neurotoxicity of the Cannabinoids in Chronically TreatedRats and Monkeys," The Pharmacologist, 13 (2) : 296 (1971). Thompson, G. R., Schaeppi, U. T., Rosencrantz, H. and Brande,Al. C.: "Acute Oral Toxicity of Cannabinoids in VariousSpecies," Toxicology and Applied Pharmacology, 19 (2) : 413(1971). Thompson, G. R., Schaeppi, U. IT., Rosencrantz, H. N.,Hagopian, M, Mason, M. M., Fleishman, R. W., and Hamniann, C. G.:"Determine, Toxicity of delta 8 and delta 9Tetrahydrocannabinol and Marihuana Extract," Mason ResearchInstitute, Worcester, Mass., Reports IXIX to the NationalInstitute of Mental Health Contract #HSM 42-70-95 (June 1970-June1971), #HSM 42-71-79 (June 1971-Jan. 1972). Tinklenberg, J. R., Melges, F. T., Hollister, L. E., andGillespie, H. K.: "Marihuana and Immediate Memory," Nature, 226 (5251) : 1171 1172 (June 1970). Truitt, E. B.: "Biologic Disposition ofTetrahydrocannabinols," Pharmacological Review, 23 (4) :273-278 (1971). Truitt, E., Mitchell, R., Foltz, R., Fentiman, A., Kinzer, G.,Grotta, II., and Leighty, E.: "Bioanalytical 'Studies ofCannabis Smoking," Report to the National Institute ofMental Health, Contract Number P11-43-68-1338, Battelle MemorialInstitute, Columbus, Ohio (1970). Ungerleider, J. T.: "Letter to the Editor," AmericanJournal of Psychiatry, 125: 1448 (1969). Ungerleider, J. T., Fischer, D. D., Goldsmith, R. S., Fuller,M., and Forgy, E.: "A Statistical Survey of AdverseReactions to LSD in Los Angeles County," American Journal ofPsychiatry, 125 (3) : 352-357 (1968). United Nations Economic and Social Council: "A Programmeof Studies of the Plan and Its Products, Survey of the CannabisSituation in India," U.N. Document No. E/CN.7/286, Addendum12 (March 1957). Volavka, J., Dornbush, R., Feldstein, S., Clare, G., Zaks, A.,Fink, M., and Freedman, A. M.: "Marihuana, EEG andBehavior," Annals of the New York Academy of Science, 191:206-215 (1971). Vree, T. B., Breinier, 1). D., Van Ginneken, C. A. M. and VanRossum, J. M.: "Identification of the Methyl and PropylHomologues of CBD, THC, CBN in Hashish by a New Method ofCombined Gas Chromatography-mass Spectrometry," ActaPharmaceutica Suecica, 8: 683684 (1971). Waldman, M. M.: "Marihuana Bronchitis," Journal ofthe American Medical Association, 211: 501 (1970). Wall, M. E.: "The InVitro and InVivo Metabolism ofTetrahydrocannabinol (THC)," Annals of the New York Academyof Science, 191: 23-39 (1971). Wall, M. E., -Brine, -1). R., J-1rine, G. A. Pitt, C. G.,Emudenthal, R. 1. and Christensen, H. D.: "Isolation,Structure, and Biological Activity of Several Metabolites of A'Tetrahydrocannabinol," Journal of the American ChemicalSociety, 92 (11) : 3466-3468 (1970). Wall, Al. E., Brine, D., Perez-Reyes, Al. and Lipton, M.:"Studies on the InVitro and InVivo Metabolism of A'Tetrahydrocannabinol," Acta Pharmaceutica Suecica, 8: 702(1971). Waller, C. W.: "The Chemistry of Marihuana,"Proceedings of the Western Pharmacology Society, 14: 1-3 (1971). Walters, P. A., Goethals, G. W. and Pope, H. G.: "DrugUse and Life Style Among 500 College Undergraduates"Archives of General Psychiatry, 26: 92-96 (1972). Walton, R. P.: Marihuana, America's New Drug Problem,Philadelphia: J. B. Lippincott Co. (1938). Warnock, J.: "Insanity from Hasheesh," Journal ofMental Sciences, 49: 96-110 (1903). Waskow, 1. E., Olsson, J. E., Salzman, C. and Katz, Al. M.:"Psychological Effects of Tetraliydrocannabinol,"Archives of General Psychiatry, 22 (2): 97-107 (1970). Watt, J. M.: "Dagga in South Africa," UN Bulletin onNarcotics, 13 (3) : 9-14 (1961). Watt, J. M. and Breyer-Brandwijk, M. B.: The Forensic andSociological Aspects of the Dagga Problem in South Africa,"South African Medical Journal, 10: 573-579 (1936). Weil, A. T.: "Adverse Reactions to Marihuana.Classification and Suggested Treatment," New England Journalof Medicine, 282 (18) : 997-1000 (1970). Weil, A. T.: Testimony before National Commission on Marihuanaand Drug Abuse, Washington, D.C. (May 1971). Weil, A. T., and Zinberg, N. E.: "Acute Effects ofMarihuana on Speech," Nature, 222: 434-437 (1969). Weil, A.T., Zinberg, N. E. and Nelsen, J. ',M.: "Clinical andPsychological Effects of marihuana in Alan," Science, 162:1234-1242 (1968). Weiss, J. L.: Personal Communication, Staff Fellow, NationalInstitute of Mental Health, Laboratory of Clinical Science,Bethesda, Maryland, August 1, 1971. Weiss, S.: "A GeneralPicture of Charas Habit in Afghanistan," Report from KabulUniversity Medical School (July 1971). White, R. B., Goolishian, H., and Barratt, E. S.:"Dilemmas Encountered by the Marihuana Researcher,"Presented 46th Annual Conference of the Central NeuropsychiatricAssociation, Galveston (October 1970). Wikler, A.: "Clinical and Social Aspects of MarihuanaIntoxication," Archives of General Psychiatry, 23: 320-325(1970). Wikler, A., and Lloyd, B. J.: "Effect of SmokingMarihuana Cigarettes on Cortical Electrical Activity,"Federation Proceedings, 4: 141-142 (1945). William,,;, E. G., Himmelsbach, C. K., Wikler, A., Ruble, D.C., and Lloyd, B.N.: "Studies on Marihuana and PyrahexylCompound," Public Health Reports, 61 (29) 1059-1083 (1946). Winick, C.: "Use of Drugs by Jazz Musicians," SocialProblems, 7: 240-253 (1960). Wurmser, L., Levin, L., and Lewis, A.: "Chronic ParanoidSymptoms and Thought Disorders in Users of Marihuana and LSD asObserved in Psychotherapy," Bulletin, Problems on DrugDependence, 31: 6154-6177 (1969). Contents | Feedback | Search DRCNet Library | Schaffer Library | Major Studies Marihuana, A Signal of Misunderstanding WT01-B25-46IA031-000651-B022-17http://206.61.184.43:80/schaffer/LIBRARY/studies/nc/nc1i.htm 206.61.184.43 19970122123447 text/html 11525HTTP/1.0 200 OKDate: Wednesday, 22-Jan-97 12:34:34 GMTServer: WebSitePro/1.1f (S/N wpo-0deb)Allow-ranges: bytesContent-type: text/htmlLast-modified: Saturday, 28-Dec-96 06:57:33 GMTContent-length: 11307 Marijuana and Public Safety Contents | Feedback | Search DRCNet Library | Schaffer Library | Major Studies Marihuana, A Signal of Misunderstanding The Report of the National Commission on Marihuana and DrugAbuse III. Marihuana and Public Safety The significant role of the law enforcement community and thepopular press in promoting the idea that marihuana use leads toundesirable and antisocial behavior has been discussed in theReport. The purpose of this chapter is to describe the genesis ofthe, perceived problem and the theoretical basis for theseallegations. The early campaigns against marihuana use can be viewed as anextension of the temperance and moral reform movements whichswept the country during the 1920's. They were generallyspearheaded by persons who opposed the use of opiates, alcoholand tobacco on the grounds that all such substances werephysically, mentally and morally debilitating. The presumeddependence of the user on the drug, the loss of self-control andthe unhealthy preoccupation with pleasure-seeking activitiespurportedly induced by these substances were seen as contrary tothe traditional values of our society. Reiteration of these themes by practicing professionals,respected members of officialdom and the popular press ultimatelygave rise, to what Lindesmith (rev. ed., 1968: 188-189) hastermed the "evil causes evil" fallacy, and which Goode(1972) has de-scribed as follows: The impetus behind public and even expert conceptions of drugsand drug use is that a phenomenon so patently undesirable anduniversally condemned as the use of narcotics or marihuana must,inevitably, have both pathological causes as well as pathologicalconsequences. Thus, the task of science and medical research isseen as "discovering" these negative concomitants ofillicit drug use. In this way, we can all feel better aboutcondemning the phenomenon itself because our moral andideological feelings can thereby be, backed up and verified bythe Indisputable data of positive science (p. 1). This same philosophical leaning of persons who view marihuanaas a significant danger to both the individual and societycarries with it a corollary that use be prohibited and the userpunished. Perhaps the most persistent controversy with respect tomarihuana use is the degree to which it poses a danger to publicsafety. Public and professional opinion surveys have repeatedlydemonstrated the existence of a widespread belief that marihuanause leads to the commission of deviant, delinquent, criminal andviolent acts. In addition, some persons have recently expressedconcern that marihuana impairs driving skills and performanceand, in this way, also constitutes a public safety hazards. This chapter will review the evidence pertaining to theeffects of marihuana on criminal and violent behavior, deviantand aggressive sexual behavior and driving skills andperformance. Then an effort will be made to assess both thenature and strength of the purported relationships betweenmarihuana use and these behaviors. Problems in Assessing the Effects of Marihuana The degree to which marihuana constitutes a danger to publicsafety is dependent, in large measure, upon the drug'sobservable, effects on the behavior of the user. No drug,including marihuana, produces the same effect at all times, underall conditions and in all individuals. Rather, the quality (formand intensity) and the quantity (extent and frequency) of theperceived effects are determined by the complex interaction ofboth pharmacological and extrapharmacological factors. As Goode(1972) has noted: We should bear this qualification in mind when looking atthe relationship between the ingestion of a drug and anysubsequent behavior-with the latter supposedly "caused"by the effects of the drug. Drug effects vary, and, in addition,even standard effects do not automatically translate intospecific forms of human behavior (P. 18). In a paper prepared for the Commission, Tinklenberg (1971 :1-8) has enumerated some of the basic factors which should betaken into consideration in evaluating the relationship betweenmarihuana and crime. They are equally relevant, however, for theassessment of any behavioral effect presumably attributable tomarihuana, and for that reason they are summarized below. Definition and Congeners. The concentration of theprincipal active chemicals in cannabis (THC and theirmetabolites) in any given amount of marihuana varies widelyaccording to where the plant is grown, how it is cultivated,harvested and cured. These variations permit a wide range ofpharmacological potencies and unknown variations in their effectson behavior. Drug-Drug Interactions. Given the strong possibility ofintentional or inadvertent adulteration of marihuana with otherpsychoactive drugs, it may be that behavioral changes attributedto marihuana may actually derive from the adulterants or from theinteraction of THC and the adulterants (which may well beoccasioned by the deliberate rather than unknown simultaneous orsequential use, of other psychoactive drugs). Dose-Response Functions. With respect to the questionof how drugs affect behavior, it is likely that marihuanainfluences behavior in different ways and degrees, depending upondosage levels. Although it is common to infer that higher dosesof a given drug will induce more of a particular response andlower doses less, such inferences may be inaccurate in that drugeffects can show a curvilinear dose-response relationship (asseems to be the case with alcohol). Time-Action Functions. Time-action function describesthe changing effects of marihuana during the course of the drugaction. During the brief periods in which the drug effects aremost intense, there may be a more pronounced alteration inbehavior than during most of the points on the drug time-actioncontinuum. Individual Variation. Different individuals apparentlyrespond quite differently to the same dose-time factors ofmarihuana as well as other drugs. In some laboratory studies,where, high doses of marihuana induced considerable euphoria andenhanced conviviality in most subjects, a few subjects whoreceived the same dosage in the same setting experiencedparanoia, excessive agitation and aggressive tendencies. Cumulative Effects. The effects of marihuana onindividual behavior have been shown to vary according to theamount of previous experience with the drug. There is increasingevidence that chronic users respond quite differently tomarihuana than do occasional users. The cumulative extent ofprevious experience may have an important influence on subsequentbehavioral responses. Psychological and Environmental Variables. Thebehavioral response to marihuana and to other drugs is at leastpartially dependent upon such psychosocial variables as theexpectations of the user regarding its influence on his behavior.These expectations are in turn derived from. the personalities ofthe, individuals involved, recent events in their lives, and thephysical, interpersonal and social milieu in which the marihuanause occurs. The behavioral responses to marihuana use are likelyto correlate with such psychological and environmental variablesquite independently of any pharmacological effects the drug mayexert. Personality Factors. A certain number of individuals inany given population demonstrate characteristic and relativelyenduring patterns of antisocial behavior regardless of theirimmediate circumstances, possible drug use and the like. Theseindividuals, variously described as antisocial, criminal oremotionally unstable, typically manifest, from childhood on,recurrent tendencies toward deviance in many areas of life. Forsome of these people, those predisposed toward both criminalityand drug abuse, crime and drug use do coexist. However, theassumption that the drug causes crime or vice versa is notnecessarily valid. One should not automatically conclude fromthis that the use of drugs has no influence on their criminalbehavior. Drug use may possibly provide a form of reinforcementwhich may increase or decrease the likelihood of a criminal act. Crime Process Factors. Crime process factors refer tothe complexities of criminal behavior and the possible influenceof marihuana on that behavior. A multifactored perspective of theetiology of crime , including personal, social and situationalvariables, allows for the possibility that at each step in thechain of events leading to the commission of a criminal act,marihuana use may contribute to enhance or diminish thepossibility of this outcome. In short, any interpretation of the data to be presented belowwhich fails to take into account at least some of these variableswill likely result in a "post hoc, ergo propter hoc"fallacy-that is, the invalid assumption that simply because oneevent occurs later than another event (one commits a crime aftersmoking marihuana) that the latter is caused by the former(marihuana caused the crime). Contents | Feedback | Search DRCNet Library | Schaffer Library | Major Studies Marihuana, A Signal of Misunderstanding WT01-B25-47IA031-000651-B022-43http://206.61.184.43:80/schaffer/LIBRARY/studies/nc/nc1j.htm 206.61.184.43 19970122123459 text/html 54311HTTP/1.0 200 OKDate: Wednesday, 22-Jan-97 12:34:49 GMTServer: WebSitePro/1.1f (S/N wpo-0deb)Allow-ranges: bytesContent-type: text/htmlLast-modified: Saturday, 28-Dec-96 06:57:28 GMTContent-length: 54093 Marihuana and Violence Contents | Feedback | Search DRCNet Library | Schaffer Library | Major Studies Marihuana, A Signal of Misunderstanding The Report of the National Commission on Marihuana and DrugAbuse Marihuana and Violence (The evidence to be presented here applies not only toaggression and to violence but to marihuana's relationship tocrime in general, and is therefore equally relevant to a latersection on marihuana and non-violent crime. The effects ofmarihuana on sexual behavior, including the commission of sexualoffenses will be treated in the following section on marihuanaand sexual behavior.) The popular and professional literature contains numerousunsupported and often emotionally charged accusations regardingmarihuana's contribution to violence. In at least two dozen comparatively recent eases of murder ordegenerate sex attacks, marihuana proved to be a contributingcause (Anslinger, 1937). In a recent study of thirty-seven murders in New Orleans in ayear, seventeen were traced directly to marihuana. . . . Evilmarihuana is pock-marking this nation with murders, sex attacks,suicides, and crimes in every category from bank stick-ups topetty thievery . . . (LaRoe, 1940). Marihuana, while giving the hallucinations of cocaine, addsdelusions of impending physical attack by one's best friend orclose relatives. In addition, marihuana is intrinsically andinherently crime exciting. It has led to some of the mostrevolting cases of sadistic rape and murder of modern times(Rowell and Rowell, 1939: 67). Even sex does not satisfy the abnormal urges induced bymarihuana. There is still the necessity for further excitement,more emotional release. That is when the guns are grabbed, theknives waved and the razors swung. And all that is a marihuanauser's idea of what is normal! (Williams, 1969). To add greater credibility to their undocumented assertions,some persons describe the manner in which the drug purportedlyleads to violence. In the earliest stages of intoxication the willpower isdestroyed and inhibitions and restraints are released; the moralbarricades are broken down and often debauchery and sexualityresult. Where mental instability is inherent, the behavior isgenerally violent. An egotist will enjoy delusions of grandeur,the timid individual will suffer anxiety, and the aggressive oneoften will resort to acts of violence and crime ... (Anslingerand Tompkins, 1953: 22). Smoking of the weed is habit-forming. It destroys willpower,releases restraints, and promotes insane reactions ... Robberies,thrill murders, sex crimes and other offenses result (New YorkDaily Worker, 1940, in Solomon, 1968: 288). Others simply deny these allegations or assert that there isno evidence to support the thesis of an independent causalrelationship. The fact that so many witnesses testified to the peaceable andorderly character of the excessive consumers goes far to provethat in this country experience shows that as a rule these (hemp)drugs do not tend to violent crime and violence (Indian HempDrugs Commission, 1969: 258). A fair summary of the available evidence would be that veryrarely do major (particularly violent) crimes follow upon the useof the drug, and that, in instances where they do, therelationship is an indirect one (Ausubel, 1958: 103). One likely hypothesis is that, given the accepted tendency ofmarihuana to release inhibitions, the effect of the drug willdepend on the individual and the circumstances. It might, butcertainly will not necessarily or inevitably, lead to aggressivebehavior or crime (President's Commission on Law Enforcement andAdministration of Justice, 1967: 13). The relationship between marihuana use land the commission ofaggressive acts or violent crime such as murder, rape and assaultremains one of the most controversial issues relating to thedrug. Persons who believe that such a relationship exists oftenargue that marihuana triggers the release of inhibitions andrestraints, destroys the will power and heightens aggressivetendencies of the user, serving as a catalyst for the commissionof aggressive or violent acts. This argument raises several fundamental questions: Are theeffects presumably induced by the drug commonly experienced bymarihuana users? Are these effects, to the extent that, they dooccur, generally or frequently translated into overt behavior?And is the behavior which presumably manifests itself ordinarilyviolent or aggressive? The answers to these questions may be obtained from severalsources, including the results of laboratory experiments designedto measure certain physiological and psychological reactions andto identify observable behavioral effects; and retrospectiveself-reports of effects purportedly experienced by marihuanausers. Additional clues may be gained from examination of thecriminal records of known marihuana users and the incidence ofmarihuana. use among persons arrested for or convicted of violentcrimes. However, while these latter methods may revealstatistical associations (which could prove to be spurious uponfurther analysis), they should riot be interpreted to demonstratethe existence of a causal connection between marihuana use andthe offenses committed. THE VIOLENT AND CRIMINOGENIC EFFECTS OF MARIHUANA The empirical evidence gathered to date lends no support tothe hypothesis that marihuana heightens aggressive tendencies inthe user or that its effects significantly increase thelikelihood of inciting the user to violence or crime. However,those findings summarized below do not mean that marihuana cannotbe related to aggressive or violent behavior but merely suggestthat the effects of the drug and the behaviors in question mayoperate independently. The Mayor's Committee on Marihuana (1944) studied thepsychomotor effects of marihuana on 72 prisoners, both users andnon-users. Marihuana was administered experimentally as both anoral extract and as cigarettes. The data show that the degree ofthe drug's effect on psychomotor activities is dependent upon thecomplexity of the function and, in some cases, on the strength ofthe dose administered. Although simple reaction time and taskswere only slightly affected, more complex functions like staticequilibrium and body and hand steadiness were significantly andadversely affected by both large (5 cc.) and small (2 cc.) dosesof the drug. In contrast to the ability of amphetamines to enhance muscularperformance and to increase physical activity (Weiss and Laties,1962; Tinklenberg and Stillman, 1970), marihuana has been foundto decrease the inclination toward physical activity and toactually reduce both physical exertion and activity (Mayor'sCommittee on Marihuana, 1944; Hollister, et. a]., 1968;Hollister, 1971), thereby decreasing the probability of incitingthe user to assaultive behavior. Although marihuana has been found to reduce inhibitions insome persons, it has not been shown to exaggerate extantaggressiveness to any appreciable degree; in some instances ithas, in fact, been shown to reduce aggressiveness, and to inducetimidity, fear and passivity in the user (Bromberg) 1934,1939;Chopra and Chopra, 1939; Allentuck, 1942; Chopra, and Chopra,1942; Charen and Perelman, 1946; Carstairs, 1954; Blumer, et.al., 1967; National Institute of Mental Health, 1970, 1972). In recent years, a number of studies have been conducted inwhich marihuana users were asked to describe the effects theyexperienced while under the influence of the drug. On the whole,their findings are similar to those obtained from the results oflaboratory experiments. Halikas, Goodwin and Guze (1971) found that the majority ofthe users in their sample reported "usually" feelingrelaxed (79%) and peaceful (74%). Tart (1971) administered a questionnaire to college studentsin California, one item containing a list of 206 possible effectsof marihuana. Respondents were asked to indicate whether, withinthe last six months, they had experienced the designated effectsnever, rarely, sometimes, very often or usually. Of the 153respondents, 69% gave one of the latter three responses to theitem: "My inhibitions are lowered so that I do things I'mnormally inhibited to do." To the item: "I lose control of my actions and doantisocial things (actions that harm other people) that Inormally wouldn't do," 22% said rarely, 1% said sometimes,and the remaining 77% replied "never." With respect toother more specific effects, 23% of the users stated they"usually" felt physically relaxed, and 49% said they"very often" felt physically relaxed and did not wantto get up or move around when high on marihuana (pp. 703-704). In a study by Brotman and Suffet (1970) of 74 users in NewYork City (both students and nonstudents) no one mentioned anyhostile feelings or actions when asked to describe what happenswhen they get high on marihuana (p. 264). Goode (1970) asked 204 respondents to describe theirexperiences when high on marihuana. Table 1 illustrates theresponses of the users to effects possibly related to aggressionor crime (pp. 53-54). In a more recent, Commission-sponsored survey of 15 to 34 yearold male residents of Philadelphia, respondents were interviewedabout the extent and frequency of their marihuana use, the extentto which marihuana figured in the commission of criminal ordelinquent acts and the effects they generally experienced whileunder the influence of the drug (Goode, 1972). With respect tothe effects experienced, nearly all the marihuana users (about75% of the total sample reported that they had tried marihuana atone time or another) denied that the effects of marihuana on themcould be interpreted as criminogenic or violent in nature. Table2 below presents the subjective effects of marihuana related tocrime and violence which were reported by the 559 respondents. Table I.-CRIMINOGENIC AND AGGRESSIVE EFFECTS OF MARIHUANA (Figures in Percentages) More relaxed, peaceful, calmer; marihuana acts as a tranquilizer - -- ---------------- ------ -- --------------------- 46 Exaggeration of mood: greater subjective impact, emotionalsignificance --- ------ ----- ------------------ -_ -_ 25 Time seems slowed down, stretched out, think more time has passed ---------- ----------- ------ ---- --------------- 25 Become more withdrawn, introverted, privatistic-- - __ 22 Become tired, lazy, lethargic, don't want to move---- - 19 Feel freer, unrestrained, uninhibited --------- ---- --------- 18 Feel paranoid ----- ----------- -------- ------ --------------- -- ------- 15 Have hallucinations ---------------------- - -- -- ----------- ------- 15 Feel sleepy ------ ----------- --- ---------------------------------- 14 More uncoordinated, clumsier, motor skills impaired 9 Other people annoy me more; find fault in others ------ 8 Become more active, want to move around more -_ __ - 6 Table 2.-REPORTED EFFECTS OF MARIHUANA AS RELATED TOCRIMINAL AND VIOLENT BEHAVIOR (Figures in Percentages) Almost More Less Never all than than or Effects reported the half half almost time the the never time time Feeling of wanting to hurt someone 0 3 96 Feeling of wanting to do something violent.. * 4 95 Feel more angry 1 3 8 88 Feeling of frustration 3 4 16 78 More willing to follow others' suggestions 4 12 25 59 Care less what others think of what you do. . 16 15 10 18 Feeling of being able to do anything 6 5 13 77 Have hallucinations 9 8 16 66 Feeling of relaxation.... 50 22 10 18 Feel less angry 31 22 13 34 Feeling of drowsiness or sleepiness 22 25 25 27 * Less than 1/2 of one percent. Source: Goode, 1972: 21. The data show that the overwhelming majority of therespondents report "never or almost never" experiencingeffects which can be characterized as producing frustration,anger, or aggression, and that they usually do Dot experienceeffects which could be taken to indicate an increase insuggestibility. On the other hand, substantial proportions of therespondents reported feeling relaxed (72%), less angry (53%) anddrowsy or sleepy (47 %, ) at least half of the time. In sum, these data suggest that marihuana does not commonlyproduce effects which are likely to increase aggression or incitethe user to violence. Numerous studies designed to assess therelationship more directly demonstrate, on the whole, thatmarihuana does not play a significant role in the commission ofviolent crimes. MARIHUANA AND VIOLENT CRIME: THE EVIDENCE Over the years a number of approaches have been utilized in aneffort to assess the relationship between marihuana use andviolent crime. Perhaps the simplest approach is to compile a.list of violent offenses allegedly committed by marihuana usersand to establish, retrospectively, the role of marihuana in thecommission of these offenses. The Indian Hemp Drugs Commission (1894), for example,investigated 81 cases of violence allegedly caused by hemp drugsin in effort to determine whether or not a causal relationshipexisted. Of these 81 cases, 11 were too old to permit adequateinvestigation. In 23 of the cases examined, however, 18 showed noevidence of a connection between the crimes and the use of hempdrugs. The Commission concluded that: In respect to his relations with society, however, even theexcessive consumer of hemp drugs is ordinarily inoffensive,. Hisexcesses may indeed bring him to degraded poverty which may leadhim to dishonest practices; and occasionally, but apparently veryrarely indeed, excessive indulgence in hemp drugs may lead toviolent crime. But for all practical purposes it may be laid downthat there is little or no connection between the use of hempdrugs and crime (Indian Hemp Drugs Commission, 1893-1894,reprinted 1969: 204). Similarly, in 1938 the Foreign Policy Association publishedthe accounts of 10 marihuana crimes, including murder andassault, "culled at random from the files of the U.S. Bureauof Narcotics" (Merrill, 1938: 28). These cases werepresented in such a way as to imply that marihuana caused theoffenses. According to Grinspoon (1971: 302), they "gave thereader the distinct impression that the -user of marihuana was aviolent criminal who was given to rape, homicide, andmayhem." Bromberg (1939), however, questions the validity ofthe causal assumption. It is difficult to evaluate these statements, because of theiruncritical nature.... Among the ten patients, the second, J. O.,was described as having confessed how lie murdered a friend andput his body in a trunk while under the influence of marihuana.J. 0. was examined in this clinic (Bellevue Hospital) ; althoughlie was a psychopathic liar and possibly homosexual, there was noindication in the examination or history of the use of any drug.The investigation by the probation department failed to indicateuse of the drug marihuana. The deceased, however, was addicted toheroin (p. 9). Based on retrospective case analyses, some observers haveattempted to specify more precisely. the nature of the purportedrelationship or the situations in which aggressive behavior mayresult from marihuana use. Bromberg (1939), for example,suggested that aggressive or violent behavior may arise when anaive subject develops a panic state in response tomarihuana-induced hallucinations. Allentuck and Bowman (1942)believed that aggressive or antisocial behavior following use mayoccur as a reaction to some unpleasant external stimulus duringthe phase, of hypersensitivity and heightened psychomotoractivity. Others have suggested that antisocial conduct of anaggressive or violent nature may occur when marihuana is used, asalcohol often is, to release repressed feelings of hostility(Siler, et al., 1933; Chopra and Chopra, 1939; Allentuck andBowman, 1942; Freedman and Rockmore, 1946; Murphy, 1963), and toserve as a fortifier for aggressive or violent crimes (Ewens,1904; South Africa Interdepartmental Committee on Abuse of Dagga,1952; Ames, 1958; Watt, 1961; Blumer, et al., 1967; Miller,1968). The available evidence bearing on these issues, however,suggests that panic reactions rarely occur; that psychomotoractivity is more often reduced than enhanced following use; thataggression rarely follows use, but when it does, it generallyoccurs among individuals with histories of maladjustment,emotional instability or impulse disorders (Bromberg, 1934, 1939;Charen and Perelman, 1946; Ausubel, 1958; Bloomquist, 1968;Grinspoon, 1971; Kaplan, 1971; National Institute of MentalHealth, 1972). After a series of studies of marihuana and crime, Chopra andChopra (1939) concluded that if any relationship existed betweenmarihuana use and violent crime, it was an indirect one. Theystated that: So far as premeditated crime is concerned, especially thatof a violent nature, hemp drugs . . . may not only not lead toit, but they actually act as deterrents.... One of the, importantactions of these drugs is to quieten and stupify the individualso there is no tendency to violence. . . . The result ofcontinued and excessive use of these drugs in our opinion is tomake the individual timid rather than lead him to commit a crimeof a violent nature (p. 92). Over the years, the conclusion of the Chopras has receivedincreasing support from many quarters of the research community(Mayor's Committee on Marihuana, 1944; Maurer and Vogel, 1962;White House Conference on Narcotic Drug Abuse, 1962; Murphy,1963; President's Commission on Law Enforcement andAdministration of Justice, 1967; National Institute of MentalHealth, 1970, 1972). In the absence of possibilities for addressing the issue moredirectly, several researchers have relied on statistical studiesand have sought to establish the overall and comparativeincidence of detected violent crimes among cannabis users. Onemethod has been to compile lists of violent crimes committedduring specific periods of time and to determine the proportionof these offenses committed by cannabis users. Lambo (1965) compiled a list of crimes occurring in three WestAfrican countries during a recent two-year period. He claimedthat users of cannabis had committed 51% of the 73 murders, 31%of the 263 cases of assault and battery and 26% of the 472 casesagainst women. Some have preferred to base their statistical studies onsamples of offenders (rather than lists of offenses) drawn fromthe arrest or conviction files of law enforcement agencies.Several researchers adopting this method are content to identifythe marihuana users in their samples and then simply report thenumber of users charged with violent crimes or the proportions ofthe total number of violent crimes perpetrated by the users. The District Attorney of New Orleans, for example, testifiedbefore the House Ways and Means Committee that of the 450 menconvicted of major crimes in 1930, 125 were identified as regularmarihuana users. Approximately one-half of the murderers andone-fifth of those charged with assault, robbery or larceny weresaid to be regular marihuana users (U.S. House ofRepresentatives, 1937: 23-24). Bromberg (1939) reviewed the records of 16,854 offenders inthe psychiatric clinic of New York County's Court of GeneralSessions during the period 1932 to 1937. Of the 67 marihuanausers identified, only six had been charged with violent crimes.He concluded that there was no causal relationship betweenmarihuana use and aggressive crime. Others go one step further and attempt to compare the users'rates of violence with those of other selected populations suchas non-marihuana using offenders, offenders using other drugs, orall of fenders in a given file. Bromberg and Rodgers (1946) studied the civilian and militarycriminal records of 8,280 convicted offenders at the UnitedStates Naval Prison in Portsmouth, Now Hampshire between January1, 1943 and July 1, 1945. Of the total number of offendersinvestigated, 40 or .0048% were identified as marihuana users (23used to excess, 10 were moderate users and seven were describedas light users). Of these 40, only two reported being moreaggressive while under the influence of marihuana than they wouldbe under normal conditions and three had been charged withviolent crimes (assault or striking an officer) while in themilitary. Comparison of the users' criminal records with those of40 randomly selected non-using prisoners revealed that thenon-user group had committed more aggressive crimes than theusers. In conclusion, the researchers stated that: There is no positive relationship between aggressive crime and marihuana usage in the Naval service; . . . . . . there is no significant causal relationship between aggressive crime in civilian life (of the naval offenders studied) and the use of marihuana . . . . Marihuana usage is but an aspect of some type of mental disorder or personality abnormality (p. 826). Maurer and Vogel (1962) have stated a similar conclusion. "It has not been our impression from contact with manyhundreds of marijuana users that these people are violentcriminals; ... While there may be occasional violent psychopathswho have used marijuana, have committed crimes of violence, andwho have, in court, explained their actions as uncontrolledviolence resulting from the use of the drug, these are exceptionsto the general run of marijuana users.... Marijuana is notpossessed of any mysterious power to force people to commit actswhich they would not otherwise perform (p. 281). Blum (1969) reviewed the data provided in 1966 by the FederalBureau of Investigation as part of its Careers in Crime Project.The data showed that marihuana users did not differ significantlyfrom either heroin users or from all offenders (drug and non-drugusers) in their rate of violent crime relative to their totalnon-drug offenses (28%, 26% and 26%, respectively). There have been several statistical studies, also usingoffender populations, designed to assess the degree to whichpersons arrested for cannabis use have previous or subsequentarrests for violent crimes. Bromberg and Rodgers (1946) found that of the 40 offenders intheir sample identified as marihuana users, 12 had been chargedwith previous offenses, three of them for assault. Gardikas (1950) reviewed the criminal records of 379 personsarrested between 1919 and 1950 for publicly using hashish. Ofthese, 117 (31%) reportedly progressed from hashish use to othercrimes, about one-third of these subsequent crimes involvingviolence or weapons. Gardikas stated that one subgroup of these,offenders accumulated 420 offenses of assault, woundings,threats, robberies, and manslaughter (p. 5). In sum, these statistical studies based on samples of violentoffenses, violent offenders or arrested marihuana law violatorsindicate that some individuals identified as marihuana users docommit violent crimes, have committed them in the past and go onto commit them in the future. Their numbers, however, are generally small, both absolutelyand relatively. These studies therefore suggest a very weak andinsignificant statistical association between marihuana use andviolent crime which may itself be completely attenuated when theproper statistical controls are applied. These studies do not establish a causal relationship betweencannabis use and violent crime; nor do they permit an affirmativeresponse to the crucial question of whether the use of marihuanaalters the progression to violent crime at a significantlygreater rate than that which might be expected from some othercriminal subgroups, more representative samples of cannabisusers, or samples drawn from the general population. They alsofail to address themselves to the external conditions andcircumstances which might serve to mitigate the observedrelationships. Several recent and more sophisticated empirical investigationshave addressed some of the critical questions left unanswered bystatistical studies of offender populations. Namely, they setabout to determine whether marihuana users in the generalpopulation commit acts of aggression or violence significantlymore frequently than do nonusers; and whether any observeddifferences between users and non-users may be more directlyattributable to extra-pharmacological (social, cultural,psychological) variables than to the use of marihuana itself orto the pharmacological action of the drug per se. In 1965, Robins and his associates (1970) conducted a surveyof 20 black men born in St. Louis between 1930 and 1934. Themarihuana users in the sample were then compared with thenonusers relative to their ratings on a "violencesyndrome" constructed by the researchers. Respondents were rated high on the violence syndrome if theyreported having participated or felt like participating in threeor more of the following items, one of which was a judgment bythe interviewer that the respondent demonstrated hostility duringthe interview: 1. Getting hurt in a fight. 2. Ever feeling like killing someone. 3. Ever hitting people when angry. 4. Being quick to lose one's temper. 5. Throwing or breaking things when angry. 6. Ever hurting someone in a fight. 7. Ever fighting with a weapon. 8. Getting mean when drinking. 9. Interviewer's observation of respondent's hostility. The researchers found that those who had used marihuana duringadolescence were more likely to score high on the violencesyndrome than were those who did not use the drug for the firsttime until adulthood; 31% of the respondents who had usedmarihuana and no other drug during adolescence exhibited three ormore of these measures, 24% of those who used marihuana only butstarted as adults scored high, 16% of the non-users wereclassified as high on the violence syndrome, and 45% of those whoused marihuana and other drugs were so classified. The researchers also found that users were significantly morelikely to report the, commission of " adult person orproperty offenses" than were nonusers; 32 % of the nonusers,48 % of the marihuana only adult starters, 56% of the marihuanaonly adolescent starters, and 77% of the multiple drug usersreported committing crimes against persons or property as adults. Based on these data, marihuana users were said to besignificantly more likely to have exhibited violent behavior thanwere nonusers. This conclusion, however, seems somewhatpremature. First, upon the application of three "pathological"controls (dropping out of school, alcoholism and involvement injuvenile delinquency), the original relationship was reduced tosome unspecified extent; the researchers reported only that thesecontrols "failed to completely wipe out" thestatistical correlation. Secondly, several of the items would notappear to be sufficiently discriminating in that large numbers ofpeople, whether drug users or not, have probably been quick tolose their temper, hit people when angry (most parents, forexample), or felt like killing someone in a moment of anger. Thesubjective nature of the last item the interviewer's observationof hostility has already been noted. Thirdly, neither the drinkers nor those who were multiple drugusers were isolated in the analysis, making it impossible todetermine whether or not the apparent relationship betweenmarihuana use and violence may have been a. function of theseother drugs rather than the marihuana. Lastly, but perhaps most importantly, the researchers foundseveral other "pathological" variables correlated withthe use of marihuana in their sample: (a) low income, (b) lowstatus jobs, (c) unemployment, (d) receiving financial aid, (e)failing to graduate from high school, (f) fathering illegitimatechildren, (g) marrying women who had been married previously orwho had children, and (h) drinking "heavily enough tocreate, social or medical problems." Because none of these variables was controlled in the dataanalysis (despite the fact that most of them have been found tobe significantly related to delinquency and crime andcharacteristic of persons involved in delinquent, criminal anddrug subcultures), it is impossible to determine whether or notany or all of these variables played a mediating role in theobserved relationship between marihuana use and antisocialbehavior in the, sample. As Goode (1972) has noted, the fact thatthe three controls which were applied did reduce therelationship, makes it likely that "additional controlswould reduce the relationship even more, indeed, reduce it tozero, if applied simultaneously" (p. 13). As such, although this study represented a significant stepforward in investigating the relationship between marihuana andcrime or violent behavior, its methodological limitationspreclude generalizations of the findings to the larger universe. In a study of drug use among lower class minority group youth,Blumer and his associates (1967) found that marihuana users weremuch less likely to commit aggressive or violent acts than werethose who used amphetamines or preferred alcohol, and that mostof the marihuana using youths deliberately shunned aggressivebehavior and adopted, instead, a "cool," non-violentstyle. The researchers did find a small group of youths (termed"the rowdy") who were oriented toward aggressiveness.Generally, these youths preferred alcohol over other drugs andwere found, for the most part, to have been raised in anaggressive and combative social milieu. The researchers pointout, however, that most marihuana users in the sample were not ofthe rowdy type, even though it is this small group which oftenforms the basis of the public and police image of the youthfulmarihuana user. In commenting on the role of marihuana in thepassage of youth from rowdy to a cool style, the authors note,that the passage from the rowdy type to a cool and mellowyoungster, as it relates to the use of drugs, involves chiefly ashift to the smoking of marijuana. . . . [The youngsters']accounts and discussions also stress that the use of marijuanaboth produces and symbolizes a "mellow" mode of conductthat is opposed to that associated with rowdy behavior. Theyplace great weight on the "socializing" effects ofmarijuana use, declaring that its use not only leads youngstersaway from violence but has the effect of changing them intosocial human beings (p. 30). In a large scale, systematic survey (questionnaire andinterview) of more than 1300 students at five West Coast collegesand universities, Blum and his associates (1969) found that 19%of the total sample had used marihuana but that 94% had usedalcohol. One, percent of the marihuana users reported fights orother criminal behavior which they attributed to the drug. Ofthose who used alcohol, 8% reported fights and 2% reportedoffenses while under the influence of this drug. The researchersmake particular note of the fact that despite the increase ofmarihuana use on these campuses since the middle and latesixties, there has been no comparable increase in assaultivecrimes. In a Commission-sponsored household survey of 15 to 34year-old male residents of West Philadelphia, Goode (1972) foundthat not one of the violent crimes, including "forcingsexual intercourse," was significantly correlated withmarihuana use. Among the five offense types showing a very weakrelationship to the use of marihuana, the only so-called violentoffense, "hurting someone in a minor way," showed theweakest association. The author notes that "the statisticaldifferences in rates of offenses between users and nonusers reston adding together a small number of weakly correlated offenses.. . . [They do not indicate] massive differences, or differencesindicating higher rates of classic, violent crimes amongusers" (p. 32a). These more rigorous studies of the relationship betweenmarihuana use and violent crime suggest that marihuana users inthe general population do not commit acts of aggression orviolence significantly more frequently than do nonusers; thatmarihuana does not heighten aggressive tendencies in most usersand may, in some cases, serve to reduce aggressiveness; and thatmuch of the observed relationship between marihuana and violenceis probably a function of social, cultural or psychologicalvariables such as multiple drug use, set and setting andinvolvement in a criminal or drug subculture. There is no reason to believe that marihuana use will cause orlead to the commission of aggressive or violent acts by the largemajority of psychologically and socially mature individuals inthe general population. OPINIONS ABOUT MARIHUANA AND AGGRESSIVENESS: THE LAWENFORCEMENT AND CRIMINAL JUSTICE COMMUNITIES Several references have already been made to anecdotal casehistories, to the claims made and to the opinions formerly heldby a number of law enforcement authorities relative to therelationship between marihuana use and aggressive behavior orviolent crime. A few systematic efforts have been made to explorethe current opinions and attitudes of law enforcement andcriminal justice officials. Probably the first detailed survey of the opinions of policeofficers was that conducted by a Stanford University law studentin 1968. Part of this unpublished study has been summarized byKaplan (1971) and is reprinted below. Law enforcement agencies have continuously supported theexistence of a strong causal relationship between the use ofmarijuana and acts of aggression and violence. In order todetermine the nature and basis for this belief, sixteen lawenforcement and narcotics officers were interviewed. The officersselected for the interview from each pollee department were thosewho spent the largest percentage of their time actually workingwith marijuana users. When the department had several officersworking full time on narcotics, the officer In charge wasinterviewed, on the supposition that as chief officer, he wouldhave the longest and widest range of experience with marijuanausers. Of those interviewed, seven spent 100% of their time onnarcotics problems; three spent 75% to 100%; I spent about 50%;and the remaining five spent 10% to 25%. All emphasized that oftheir narcotics work, a major proportion of the time is spent onmarijuana problems. The context in which the officers observe individuals underthe influence of marijuana is an important factor in evaluatingtheir observations. Only three had done stakeout work whereconduct could be observed while under cover. The remainingthirteen officers had only encountered marijuana users in eitherarrest or questioning situations. In response to the question ofwhether they had opportunities for informal contact with peopleusing marijuana while off duty or in a social situation, theofficers uniformly answered, "no." The specific subject of this project, i.e. marijuana andaggression, was never mentioned to the officers. They were toldonly that I was interested in the marijuana question. The firstquestion which I asked was to briefly characterize, from theirper8onal experience and observations, the behavior of individualswhile under the influence of marijuana. During this originaldescription, 10 of the officers mentioned violence or aggressivebehavior as a common characteristic. The six other officersdidn't mention aggression as a distinguishing characteristic intheir original description however, in the next question, whenspecifically asked if marijuana does lead to aggressive behavior,all said that it did. Every one of the officers pointed out the wide range ofconduct which they see exhibited by those that are"high" on marijuana. They emphasized that how a personreacts depends on his particular personality. As one officercommented, "Some individuals are very happy and to themeverything is beautiful, while others are always looking for afight." Six (6) of the officers emphasized how quickly theycan see one mood change into the other-at one moment docile andpassive, at another extremely aggressive. A few of the officers commented that along with the directinfluence of marijuana, another important factor in aggressivebehavior Is the arresting situation. One officer, Lieutenant A ofthe B Police Department, who has done quite a bit of stake-outwork as well as undercover investigation, pointed out that thischange from "silly, joking, funny and talkative" moodsto apprehensive and often aggressive postures is many timesprecipitated by the realization that a law enforcement officer ispresent. Sergeant C of the D Police Department also felt the"arresting situation" was probably the primary factorin aggressive behavior reports about marijuana users. Sergeant Ealso mentioned "the approach of a known policeman" as afactor in the aggressive behavior which they see. However,Sergeant E also estimated that one fifth of the males, when under the influence of [marijuana] and whenaware that they are being arrested, will break and run or resist.This he feels is a much higher percentage than for other types ofarrests. Similarly most of the officers did maintain that evenconsidering all other factors such as arrest, the marijuana wasthe force in most cases which was responsible for the aggressionand violence. Mr. F of the G County Sheriff's Office, however, maintainedthat in the last few years, those arrested for marijuana offenseshave tended to resist arrest less often than previously. Hestated, "They now feel they don't have to fight the officersbecause of the laws-because of legalizing attempts, they feelthey don't have to fight, for they will have their day incourt." Sergeant H of the I Police Department stated that recently(within the last year) he has seen no aggressive reaction tomarijuana because of the extremely weak grades of marijuana nowavailable. He felt that the determinative factor in how a personreacts while "high" is the strength of the grasssmoked. He reported that the grass they have recently beenfinding has a very low resin content and its effects are merely"a quick stimulant followed by a depressed mood."However, in another part of the interview, when discussing thetype of personality prone to using marijuana, Sergeant Hdistinguished between those now smoking and the "oldgrasshead." These latter were, only "Spanish-Americanor criminals." Now, however, "people without criminalrecords are joining the ranks of criminals." This majorshift in the personality type now using marijuana, it would seem,would be another factor leading to Sergeant H's observation thatthe problems with aggressive reactions have decreased. While all stated their belief that marijuana does lead toaggressive behavior, it was in most cases very difficult toelicit from the officers any specific instances where theypersonally had observed an aggressive reaction to the use ofmarijuana. Four (4) officers stated that they had neverpersonally seen someone aggressive under marijuana. They all,however, had heard reports of such instances from other officers.It should be noted also, that these four officers are from smallpolice departments located chiefly in middle class residentialareas. Me officers who did cite specific examples of aggressivebehavior from their personal observations cited such conduct asindividuals who possessed marijuana fighting among themselves,cases of resisting arrest, a [man] picking a fight in a bar,beating one's wife, sexual promiscuity, stealing, recklessdriving, and carrying knives and guns. While citing this type ofexample most officers emphasized the real difficulty in tellingwhen someone is "high." Except for a few symptoms suchas red or dilated eyes, they have to make the judgment from thegeneral actions of the subject. When the subject is actingpeculiar and there is no alcohol, or they find marijuana in hispossession, then they assume he is "high." It was also difficult to limit these discussions solely tomarijuana. When asked for personal case histories, they oftenrecounted incidents of individuals who had also been using otherdrugs or alcohol in combination with marijuana. The officers tendto group all of the drugs together, and discuss them together ingeneralities applying to all. One officer, from J County,recounted as one of his -personal experience histories withaggression and marijuana, a boy who went "berserk" onChristmas day, and who finally had to be shot by the police. Onchecking newspaper accounts, it appears that LSD was alsoinvolved in the episode. The officers all indicated that they have personally seen manyaggressive reactions to the use of alcohol. Most, however, didnot feel they could compare the frequency with that of marijuana.Most deal mainly with narcotic problems and thus spend most oftheir time with marijuana problems. The alcohol problems, andspecifically the aggressive or belligerent drunk, are handled bythe "beat" cops. It was also difficult to limit the discussion to personalexperiences of the officers themselves. Many of them, when askedfor specific examples, went immediately to their desks forreports and articles issued by other law enforcement agencies.This it seems is a problem which developed because of the samplechosen to interview. Because they were usually the mostexperienced and the chief narcotics officers, most of them arecalled upon to give speeches before PTA's, church groups, schoolclasses, etc. They all, therefore, were familiar with theliterature distributed by law enforcement.... Three of the officers cited as proof of marijuana's danger arecent distribution which pointed out that the "deathpenalty" Is now imposed on marijuana offenders in Nigeria. When questioned on passive reactions to marijuana, all of theofficers could think of personal encounters with people who were"high" and who were decidedly passive and docile. Yetonly four of the officers included this trait in their originalcharacterization of behavior under marijuana. Eight of theofficers, however, in their original description of behaviorwhile "high" described some persons as"happy," "funny," or "giggly." One question asked of the officers was aimed atdifferentiating the aggressiveness (chiefly in terms of frequencyof resisting arrest) between those "high" on marijuanaand those arrested for sale or for possession. As mentionedpreviously, the officers indicated that generally they have avery difficult time distinguishing those who are"high." The officers interviewed generally work on[arresting] pushers, and dealers. Their attention is usually notdrawn to individuals because of the particular conduct they mightbe exhibiting, but rather because the individual is dealing inmarijuana. When pot parties where everyone is high have been[broken up], Sergeant 0 of D reported that the places raided haveusually been on the peaceful side. Another officer, K, on thenarcotics detail in D, felt that users are usually "veryeasy to arrest. With others, such as pushers, and sellers,however, officers have to -be more careful." Captain L of Mdisagreed, however, maintaining that those under the influencemust be watched more closely and are usually more aggressive andviolent because of a lessening of concern for the consequencesand a lack of ability to make sound judgments. Deputy Chief N ofthe 0 Police Department pointed out that In 0 at any rate, thereis a certain "show" which those arrested feel they mustput on; "it is hard to separate this show from the effectsof the marijuana," Lieutenant P of the 0 Police Departmentsaid his experience indicated that those under the influence hadto be watched closely. He has arrested people, [when they were]"high" three of four times without incident; the fifthtime, however, he felt they might go wild. In response to a question of whether they felt that somepersons smoke pot before engaging in crimes against property,such as robbery, ten of the officers replied that they didbelieve that this occurred often. Seven of these could citespecific examples of people who had been picked up for stickups,car thefts, etc. and who reported using marijuana beforehand tobolster their courage, or sharpen their senses. However, theother three of the ten had only heard of such conduct. Theremaining six officers answered that they did not think this wascommon, and had never seen any examples. . . . None (of the officers) believed however that marijuana wasresponsible for any long-term effects resulting in aggressivebehavior. The relationship between marijuana and aggression, theyfeel, is limited strictly to the period of time during which theuser is under the influence. In terms of long-range effects ofmarijuana on aggression, the reactions of the officers confirmthat, if anything, there is a negative correlation. That is,marijuana leads to nonaggressive, non-competitive, passiveconduct, when viewed in the context of chronic use. Whatever limitations and qualifications one can cite regardingthe conclusions drawn by law enforcement officers, one thingremains certain: they do believe that the use of marijuana leadsin a significant number of cases to aggressive behavior (Kaplan,1971, citing Schofield: 110-115). In seeking to present to the public as much information aboutmarihuana and its effects, from as many different sources andapproaches as possible, the Commission sponsored the design andexecution of two opinion surveys of the criminal justiceCommunity. In addition to soliciting their current opinions aboutthe relationship of marihuana to aggressive or violent behavior,and to infer from them the extent to which their professionalexperience with marihuana users may have changed over the years,the Commission sought to determine the extent to which currentopinions and attitudes of the criminal justice community reflectthe growing body of empirical evidence on the subject. To these ends, nationally representative samples ofprosecuting attorneys, judges, probation officers and courtclinicians were surveyed by mail. The questionnaires mailed tothese officials contained items relative to the relationshipbetween marihuana use and aggressive or violent behavior. Theresults of these surveys show that more than three fourths of the781 judges, probation officers and court clinicians responding toa mail survey (InTech, 1971) regarded as either questionable or" probably untrue" the statement that "mostaggressive acts or crimes of violence committed by persons whoare known users of marihuana occur when the offender is under theinfluence of marihuana. More than 60% however, regard as equallyquestionable or untrue the statement that most such aggressiveacts or crimes of violence occur when the offender is not tinderthe influence of the drug but is attempting to obtain it or themoney to buy it. Table 3 shows the percentage of each of thethree groups of respondents answering in this manner. (InTech,1971). These figures give the impression that neither judges,probation officers nor court clinicians are certain of the roleof marihuana in the commission of violent crime. Their tendencyto deny both statements suggests that at the least, therelationship, to the extent that it does exist, is a tenuous one. Table 3.-CRIMINAL JUSTICE OFFICIALS, BELIEFS ABOUT THERELATIONSHIP OF MARIHUANA USE TO AGGRESSIVE ACTS (Figures in Percentages) A. "Most aggressive acts or crimes of violence committedby persons who are known users of marihuana occur when theoffender is under the influence of marihuana.', Probably Probably Not sure true not true Judges 17.3 44.2 29.5 Probation officers 14.5 60.0 21.8 Clinicians 6.1 76.5 13.0 Total 15.2 51.2 26.0 B. "When the offender is not under the influence ofmarihuana but is attempting to obtain marihuana or the money tobuy it." Probably Probably Not sure true not true Judges 35.6 30.6 25.0 Probation officers 27.3 44.5 21.8 Clinicians 20.0 60.9 15.7 Total 32.1 37.0 23.2 In its survey of state prosecuting attorneys, the Commissionlikewise found a tendency for these officials to deny a causalrelationship between marihuana use and aggressive behavior; 52%of the respondents stated that they either did not believe orwere uncertain about the proposition that use of marihuana causesaggressive behavior. Of those who did believe in a causalrelationship, however, two-thirds of the respondents' beliefsstemmed front other than personal observation of aggressivebehavior exhibited by marihuana users. These opinion surveys reveal that at least these members ofthe criminal justice community have begun to reexamine theirearlier beliefs. The data suggest that, in their professionalexperience, they have not found marihuana users to be aggressiveor violent to such an extent as to elicit strong and consistentopinions about the causal relationship between marihuana use andviolence. Contents | Feedback | Search DRCNet Library | Schaffer Library | Major Studies Marihuana, A Signal of Misunderstanding