WT01-B26-1IA031-000651-B022-72http://206.61.184.43:80/schaffer/LIBRARY/studies/nc/nc1k.htm 206.61.184.43 19970122123510 text/html 26347HTTP/1.0 200 OKDate: Wednesday, 22-Jan-97 12:35:01 GMTServer: WebSitePro/1.1f (S/N wpo-0deb)Allow-ranges: bytesContent-type: text/htmlLast-modified: Saturday, 28-Dec-96 06:57:15 GMTContent-length: 26129 Marihuana and Sexual Behavior Contents | Feedback | Search DRCNet Library | Schaffer Library | Major Studies Marihuana, A Signal of Misunderstanding The Report of the National Commission on Marihuana and DrugAbuse Marihuana and Sexual Behavior Since the mid-1930's, Americans have, at one time or another,either acclaimed or decried marihuana as an aphrodisiac, laudedits ability to intensify and enhance enjoyment of sexualexperiences and accused it of heightening sexual aggression andinciting the commission of sexual offenses. Even today, there isno consensus among Americans regarding what they consider to bethe effects of marihuana on sexual desire, arousal andperformance. Rather, what evidence exists on the subjectcontinues to reveal the existence of diverse and ofteninconsistent beliefs and experiences. Society's concern about the effects of marihuana on sexualbehavior, however, does not generally center on the drug'sinherent ability to produce or heighten sexual arousal per se buton the relationship between sexual arousal and the likelihood ofsexual excess on the part of the user. The key question is theextent to which and the conditions under which marihuana acts asa catalyst to sexual aggression, profligacy, promiscuity andother aberrant sexual behavior. MARIHUANA AND PSYCHOSEXUAL STIMULATION The numerous medical and clinical observations, experimentalinvestigations and survey studies reviewed by the Commission showthat the belief regarding the stimulant effects of marihuana andthe use of hemp drugs to achieve sexual arousal, the improvementof sexual powers and the prolongation of coition have existed forcenturies and have be-en documented (Chopra and Chopra, 1939;Bouquet, 1950; Robinson, 1967; Grinspoon, 1971) ; The proportionof the population actually aroused sexually by marihuana,however, is difficult to assess. Relevant research findings arebased on widely divergent research procedures, differing criteriaof arousal, and variations in the amount of arousal experienced.Nonetheless, it is fair to state that marihuana producesheightened sexual interest, desire and arousal in substantialproportions of both male and female users (Bromberg, 1934;Allentuck, 1944; Johnson, 1968; Goode, 1969; Hochman and Brill,1971). It is equally accurate to state, however, that marihuanadoes not increase and in fact may decrease sexual desire orstimulation in significant proportions of users (Walton, 1938;Chopra and Chopra, 1939; Taylor, 1963; Brenner, Coles andMeagher, 1970; Goode, in press). At best, the available evidenceis inconclusive. In a study of regular marihuana users conducted by threephysicians, for example, "heightened sexual feeling"and "increased sexual arousal" while under theinfluence of the drug were reportedly experienced"usually" by one-third of the subjects (34%, and 33%,respectively) and each of these effects was experienced"occasionally" by 59% of the sample (Halikas, Goodwinand Guze, 1971). In another more recent study by physicians, "increasedsexual appetite" was reported by 60% of the chronic usersand 43% of the occasional users of marihuana. Responses to asimilar question regarding "decreased sexual appetite,"revealed that 75% of the chronic users and 70% of the occasionalusers reported that this never occurred (Hochman and Brill,1971). The Mayor's Committee on Marihuana (1944) likewise attemptedto assess the effects of marihuana on sexual interest and sexualstimulation. Its clinical studies of 72 male prisoners conductedat the Welfare Hospital in New York City revealed that"although there was an undeniable increase in overt sexinterest following the ingestion of marihuana, . . . This sexinterest seems to have been due primarily to the fact that thesemen have been imprisoned for various periods and had not hadaccess to women" (p. 130). With respect to marihuana'seffect on sexual stimulation the Committee indicated thatalthough "some evidence of eroticism" was reported (inabout 10% of the 150 instances in which marihuana wasadministered), there was no "frank expression of sexualstimulation" despite the presence of female nurses,attendants and others associated with the experiment (p. 38). More recently, Professor Goode published the results of aninformal survey of about 200 marihuana users in which he inquiredabout the relationship of marihuana to both sexual desire andsexual activity. To the question, "Do you think that beinghigh on marihuana stimulates your sex interest, or not?",38% said that their interest in sex while high was no differentin degree from their normal interest in sex; 5% stated that beinghigh on marihuana had a negative effect, i.e., that "ittended to turn them off sexually"; 13% replied that theeffect depended on either their mood, their partner or both; and44% (39% of the men and 50% of the women) reported that it"definitely increases their sexual desire" (1970: 162). Perhaps the most conclusive and consistent finding to emergefrom studies of the effects of marihuana on psychosexualstimulation is that the degree of sexual interest, desire andarousal induced by marihuana is dependent on the characteristicsof the user and the extent to which he comes to expect oranticipate such an effect. Research shows that women are morelikely to report heightened sexual desire than are men (Goode,1969) ; that young people more frequently report arousal than doolder persons (Bloomquist, 1968; Brenner, Coles and Meagher,1970) ; 2 that frequent users are more likely to report increasedsex interest than infrequent users (Goode, 1970) ; that personswho are more sexually experienced are more likely to be sexuallyaroused by marihuana than are those less sexually experienced(Brenner, Coles and Meagher, 1970; Hochman and Brill, 1971; Goodein press) and that those who expect to be sexually aroused by thedrug are more likely to be so aroused than those who do not(Goode, 1969; Fort, 1970; Grinspoon, 1971). There is nothing inherent in the drug itself which producesheightened sexual interest, desire or arousal, nor is there anyphysiological evidence to show that marihuana directly orspecifically acts on either the, sexual centers of the brain orthe sexual organs. As one observer has noted, marihuana "isnot a sexual stimulant; that is, in the, sense that it will notexcite mindless, laboratory-located animal tissue" (Goode,1969: 20). In short, marihuana is not an aphrodisiac. HOW MARIHUANA INFLUENCES SEXUAL RESPONSE It has already been stated that marihuana is not, in itself,an aphrodisiac although a substantial number of persons reportincreased sexual interest, desire and arousal following use ofthe drug. To what, then, are these effects attributable? Researchhearing on this question suggests that to the extent thatmarihuana influences these respouses, it does so indirectly byacting on the higher centers of the brain to relax inhibitionsand reduce, the usual restraints on behavior. By so doing, theuser is placed in the position of being freer to respond to hissexual needs and desires (Walton, 1938; Allentuck and Bowman,1942; Ausubel, 1958; Brown, 1961; McGothlin, 1966; Rosevear,1967; Bloomquist, 1968; Oursler, 1968; Goode, 1969; Fort, 1970).The extent to which these responses occur, however, are dependentupon individual expectation and knowledge (Fort, 1970) and thesocial situation (set and setting) in which the marihuana usetakes place (Goode, 1969). As Professor Goode has stated, Man'ssomatic responses are often influenced more by what he thinksthan by biological and chemical imperatives; in fact, it canhappen that what he thinks actually becomes his biological andchemical imperative (1969, p. 20). In addition to its effects on sexual inhibition and restraints(the extent and consequences of which will be examined later),marihuana is also reported to intensity aesthetic experiences andto enhance sensual activity. As one observer has noted, it isperhaps the principal effect of marihuana to take one moreintensely into whatever experience - ." (Trocchi, 1967:108). One observer points out, however, that most of the users ofmarihuana in this country are youths between the ages of 14 and25 and that "this age span needs no aphrodisiac to stimulateeither interest or capacity to perform" (Bloomquist, 1968:183). It is this fact (which probably explains why substantialproportions of marihuana users characterize their sexualexperiences under the influence of the drug as particularlyintense, prolonged, sensuous and pleasurable (Johnson, 1968;Goode, 1969; Brenner, Coles and Meagher, 1970; Hochman and Brill,1971; Tart, 1971; Abelson, et al., 1972). In one study of marihuana users conducted by a psychologist,65% reported a heightened sense of touch, 55% stated that"touch takes on new qualities," and 56% replied that"sexual orgasm was very often or usually more exciting thanwhen "straight"' (Tart, 1971). Of the approximately 500marihuana users surveyed by Goode, 68% (74% of the men and 62% ofthe women) reported that marihuana "Generally acted as apleasure enhancer (and) usually increased their sexualenjoyment" (Goode, in press, pp. 8-9). In still another study of marihuana users, both occasional andchronic, "increased sexual pleasure" was the secondmost common response, by the chronic users and the eighth mostcommonly reported effect by the occasional users; 83% of theformer and 50% of the latter reported that increased sexualpleasure was often or always experienced after smokingmarihuana.' Interesting too, was the finding that 85% of thechronic users and 78% of the occasional users reported neverexperiencing "decreased sexual pleasure" following useof the drug (Hochman and Brill, 1971:7). In the Commission's National Survey, respondents were asked toindicate whether or not they believed that marihuana increasessexual pleasure. Of those adults admitting they had triedmarihuana at least once (15%), 52% thought that the drug doesincrease sexual pleasure. Both adults and youth in general,however, seem to be less certain of this effect. Only aboutone-fourth of all respondents (24% of adults and 26% of youth)indicated agreement with the statement while slightly tinderone-half of those surveyed (48% of the adults and 49% of theyouth) expressed uncertainty about marihuana's ability toincrease sexual pleasure (Ableson, et al., 1972: 25-33). 3 The students were also asked to assess the degree ofimportance attached to a number of possible motivations for usingmarihuana. As might be expected from the findings regardingmarihuana and sexual enjoyment, significantly more of the usersthan the nonusers attached at least some degree of importance tomarihuana's perceived ability to enhance sexual experiences. Tothe item: "for better sexual experiences," 12% of thenon-users, 40% of the occasional users and 70% of the chronicusers felt that it was of some importance or "very"important in motivating use of the drug (Hochman and Brill,1971). The research bearing on the effects of marihuana on sexualpleasure suggests that marihuana is not usually perceived by thegeneral public to increase sexual enjoyment, that users aresignificantly more likely to believe that marihuana has thiseffect than are non-users, that those who expect to receiveincreased sexual pleasure are more likely to experience it thanthose who do not, and that frequent or regular users aresignificantly more likely to have actually experienced thiseffect than are those who use the drug less frequently. THE EFFECTS OF MARIHUANA ON OVERT SEXUAL BEHAVIOR As noted at the beginning of this discussion, society ingeneral and policy makers in particular are primarily concernedabout the extent to which and the conditions tinder whichmarihuana is likely to generate or increase, the likelihood ofsexually aberrant or aggressive behavior. Marihuana has alreadybeen shown to increase psychosexual stimulation in substantialproportions of users and to serve as a relaxer of inhibitions andrestraints. The questions as yet unresolved, however, relate to(a) the importance of sexual arousal in generating sexualactivity-particularly deviant sexual acts, and (b) the extent towhich inhibitions and restraints, which normally serve to protectthe individual and society from sexual excess and abuse, arelowered by marihuana to the point of being inoperative. The available evidence suggests that (a) although marihuanausers are more sexually active and sexually permissive than arenonusers, marihuana does not generally stimulate sexual activity,appreciably alter established patterns of sexual behavior orserve as a catalyst to sexual promiscuity; (b) the marihuana useris rarely sexually aggressive; and (c) persons arrested formarihuana law violations generally do not have previous orsubsequent criminal records for the commission of sexual offenses(Walton, 1938; Brown, 1961; White House Conference on NarcoticDrug Abuse, 1962; Blunt et al., 1969; Bremner, Coles and Meagher,1970; Goode, 1972; Goode, in press). Before summarizing the research forming, the basis of theseassertions, however, it should be noted that there, are severalcontradictory research findings with respect to (a) above. In onerecent study, for example, two Philadelphia physiciansinvestigating the effects of marihuana on adolescents and youngadults reported that the drug was directly responsible for sexualpromiscuity in 13 of their female patients. In the words of theseclinicians: This group is singled out because of the unusual degree ofsexual promiscuity, which ranged from sexual relations withseveral individuals of both sexes, and, sometimes, individuals ofboth sexes on the same evening. In histories of all of theseindividuals, we were struck by the loss of sexual inhibitionsafter short periods of marihuana smoking. Seven patients of thisgroup became pregnant (one on several occasions), and fourdeveloped venereal diseases. . . . In no instance was theresexual promiscuity prior to the beginning of marihuana smoking. .. . We take these results to indicate marihuana's effects onloosening the superego controls and altering superego ideals(Kolansky and Moore, 1971: 491). During 1970, another researcher (Goode, in press) distributedquestionnaires on drug use to between 500 and 600 undergraduatesin a large lecture course at a State University. Four measures ofsexual activity were employed: (1) engagement in premaritalintercourse, (2) the respondent's total number of differentsexual partners, (3) the age of first intercourse and (4) theaverage frequency of intercourse during the six months prior tothe study. The three indices of drug use employed were whether ornot the respondent had ever smoked marihuana, the frequency ofmarihuana use during the six months prior to the survey, and thetotal number of drugs or drug types ever used by the respondent.The researcher found that "all measures of sexual activitycorrelated significantly -and powerfully with all measures ofdrug use" (p. 12). More specifically, marihuana users werefar more likely to have engaged in premarital intercourse (72%)than were non-users (34%) ; the greater the frequency ofmarihuana use and the greater the number of drugs ever tried, theearlier was the first intercourse, the greater was the frequencyof intercourse and the greater was the number of sexual partners. As the researcher suggests, one might be tempted to concludefrom these findings that marihuana, as well as other drugs,causes early sex, frequent sex and sex with a number of differentpartners were it not for the fact that similar findings point toa relationship in the opposite direction. That is, not only weremarihuana users and drug experimenters more likely to experiencesex early in their lives, but "it is also the sexuallyprecocious who are more likely to use drugs, includingmarihuana" (p. 14). Of all respondents reporting intercourseby age 16, for example, 7% stated that they had never tried anyillegal drug, but total absence of illicit drug use was found in47% of the virgins (p. 14). Professor Goode concludes that "using marihuana or otherillegal drugs no more 'causes' sexual behavior than sexualbehavior 'causes' drug use" (p. 14). Rather, he suggests, Both sexual permissiveness and marihuana use as well as, tosome extent, experimentation with certain other illegal drugs-areindicators of the young person's involvement in and with asubculture which is tolerant toward a wide range ofnontraditional values and activities . . . Quite clearly,marihuana use grows out of a specific life style, which is, inturn, partly dependent on specific sociocultural backgroundfactors and permissive sexual behavior (branded as"promiscuous" by those who disapprove of it) is a partof this life style (pp. 14, 16). Similar to Goode's findings are those obtained from a mailsurvey of 1400 undergraduate students at UCLA (Hochman and Brill,1971). The data show that marihuana users have their first sexualexperience earlier than do non-users (50% of the users and 30% ofthe non-users had their first experience before age 18) ; havemore sexual experience than non-users; have a greater number ofsexual partners than do nonusers (twice as many users asnon-users had five or more sexual partners) ; and have moreliberal attitudes toward sex than do non-users. One of the questions asked of the students was: "In yourexperience or opinion, do you think that marihuana usage over along period results in sexual promiscuity?" Over half of thenon-users (54%) and almost three-fourths (73%) of the usersbelieved this happened rarely or not at all while 12% of thenonusers, 3% of the occasional users and 2% of the chronic usersbelieved that extended use of marihuana frequently leads tosexual promiscuity. Although the users more often suffered from venereal diseasethan did the nonusers (7% vs. 2%), there were no differencesbetween the groups in the average frequency of sexualintercourse, the number of concurrent sexual partners, the numberof pregnancies, miscarriages and illegitimacies, or the incidenceof homosexuality. A more middle-of-the-road position regarding the associationbetween use of marihuana and sexual promiscuity was revealed in aCommission sponsored mail survey of 781 judges, probationofficers and court clinicians (InTech, 1971). In an effort todevelop a profile of the regular marihuana. user, respondentswere asked: "In light of your professional experience, doyou, think all, most, some or just a, few of the people whoregularly use marihuana are sexually promiscuous?" Tabulation of the responses revealed, among all three groups,considerable uncertainty and ambivalence as manifested in thefindings that 23% of the total sample either did not answer thequestion or stated that they did not know, and that three-fifthsof those who responded (70%) would answer no more categoricallythan to say that only some" could be characterized in thismanner. The percentages of each of the three groups ofrespondents stating that all or most, some and few or none of theregular marihuana users are sexually promiscuous are shown inTable 4. The Commission has found several studies dating from 1939which support the assertions that the marihuana user is rarelysexually aggressive and that he rarely has a criminal record forthe commission of sexual offenses. A survey of the criminal records of 379 Greek offenders eithersentenced or arrested for the public use of hashish between 1919and 1950 (Gardikas, 1950) revealed no link between the use ofhashish and the commission of sexual offenses. Lambo (1965) compiled a list of crimes which occurred during arecent two-year period in three West African countries. Of the472 "offences against women" committed during theperiod of study, 26% were claimed to have been committed by usersof cannabis. In a, study conducted by the Kinsey Institute for SexResearch, 1500 incarcerated sex offenders were interviewed abouttheir sexual offenses. The researchers found that in markedcontrast to the role of alcohol in the commission of theiroffenses, particularly aggressive sex crimes, marihuana was avery insignificant factor. While the presence of alcohol wasreported in relation to 67% of all sexually aggressive actsagainst children and 39% of such aggressive acts against adultwomen, marihuana was mentioned in only eight sexual offenses outof a total of 2,022 such offenses committed by the respondents(Gebbard, Gagnon, Pomeroy and Christenson, 1967: 761-819). Two recent systematic studies of rape cases recorded by thepolice in Philadelphia (Amir, 1971) and Denver (MacDonald, 1971)gave no indication that marihuana was specifically linked tothese offenses. It should be noted, however, that the involvementof marihuana in these cases, unlike the involvement of alcohol,was not specifically explored. Table 4--JUDGES, PROBATION OFFICERS AND COURT CLINICIANSWHO BELIEVE THAT REGULAR MARIHUANA USERS ARE SEXUALLY PROMISCUOUS (Figures in Percentages) All or Some Few or most none Judges (N =408) 23.8 58.3 17.9 Probation Officers (N=87) 21.9 58.6 19.5 Clinicians (N = 106) 11.3 65.1 23.6 Total (N=701) 21.3 59.6 19.1 In two Commission-sponsored studies of the relationshipbetween marihuana and crime, no evidence was found to suggestthat marihuana is a significant factor in or contributor to thecommission of sexual offenses. A study of 1,776 youthfuloffenders (16 to 21 years of age) arrested for marihuana lawviolations in five New York counties between 1965 and 1969revealed that none of the offenders had either a previous orsubsequent criminal record for the commission of sexual offenses(Weitzner, et. al., 1971). In another study sponsored by the Commission, interviews with559 male residents (16 to 34 years of age) of West Philadelphia,revealed that six respondents, or about one in 100, admitted tohaving committed the offense of "forcing sexualintercourse," three having reportedly committed it more thanonce but none having been apprehended for these offenses (Goode,1972; 29a). In an effort to assess the role of marihuana in theseoffenses, respondents were asked whether or not they had used thedrug within the 24 hours preceding the commission of both theirfirst and most recent offenses. In contrast to alcohol, which wasreported to have been consumed within 24 hours prior to one-thirdof the first and most recent offenses of forcing sexualintercourse (two out of six and one out of three, respectively),none of the offenders reported smoking marihuana within 24 hoursof either the first or most recent time they committed thisoffense (Goode, 1972: 29a). Research findings which are available lend little support tothe thesis that marihuana either causes or is a significantfactor in the heightening of sexual aggression or the commissionof sexual offenses. Contents | Feedback | Search DRCNet Library | Schaffer Library | Major Studies Marihuana, A Signal of Misunderstanding WT01-B26-2IA031-000651-B022-100http://206.61.184.43:80/schaffer/LIBRARY/studies/nc/nc1l.htm 206.61.184.43 19970122123525 text/html 91560HTTP/1.0 200 OKDate: Wednesday, 22-Jan-97 12:35:14 GMTServer: WebSitePro/1.1f (S/N wpo-0deb)Allow-ranges: bytesContent-type: text/htmlLast-modified: Saturday, 28-Dec-96 06:57:07 GMTContent-length: 91342 Marihuana and (Non-Violent) Crime Contents | Feedback | Search DRCNet Library | Schaffer Library | Major Studies Marihuana, A Signal of Misunderstanding The Report of the National Commission on Marihuana and DrugAbuse Marihuana and (Non-Violent) Crime Much that has been said with respect to aggressive behaviorand violent crime also applies to the more general propositionthat marihuana causes or leads to (non-violent) crime anddelinquency. The popular and professional literature abounds withclaims and counter-claims. Public and professional opinionsurveys demonstrate a widespread belief in the existence of amarihuana-crime relationship but also reveal considerableuncertainty about the existence of such a relationship. The empirical evidence is somewhat more consistent. Laboratorystudies provide no evidence that marihuana produces effects whichcan be interpreted as criminogenic. Although some studies ofoffender populations purport to demonstrate a causal relationshipbetween marihuana and crime, they reveal, at the most, asignificant statistical association. Closer examination of thesedata or more sophisticated analysis, however, generally shows thepurported relationship to be spurious. The original relationshipis usually found to derive not from the chemical effects of thedrug but from the operation of social and cultural variablesunrelated to either the drug or its use. In the following pages the available evidence bearing on therelationship between marihuana. and crime will be reviewed in aneffort to determine whether marihuana itself or the use of thedrug plays a significant precipitating or contributory role inthe commission of criminal or delinquent acts. PUBLIC AND PROFESSIONAL OPINION The formulation and expression of strong opinions about therelationship of marihuana to criminal and delinquent behaviorhave persisted despite the inherent complexities of the issue,the relative absence of conclusive empirical evidence and thegeneral lack of knowledge and understanding about the effects ofthe drug. For the most part, however, neither public norprofessional opinion about marihuana and its impact on publicsafety has been explored in any systematic fashion. As aconsequence, public policy with respect to the drug has beenshaped by the most vociferous advocates of one position oranother at any given time. Probably the first official body to explore prevailing opinionabout the relationship between marihuana use and crime was theIndian Hemp Drugs Commission of 1893-1894. The Commission spentover a year in making field trips to 30 cities, in receivingevidence from almost 1,200 expert witnesses (335 of whom weremedical practitioners) and in reviewing judicial proceedings andthe case files from India's mental hospitals. The Commission'sReport, reprinted in 1969, contains the following informationgathered with respect to the relationship of marihuana use tocrime. First, the Commission found that the majority of hemp drugconsumers were moderate rather than excessive users, and that thedrug users were rarely regarded as offensive or potentiallydangerous by their neighbors (a few objected to the smell of thesmoke or the example set by the users for the neighborhoodchildren). With respect to the drug's possible long-term or chroniccriminogenic effects (producing "bad characters"), theCommission reported that two thirds of the witnesses did notbelieve that marihuana would produce, over time, a largeproportion of "bad characters" among the moderateusers. A majority felt that even excessive use was unrelated tothe production of "bad characters." When the possiblerelationship was framed more precisely in terms of cause-effectrather than statistical association, a ratio of 8 to 1 of thewitnesses held that moderate consumption of these drugs had noconnection with crime and a ratio of 4 to 1 denied a causalconnection between excessive consumption and being a "badcharacter." With respect to the more acute effects of hemp drugs, theCommission set out to determine whether criminals use the drug tofortify their courage prior to the commission of their crimes,whether the drugs were used by criminals "to stupefy theirvictims," and whether the drugs incited the user to commitunpremeditated crimes. The Commission's conclusion regarding thefirst question was that "criminals like any other consumersof these drugs go to them for that assistance when they feel theyrequire it" (p. 256). To the second question, the Commission responded that althoughsome persons had alleged the commission of "thefts ofornaments from children stupefied by sweet meats" containingmarihuana, the fact of other readily available, more effectiveand more disabling drugs, considerably more conducive tosurreptitious administration, cast doubt on the use of hemp drugsby criminals for this purpose. To the third question, the Commission said that the majorityof witnesses saw no connection between either the moderate orexcessive use of hemp drugs and the commission of unpremeditatedcrimes, including crimes of violence. The Commission thereforeconcluded that "for all practical purposes it may be laiddown that there is little or no connection between the use ofhemp drugs and crime," (p. 264). The Mayor's Committee on Marihuana (1944) also interviewed lawenforcement officers (federal, state and local police) about thepurported link between marihuana and crime. The Committeereported that: In most instances [the police officers] unhesitatinglystated that there is no proof that major crimes are associatedwith the practice of smoking marihuana. They did state that manymarihuana smokers are guilty of petty crimes, but that thecriminal career usually existed prior to the time the individualsmoked his first marihuana cigarette (Schoenfeld, 1944:14-15). Reference has already been made to the results of a small,unpublished survey of the opinions of police officers about therelationship of marihuana to aggression (Schofield, 1968), All ofthe respondents reported observing a variety of conduct exhibitedby users under the influence of marihuana and emphasized that anindividual's reaction to the drug depends on his particularpersonality and, in some instances, the strength of the dose.Some, respondents observed a recent shift in the type ofindividual or personality prone to using marihuana. In response to a question regarding the use of marihuana priorto engaging in property crimes, 10 out of the 16 officersinterviewed believed that this often occurred. Seven citedspecific examples of offenders who reported using marihuanabefore committing their offenses to bolster their courage andsharpen their senses; the views of three rested on hearsayevidence; and the remaining six officers responded that they didnot believe this was a common practice and that they had neverpersonally observed such examples. In the Commission-sponsored National Survey of arepresentative sample of more than 3,000 American youth andadults (Abelson, et al., 1972), respondents were asked toindicate their agreement or disagreement with the statement that"many crimes are committed by persons who show that 56% ofthe adults and 41% of the youth agree with the statement. Theextent of agreement, however, varies significantly according toage, education, geographic location and the marihuana-usingexperience of the respondent. Those who are early adolescents(12-13 years), over 25 years of age, have not completed highschool, live in the South or North Central regions of the countryand have no experience with marihuana are, significantly morelikely to agree with the statement than are those who are between14 and 25 years of age, are at least high school graduates, livein the Northeast or West and have had experience with marihuana.Table 5 below, shows the percentage of respondents agreeing tothe statement according to age, education, geographic locationand experience with marihuana. The survey also showed the existence of considerableuncertainty with respect to the proposition that many crimes arecommitted by persons under the influence of marihuana; 25%, ofthe youth and 17% of the adults were either unsure of itsrelative truth or failed to respond to the question (p. 69).Adults were considerably more certain, however, about therelationship between alcohol and crime (youth were not asked thequestion) ; 7% were either unsure or did not respond and 69%agreed with the statement that many crimes are committed bypersons who were under the influence of liquor (pp. 28, 31). Table 5.-PERCENTAGE OF RESPONDENTS WHO AGREE THAT"MANY CRIMES ARE COMMITTED BY PERSONS WHO ARE UNDER THEINFLUENCE OF MARIHUANA" Percent agreeing Youth Adults Total respondents agreeing 40.7 56.0 Age (years): 12-13 54.5 14-15 35.2 16-17 31.8 18-25 35.1 26-34 48.5 35-49 59.0 50 and over 68.8 Education: Less than high school graduate 70.9 Eighth grade or less 49.5 Ninth-twelfth grades 31.8 High school graduate 56.8 College or more 39.2 Geographic location: Northeast 34.1 46.9 North-Central 42.1 54.9 South 48.5 66.8 West 34.0 52.3 Marihuana experience (ever used): Yes 8.9 24.1 No 46.1 62.0 The surveys of prosecuting attorneys, judges, probationofficers and court clinicians also revealed considerable doubtabout the existence of a causal connection between marihuana andcrime. Although the survey of prosecuting attorneys conducted bythe Commission staff asked only about aggressive behavior andviolent crime, the data showed that 52% of the respondents eitherdenied or were uncertain that marihuana causes such behavior. The Commission-sponsored survey of nationally representativesamples of judges, probation officers and court clinicians,however, posed several questions bearing on the more generalproposition that marihuana is related to crime and delinquency(InTech, 1971). Respondents were first asked whether or not theyhad witnessed an increase in the incidence of drug ordrug-related offenses in their caseloads during the past fiveyears. The large majority of all three groups (86%) respondedaffirmatively and reported that marihuana was the type of drugmost often seen in this connection (83%). However, about twothirds of the respondents reported that marihuana offenders(those arrested for using or selling marihuana) constituted lessthan 20% of their caseloads; 56% of the respondents reported thatthose arrested for non-drug offenses but incidentally found topossess marihuana comprised less than 10% of their caseloads; and73% of the respondents reported that less than 10% of theircaseloads attributed their offenses to marihuana (pp. 31, 34). To determine better the nature and direction of a possiblerelationship between marihuana use and crime, respondents wereasked to indicate which -of four statements most reflected theirown professional experience. On the whole, the respondents weremore likely to postulate a statistical association (36.6%) ratherthan a direct cause-effect relationship (26.9%) ; 18% of therespondents thought that involvement in a criminal or delinquentsubculture caused or led to the use of marihuana (in contrast tothe. more prevalent belief that marihuana use, leads to crime)and 9.1% believed there was absolutely no relationship betweenmarihuana use and other criminal or delinquent behavior. Theextent to which uncertainty prevails even among these practicingprofessionals is reflected in the 9.3% no response category (p.39). Table 6 shows the responses of the judges, probation officersand clinicians to each of the four propositions (InTech, 1971:Appendix 1, Section II, Question 3). The data show that judgesare significantly more, likely to believe that marihuana causesor leads to criminal and delinquent behavior and significantlyless likely to believe in either a statistical relationship or inno relationship whatsoever than either the probation officers orthe clinicians. The researchers also attempted to determine these,professionals' opinions about crimes actually committed bymarihuana users. More specifically, did the respondents thinkthat most non-drug crimes committed by persons who were knownusers of marihuana occurred when the individuals were, actuallyunder the influence of the drug or when they attempted to obtainit? Again, the responses indicated considerable uncertainty inall three, groups. One-third of the, respondents were eitherunsure or did not respond to either proposition. About twice thenumber of respondents thought that the crimes occurred while inthe attempt to obtain marihuana (31.0%) rather than while tinderthe influence of marihuana (16.8%). Table 7 shows the percentage of respondents indicating theprobable truth and probable nontruth of the two propositions(Appendix 1, Section 11, Questions 2a, 2b). The data show that half of the respondents denied thecommission of non-drug crimes while under the influence of thedrug, suggesting that marihuana itself does not have the capacityto produce criminogenic effects. About one-third of therespondents, however, believed that these crimes occur when theuser is attempting to obtain the drug, suggesting an addictionmodel; that is, that users commit crimes to support a"habit."` This interpretation is corroborated by the significantfindings that 65% of the respondents either did not know (23%) orthought that a few (21%), some (17%) or most (4.4%) of theregular users were physically addicted to marihuana Table 7.-RESPONSES OF JUDGES, PROBATION OFFICERS AND COURTCLINICIANS TO STATEMENTS ABOUT NON-DRUG CRIMES COMMITTED BYMARIHUANA USERS (Figures in Percentages) Most non-drug crimes committed by persons who use marihuanaoccur when the offender is- Under the in- Attempting to fluence of mari- obtain marihuana huana Prob- Prob- Prob- Prob- ably ably ably ably true not true true not true Judges 17.1 % 46.8 % 34.2 %, 30.4 %, Probation officers 21.8 47.3 30.0 37.3 Court clinicians.. .. . 10.4 65.2 16.5 60.0 Total 16.8 49.6 31.0 35.7 The National Survey of the general public (Abelson, et al.,1972) likewise showed that large segments of the population (65%of all adults and 48% of all youth) regard marihuana asaddictive. Even among the users, 40% of adults and 21% of theyouth believed marihuana to be addicting (p. 22) These findings, taken together, suggest that much of theconfusion regarding the relationship between marihuana and crimemay be predicated on public and professional misconceptions aboutthe drug's addiction potential. The Commission's National Surveyshowed that, among those persons who believed marihuana to beaddicting, 67.5% of the adults and 52.3% of the youth believedthat many crimes are committed by persons under the influence ofmarihuana. Among those who said that marihuana was not addicting,34.6% of the adults and 30.2% of the youth agreed that manycrimes are committed by marihuana users. Table 8 below shows thisrelationship (unpublished data, Abelson, et al., 1972). Table 8.-RELATIONSHIP BETWEEN PERSONS WHO THINK MARIHUANA ISADDICTIVE AND THOSE WHO THINK THAT MANY CRIMES ARE COMMITTED BYPERSONS UNDER THE INFLUENCE OF MARIHUANA (Figures in Percentages) Persons who think marihuana is Addictive Not addictive Youth Adults Youth Adults Many crimes are committed under the influence of marihuana: Mostly agree.. . . 52.3 67.5 30.2 34.6 Mostly disagree 20.8 14.5 39.9 41.1 Other 2.3 3.1 4.4 2.0 Not sure/no answer 24.6 14.9 25.6 27.3 Table 6.-THE OPINIONS OF JUDGES, PROBATION OFFICERS AND COURTCLINICIANS REGARDING THE NATURE OF THE RELATIONSHIP BETWEENMARIHUANA USE AND OTHER CRIMINAL OR DELINQUENT BEHAVIOR (Figures in Percentages) Judges Probation Court Total (N=556) officers clinicians (N=781) (N=110) (N 1.15) Use of marihuana causes or leads to antisocial behavior in thesense that it leads one to commit other criminal or delinquent acts33.8 18.2 1.7 26.9 Involvement in a criminal or delinquent subculture causes orleads to the use of marihuana 18.3 20.0 14.8 18.1 There is a statistical relationship or association betweenmarihuana use and other criminal or delinquent behavior, but it is not a cause-effect relationship 31.1 40.0 60.0 36.6 There is absolutely no relationship between marihuana use and other criminal or delinquent behavior 6.7 14.5 15.7 9.1 (X2=76.895, p<.001). To summarize, these opinion surveys demonstrate that there isconsiderable uncertainty about the existence and the nature of arelationship between marihuana use and crime and that thisuncertainty exists among youth and adults, practicingprofessionals in the criminal justice community and the laypublic, marihuana users and non-users alike. The data suggest,however, that the persistent and fairly widespread belief in acause-effect relationship between marihuana and crime may, atleast in part, be predicated on the erroneous but equallyprevalent belief that marihuana is physically addicting. To theextent that the general public operates under this misconception,they may be more likely to believe that, like the heroin user,the marihuana "addict" commits crime in order tosupport his "habit" and obtain the drug. The logical extension of this belief is that marihuana users,like heroin user-,, will be considered more likely to committheir crimes in the attempt to obtain the drug than while underthe influence of the drug. Stated another way, persons whobelieve that marihuana is physically addicting would be morelikely to base the purported causal relationship betweenmarihuana and crime not on the chemical effects of the drug perse but on the user's physical need for the drug. As such, theywould be more likely to postulate that most crimes committed byusers occur not when the offender is under the influence of thedrug (which, like heroin, makes one passive, lethargic andstuporous) but when the, "addict" needs a"fix" and is desperately trying to obtain the drug orthe money to buy it. This interpretation is, indeed, supported bythe findings of the Commission-sponsored survey of judges,probation officers and court clinicians and is suggested from thefindings of the National Survey. STUDIES OF OFFENDER POPULATIONS Over the years, numerous studies have relied on offenderpopulations and zero-order statistical correlations to"demonstrate" a cause-effect relationship betweenmarihuana and crime. This method of " proof byenumeration" has become probably the most common approach to"demonstrating" the purported causal relationship. As Goode (1970) has noted, however: Not even marihuana's staunchest supporter would argue thata crime has never been committed by a user while high. Yet,incredible as it seems, the burden of many proofs of marihuana'scriminal effects has been precisely the simple fact that it ispossible to locate crimes committed in conjunction with smokingmarihuana. "Proof" by enumeration is no proof at all.By examining an enumeration of crimes which were committed underthe influence of marihuana (even were this definitely known), itis impossible to determine the " cause" of the eventtaking place, in this ease the crime-or, indeed, that marihuanahas anything whatsoever to do with its commission (pp.215-216). Even if these studies are taken at face value, their findingsdo not generally support the thesis of a positive and significantstatistical association. In most instances, marihuana has notbeen found to predispose one to commit crime or to serve as aninitiator of criminal careers; nor does the use of the drugappear to alter the progression to other non-drug offenses amongthose without prior criminal records or histories ofpsychological maladjustment. Predictably, however the data do indicate a greater rate, of progression amongmarihuana-using offenders (both those arrested specifically fortheir marihuana offenses and those charged with non-drug crimes)than that which might be expected from similar, non-usingoffenders or from the general population. Because these studies do provide at least interesting insightsinto the possible nature and direction of a relationship betweenmarihuana and crime or, conversely, a non-existent relationship,several of these studies are summarized below. Bromberg, 1939. Between 1932 and 1937, Bromberg and his teamof researchers reviewed all cases eventuating in conviction byNew York's Courts of General and Special Sessions; conductedinterviews with about 17,000 drug and non-drug-using offenders;and analyzed the statistics from both courts. The report of thiswork, published in 1939, yielded the following information. Among the 16,854 offenders convicted of felonies in the courtof General Sessions, 67 (.005%) were identified as marihuanausers. Of these 67, 46 (697c) had been convicted on charges ofpossession with intent to sell; 16 (24%) were charged withburglary, robbery and grand larceny; two persons were chargedwith assault and one each was charged with petty larceny, forgeryand murder. The researcher points out that in only nine cases did the,offenders' criminal records commence with a drug charge,"indicating that there was not in those cases a closerelationship between drugs and the beginning of a career incrime" (p. 10). In a 25% random sample of offenders convicted in the Court ofSpecial Sessions (misdemeanors), 135 or 9% were charged withpossession of marihuana. Of these 135, 93 or 69% had no previousrecord, 8 had been charged previously with drug violations only,5 had mixed drug and non-drug charges and 29 (21%) had onlynon-drug arrests. In summary, the researcher stated that: As measured by the succession of arrests and convictions inthe Court of General Sessions (felonies) . . . , it can be said that drugs generally do not initiatecriminal careers. Similarly, in the Court of Special Sessions(misdemeanors), only 8% of the offenders had previous charges ofusing drugs and 3.7% had previous charges of drugs and otherpetty crimes. In the vast majority of cases . . . then, theearlier use of marihuana apparently did not predispose to crime,even that of using other drugs. . . . The expectancy of majorcrimes following the use of cannabis in New York County is small,according to these experiences (p. 10). Bromberg and Rodgers, 1946. A study of 8,280 naval and marineprisoners at the U.S. Naval Prison in Portsmouth, New Hampshire(1946) revealed that 40 or .0048% of the offenders were marihuanausers. The offenses they committed while in the service were:AWOL or AOL (32, or 80%), assault or striking an officer (3),theft (3), and narcotics violations (2). Their previous civilianoffenses included three each of assault, theft and trafficviolations and one each of gambling and narcotics violations,drunkenness, draft dodging, and violation of the Mann Act.Twenty-eight or 70% of the marihuana users had no previouscivilian criminal records (p. 825). The preponderance of psychiatric disorders in the user groupover the non-users (40 randomly selected non-using navalprisoners) led the researchers to conclude that "marihuanausage is but an aspect of some type of mental disorder orpersonality abnormality" (p. 826), a conclusion also reachedby Charen. and Perchan 1946), Ausubel (1958), Andrade (1964),Lambo (1965), Bloomquist (1968), Simmons (1969) and Grinspoon(1971). Gardikas, 1950. The researcher reviewed the criminal recordsof "379 individuals either sentenced or arrested flagrantedelicto for using hashish publically" between 1919 and 1950.More than half (55%) of these individuals were already known tolaw enforcement authorities prior to their use of hashish and anadditional 14% had no subsequent difficulties with the law exceptfor hashish and vagrancy offenses. The researcher notes, however,that the remaining 117 offenders (31% of the original sample)went on to become " confirmed criminals after their firsthashish arrest." Dividing this last subgroup of 117 into three approximatelyequal parts, Gardikas. then described the subsequent criminalityof each group. The first group was given 332 more sentencesfollowing their first sentence for using hashish; 142 (43%) wereadditional hashish offenses, a similar number were for violentcrimes or crimes involving weapons, 18 were for"insults" and two were for "high treason." In a critique of the Gardikas study, Kaplan were accumulated;mostly for hashish offenses (42%) and thefts (20%). Althoughthere were a small number of violent crimes subsequentlycommitted by this group of offenders, most sentences subsequentto their initial hashish sentence were for such relatively minoroffenses as illegal gambling, living on immoral earnings,"false statements of identity," and "fishing withdynamite,." The, third group discussed by Gardikas, comprised of those"who after having, made use of hashish becamecriminals," accumulated 332 additional sentences. Hashishoffenses were again responsible for 30% of these offenses andmost of the rest were for theft. Gardikas notes with respect tothis group that although not all of these individuals werecriminal before they used hashish, their use of hashish"turned [them] into habitual hashish smokers and habitualcriminals with a, strong propensity leading toward crime ofdishonesty and particularly theft and f rand. At least one-halfof them surely and undoubtedly are even to be characterized asdangerous idle, vagrants" (p. 203). In a critique of the Gardikas study, Kaplan (1971) has statedthat: The basic problem underlying Gardikas' paper is hisconclusion that hashish use caused his subsample of 117 arreststo become criminals. This assumes, first. that they had notengaged in crime before beginning to use hashish and, second,that it was the hashish use and not something else that turned-them toward crime. Neither of these assumptions is justified bythe data. . . . As for the first assumption . . . all we know isthat they had not been arrested or convicted for other crimesfirst. . . . The second assumption . . . is also impossible tojustify. Even if the members of the subsample had not previouslybeen criminals, it may very well be difficult to distinguish thecriminogenic effects of hashish from those of conviction andsentence to Greek jails. Even aside from any criminogenic effect of the Greek penalsystem, the figures may indicate only that once somebody has beenarrested for hashish-and probably served a term in jail aswell-lie is more likely to be picked up by the police whenfurther crimes are committed. Finally, the years from 1919through 1950 . . . were a period of enormous social dislocation[in Greece] . . . . It is obviously an almost impossible task tosort out how much of the subsequent criminality in the subsamplewas due to hashish use and how much to the social chaos thatprevailed in Greece (pp. 103-104). Andrade, 1964. The researcher retrospectively reviewed theexaminations of 120 patients sentenced between 1951 and 1960 by aBrazilian Court to Heitor Carrilho insane asylum. Sentencing inall cases was based on the allegation that cannabis was directlyresponsible for their crimes. The researcher concluded that: In the 120 patients examined, we did; not find anycriminogenic action that could be attributed to cannabis; ... Inthe majority of cases examined (83), we found patients withpsychotic disturbances. . . . In the cases in which we did notfind mental disturbances, a total of 37, the crime attributed tothem was that of carrying or selling marihuana.... In the studyof the dynamics of the crimes of all the others, we saw thatthere was a link between the crime and the illness, independentof the use of cannabis (Tinklenberg, 1971: 12). Lambo, 1965. The researcher compiled lists of crimes occurringover a, two year period in three West African nations andrecorded the number of offenders perpetrating these crimes. Hefound that approximately one-fourth of the offenders had previousconvictions. Forty-seven percent of the 863 offenders convictedfor false pretenses, 61% of the 2,880 convicted burglars and 54%of those convicted on charges of "culpable driving"were said to have histories of cannabis use. Many of these users,however, were also shown to have long histories of psychologicalmaladjustment (p. 10). The researcher suggests that "the useof cannabis enhances suggestibility in certain individuals, andthis may be a factor in the commission of crime, by these chronicabusers" (p. 11). THE RELATIONSHIP BETWEEN MARIHUANA AND CRIME: AN EXPLANATION As indicated at the outset, enumerative studies of the crimescommitted by apprehended marihuana, law violators and non-drugoffenders identified as marihuana users cannot, by their verynature, either prove or disprove a causal connection between theuse of cannabis and the commission of crimes; nor can their ratesof crime be projected onto the larger universe of marihuanausers. As several researchers have pointed out, those individualsapprehended for marihuana offenses represent only a. tinyfraction of all marihuana users (Kaplan, 1971; Weitzner, et al.,1971) ; likewise, those in other offender samples who areidentified as marihuana users represent only a small proportionof the offender populations of which they are a part (Bromberg,1939; Bromberg and Rodgers, 1946; Kaplan, 1971). Although the data do indicate that some individuals identifiedas marihuana users are subsequently involved in crime, bothdrug-specific and non-drug offenses, they do not provide supportfor the thesis that cannabis was the determining factor in theircriminal careers. Likewise, they fail to indicate that the rateof progression to other crimes manifested by these offenders wassignificantly greater than that which might be expected in eithera non-using criminal subgroup or the general population. As Tinklenberg (1971) has stated: The important issue is that unless one has systematic dataon the proclivities toward crime of the various subgroups ofmarihuana users, one cannot answer the crucial question ofwhether the use of marihuana alters the actual rate of crimeamong these various subgroups over the criminality which would beexpected. At this time, it is unknown whether individuals withthese characteristics seek the use of marihuana or whether theuse of marihuana in any way contributes to the development ofthese traits (P. 24). By reading between the lines of these enumerative studies,however, one would be tempted to postulate that individuals withcertain psychological, social and cultural characteristics aremore likely to seek the use of marihuana, than is marihuanalikely to contribute to the development of delinquent or criminalbehavior patterns. The number of researchers pointing to individuals with longhistories of psychological maladjustment or disturbances hasalready been noted. Others have alluded to persons involved,prior to cannabis use, in criminal or delinquent subcultures(Blumer, 1967; Robins, et al., 1970; Kaplan, 1971; Weitzner, etal., 1971). Still others suggest that marihuana use is morelikely to develop among persons living in underprivilegedcommunities or within a social structure that limits achievementand advancement (Asuni, 1964; Blumer, 1967; Goode, 1972). In recent years, considerable evidence has been gathered tosuggest that the use of other drugs and association withdrug-using friends are also likely to enhance the probability ofmarihuana use (Hochman and Brill, 1971; Goode, 1972; Abelson, etal., 1972). Because many of these characteristics are likely' to beassociated with both criminal or delinquent behavior andmarihuana, use, some individuals have mistakenly concluded a.cause-effect relationship rather than a statistical correlation. The studies reviewed in the following pages axe probably themost methodologically adequate assessments of the. purportedrelationship between marihuana and crime undertaken to date. Thedata show that the seemingly significant statistical correlationoften observed between marihuana, use and crime is spurious; itis dependent not on the chemical effects of the drug but upon theoperation of several extra-pharmacological variables which havelittle or nothing to do with the use of marihuana. per se. The first of these studies (Goode, 1970) is based on a sampleof marihuana users. Because it, like the study by Robins and hiscolleagues (1967, 1970) referred to earlier, involves a selectedpopulation, the extent to which its findings can be applied tothe general population remains speculative. The second study presented, a Commission sponsored survey ofyoung male urban dwellers, is probably the most adequateassessment to date of the relationship between marihuana use andcrime. The results are based on a representative sample of thegeneral population of males, 15 to 34 years of age, the selfreports of criminal behavior have been cross-checked withPhiladelphia Police Department files; and numerous statisticalcontrols have been applied to the data. The study thereforeprovides at least tentative answers to the following questions: -Do young, male marihuana users and nonusers in the generalpopulation differ significantly in the nature and extent of theircriminal activities? -Is marihuana use, in and of itself, the principal determinantof any observed differences? -If not, what are the variableswhich explain a statistical correlation between marihuana use andcrime? Goode, 1970. Between February and September of 1967,face-to-face interviews were held with 204 marihuana usersresiding in the New York City Metropolitan Area. The sample,admittedly nonrepresentative, was drawn front membership lists ofdrug-related organizations and also included friends andacquaintances of the researcher. The sample, suspected of differing to some unknown extent froma random sample of marihuana users, can be characterized -asprimarily male (53%), young (median age 22 years), white (89.5%),single (78%), middle class urban dwellers, including students,dropouts, business people, housewives and the unemployed (p.316). All of the respondents, by virtue of their marihuana use,possession or sale, had engaged in law violative behavior, but,only nine marihuana arrests were reported. This finding indicatesthat persons who are arrested for marihuana related activitiesconstitute only a small fraction of total marihuana users. Because of their marihuana-related criminal activity, onewould expect that persons in this sample would have a higherprobability of being arrested than would the "average"person from the general population. To determine if, in fact,this might be the case, the researcher computed the rate ofarrest for his sample and compared it with the national rate ofarrest provided by the Federal Bureau of Investigation for theyear 1965. Despite the fact that the rates are not strictlycomparable (the sample rate is based on arrests ever experienced;the national rate is based on the number of arrests recorded forone year), the similarity is striking. The national rate wasgiven as 3.7 per 100; the sample rate was computed to be 3.9 per100 per year, 4.5 if one adds the marihuana arrests (p. 236). Although the arrest, rates of the users and the generalpopulation were found to be roughly similar, the types of crimescommitted by the users differed significantly from those crimesrecorded for the population as a whole. In contrast to themajority of drunkenness and disorderly conduct charges noted forthe general population, the offenses of the users most oftenresulting in arrest involved participation in politicaldemonstrations (19 out of the 55 arrests). No other singleoffense attracted more, than a few arrests (p. 2335). In addition to examining arrest rates and the types ofoffenses committed, the researcher also investigated therelationship between the amount of marihuana smoked and thecriminal behavior of the user. If it were true that marihuana didproduce a dangerous and criminogenic state in the user, thegreater would be his likelihood of committing crimes and of beingarrested. The data, however, show no relationship; excluding the"political crimes" (which were most common among theleast frequent smokers and least common among the most frequentsmokers), the "serious" crimes committed by 15respondents (non-marihuana narcotics possession, disorderlyconduct, drunkenness, burglary, theft, assault, auto theft,serving liquor to a minor and larceny) resulted in a total of 21arrests. The heavy smokers did not commit these crimessignificantly more frequently than did the light smokers. Similarly, there was no relationship found between thefrequency of use and the likelihood of arrest; three of the dailysmokers, three of those who smoked three to six times per week,three who smoked one or two times weekly, one who smoked fourtimes monthly and three who were less than monthly smokers werearrested for committing these "serious" crimes (pp.237-38). The researcher concludes that: Although these numbers are extremely small, the fact oftheir perfect dispersal is perhaps indicative of the lack of acrime-inducing effect of the drug. It is, at any rate, aproposition which ought to be tested more systematically in thefuture with more complete data. For the moment, there areindications that point to the fact that the marijuana smoker isno more criminal than the rest of the population (p. 238). Goode, 1972. The Commission-sponsored Philadelphia survey setout to resolve these issues. Goode (1972) analyzed the datacollected during August of 1971 from an interview survey of 55915-to-34-year-old residents of West Philadelphia. That part of the report devoted specifically to the analysisof the data is presented in its entirety below. The onlydeletions made were the author' references to previous studiesbearing on the issues addressed, the findings of which have beenpresented earlier in this chapter. Excerpts From MARIJUANA USE AND CRIME* PREFACE *Prepared by Professor Erich Goode for the National Commissionon Marihuana and Drug Abuse, January 15, 1972. The data on whichthis report is based were obtained from a survey conducted by theInstitute of Survey Research of Temple University. All tablesreferred to in Professor Goode's text are found at the end ofthese excerpts. 'The interview schedule was developed andexecuted and the data processed for the Commission by TempleUniversity's Institute for Survey Research, in Philadelphia. The data analyzed in this report were gathered in August 1971by the Institute for Survey Research of Temple University InPhiladelphia; the author of this report did not have a hand inany phase of the data gathering, including constructing theinterview schedule, although he is solely responsible for thedata analysis. The sample consists in toto of males age 15through 34 living in households located in a section of WestPhiladelphia. Each respondent was interviewed; a total samplesize of 559 was collected. (The refusal rate was 10%, which istypical for house-to-house surveys of this type.) The area inwhich the sample was drawn is composed mainly of twoheterogeneous populations: lower-middle and working-class, highschool educated blacks, and college-associated whites-studentsand professionals associated with [Drexel University and] theUniversity of Pennsylvania. About four respondents in ten in thissurvey are black, and just over half are white. (The number ofOrientals and Puerto Ricans or Mexicans is too small to permit ameaningful statistical analysis, so that when race is discussedin this report, only the black-white comparison will be made.)The racial composition is roughly equivalent to the censusfigures for the sample area although no attempt was made, througha weighting of cases, to "correct" any discrepancieswhich might have prevailed in population composition. Moredetailed information is available from the Institute for SurveyResearch. A quarter of the sample (23%) had never smoked marijuana; in17 cases (3%), no information on marijuana use was given by therespondent. Of the marijuana users the question asked aboutfrequency of use during the respondent's most recent year ofuse-about 1 in 10 smoked marijuana daily or more, about 1 in 5smoked approximately once or twice a week, 1 in 4 smoked once ortwice per month, on the average, and about 4 in 10 smokedmarijuana several times a year. (The study also asked how oftenthe respondent smoked marijuana in his first year of use avariable which I have not made use of in this report.) Questionswere also asked concerning the respondent's use of otherdrugs-"stimulants or uppers, such as bennies, speed, ordex," "sedatives or downers, such as sleeping pills,amytal or blues, or nembutal, or yellow jackets,""hallucinatory drugs, such as LSD, mescaline, or STP,"and "hard drugs, such as heroin, morphine, demerol, cocaine,or codeine." In addition, questions on one's friends' druguse-both marijuana and these other drugs--were asked. The commission of various offenses formed another segnient ofthe questionnaire. There were 16 of them, and ranged from thosewhich would not be considered crimes in most instances-such as"disturbing people"-to those which would be consideredfelonies, drawing long prison sentences such :as rape, armedrobbery, and assault. As would be expected], the serious offenseswere committed (or admitted to) by very, very few respondents-andthus, any comparison between users and non-users has to be mademainly on the basis of committing trivial offenses.... III. THE EFFECTS OF MARIJUANA At this point, I will introduce the data from the Philadelphiamarijuana use and crime study, specifically mandated by theNational Commission on Marihuana and Drug Abuse. This survey'sdata will form the bulk of the factual evidence on themarijuana-crime connection in the report which follows. The question of marijuana's relationship to crime andaggressive behavior is obviously closely related to the drug'seffects. One of the most fundamental generalizations inpsychopharmacology to be obtained from thousands of recentresearch efforts is that the same drug does not have standard andinvariant "effects," but that effects are sensitive toa number of extra-pharmacological variables, including thepersonality of the user, the social setting in which drug, usetakes place, the user's past experience with the drug, hisexpectations, and so on. Thus, it is elliptical and somewhatartificial, and incomplete, to speak of any drug's"effects," as if they occurred under any and allconditions, in all users. We should bear this qualification inmind when looking at the relationship between the ingestion of adrug and any subsequent behavior-with the latter supposedly",Caused" by the effects of the drug. Drug effectsvary, and, in addition, even standard effects do notautomatically translate into specific forms of human behavior.Even opposite forms of behavior could follow the same effects,given different individuals taking the drug, different settingsin which the drug is used, different definitions of the drug andits use and so on.... The data collected by the Philadelphia survey on thesubjective effects of marijuana dovetail precisely with those ofearlier studies. The effects agreed to by the users in the sampleare clearly inconsistent with aggressive behavior. This does notmean that marijuana cannot be related to the commission ofcriminal or aggressive acts-but it does suggest that the effectsof marijuana, per se, may have nothing to do with the commissionof crimes, especially violent crimes. Table 1 summarizes theresults from this survey's question on marijuana's effects, whichwas: "I am going to read to you some of the ways usingmarijuana may affect people. For each could you tell me whethermarijuana had this effect on you almost every time, more thanhalf the time, less than half the time, or never or almost never,when using marijuana." The effects asked about were relatedto feelings generally thought of as criminogenic either in apositive or a negative direction. Those that are generallyconsidered to be related to crimes deal with anger andfrustration, or with derangement, or with suggestibility. Thoseinversely related to the commission of crimes and aggressive actsdealt with relaxation and sleepiness. As can be readily seen from Table 1, users overwhelmingly denythat marijuana has effects on them which could be interpreted ascriminogenic or violent in nature. Nearly all respondentsspecifically denied that aggressive feelings came over themduring the marijuana intoxication. When asked whether, under theinfluence of marijuana, they had a feeling of wanting to hurtsomeone, 96% said that this occurred never or almost never. Whenasked whether they had feelings of wanting to do somethingviolent, 95% said never or almost never. Almost nine in 10 (88%)said that they never or almost never felt more angry when high.And almost eight in 10 (78%) said that they never or almost neverfelt frustrated when tinder the influence. Thus, thefrustration-anger-aggressive impulse syndrome seems to be anextremely rare phenomenon associated with the marijuanaintoxication. Likewise, the suggestibility syndrome does notappear to be characteristic, although it seems to be somewhatmore common than aggressive feelings. About six in 10 (or 59%) ofthe respondents said that they had a feeling of "being morewilling to follow other people's suggestions," never oralmost never. And about three-quarters (77%) said that they had a"feeling of being able to do anything," never or almostnever. Those sensations, however, which would be seen asinhibiting criminal and aggressive im pulses and acts weredecidedly more common, Exactly half of the respondents said thatthey felt "a feeling of relaxation" almost all thetime. About a third (31%) said that they felt less angry thanusual almost all the time. About a fifth (22%) felt drowsy andsleepy almost all the time-and another quarter (25%) felt thismore than half the time. These data suggest-but do not demonstrate-that the effects ofmarijuana per se are probably not related in any meaningful orcausal manner to aggressive or criminal acts. They give us aclue, but do not prove, that in and of itself, marijuana use doesnot "cause" the commission of criminal acts. In fact,if we were to look at the subjective effects of marijuanathemselves, they appear to point in exactly the oppositedirection-they would seem to inhibit crime, indeed, activity ofall kinds. The effect of marijuana would be more in the directionof reducing than stimulating aggressive, criminal or violentactivity. Two final qualifications would appear to be in order before Iexplore the marijuana-crime link more systematically and fully.One has to do with the length of time that the marijuanaIntoxication lasts. Two facts bear on this issue. First, eachepisode of use generally produces an intoxication which lastsroughly three or four hours, at the most. Marijuana's effectswear off about three hours or so after the user smokes the drug.Secondly, from previous studies ... as well as the survey whosedata I am analyzing In this report, it is clear that the average,or median, level of marijuana use Is roughly once a week. Thismeans that the typical marijuana user is under the influenceabout three or four hours per week, or roughly 3% or so of hiswaking hours, and under a "normal" state of mind theremaining 97%. Now, it is possible that this tiny segment of timewould influence some users in some significant way, but the factof its briefness of duration ought to be kept in mind whenreasoning about the impact of the drug on the lives of users. Thedaily user comprises roughly one marijuana user out of 10, andthe individual who is high all, or nearly all, of his wakinghours, probably constitutes about I or 2% of all marijuanasmokers. These facts cannot be ignored in our exploration of thecausal connection between the effects of marijuana and criminalactivities. And the last issue I will raise in the marijuana effects topichas to do with the truthfulness of the answers given by users. Aplausible objection to taking the word of users concerning theeffects of the drug on them would be that they areuntrustworthy-that they have a motive for lyIng, for portrayingthe drug and their experiences in a positive light. Actually,what nearly all researchers have found in an interview situationwith drug users is that they very rarely lie; in fact, theirhonesty about themselves and their activities and experiencesappears to be the rule, overwhelmingly. . . . The overall picture that we receive from . . . various studiesis that, like most interview subjects, marijuana users mayoccasionally lie or hide the truth, but their answers will, ingeneral, be truthful. This does not mean that everything they saymust be taken at face value-as with any other group ofinterviewees, anything which the researcher is capable ofchecking independently, and which we have data on, we shouldcorroborate with what we learn in the interview situation. At thesame time, we would be as fallacious in assuming that everythingthat marijuana smoker-, said to be true is suspect as if weaccepted everything they said to be true in all respects. Whatall of this means is that we must reason with caution fromself-reported data, use them whenever we must, and check themwhenever we can. IV. CRIMES UNDER THE INFLUENCE The Philadelphia survey on marijuana use and crime askedseveral questions concerning 16 different offenses. The questionsbegan as follows: "'Many people in every community commitacts which others consider offenses, delinquent acts, andviolations. Here is a list of these acts." The specificquestions dealt with whether the respondent had ever committedeach one, how often, how old lie was when the offense occurred,whether lie was caught by the police, and whether the respondenthad been drinking, or was under the influence of marijuana, 24hours or less before committing the act-as well as whether therespondent thought that using marijuana influenced him to committhe act; these questions were asked about the first as well asthe most recent such of. fense, if they occurred. The offenseswere: hurting someone in a minor way, hurting someone badly,carrying a knife. stealing a car, disturbing people, threateningto hurt someone, taking money, stealing from a store, making anobscene telephone call, forcing sexual intercourse with a woman,breaking into a house or store, damaging property, buying stolenproperty, setting off an alarm, carrying a gun, and using aweapon to steal. From these facts, it might be interesting tofind out what proportion of acts involved some drug use occurringwithin 24 hours-and whether that drug is alcohol or marijuana. Iwill explain after the data are presented what these facts canand cannot tell us. We must not be too hasty in reading too muchinto any given set of data. Table 2 presents summary information from this set ofquestions. I have presented figures for only six offenses:stealing from a store, damaging property, hurting someone in aminor way, breaking into a house or store, stealing a ear, andhurting someone badly. Some of the crimes asked about werecommitted by so few respondents (such as forcing sexualintercourse) that any statistical analysis would be completelymeaningless. Other offenses seem to be unrelated to theaggressive syndrome associated with marijuana use-such as buyingstolen property. The six I have chosen are, in any case,representative. Tile first three are relatively minor, and wouldusually be classified by the law as misdemeanors; the second twoare considerably more serious, and would often be classified asfelonies. Table 2 presents the proportion who drank alcohol, andsmoked marijuana 24 hours or fewer before the crime wascommitted; the figures in the first two columns are for the firsttime the respondent committed the offense, and the second twocolumns are for the most recent time, if it occurred more thanonce. What generalizations may we make front Table 2? First of all, committing these crimes is atypical. Not onethese six offenses was committed by a majority of the sample.Secondly the more serious the offense, the less likely it was tobe committed. Minor offenses were committed at least once bybetween four and five out of every 10 respondents, but majoroffenses had been committed at least once by something like onerespondent in 25. (And two of the offenses not in the table wererarer still; forcing sexual intercourse was admitted to by sixrespondents, or about one in 100, and using a weapon to steal wasreported by only three respondents, or one out of 200.) What about drugs and crime? Compared with not being under theinfluence, drugs tend to be atypical in the commission of crimes.For none of these categories, whether first offense or mostrecent, was being under the influence of either alcohol ormarijuana characteristic of over a quarter of all offenses, andmost are considerably below this. Most crimes here were committedwhen the offender was not under the influence of any drug,marijuana, or alcohol, when lie was in a "normal" stateof mind pharmacologically.* Secondly, in terms of absoluteincidence, alcohol is involved in the commission of crimeconsiderably more often than marijuana. Adding together all ofthe offenses committed 24 hours before each drug was used,alcohol had been used in conjunction with first offenses a totalof 47 times, and marijuana only five times-a ratio of not quiteten to one. For the most recent offenses, alcohol was involved atotal of 66 times, and marihuana 19--a ratio of about three toone. In conjunction with this point, it should be stressed that theclassic, aggressive, violent crimes traditionally andhistorically associated with the marijuana intoxication are very,very rarely committed-by anyone, high or normal, user or non-useralike. Six men in this survey admitted to forcing a woman to haveintercourse with him as a first offense, and three admitted torape more than the first time. In two out of the six first-timecases, the offender said that he had been drinking 24 hoursbefore, and in one out of the three most recent-time cases,drinking was involved as well. But in none of the six first timecases, and in none of the three recent-time cases, had anyonesmoked marijuana 24 hours before. (None of the men had beenapprehended for this offense, incidentally.) Only three of themen in the survey said that they had used a weapon to steal as afirst offense, and two admitted this offense more than the onetime-and none said that lie had either drunk or smoked 24 hoursbefore the offense. *Several facts should he born in mind when considering thisgeneralization. First of all, the survey asked about the use ofeach drug 24 hours before the offense was committed or less-andhence, the respondent was not necessarily under the influencewhen the offense was committed, although certainly manyrespondents were under the influence at that time. Secondly,anyone who uses marijuana is far more likely to becomeintoxicated with each episode of use than is true of each episodeof alcohol use. Considering the fact that the typical marijuana smoker in thisstudy had been intoxicated several hundred times for a total ofwell over a thousand hours, and therefore in a state of mindwhich, if the "causal" theory is correct, is aggressiveand criminogenic, then this almost total absence of violent andaggressive crimes committed by users should be puzzling. Thisfact indicates that the "causal" theory may beinadequate and erroneous. However, it is not possible to tell from Table 2 whether thecommission of crimes is more frequent for alcohol or marijuana ona relative basis during the period of intoxication. That is, ifanyone wanted to know whether a thousand hours of a marijuana oran alcohol intoxication was more like to result in the commissionof various crimes, this table would not convey this information.Unfortunately, this survey did not ask a question on thefrequency with which the respondents drank alcohol or, indeed,whether they drank at all so that an alcohol -marijuanacomparison cannot be more systematically made. It is entirelypossible that alcohol-related crimes are far more frequent thanmarijuana-related crimes. simply because alcohol is still, evenin this sample, probably the drug of choice among young people,and is more often used than marijuana (just as not being undertile influence of any drug is more frequently involved withcrimes than being under the influence, simply because mostpeople, most of the time, are not intoxicated). As to which drugis more "criminogenic" in the sense of what proportionof the time under the influence of marijuana vs. alcohol onecommits various crimes cannot be determined from the data fromthis study. However, in absolute terms, alcohol is considerablymore often used before crimes than marijuana. Another generalization that may be made from Table 2 is thatthe contribution of marijuana from first offense to most recentoffense grows somewhat relative to alcohol. That is, for thefirst offense, alcohol is used before it about 10 times asfrequently as is marijuana, but for most recent offense, alcoholis only three times as frequent. This probably is a reflection ofthe following two trends: (1) Marijuana smoking is considerablymore frequent today (i.e., closest in time when the most recentoffense occurred) titan a few years ago (i.e., closest in timewhen the first offense occurred), and hence, its frequencyrelative to alcohol would be greater in conjunction with anyactivity-criminal or non-criminal as well-simply because its useis more common ; (2) Marijuana smoking is more common among youngadults (the age group most closely represented by the age whenlast offense was committed) than among adolescents andpreadolescents (the age group most closely represented by the agewhen first offense was committed) and, moreover, as age rises,marijuana use rises faster than alcohol use rises, at least up,until early adulthood. . . . It is possible that, as marijuana usage increases, the numberof crimes committed under the influence of this drug may increaseas well. However, the question as to marijuana's directcontribution to the commission of crimes, especially aggressivecrimes, is ail independent issue, and one in need of exploration. V. WHO COMMITS CRIMES AND WHO DOESN'T? In this section, it is our job to explore two basic issues: Do marijuana users commit crimes and offenses any more frequently titan non-users do? Are any variables with which marijuana use is strongly related also correlated with criminality? In the next section I will deal with a third question, and onewhich is probably the most crucial one in this report: Can themarijuana-crime connection be explained mainly by the use ofmarijuana in and of itself, or is use itself dependent on thirdvariables which themselves explain the commission of offenses? As the principal measure of committing crimes, this study hasemployed the number of different types of offenses admitted to inthe 16 categories asked about. Naturally, there are many othercrimes not asked about, and, in addition, some of these crimeswould not correspond to the image most people would have of"classic" aggressive offenses-such as "disturbingpeople," or receiving stolen goods. However, as a generalindex or overall measure of criminality of different groups orcategories of individuals, this one is as good as any others thathave been employed, and is probably adequate for our purposes.(The survey, it must be noted, did not ask questions about anywhite collar crimes, which must be reckoned into an adequatemeasure of output of criminal behavior-but these crimes do notcorrespond with the public's image of aggressive crimes committedunder the influence of marijuana, and so their absence is lessrelevant than would appear at first glance.) Throughout theremainder of this report, the number of crimes and offenses willbe employed as the dependent variable-the outcome to beexplained. And throughout, I will be examining themarijuana-crime connection-as well as other relationships-insofaras it bears on file basic issue. Before the analysis proceeds, it should be pointed out that ofthe 16 offenses, not one of the violent crimes correlated withmarijuana use in any meaningful way at all, and a very weakrelationship was evidenced with only five of theoffenses-stealing from a store, buying stolen property,disturbing people, damaging property, and hurting someone in aminor way (the last of which showing the weakest association ofall). The statistical differences in rates of offenses betweenusers and non-users rest on adding together a small number ofweakly correlated offenses. When offense differences arediscussed, the reader should not hold the mistaken impressionthat they indicate massive differences, or differences indicatinga higher rate of classic, violent crimes among users. With thatwarning in mind, we may now proceed to user/non-user differencesin offenses. The first relationship to be presented, then, is whethermarijuana users as a whole commit offenses any more frequentlythan non-users as a whole. The answer is yes. I have employed twoindicators of marijuana use; one is frequency of marijuana useduring the period of most recent use (which may have been in thepast, or may be at present), and whether or not the respondenthas ever, or has never, used marijuana. Both indicators ofmarijuana use correlate very powerfully with committing offenses.For both tables, the differences are significant beyond the .001level, employing Chi-square as a test of significance, whichmeans that the differences observed could occur at random onlyone chance in a thousand. This is considered extremelysignificant. There is a regular and step-wise relationshipbetween frequency of use and committing offenses; the more that agiven respondent smokes marijuana, the greater is the likelihoodthat lie will have committed four or more offenses, and the loweris his likelihood of committing no offenses at all. Over a third(38%) of those who have never smoked marijuana said that theycommitted none of the 16 offenses asked about-but this was trueof only one respondent in eight (or 12%) of the regular smokers.At the other end, there was a 17% difference between non-usersand regular users (24% vs. 41%) in admitting to four or more ofthese offenses. Tables 3 and 4 present these data in detail. We would be remiss in our duties as sensitive and acute socialanalysts if we ended the analysis there. The simple correlationbetween marijuana use and offenses may very well mask importantand even more basic relationships buried beneath it. Marijuana iscorrelated in a simple manner with the commission of crimes,, butdoes it remain correlated when controls are applied? In otherwords, is it a spurious relationship, or one which will remainwhen crucial variables are held constant' Which-factors are alsorelated to the commission of offenses-which might actuallythemselves explain the simple marijuana-crime connection? Thereare several such variables-race, age, education, the use of otherdrugs, and the respondent's involvement in the drug subculture.Blacks are significantly less likely to use marijuana (64% of theblacks in the survey said that they had tried marijuana, but 86%of the whites said that they had done so), but slightly morelikely to admit to the commission of offenses--41% of all blackssaid that they committed four or more offenses but this was trueof only 25 ) % of all whites (see Tables 23 and 25). Does themarijuana-crime correlation hold up for blacks and whitesseparately? Age was also related to both offenses and marijuana.The oldest respondents (age 29-34) were least likely to havetried marijuana (61%), the youngest (15-20) were next least(73%), and the intermediate age groups (21-23 and 24-28) weremost likely to have tried marijuana (82% and 80%). There was alinear relationship between age and offenses, however. Theyoungest group was least likely to have committed no offenses(20%), and most likely to have committed four or more (42%) ; theoldest group was most likely to, have committed no offenses(35%), and least likely to have committed four or more (22%) (seeTables 29-31). Thus, we would want to know whether marijuana andcrime still correlate in each age group separately. The samething can be said for education (Tables 26-28), the use of drugsother than marijuana (Tables 11-16), and having friends who usedrugs (Tables 17-22)-the relationship between marijuana use andcrime could be mitigated or even transformed altogether if thesethird variables are considered. One possibility is that themarijuana-crime relationship is wiped out altogether with theapplication of these controls-that is, that the relationship iscompletely spurious. A second possibility is that themarijuana-crime connection may be specific to some groups orcategories, but not others. And the third possibility is that thesame original relationship remains basically unaltered, or evenis strengthened, by the application of these controls. Special attention ought to be paid to the drug-relatedvariables. There is a powerful and significant associationbetween the use of marijuana and the use of other drugs. Althoughrecent studies have presented evidence that this basicrelationship is probably not due to the effects of marijuana perse, but to friendships and associations made in conjunction withmarihuana use . . . , the simple relationship between marihuanaand other drugs is a statistical fact. There is, in addition, astrong and marked association with using drugs other thanmarijuana and the commission of crimes. Thus, a legitimatequestion to be explored is whether "marijuana only"users have a greater crime rate than non-users, whether thehigher rate of the commission of offenses cannot be attributedlargely or solely to using drugs other than marijuana. VI. MARIJUANA USE AND CRIME: CAUSAL OR SPURIOUS Our first clue as to the nature of the underlying relationshipbetween marijuana use and crime is obtained by examining Table 5,which documents the association between number of offenses andmarijuana use, taking into account the use of other drugs aswell. Table 5 shows that "marijuana only" marijuanausers are only very slightly more likely to commit crimes thannon-users. Tire original nine percentage point difference betweenusers and non-users in committing four or more offenses hasshrunk to only two percentage points (in fact, only onepercentage point--we are comparing 24.4% with 25.5%, and theoriginal 19 percentage point difference between users andnon-users in committing no offenses has been reduced to 13percentage points. In fact, the "marijuana only" useris far more similar to the non-user in number of offensescommitted than he is to the user of marijuana plus two or moreother drugs. The application of the control involving other drugsclearly attenuates the marijuana-crime relationship, and much ofthe user-non-user differences in offenses committed can be tracedto the fact that marijuana users are significantly more likely touse other drugs, rather than the use of marijuana per se.* *The exploration of the "escalation" hypothesis-thequestion of whether or not marijuana "leads to" the useof other more dangerous drugs-would take us far afield in thisreport. The issue is dealt with in a separate report by theauthor prepared for the National Commission on Marihuana and DrugAbuse, however. Our confidence in the lack of basic association betweenmarijuana use itself and offenses--and our ability to attributethe simple original relationship to the use of drugs other thanmarijuana-is strengthened when we examine the relationshipbetween frequency of use and offenses, holding the use of otherdrugs constant. Table 5A presents these data. Among"marijuana only" users, there is no statisticallysignificant correlation between frequency of use and thecommission of crimes--the differences are small, insignificant,and in no consistent direction. Among users of one other drug,likewise, frequency of marijuana use is extremely looselyassociated with committing offenses-the differences which areobserved are small, statistically insignificant, and point in noparticular direction. And lastly, among users of two or moreother drugs aside from marijuana, the association betweenfrequency of marijuana use and the commission of the offensesdescribed earlier is loose and not at all significant. Table 5Avery strongly indicates the validity of the "spurious"model. Closely related to the use of other drugs is a control whichshould be explored: the respondent's involvement with adrug-using subculture-with others who also use drugs. Naturally,as we saw in the last section, individuals who use marijuana tendto have friends who also use marijuana. What we would like toknow is whether the social patterns they exhibit can be traced totheir use of the drug. or to the fact that they have friends whouse drugs. Thus, we should be very interested in looking at theindividual who uses marijuana, but who does riot have drug-usingfriends, as well as the individual who does riot rise marijuana,but has drug-using friends. If interesting changes take place inthe original marijuana-crime correlation, then we haveindications that it is the individual's social relations, and nothis rise of marijuana, per se, that determine marijuana use'scorrelation with crime. Tables 6 and 7 deal with this issue; theyshould be examined in conjunction with one another. Among respondents with no marijuana-using friends (out oftheir 10 closest friends). as well as those with no drug-usingfriends at all. almost an identical relationship betweenmarijuana use and crime obtains as in the original Table 3.Marijuana users are, significantly (but not strikingly) morelikely to commit four or more offenses, and significantly lesslikely to commit none. The percentage differences in Tables 6 and7 are almost the same (even slightly more) as those in Table.3-about 25% at the "none" end vs. 19% for the originaltable, and about 18% at the "four or more" end vs. 9%for the original table (Table 3). If we were to rely only onthese segments of the table, we would be led to the, inferencethat marijuana is meaningfully related to the commission ofcrimes. However, an extraordinary thing happens to the other segmentsof the table: among those with drug-using friends, there is norelationship at all between marijuana use and committingoffenses. The differences are so small as to be statisticallyinsignificant. (And they are actually in the oppositedirection-non-users are slightly more likely to commit four ormore offenses than users are.) In other words the marijuana-crimerelationship is completely wiped out by the application ofcontrols-in this case, integration into the drug-usingsubculture. We are led overwhelmingly to the conclusion thatmarijuana users tend to be somewhat more likely to commit crimessolely because they are part of a drug-using subculture; theactual properties of marijuana appear to be completelyunassociated with criminal behavior. Anyone (whether he usesmarijuana or not) who makes friends and becomes involved withothers who use drugs-especially others who use drugs in additionto and aside from marijuana stands a higher likelihood ofcommitting offenses, simply because this segment of thepopulation tends to be more lax about obeying the law. It ismerely because marijuana users tend to associate with others whoare part of this subculture that their crime rate is somewhathigher. In other words, the marijuana-crime relationship-in termsof the causal or effects model is completely spurious. What of the marijuana-using isolate? What of those who usemarijuana but who have no friends who use drugs-either marijuanaor other drugs? How can we explain the fact that the originaldifference in offense rate between users and non-users were notwiped out among those without drug-using friends-in contrast tobeing wiped out among those who had drug-using friends? Lookingback at Tables 6 and 7, we are struck by the fact that theoffense rate of the marijuana-using group without drug-usingfriends is as high as the groups with drug using friends. Whatdoes this indicate? First of all, involvement with a drug-risingsubculture is clearly not the only determinant of a high rate ofcommitting offenses. Probably something else is at work. The factthat the offense differences wash out among those involved withthe drug subculture indicates that rise by itself (i.e., beinghigh) cannot be a factor in the original marijuana-crimerelationships difference cannot explain two things that aresimilar. The using isolate, however, is probably a (Qualitativelydifferent social being from those who either do not rise, orthose who use and have friends who also use. The isolate isprobably deviant in a variety of ways crime being one of them.The fact that he uses in spite of having no friends who use(although lie may have friends who do not use) means that he usesmost of the time alone. has not integrated his activities into asocial life or a subculture, and probably pursues some activitieswhich the dominant society would judge to be eccentric andunusual. In other words, it is possible that his involvement withcrime is related to his social isolation from a group whichpursues drug activities similar to his own, rather than his useof marijuana. However, these remarks must be regarded asspeculation, since more complete information is not available. A related process occurs when race is employed as the controlvariable. Among blacks, the original relationship remains intact;marijuana users are significantly (although not markedly) morelikely to commit four or more offenses, and less likely to commitnone, than is true of non-users. (The relationship is significantat the .004 level, using Chi-square.) However, among whites, theoriginal relationship is completely washed out; users are not atall more likely to commit offenses. Table 8 presents these data.The minor differences can be completely accounted for by randomfluctuations; the relationship is not significant at any level. When education is treated as the control variable in thisrelationship, the marijuana-crime connection follows a patternparallel to the two previous explorations-that is, it iscompletely washed out for some groups, but remains for others. InTable 9, we see that marijuana users who have at least attendedcollege, but not graduate school, are not any more likely tocommit offenses than college non-users. The percentagescommitting four or more crimes, and those committing none, arealmost identical for users and non-users alike. (The differencesare insignificant, and due to random fluctuation.) However, amongrespondents with only a high school education, the same basicrelationship produced in Table 3 is upheld: marijuana users aresignificantly more likely to have committed offenses thannon-users. However, at least two variables are compounded here,since most respondents with a college education are white. Thus,the retainment of the original marijuana-crime correlation amonghigh school education respondents, and its wash-out among collegeeducated respondents, should not come as any surprise. However,among respondents with at least some graduate school education,the original relationship asserts itself; users are more likelyto commit offenses than non-users. (The differences observed aresignificant at the .05 level; in other words, the differenceshave a one in 20 chance of occurring purely at random.) Table 9presents the marijuana-crime relationship, holding educationconstant. Using age as a control variable also produces mixed results.Among the two youngest age groups (15--20 and 21-23), thedifferences obtaining between users and nonusers arestatistically insignificant, and could have occurred by chancealone; in the youngest of these two groups, the non-user isslightly more likely to have committed four or more offenses, andin the next to youngest of these groups, the user is slightlymore so--but in both, the differences are too small to bemeaningful. In the 24-to-28-year-old group, the differencesapproach statistical significance, but they are not substantial(.07 level of significance, using Chi-square). However, among theoldest group (age 29 to 34), the same basic difference inoffenses as obtained in the original relationship holds up here;users are about twice as likely to have committed four or moreoffenses as non-users (28% vs. 13%), and less than half as likelyto have committed no offenses (21% vs. 58&). These dataappear in Table 10. VII. SUMMARY AND CONCLUSIONS The central effort in this report has been to determinewhether marijuana use, in and of itself, is meaningfully andcausally related to the commission of crime. Two models have beenused in the past to answer this issue: the causal model, whichholds that using marijuana, being under the influence of thedrug, actually does stimulate the will to commit antisocial acts,and the spurious model, which holds that marijuana use is merelya reflection of independent and more powerful forces, and that initself, marijuana use is unrelated to criminal and aggressivebehavior. Some small amount of research has been conducted in thepast on this issue, but no consistent findings have been turnedup; . . . It is because of these factual lacunae that theNational Commission on Marihuana and Drug Abuse mandated a studyof marijuana use and crime, which culminated in the Philadelphiasurvey, as well as this report. The findings from this study strongly support the view thatmarijuana, use by itself is not related in any meaningful orsystematic fashion to criminal behavior, that marijuana useprobably does not "cause criminiality. The"spurious" model appears to be a far more accuratedescription of the marijuana-crime connection than does the"causal" model. The use of marijuana per se is probablycompletely unrelated to criminal and aggressive behavior. Thedrug does not "cause" any significant number of usersto commit crimes, or aggressive or violent behavior. The effectsof the drug seem to be, from what can be gathered from theavailable data on the question, without criminogenic causality.This does not mean that it is not possible to commit crimes,including aggressive crimes, under the influence of marijuana-butthat being high does not increase one's probability of doing so,that on an hour-for-hour, crime-for-crime basis, there areprobably no significant differences between being intoxicated onmarijuana and being "normal," not under the influenceof any drug. A wide variety of data have been brought to bear on themarijuana-crime issue. First of all, regarding the subjective self-reported effectsof marijuana, all indications are that the effects classicallydescribed as being related to aggressive behavior and thecommissions crimes-feeling angry, frustrated, wanting to -hurtsomeone, being willing to follow any and all suggestions ofothers, being deranged, wanting to do something violent-have noempirical support whatsoever; users consistently describe these"effects" as non-existent or as extremely rare andatypical, no different from normally. In fact, precisely theopposite is the case: if anything, the effects of marijuana wouldhave far more to do with reducing the criminal"impulse," whatever that might be, due to the fact thatthey tend to be in the direction of relaxation, feeling calm, ofnot wanting to move about, feeling somewhat drowsy, sleepy.Activity of any sort tends to be inhibited by the marijuanaintoxication. Secondly, the Philadelphia survey asked the respondents aboutusing marijuana and/or alcohol 24 hours or less before variouscrimes were committed. Marijuana very rarely figured into thecommission of crimes in any way. For only a tiny minority of allcrimes committed was the respondent under the influence. This wasespecially the case for serious and aggressive crimes. Alcoholwas far more likely to be used soon before criminal activity thanmarijuana. - The third type of information brought to bear on themarijuana-crime question was the self-admitted offense rate ofusers versus non-users. The total number of different types ofcrimes which respondents said that they had committed wascompared. The simple relationship between using marijuana andcommitting offenses was positive and statistically significant,and there was also a high correlation between frequency ofsmoking marijuana and committing offenses. However, a wide rangeof other variables, themselves related to both crime and tomarijuana use, were also correlated-race, education, age, the useof other drugs, and having drug-using friends. Thus, the issuebecame: is it the causal connection with these third variableswhich produces the marijuana crime simple correlation, or doesthe correlation hold up even when these factors are controlled?In other words, which is right, the causal or tile, spuriousmodel? Is marijuana use merely dependent itself on larger,broader, more potent factors-or does it exert an independentpower? Do users commit crimes more frequently than nonusersbecause they use marijuana or because they happen to be the kindsof people who, would have a higher crime rate, marijuana or nomarijuana. The evidence from these three-variable tests support the"spurious" model. The control tables show that thedifferences in crime rate between users and non-users is, in mostcases, dependent not on marijuana use per se, but on these largerfactors. The fact that the relationship disappears, or is wipedout, when some controls are applied shows that themarijuana-crime connection is dependent on sociologicalvariables, and not chemical effects. When the use of other drugswas held constant, the marijuana-crime correlation was severelyattenuated, and in some cases, washed out entirely. When thevariable of having friends who use other drugs-both marijuana aswell as stimulants, sedatives, hallucinogens and "harddrugs" was applied, the relationship disappeared among thosewith drug-using friends, but not those who had no drug-usingfriends. When race was held constant, the marijuana-crimeconnection was wiped out completely among whites, but not blacks;among white marijuana users, their crime rate was notstatistically different from non-users, but black users did havea higher crime rate than non-using blacks-similar in magnitude tothe original relationship. When education was used as a controlvariable, we saw that among college-educated respondents, themarijuana-crime correlation was nonexistent, but it remainedamong respondents with a high school education, and for those whohad attended graduate school. And lastly, age was applied as acontrol. Among the youngest groups, the marijuana-crimerelationship was attenuated, but it remained somewhat strongamong the two oldest age categories. If there were truly a causal relationship between marijuanause and crime, these disappearing correlations would not occur.The application of sociological variables cannot wash out achemical reaction in the user. The enormous variability dependenton social factors indicates that marijuana effects do notinherently produce behavior of a criminal nature. The kinds ofpeople who use the drug tend to follow Patterns of behaviorregardless of whether or not they use marijuana. By itself,marijuana, use is not a potent producer of behavior, andcertainly not criminal behavior. Individuals who commit criminalacts are those who would do so with or without the use ofmarijuana. The data from this study support-the conclusion, almostwithout qualification, that marijuana use does not cause criminalbehavior.* *A subsequent regression analysis with the six variables usedindependently as controls showed that when all six variables areapplied simultaneously, the use of marijuana in and of itselfaccounts for less than 1% of the variance in committing offenses(personal communication by the author, 24 January 1972). Contents | Feedback | Search DRCNet Library | Schaffer Library | Major Studies Marihuana, A Signal of Misunderstanding WT01-B26-3IA031-000651-B022-117http://206.61.184.43:80/schaffer/LIBRARY/studies/nc/nc1m.htm 206.61.184.43 19970122123532 text/html 8348HTTP/1.0 200 OKDate: Wednesday, 22-Jan-97 12:35:26 GMTServer: WebSitePro/1.1f (S/N wpo-0deb)Allow-ranges: bytesContent-type: text/htmlLast-modified: Saturday, 28-Dec-96 06:56:48 GMTContent-length: 8131 Summary and Conclusions: Marihuana and Crime Contents | Feedback | Search DRCNet Library | Schaffer Library | Major Studies Marihuana, A Signal of Misunderstanding The Report of the National Commission on Marihuana and DrugAbuse Summary and Conclusions: Marihuana and Crime The Commission's review of the available evidence bearing onthe relationship between marihuana use and criminal, aggressiveand delinquent behavior has yielded the following information. The once prevalent belief among the general public and theprofessional law enforcement, criminal justice and researchcommunities that marihuana causes crime, violence, aggression anddelinquency has moderated appreciably over the years. Recentevidence indicates that increased attention has been devoted,instead, to a possible statistical correlation rather than acause-effect relationship. At present, however, considerable confusion and uncertaintyexists among both the general and professional publics, amongyouth and adults, and among marihuana users and non-users aboutthe relationship between marihuana and criminal, aggressive ordelinquent behavior. The confusion and uncertainty stem from ageneral lack of knowledge and understanding about the effects ofthe drug, including its potential for physical addiction. Manypersons are still under the misapprehension that marihuana isaddicting and that crimes are committed in order to support adrug "habit." In general, recent changes in public and professional opinionhave corresponded with and reflected the increased use ofmarihuana, particularly within the middle class segment ofsociety; more direct observation of and professional experiencewith the marihuana user; new and more enlightened informationabout the drug and its effects; and concomitant changes in thepublic image of the user. There is no systematic empirical evidence, at least that drawnfrom the American experience, to support the thesis that the useof marihuana either inevitably or generally causes, leads to orprecipitates criminal, violent, aggressive or delinquent behaviorof a sexual or nonsexual nature. Laboratory studies of effects have revealed no evidence toshow that marihuana's chemical properties are, by themselves,capable of producing effects which can be interpreted ascriminogenic; that is, that marihuana is an independent cause ofcriminal or aggressive behavior. If anything, the effectsobserved suggest that marihuana may be more likely to neutralizecriminal behavior and to militate against the commission ofaggressive acts. The research community has recently gathered considerableevidence to show that marihuana and criminal, aggressive anddelinquent behavior are statistically and significantlycorrelated when measured together in isolation from variableswhich are related to marihuana use and other forms of antisocialbehavior. The data also show, however, that this statisticalassociation either attenuates significantly or disappearscompletely when the proper statistical controls are applied. In other words, the observed relationship between the, use ofmarihuana and criminal, violent, aggressive and delinquentbehavior is spurious. It is dependent on suchextra-pharmacological factors as the age, race and education ofthe user; the type of community in which he lives; his pasthistory of psychosocial maladjustment; and his involvement in acriminal or delinquent subculture (use of other drugs; drugbuying and selling activities; associations with friends who alsouse, buy and sell cannabis or other drugs). To reiterate what Professor Goode has so cogently stated, If there were truly a causal relationship between marihuanause and crime, these disappearing correlations would not occur.The application of sociological variables cannot wash out achemical reaction in the user (1972:52). To put it still another way, to believe that marihuana causescriminal, violent, aggressive or delinquent behavior is toconfuse the effects of the drug with the people who use it. From the perspective of marihuana's relationship to antisocialbehavior of a criminal or violent nature, the drug cannot be saidto constitute a significant threat to the public safety. If itsuse, therefore, is to be discouraged, it must be discouraged ongrounds other than its role in the commission of criminal orviolent or delinquent acts. The enormous increases in marihuana arrests over the pastseveral years are ample evidence that the police have takenseriously their role of maintaining law and order with respect tomarihuana use and that they have responded to public pressure andconcern about the increase in marihuana use. Yet, in theirexperience with the marihuana user they have been placed in theunenviable position of having to enforce a law either disregardedor discredited by large segments of the population they serve. Over and over again they have seen their efforts in thisrespect negated by the de jure or de facto modification, if notnullification, of the laws against possession by prosecutors,judges and even legislators. Their increasing frustration anddemoralization, therefore, at least with respect to the marihuanauser, is quite, understandable. These other officials, however, are likewise placed in adifficult position; for they, too, must enforce and apply thecriminal law, and they, too, must respond to public pressures andconcerns. In some instances, they have demonstrated particularresistance to criminalizing the user and subjecting him tocriminal penalties which are deemed to be unwarranted if notunwise. In the case of marihuana, recent changes in law enforcementpractices with respect to the user have, in fact, reflected theincreased use and public tolerance of marihuana. The statutorychanges now taking place at the state and local levels arefurther evidence of the trend toward greater public acceptance ofthe user. In these instances, the laws and their enforcement werealtered because they no longer performed the symbolic function ofexpressing society's disapproval of marihuana use. Contents | Feedback | Search DRCNet Library | Schaffer Library | Major Studies Marihuana, A Signal of Misunderstanding WT01-B26-4IA031-000651-B022-139http://206.61.184.43:80/schaffer/LIBRARY/studies/nc/nc1n.htm 206.61.184.43 19970122123540 text/html 39268HTTP/1.0 200 OKDate: Wednesday, 22-Jan-97 12:35:32 GMTServer: WebSitePro/1.1f (S/N wpo-0deb)Allow-ranges: bytesContent-type: text/htmlLast-modified: Saturday, 28-Dec-96 06:56:44 GMTContent-length: 39050 Marihuana and Driving Contents | Feedback | Search DRCNet Library | Schaffer Library | Major Studies Marihuana, A Signal of Misunderstanding The Report of the National Commission on Marihuana and DrugAbuse Marihuana and Driving The United States Department of Transportation has estimatedthat in 1970, more than 111 million Americans were licenseddrivers and that there were approximately 109 million vehiclesregistered and regularly traversing America's streets andhighways. The Commission-sponsored National Survey (Abelson, etal., 1972) has revealed that approximately 21 million or 15% ofall American adults 18 years and over have tried marihuana andthat about 6.9 million adults currently use the drug. At the present time, there is no reliable estimate of theproportion of marihuana users who drive while "high,"but America's tragic experience with highway accidents andfatalities involving persons driving under the influence ofalcohol raises serious questions about the extent to whichmarihuana impairs driving skills and performance and therebyconstitutes a public safety hazard on this nation'sthoroughfares. In recent years, public safety experts, along with the medicaland scientific communities, have devoted increasing attention tothe effects of any mind-altering drug on driving, but there is asyet little evidence to inform discussion. As part of its moregeneral concern with the impact of marihuana on public safety,the Commission has reviewed the available research and hasconcluded that the evidence which presently exists is, at best,inconclusive. In view of this finding and prior to a rather brief summary ofthe knowledge we now have, the Commission feels compelled to urgethe public to consider these findings as only tentative, to adoptan extremely cautious attitude about the effects of marihuana ondriving skill and performance, and perhaps most importantly, toavoid driving at all while under the influence of anymind-altering drug or intoxicant. THE CURRENT STATE OF KNOWLEDGE The literature on drugs and driving contains severalreferences to the role of drugs, including marihuana, in trafficviolations, accidents and fatalities. They differ considerably,however, in the nature and extent to which they influence oraffect driving behavior (Waller, 1965; Chetta, 1967, Commissionon Narcotic Drugs, 1968; Third Triannual Congress on TrafficAccidents, 1969; Waller, 1970; Klein, Davis and Blackbourne, 1971National Institute of Mental Health, 1972). The studies examine the relationship between marihuana anddriving and tend to be either statistical and enumerative withregard to traffic accidents or experimental with respect to thephysiological and psychological effects of marihuana use deemedto be related to driving skill and performance. All of themsuffer to one degree or another from an overabundance or dearthof extraneous variables and have, therefore, precludedgeneralization of the results and the production of conclusive,and valid findings. The difficulty in interpreting the data gathered fromstatistical or enumerative studies of traffic accidents derivesprimarily from the inability to isolate precise cause. There areno tissue, urine or blood analysis methods currently andsystematically in use outside the laboratory, similar to thoseavailable for alcohol, for determining the presence of marihuanain the bodily fluids of drivers. Statistical Studies The statistical or enumerative studies generally can becharacterized as two types. In the first type, samples ofarrested marihuana, or other drug law violators are selected andtheir traffic violations or accident rates are compared withthose in the general population. In the second type, samples aredrawn initially from lists of persons known to have committedtraffic violations or been involved in traffic accidents. Thesamples are then divided into persons who in some way areidentified as marihuana users and those who are not and theincidence of traffic violations or accidents in the two groups isthen compared.5 5 Dr. E. J. Woodhouse, a chemist, is now in the process ofdeveloping a marihuana testing method. At the present time hereports being able to detect the presence of marihuana byanalyzing urine samples (Polak, 1971). Waller (1965), compared the crash rates per unit miles ofdriving of known marihuana users with those of other drivers ofsimilar age distribution. He found that the crash risk was notincreased by the use of marihuana. A similar study yielding similar results was performed in theState of Washington (Crancer and Quiring, 1968). There were nosignificant differences in the crash rates per 100 driversbetween those who did use marihuana and those who did not. Theresearchers compared the driving records of persons arrested forillegal drug use (100 narcotics users, 123 dangerous drug usersand 79 marihuana users) with those of 687,228 licensed driversliving in the same general driving environment (King's County,Washington). Comparisons were made of the number of accidents,the number of violations and the type of violations accumulatedbetween January 1, 1961 and October 1, 1967. All three drug using groups had significantly higher accidentand violation rates than did the comparison group matched for ageand sex; the accident rate for the marihuana users was 39%higher; for the narcotics users, 29% higher; and for thedangerous drug users, 57% higher. The violation rates were 180 %higher, 149 % higher and 16% higher, respectively. Table 9 below shows the percentage of marihuana users andcounty drivers, by sex, with none and 10 or more trafficviolations and accidents between January 1, 1961 and October 1,1967. Since the majority of the users were first arrested for theirillegal drug use in 1964, the researchers compared theirviolation rates before and after that time. The data show aviolation rate of 1.78 per marihuana driver prior to 1964(January 1, 1961 to June 30, 1964) ; the rate increased to 3.44per driver between July 1, 1964 and October 1, 1967. For the sametime periods, the county group's violation rate per driverincreased from 0.4-4 to 0.53. The violation rates for both reckless and hit-and run drivingwere significantly higher for the marihuana users than for thecounty comparison group. In short, these data suggest that marihuana users are muchmore likely to have many violations and accidents and are muchless likely to have clear accident and violation records than area comparison group of drivers drawn from the same generalpopulation. Them findings are difficult to interpret moreprecisely, however, because Such variables as the number of milesdriven and overall driving experience were not taken intoaccount. Table 9.-MARIHUANA USERS AND COUNTY DRIVERS HAVING NONE ANDTEN OR MORE TRAFFIC VIOLATIONS AND ACCIDENTS, BY SEX, JANUARY 1,1961OCTOBER 1, 1967 (Figures in Percentages) Marihuana users County drivers Male Female Male Female None... 10.0 33.3 41.1 67.7 10..... 22.9 11.1 2.2 0.1 Source: Crancer and Quiring, 1968:9. A survey of 12,453 Virginia high school students was conductedduring 1970 by the Virginia Highway Safety Division (Ferguson andHoward, 1971). The objectives of the survey were to determine theextent of drug use in the Virginia high school population and toassess the number of traffic crashes which could be caused bydrug-impaired drivers. The data, show that 2.9% of the sample reported experiencing,either as a passenger or driver, at least one traffic crash inwhich drug use "could have been a causal factor." Thedata also show that the students were more likely to attributethe crashes to marihuana (54%) than to other drugs (46%). Use ofmarihuana was found to be slightly more common than was the useof other drugs among drivers involved in non-fatal collisions butwas used with equal frequency in those drivers involved in fatalcrashes (p. 31). The researchers suggest as an explanation for their findingsthe fact that marihuana. usage was greater among this population(12.3%) than was the use of other drugs (7.7%). This explanationis not completely adequate, however, in that the survey ignoresboth the possible presence of alcohol along with marihuana andother drugs, either separately or in combination. As such, itcannot be said that marihuana causes more accidents than do otherdrugs, including alcohol. Klein, Davis and Blackbourne (1971) surveyed students at fouracademic institutions in Florida in an effort to assess the roleof marihuana in traffic involvements. Respondents were dividedinto five groups of marihuana users: (a) non-users, (b) previoususers, (c) using less than four times a month, (d) using four toeight times per month, and (e) using more than eight times permonth. For each group information was obtained relative to thefrequency of alcohol and tobacco use; respondents' ability tojudge speed, time and reaction time; traffic involvements; andlicense revocations. In addition, respondents were asked theiropinion about whether or not persons under the influence ofmarihuana should be permitted to operate aircraft and variousother vehicles, including taxis and private automobiles. With respect to traffic involvements, the data show that 18%of the infrequent users and 53% of the frequent users reportedhaving been stopped by the police while under the influence ofmarihuana. The data also show that as the frequency of useincreases, so too does the number of license revocations. As Nichols (1971) has pointed out, however: Apparently no attempt was made to compare the number oftimes they were stopped while under the influence of marihuana asopposed to the number of times they were stopped while not underthe influence. Thus, the data do not give any indication ofwhether the violations were due to the effects of marihuana orwhether they were the result of poor driving habits in the firstplace (pp. 28-29). Both experimental and quasi-experimental approaches toassessing the effects of marihuana on driving suffer frommethodological shortcominogs and inconsistent results. Theprimary deficiency in the experimental investigations lies intheir inability to hold constant the numerous external variableswhich actually affect driving behavior and which, therefore,precludes valid comparisons of actual driving performance withthat simulated in a controlled but unrealistic environment. Inthe quasi-experimental studies using interviewing techniques, theaccuracy of self-reports becomes a question which must be raisedwith respect to the, effects of marihuana on driving skills andperformance. The data derived front these studies, however, suggest thatmarihuana does interfere, at least in some users, with theability to judge time, speed and distance ; with reaction time;and with the ability to control the vehicle and respond to anemergency situation (Zinberg and Well, 1969; James, 1970- Hochmanand Brill, 1971; Klein, et al., 1971). Data from a survey of 10% of the undergraduate students atUCLA (Hochman and Brill, 1971) show that one-third of allmarihuana users drive, occasionally while "high." Ofthe chronic users, 42% drive frequently while high and 10% alwaysdrive while "stoned" (p. 22). According to the researchers, "both (marihuana) users andnon-users were universally of the opinion that (marihuana)'intoxication' affected driving, but users thought, that theycompensated by being more cautious, driving more slowly, andconcentrating on the driving," (p. 22). The researchers alsoreport that as usage of marihuana becomes more chronic,"fear" and avoidance of driving while intoxicateddecreases and the ability to compensate for the drug's effectsincreases. With respect to traffic violations, the data show that 4% ofoccasional and chronic marihuana users had received traffictickets when they were intoxicated by the drug but that none hadbeen discovered to be intoxicated at the time. These findings corroborate those, from an earlier study(Zinberg and Weil, 1969) in which the researchers stated that"users appear to be able to compensate 100% for thenonspecific effects of ordinary doses of marihuana on ordinarypsychological performance" (p. 39). In another report Weil(1969) wrote that "it appears that once a person becomesaccustomed to the effects of cannabis, he, can compensate fullyfor the drug's influence on performance of tasks of ordinarycomplexity." (p. 6). Experimental Studies Controlled laboratory experiments have attempted to measurethese and other effects on driving with greater specificity.Manno and his associates (1970) found that there are significantimpairments of motor and mental performance attributable tomarihuana. In an experiment conducted by Frank and his colleagues (1971),marihuana smokers demonstrated "a marked and very consistentincrease in the amount of time required to recover from glare . .. This ranged up to four times as long with a mean peak of almosttwice as long (171%) after smoking marihuana. . . . Furthermore,this increase in glare recovery time persisted for severalhours" (p. 9) and did not seem to be dose related. These researchers did not find significant differences betweenmarihuana users and nonusers, however, in pulse, rate, timeestimation or dilation of the pupils. With respect to marihuana's effect on emotional reactions, Dr.S. E. Miller (1959) suggested that "these drugs (Includingmarihuana) have similar abilities for changing normal emotionalreactions, even causing individuals to become oblivious orindifferent to their surroundings" (p. 864). Klein and hiscolleagues (1971), however, urge against generalizing thesefindings from the laboratory situation to the complex task ofactual driving. Crancer and his coworkers (1969) conducted a study designed todetermine the effects of a "normal social marihuanahigh" on simulated driving performance among 36 experiencedmarihuana smokers and compared the effects they discovered withthose occasioned by alcohol use. The researchers found that experienced marihuana users underconditions of a "normal social marihuana high" (fromtwo cigarettes totalling 1.7 grams of THC) accumulatedsignificantly more speedometer errors than under controlconditions. No significant differences were found, however,relative to accelerator, brake, signal, steering or total errorsin simulator scores. Comparing the effects of alcohol (at a blood level of0.10%-the legal limit of intoxication) and marihuana intoxication(1.7 grams THC), the researchers concluded that moderateintoxication by marihuana was less detrimental to simulateddriving performance than was the presence of alcohol at the 0.10%blood level. The mean error scores were 84.46 for the controlgroup, 84.49 for the marihuana group and 97.44 for the alcoholgroup (p. 6). There have been several criticisms leveled at this study,however, and several researchers have cited contradictoryfindings. Frank and his associates (1971) have pointed out thefact that the subjects did not have, complete control over theirsimulated drive. Kalant (1969) noted that "it does not followautomatically that lack of effect of a drug on the simulated taskwill correlate with lack of effect on the actual task" (p.640). He also criticized the use of dissimilar doses of marihuanaand alcohol for the comparison and in this regard stated that"the finding that a heavy dose of alcohol caused moreimpairment than a mild dose of marihuana is neither surprisingnor helpful in assessing the relative effects of the two drugs inthe relative doses in which they are normally used" (p.640). Lastly, Kalant pointed out that Crancer and his colleaguesfailed to indicate if any measures were actually taken to ensureeffective absorption of the doses by the experimental subjects.This may be important, if the findings of dose dependentimpairments observed by Dagirmanjian and Boyd (1962) and Isbelland his associates (1967) are valid. Although Crancer and his fellow researchers did not feel thatthe impairments found were related to either dosage level orexperience with the drug, this latter finding is also subject toquestion in view of the earlier findings of the Mayor's Committeeon Marihuana (1944) and Weil and his colleagues (1968) that theperformance of drug-naive subject, was more impaired than wasthat of experienced marihuana users. In a more recent simulator study, attention was directed tothe effects of marihuana on risk acceptance (Dott, 1971). Theexperimental situation involved the placement of 12 experiencedmarihuana users under four conditions (non-smoking, placebo, lowdose, and high dose) in order to compare subjects' reactions tovarious passing situations, some of which required an immediateresponse to an emergency. The data show that even though more accidents occurred underthe two marihuana conditions than under the placebo (and normal)condition, the differences were not significant. Significantdifferences were found in the number of passes completed and inthe time needed to make pass decisions. Not only did themarihuana smokers complete fewer passes (174 in placebocondition, 153 in low dose condition, and 133 in the high dosecondition), but they took more time to make the pass decisionswhile under the influence of the drug. The researcher concludedthat "marihuana appears to make the subject less willing toaccept risk, and it delays elective decision reaction time.Effects were most noted in situations which did not have a highattention demanding value. . . . In those situations which wereof an emergency nature and which demanded immediate attention andresponse . . . . no drug effects were noted" (p. 28). Dott also found, in contrast to Frank and his associates(1971) that pulse rate did seem to be affected by marihuanaintoxication. Based upon a comparison with the same experiment performedyears before in relation to alcohol (Light and Kelper, 1969),Dott stated that "the effects of marihuana on drivingbehavior are more subtle and less hazardous than the effects ofalcohol." McGlothlin (1971) is presently conducting another simulatorstudy and is attempting to measure the effects of marihuana,methadone and alcohol on simulated driving, attention,information processing abilities and other measures related todriving efficiency such is peripheral vision, depth perceptionand glare recovery. At this time, five experiments have beenconducted and the researcher has stated that: concentrated and divided attention for both auditory andvisual modalities are significantly impaired by smoked marihuanacontaining 15 mg. THC.... In general, where impairment was foundfor the marihuana treatments, it appears to be equivalent to thatresulting from a blood alcohol level of about 0.01%. Frequentmarihuana users (one or two times per week) typically showed lessimpairment than those using less frequently (p. 22.). The inconclusive and controversial nature of the research todate suggests that there is enough of a potential risk involvedto both the individual and the public safety to recommendstrongly against driving while intoxicated-no matter what theintoxicant. Although marihuana does not seem to produce seriousimpairments of driving skills or performance, to say that thedrug does not at all adversely affect driving behavior or that itmay not be a factor in traffic violations or accidents is tomisrepresent the current state of knowledge. As the NationalInstitute of Mental Health (1972) has noted, "obviously,more research is needed in elucidating the role of various drugson highway accidents . . ." (p. 220). References Abelson, H.; Cohen R.; and Schrayer, D., Public AttitudesToward Marihuana, Part 1, Princeton: Response Analysis, 1972. "A Drug and Insanity," New York Daily Worker,January 28, 1940. Cited in Solomon, D., ed. The Marihuana Papers,New York: Signet Books, 1968, p. 288. Allentuck, S., "Medical Aspects: Symptoms andBehavior," in Mayor's Committee on Marihuana, The MarihuanaProblem in the City of New York, Lancaster: Jacques CattellPress, 1944, pp. 35-51. Allentuck, S. and Bowman, K. M., "The Psychiatric Aspectsof Marihuana Intoxication," American Journal of Psychiatry,99: 248-251, 1942. Ames, P., "A Clinical and Metabolic Study of AcuteIntoxication with Cannabis Saliva and its Role in the ModelPsychoses," Journal of Mental Sciences, 104 (437) :972-99,1958. Amir, M., Patterns in Forcible Rape, Chicago: University ofChicago Press, 1971. Andrade, 0. M "The Criminogenic Action of Cannabis(Marihuana) and Narcotics," UN Bulletin of Narcotics, 16:23-28,1964. Anslinger, H. J., "Marijuana-Assassin of Youth,"American Magazine, July 1937. Anslinger, H. J. and Tompkins, W., The Traffic in Narcotics,New York: Funk and Wagnalls, 1953. Asuni, T., "Socio-Psychiatric Problems of Cannabis inNigeria," UN Bulletin on Narcotics, 16: 17-28, 1964.Ausubel, D. P., Drug Addiction: Physiological, Psychological, andSociological Aspects, New York: Random House, 1958. Bloomquist, E. R., Marijuana, Beverly Hills: Glencoe Press,1968. Blum, R H., and Associates, Society and Drugs, -San Francisco:Jossey-Bass, 1969. Blumer, H., et al., The World of Youthful Drug Use, Berkeley:School of Criminology, University of California, 1967. Bouquet, J., "Cannabis," UN Bulletin on Narcotics, 2(4) :14-30, October 1950. Brenner, J. H.; Coles R. and Meagher, D., Drugs and Youth, NewYork: Liveright, 1970. Bromberg, W., "Marihuana: A Psychiatric Study,"Journal of the American Medical Association, 113: 4-12, 1939. Bromberg, W., "Marihuana Intoxication: A Clinical Studyof Cannabis Sativa Intoxication," American Journal ofPsychiatry, 91 (2) : 23-30, 1934. Bromberg, W. and Rodgers, T. C., "Marihuana andAggressive Crime," American Journal of Psychiatry, 102:825-827,1946. Brotman, R. and Suffet, F., "Marihuana Users' Views ofMarihuana Use," in Zubin, J. and Freedman, A., eds., ThePsychology of Adolescence, New York: Grime and Stratton, 1970,pp. 258-72. Brown, T. T., The Enigma of Drug Addiction, Springfield:Charles C Thomas, 1961. Carstairs, G. H., "Darn and Bhang: Cultural Factors inthe Choice of Intoxicants," Quarterly Journal of Studies onAlcohol, 15: 220-237, 1954. "The Case Against Cannabis," Pharmaceutical Journal(England), 199 (5425) :399-400,1967. Charen, S., and Perelman, L., "Personality Studies ofMarihuana Addicts," American Journal of Psychiatry, 102:674-82,1946. Chetta, N. J., "Alcohol, Drugs and Driving," Journalof the Louisiana State Medical Society, 119 (9) : 344347, 1967.Commission of Narcotic Drugs, 23rd Session on Drug Abuse, October21, 1968. Chopra, R. N. and Chopra, 1. C., "Cannabis Sativa inRelation to Crime and Mental Disease in India," AmericanJournal of Medical Research, 30: 155-171, 1942. Chopra. R. N. andChopra, G. S., "The Present Position of Hemp Drug Addictionin India," Indian Medical Research Memoirs, No. 31, July1939. Crancer, A., Jr., and Quiring, T). L., "Driving Recordsof Persons Arrested for Illegal Drug Use," Report 011, Stateof Washington, Department of Motor Vehicles, May 1968. Reprintedin part in The Police Chief, 36: 41-43. February 1969. Crancer, A.. Jr.; Dille, J. M.; Delay, J. C.; Wallace, J. E.and Haykin, M. D., "Comparison of the Effects of Marihuanaand Alcohol on Simulated Driving Performance," Report 021,State of Washington, Department of Motor Vehicles, April 1969,Reprinted in Science, 164: 851-54, May 16, 1969. Dagirimaijian, R. and Boyd, E. S., "Some PharmacologicalEffects of Two Tetrahydrocannabinols," Journal ofPharmacology and Experimental Therapeutics, 135: 25-33, 1962. Dott, A. B., "Effect of Marihuana on Risk Acceptance inan Automobile Simulator," RR71-3, Injury Control ResearchLaboratory for the U.S. Department of Health, Education andWelfare, 1971. "Drugs and Reckless Driving," New Jersey Journal of.Pharmacy, 40 (1) : 30, 1967. Ewens, G. F. W., "Insanity Following the Use of IndianHemp," Indian Medical Gazette, 39: 401-13, 1904. Ferguson, W. S. and Howard, W. L., Marihuana and Drug Use andHighway Safety-A Survey of High School Students in Virginia,Virginia Highway Research Council, July 1971. Fort, J., "Playboy Panel: The Drug Revolution,"Playboy, 17(2) : 53-55 et. seq., February, 1970. Frank, I. M.; Hepler, R. S.; Stier, S.; Rickles, W. H. andUngerleider, J. T., "Marihuana, Tobacco and FunctionsAffecting Driving." Paper presented to annual meeting of theAmerican Psychiatric Association, Washington, D. C., May 1971. Freedman, H. L. and Rockmore, M. I., "Marihuana: Factorin Personality Evaluation and Army Maladjustment.` Journal ofClinical Psychopathology, 7: 765-82, 8: 221236,1946. Gardikas, C. G., "Hashish and Crime," Enkephalos 2-3201-211, 1950, Cited in Tinklenberg, J., "Marihuana andCrime," Paper prepared for the National Commission onMarihuana and Drug Abuse, 1972, pp. 11-12. Gebhard, P. H.; Gagnon, J. H.; Pomeroy, W. B., andChristenson, C. V., Sex Offenders: An Analysis of Types New York:Bantam, 1967. Goode, E., "Drug Use and Sexual Behavior on a CollegeCampus," American Journal of Psychiatry, in press. Goode,E., "Marijuana and Sex," Evergreen Review, 66:19-21,72-74,1969. Goode, E., The Marijuana Smokers, New York: Basic Books, 1970. Goode, E., "Marihuana Use and Crime," prepared forNational Commission on Marihuana and Drug Abuse, Jannary 15,1972. Grinspoon, L., Marihuana Reconsidered, Cambridge: HarvardUniversity Press, 1971. Gusfield, J., "On Legislating Morals: The SymbolicProcess of Designating Deviance," California Law Review, 56:54-73, January 1968. Halikas, J. A.; Goodwin, D. W.; and Guze, S. B.,"Marihuana Effects: A Survey of Regular Users," Journalof the American Medical Association, 217: 692-94, August, 1971. Hochman, J. S. and Brill, N. Q., "Marijuana Use andPsychosocial Adaptation," Paper presented to annual meetingof American Psychiatric Association, Washington, D.C., May3,1971. Hollister, L. E.; Richards, R. K.; and Gillespie, H. K., "Comparison of Tetrahydrocannabinol and Synhexyl inMan," Chemical Pharmacology and Therapeutics, 9: 383-391,1968. Hollister, L. E., "Marihuana in Man: Three YearsLater," Science, 172 (3978) : 21-29, April 2, 1971. Indian Hemp Drugs Commission, Marijuana, 1894. Reprinted,Silver Spring, Maryland: Thomas Jefferson Publishing Co., 1969. Insurance Institute for Highway Safety, Report an WashingtonState Studies-Drug User Accident Rate, 8 (4), August, 1968. InTech Corporation, Research on Marihuana Use as aContributing Factor in the Commission of Criminal Acts as Well asJuvenile Delinquency, Final Report, Prepared for the NationalCommission on Marihuana and Drug Abuse, November 19,1971. Isbell, H.; Gorodetzky, C. W.; Jasinski, D.; Claussen, U.; VonSpulak, T.; and Korte, F., "Effects of (-)-delta-9.Trans-Tetrahydrocannabinol in Man," Psychopharmacologia, 11(2) : 184-88, 1967. James, T., "Dagga and Driving," S. A. MedieseTydskrif, 44: 580-81, May 16, 1970. Johnson, R. D., "'Medico-Social Aspects of MarijuanaRhode Island Medical Journal, 51: 171-78, 1968. Kalant, H., "Marihuana and Simulated Driving,"Science, 166: 640, August 22, 1969. Kaplan, J., Marijuana: The New Prohibition, New York: PocketBooks, 1971. Klein, A. W.; Davis, J. H.; and Blackbourne, B. D.,"Marihuana and Automobile Crashes," Journal of Di-mgIssues, 1 (1) :18-26,1971. Kolansky, H. and Moore, W. T., "Effects of Marihuana onAdolescents and Young Adults," Journal of American MedicalAssociation, 216 (3) : 485-92, April 1971. Lambo, T. A., "Medical and Social Problems of DrugAddiction in West Africa," UN Bulletin on Narcotics, 17 (1): 3-13,1965. LaRoe, A. D., "Growth of the Marijuana Habit Among OurYouth," American Weekly, 1940. Light, W. 0. and Keiper, C. G., "Effects of ModerateBlood Alcohol Levels on Automobile Passing Behavior,"RR-69-4, Injury Control Research Laboratory, U.S. Department ofHealth, Education, and Welfare, 1969. Lindesmith, A. R., Addiction and Opiates, rev. ed., Chieago:Aldine, 1968. MacDonald, J. M., Rape, Offenders and Their Victims,Springfield: Charles C. Thomas, 1971. Manno, J. E.; Kiplinger, G. F.; Halne, S. E.; Bennett, I. F.;and Forney, R. B., "Comparative Effects of Smoking Marihuanaor Placebo on Human Motor and Mental Performance," ClinicalPharmacology and Therapeutics, 2 (6) :808-15,1970. Maurer, D. W. and Vogel, V. H., Narcotics and NarcoticsAddiction, Springfield: Charles C. Thomas, 1962. Mayor's Committee on Marihuana, The Marihuana Problem in NewYork City, Lancaster: Jacques Cattel Press, 1944. McGlothlin, W. H., "Cannabis: A Reference," in TheMarihuana Papers, Solomon, D., ed., New York: Signet Books, 1966,pp. 455-72. McGlothlin, W. H., Progress Report (on Marihuana and DrivingStudy), Department of Psychology, University of California at LosAngeles, August, 1971. Merrill, R. T., Marihuana, the New Dangerous Drug, OpiumResearch Committee, Foreign Policy Association, Washington, D.C.,March, 1938. Miller, D. E., "Marihuana: The Law and ItsEnforcement," Suffolk University Law Review, 3: 81-96, Fall1968. Miller, S. E., "The Physician and the Prevention of MotorVehicle Accidents," Medical Times, 87 (7) : 861-69, July1959. Murphy, H. B. M., "The Cannabis Habit: A Review of RecentPsychiatric Literature," UN Bulletin of Narcotics, 15 (1) :15-23, 1963. National Institute of Mental Health, Statement to the SelectCommittee on Crime, U.S. House of Representatives, Marijuana, H.Rept. No. 91-798, 91st Cong., 2d Sess., 1970, p. 113, National Institute of Mental Health, U.S. Department ofHealth, Education, and Welfare, Marihuana and Health: SecondAnnual Report to Congress from the Secretary, Health, Education,and Welfare, Washington, D.C.: U.S. Government Printing Office,1972. Nichols, J. L., Drug Use and Highway Safety: A Review of theLiterature, Prepared for U.S. Department of Transportation, July1971. Oursler, W., Marijuana: The Facts, The Truth, New York: Pap _IS. Eriksson, 1968. P_olak; "Chemical Analysis: Pot Test Developed for Use onDrivers," Washington Evening Star, November 26,1971, p. 7. President's Commission on Law Enforcement and Administrationof Justice, Task Force Report: Narcotics and Drug Abuse,Washing-ton, D.C.: U.S. Government Printing Office, 1967. "Report of the Third Triannual Congress on TrafficAccidents," Bulletin de Medecine Legate et de ToxicologicMcdecale, 12(4) :161-65,1969. Robins, L. N. and Murphy, G. B., "Drug Use in a NormalPopulation of Young Negro Men," American Journal of PublicHealth, 57: 1580--96, September 1967. Robins, L. N.; Darvish, H. S.; and Murphy, G. E., "TheLong-Term Outcome of Adolescent Drug Users," in Zubin, J.and Freedman, A., eds., The Psychology of Adolescence, New York:Grime and Stratton, 1970, pp. 159-78. Robinson, V., "Concerning Cannabis Indica," in Bookof Grass: An Anthology of Indian Hemp, Andrews, G. and Vinkenoog,S., eds., New York: Grove Press, 1967, pp. 135-139. Rosevear, J., Pot: A Handbook of Marihuana, New York:University Books, 1967. Rowell, E. A. and Rowell, R., On the Trail of Marihuana: TheWeed of Madness, Mountain View, California: Pacific Press, 1939. Schofield, G. W., Unpublished Survey of the views of policeofficers regarding marihuana and aggression (1968), in Kaplan,J., Marijuana: The New Prohibition, New York: Pocket Books, 1971,pp. 110-115. Schoenfeld, D. D., "The Sociological Study," inMayor's Committee on Marihuana, The Marihuana Problem in the Cityof New York, Lancaster: Cattell Press, 1944, pp. 1-25. Siler, J. P., et al., "Marihuana Smoking in Panama,"The Military Surgeon, 73: 269--280,1933- Simmons, J. L., Deviants, Berkeley: Glendessary Press, 1969. Solomon, D., ed., The Marihuana Papers, New York: SignetBooks, 1966. South Africa Interdepartmental Committee on Abuse of Dagga,Report, Government Printer, 1952. Tart, C. T., On Being Stoned: A Psychological Study ofMarijuana Intoxication, Palo Alto: Science and Behavior-Books,1971. Taylor, N., Narcotics: Nature's Dangerous Gifts, rev. ed., NewYork: Dell, 1963. Tinklenberg, J., "Marihuana and Crime," Prepared forNational Commission on Marihuana and Drug Abuse, October 1971. Tinklenberg, J. R. and Stillman, R. S., "Drug Use andViolence," in Daniels, D. N., et al., eds., Violence andMan's Struggle for Existence, Boston: Little, Brown and Company,1970. Trocchi, A., "Marihuana and Sex," in Book of Grass:An Anthology of Indian Hemp, Andrews, G. and Vinkenoog, S., eds.,New York: Grove Press, 1967, p. 108. U.S. House of Representatives, Committee on Ways and Means,Taxation of Marihuana, 75th Cong., 1st Sess., 1937. Waller, J. A., "Chronic Medical Conditions and TrafficSafety: A Review of California Experience," New EnglandJournal of Medicine, 273: 1413-20, Dec. 23, 1965. Waller, J. A., "Medical Impairment and HighwayCrashes," Police, 14 (6): 24-27, July-August, 1970. Walton,R. P., Marihuana: America's New Drug Problem, Philadelphia:Lippincott, 1938 Watt, J. M., "Dagga in South Africa," UN Bulletin onNarcotics,13 (3):9-14,1961. Weil, A. T., "Cannabis," Science, 164: 2-8,September 1969. Weil, A. T.; Zinberg, N.; and Nelsen, J. M.,"Clinical and Psychological Effects of Marihuana inMan," Science, 162: 1234-42, 1968. Weiss, B. and Laties, V. G., "Enhancement of HumanPerformance by Caffeine and Amphetamines," PharmacologicalReviews, 14: 1-37,1962. Weitzner, M.; Smith, H. B.; Gerver, I.; and Pollack, H.,"A Study of the Relationship Between Severity of Dispositionand Subsequent Criminal Behavior in a Sample of YouthfulMarijuana Offenders in New York State." Prepared for theNational Commission on Marihuana and Drug Abuse, 1971. White House Conference on Narcotic Drug Abuse, Proceedings,Washington, D.C.: U.S. Government Printing Office 1962. Williams, G., cited in Wilson, E., "The CrazyDreamers," Colliers, June 4,1969. Zinberg, N. E. and Weil, A. T., "The Effects of Marihuanaon Human Beings," Addictions, 16 (4) : 2G-42 Winter 1969. Contents | Feedback | Search DRCNet Library | Schaffer Library | Major Studies Marihuana, A Signal of Misunderstanding WT01-B26-5IA087-000632-B018-125http://206.61.184.43:80/schaffer/history/whiteb1.htm 206.61.184.43 19970122092246 text/html 73436HTTP/1.0 200 OKDate: Wednesday, 22-Jan-97 09:22:34 GMTServer: WebSitePro/1.1f (S/N wpo-0deb)Allow-ranges: bytesContent-type: text/htmlLast-modified: Saturday, 28-Dec-96 05:39:40 GMTContent-length: 73218 History of the Non-Medical Use of Drugs in the UnitedStates Contents | Feedback | Search DRCNet Library | Schaffer Library | Historical Research The History of the Non-Medical Use of Drugs in the UnitedStates by Charles Whitebread, Professor of Law, USC Law School A Speech to the California Judges Association 1995 annualconference Links to Related Documents This speech is derived from The Forbidden Fruit andthe Tree of Knowledge: An Inquiry into the Legal History ofAmerican Marijuana Prohibition by Professor Richard J. Bonnie& Professor Charles H. Whitebread, II In this speech, Professor Whitebread refers to the followingdocuments which are online in this library, either in whole or inpart. The Hearings of theMarihuana Tax Act and related documents. Marihuana, A Signalof Misunderstanding, by the National Commission on Marihuanaand Drug Abuse. Introduction This session is going to be about the history of thenon-medical use of drugs. Let me say that, because this is goingto be a story, that I think it will interest you quite a bit. Thetopic is the history of the non-medical use of drugs and I thinkyou ought to know what my credentials are for talking about thistopic. As you may know, before I taught at the University ofSouthern California, I taught at the University of Virginia forfifteen years, from 1968 to 1981. In that time period, the veryfirst major piece that I wrote was a piece entitled, "TheForbidden Fruit and the Tree of Knowledge - The Legal History ofMarihuana in the United States". I wrote it with ProfessorRichard Bonnie, still of the faculty of the University ofVirginia. It was published in the Virginia Law Review in Octoberof 1970 and I must say that our piece was the Virginia Law Reviewin October of 1970. The piece was 450 pages long. It got a ton ofnational attention because no one had ever done the legal historyof marijuana before. As a result of that, Professor Bonnie wasnamed the Deputy Director of the National Commission on Marihuanaand Drug Abuse and I was a consultant to that commission. As a result of Richard's two year executive directorship ofthe National Commission in 1971 and 1972 he and I were givenaccess to both the open and the closed files of what was thencalled the Bureau of Narcotics and Dangerous Drugs, what hadhistorically been called the Federal Bureau of Narcotics and whattoday is called the Drug Enforcement Agency. Based upon ouraccess to those files, both open and closed, we wrote a bookcalled "The Marihuana Conviction- The Legal History of Drugsin the United States" and that book went through sixprintings at the University of Virginia press before being soldout primarily in sales to my friends at the FBI over the years.It is based upon that work that I bring you this story. The Situation in 1900 If you are interested in the non-medical use of drugs in thiscountry, the time to go back to is 1900, and in some ways themost important thing I am going to say to you guys I will sayfirst. That is, that in 1900 there were far more people addictedto drugs in this country than there are today. Depending uponwhose judgment, or whose assessment, you accept there werebetween two and five percent of the entire adult population ofthe United States addicted to drugs in 1900. Now, there were two principal causes of this dramatic level ofdrug addiction at the turn of the century. The first cause wasthe use of morphine and its various derivatives in legitimatemedical operations. You know as late as 1900, particularly inareas where medical resources were scarce it was not at alluncommon for you to say, let's say you would have appendicitis,you would go into the hospital, and you would get morphine as apain killer during the operation, you would be given morphinefurther after the operation and you would come out of thehospital with no appendix but addicted to morphine. The use of morphine in battlefield operations during the CivilWar was so extensive that, by 1880, so many Union veterans wereaddicted to morphine that the popular press referred tomorphinism as the "soldier's disease". Now I will say,being from Virginia as I am, that the Confederate veterans didn'thave any problems about being addicted to morphine because theSouth was too poor to have any, and therefore battlefieldoperations on the Confederate Army were simply done by choppingoff the relevant limb while they drank a little whiskey. But theNorthern troops heavily found themselves, as the result ofbattlefield operations and the use of morphine, addicted tomorphine. Now, the other fact that I think that is so interesting aboutdrug addiction at the turn of the century, as opposed to today iswho the addicts were, because they were the exact opposite of whoyou would think most likely to be an addict today. If I were toask you in terms of statistical groups who is most likely to beinvolved with drugs today, you would say a young person, a male,who lives in the city and who may be a minority group member.That is the exact opposite of who was most likely to be addictedto drugs at the turn of the century. In terms of statistical groups, who was most likely to beaddicted to drugs at the turn of the century? A rural living,middle-aged white woman. The use of morphine in medicaloperations does not explain the much higher incidence of drugaddiction among women. What does is the second cause of the highlevel of addiction at the turn of the century -- the growth anddevelopment of what we now call the "patent medicine"industry. I think some of you, maybe from watching Westerns on TV ifnothing else are aware that, again, as late as 1900, in areas,particularly rural areas where medical resources were scarce, itwas typical for itinerant salesmen, not themselves doctors, tocruise around the countryside offering potions and elixirs of allsorts advertised in the most flamboyant kinds of terms."Doctor Smith's Oil, Good for What Ails You", or"Doctor Smith's Oil, Good for Man or Beast." Well, what the purveyors of these medicines did not tell theirpurchasers, was that later, when these patent medicines weretested, many of them proved to be up to fifty percent morphine byvolume. Now, what that meant, as I have always thought, was the mostsignificant thing about the high morphine content in patentmedicines was it meant they tended to live up to theiradvertising. Because no matter what is wrong with you, or yourbeast, you are going to feel a whole lot better after a couple ofslugs of an elixir that is fifty percent morphine. So there wasthis tendency to think "Wow! This stuff works." Downyou could go to the general store and get more of it and it couldbe sold to you directly over the counter. Now, for reasons that we weren't able to full research, butfor reasons, I think, probably associated with the role of womenrural societies then patent medicines were much more appealing towomen than to men and account for the much higher incidence ofdrug addiction in 1900 among women than among men. If you want to see a relatively current portrayal of a womanaddicted to patent medicine you might think of Eugene O'Neil'splay "A Long Day's Journey Into Night". The motherfigure there, the one that was played by Katherine Hepburn in themovies was addicted to patent medicines. In any event, the use of morphine in medical operations andthe sale of patent medicines accounted for a dramatic level ofaddiction. Again, between two and five percent of the entireadult population of the United States was addicted to drugs aslate as 1900. Now if my first point is that there was a lot more addictionin 1900 than there is today and that the people who were addictedare quite a different group than the group we would be thinkingof today, my next point would be that if you look at drugaddiction in 1900, what's the number one way in which it isdifferent than drug addiction today? Answer: Almost all addictionat the turn of the century was accidental. People became involved with drugs they did not know that theywere taking, that they did not know the impact of. The firstpoint, then, is that there was more drug addiction than there isnow and most of it was accidental. The Pure Food and Drug Act Then the single law which has done the most in this country toreduce the level of drug addiction is none of the criminal lawswe have ever passed. The single law that reduced drug addictionthe most was the 1906 Pure Food and Drug Act. The Pure Food and Drug Act of 1906 did three things: 1). It created the Food and Drug Administration in Washingtonthat must approve all foods and drugs meant for humanconsumption. The very first impact of that was that the patentmedicines were not approved for human consumption once they weretested. 2) The Pure Food and Drug Act said that certain drugs couldonly be sold on prescription. 3) The Pure Food and Drug Act, (and you know, this is stilltrue today, go look in your medicine chest) requires that anydrug that can be potentially habit-forming say so on it's label."Warning -- May be habit forming." The labeling requirements, the prescription requirements, andthe refusal to approve the patent medicines basically put thepatent medicine business out of business and reduced thatdramatic source of accidental addiction. The Pure Food and DrugAct of 1906, not a criminal law, did more to reduce the level ofaddiction than any other single statute we have passed in all ofthe times from then to now. The Harrison Act The very first criminal law at the Federal level in thiscountry to criminalize the non-medical use of drugs came in 1914.It was called the Harrison Act and there are only three thingsabout the Harrison Act that we need to focus on today. Number one is the date. Did you hear the date, 1914? Some ofyou may have come this morning thinking that we have used thecriminal law to deal with the non-medical use of drugs since thebeginning of the Republic or something. That is not true. Theentire experiment of using the criminal sanction to deal with thenon-medical use of drugs really began in this country in 1914with the Harrison Act. The second interesting thing about the Harrison Act was thedrugs to which it applied, because it applied to almost none ofthe drugs we would be concerned about today. The Harrison Actapplied to opium, morphine and its various derivatives, and thederivatives of the coca leaf like cocaine. No mention anywherethere of amphetamines, barbiturates, marijuana, hashish,hallucinogenic drugs of any kind. The Harrison Act applied onlyto opium, morphine and its various derivatives and derivatives ofthe coca leaf like cocaine. The third and most interesting thing for you all as judgesabout the Harrison Act was its structure, because the structureof this law was very peculiar and became the model for everysingle piece of Federal legislation from 1914 right straightthrough 1969. And what was that model? It was called the Harrison Tax Act. You know, the drafters ofthe Harrison Act said very clearly on the floor of Congress whatit was they wanted to achieve. They had two goals. They wanted toregulate the medical use of these drugs and they wanted tocriminalize the non-medical use of these drugs. They had oneproblem. Look at the date -- 1914. 1914 was probably the highwater mark of the constitutional doctrine we today call"states' rights" and, therefore, it was widely thoughtCongress did not have the power, number one, to regulate aparticular profession, and number two, that Congress did not havethe power to pass what was, and is still known, as a generalcriminal law. That's why there were so few Federal Crimes untilvery recently. In the face of possible Constitutional opposition to what theywanted to do, the people in Congress who supported the HarrisonAct came up with a novel idea. That is, they would masqueradethis whole thing as though it were a tax. To show you how itworked, can I use some hypothetical figures to show you how thisalleged tax worked? There were two taxes. The first (and again, these figuresaren't accurate but they will do to show the idea) tax was paidby doctors. It was a dollar a year and the doctors, in exchangefor paying that one dollar tax, got a stamp from the Governmentthat allowed them to prescribe these drugs for their patients solong as they followed the regulations in the statute. Do you seethat by the payment of that one dollar tax, we have the doctorsregulated? The doctors have to follow the regulations in thestatute. And there was a second tax. (and again, these are hypotheticalfigures but they will show you how it worked.) was a tax of athousand dollars of every single non-medical exchange of everyone of these drugs. Well, since nobody was going to pay athousand dollars in tax to exchange something which, in 1914,even in large quantities was worth about five dollars, the secondtax wasn't a tax either, it was a criminal prohibition. Now justto be sure you guys understand this, and I am sure you do, butjust to make sure, let's say that in 1915 somebody was found,let's say, in possession of an ounce of cocaine out here on thestreet. What would be the Federal crime? Not possession ofcocaine, or possession of a controlled substance. What was thecrime? Tax evasion. And do you see what a wicked web that is going to be? As aquick preview, where then are we going to put the law enforcementarm for the criminalization of drugs for over forty years -- inwhat department? The Treasury Department. Why, we are just outthere collecting taxes and I will show you how that works in aminute. If you understand that taxing scheme then you understand whythe national marijuana prohibition of 1937 was called theMarihuana Tax Act. The Early State Marijuana Laws But before we get to that next big piece of Federallegislation, the marihuana prohibition of 1937, I would like totake a little detour, if I may, into an analysis of the earlystate marijuana laws passed in this country from 1915 to 1937. Let me pause to tell you this. When Professor Bonnie and I setout to try to track the legal history of marijuana in thiscountry, we were shocked that nobody had ever done that workbefore. And, secondly, the few people who had even conjecturedabout it went back to the 1937 Federal Act and said "Well,there's the beginning of it." No. If you go back to 1937,that fails to take account of the fact that, in the period from1915 to 1937, some 27 states passed criminal laws against the useof marijuana. What Professor Bonnie and I did was, unique to ourwork, to go back to the legislative records in those states andback to the newspapers in the state capitols at the time theselaws were passed to try to find out what motivated these 27states to enact criminal laws against the use of marijuana. Whatwe found was that the 27 states divided into three groups byexplanation. The first group of states to have marijuana laws in that partof the century were Rocky Mountain and southwestern states. Bythat, I mean Texas, New Mexico, Colorado, Montana. You didn'thave to go anywhere but to the legislative records to find outwhat had motivated those marijuana laws. The only thing you needto know to understand the early marijuana laws in the southwestand Rocky Mountain areas of this country is to know, that in theperiod just after 1914, into all of those areas was a substantialmigration of Mexicans. They had come across the border in searchof better economic conditions, they worked heavily as rurallaborers, beet field workers, cotton pickers, things of thatsort. And with them, they had brought marijuana. Basically, none of the white people in these states knewanything about marijuana, and I make a distinction between whitepeople and Mexicans to reflect a distinction that any legislatorin one of these states at the time would have made. And all youhad to do to find out what motivated the marijuana laws in theRocky mountain and southwestern states was to go to thelegislative records themselves. Probably the best singlestatement was the statement of a proponent of Texas firstmarijuana law. He said on the floor of the Texas Senate, and Iquote, "All Mexicans are crazy, and this stuff (referring tomarijuana) is what makes them crazy." Or, as the proponentof Montana's first marijuana law said, (and imagine this on thefloor of the state legislature) and I quote, "Give one ofthese Mexican beet field workers a couple of puffs on a marijuanacigarette and he thinks he is in the bullring at Barcelona." Well, there it was, you didn't have to look another foot asyou went from state to state right on the floor of the statelegislature. And so what was the genesis for the early statemarijuana laws in the Rocky Mountain and southwestern areas ofthis country? It wasn't hostility to the drug, it was hostilityto the newly arrived Mexican community that used it. A second group of states that had criminal laws against theuse of marijuana were in the Northeast, Connecticut, RhodeIsland, New York -- had one and then repealed it and then had oneagain -- New Jersey. Well, clearly no hypothesis about Mexicanimmigration will explain the genesis of those laws because, asyou know, the Northeast has never had, still doesn't really, anysubstantial Mexican-American population. So we had to dig alittle deeper to find the genesis of those laws. We had to go notonly to the legislative records but to the newspapers in thestate capitols at the time these laws were passed and what wefound, in the early marijuana laws in the Northeast, we labeledthe "fear of substitution." If I may, let me paraphrasean editorial from the New York Times in 1919 so we will getexactly the flavor of this fear of substitution. The New York Times in an editorial in 1919 said, "No onehere in New York uses this drug marijuana. We have only justheard about it from down in the Southwest," and here comesthe substitution. "But," said the New York Times,"we had better prohibit its use before it gets here.Otherwise" -- here's the substitution concept -- "allthe heroin and hard narcotics addicts cut off from their drug bythe Harrison Act and all the alcohol drinkers cut off from theirdrug by 1919 alcohol Prohibition will substitute this new andunknown drug marijuana for the drugs they used to use." Well, from state to state, on the theory that this newlyencountered drug marijuana would be substituted by the hardnarcotics addicts or by the alcohol drinkers for their previousdrug that had been prohibited, state to state this fear ofsubstitution carried, and that accounted for 26 of the 27 states-- that is, either the anti-Mexican sentiment in the Southwestand Rocky Mountain areas or fear of substitution in theNortheast. That accounted for 26 of the 27 states, and there wasonly one state left over. It was the most important state for usbecause it was the first state ever to enact a criminal lawagainst the use of marijuana and it was the state of Utah. Now, if you have been hearing this story and you have beenplaying along with me, you think "Oh, wait a minute,Whitebread, Utah fits exactly with Colorado, Montana, -- it musthave been the Mexicans." Well, that's what I thought at first. But we went and did acareful study of the actual immigration pattern and found, to oursurprise, that Utah didn't have then, and doesn't have now, areally substantial Mexican-American population. So it had to besomething else. Come on folks, if it had to be something else, what do youthink it might have been? Are you thinking what I was thinking --that it must have had something to do with the single thing whichmakes Utah unique in American history -- its association with theMormon church. With help from some people in Salt Lake City, associated withthe Mormon Church and the Mormon National Tabernacle inWashington -- with their help and a lot of work we found out whatthe genesis was of the first marihuana law in this country. Yes,it was directly connected to the history of Utah and Mormonismand it went like this. I think that a lot of you know that, in its earliest days, theMormon church permitted its male members to have more than onewife -- polygamy. Do you all know that in 1876, in a case calledReynolds against the United States, the United States SupremeCourt said that Mormons were free to believe what they wanted,but they were not free to practice polygamy in this country.Well, who do you think enforced that ruling of the Supreme Courtin 1876? At the end of the line, who enforces all rulings of theSupreme Court? Answer: the state and local police. And who werethey in Utah then? All Mormons, and so nothing happened for manyyears. Those who wanted to live polygamously continued to do so. In 1910, the Mormon Church in synod in Salt Lake City decreedpolygamy to be a religious mistake and it was banned as a matterof the Mormon religion. Once that happened, there was a crackdownon people who wanted to live in what they called "thetraditional way". So, just after 1910, a fairly large numberof Mormons left the state of Utah, and indeed left the UnitedStates altogether and moved into northwest Mexico. They wrote alot about what they wanted to accomplish in Mexico. They wantedto set up communities where they were basically going to convertthe Indians, the Mexicans, and what they referred to as "theheathen" in the neighborhood to Mormonism. By 1914, they had had very little luck with the heathen, butour research shows now beyond question that the heathen had alittle luck with them. What happened apparently -- now some ofyou who may be members of the church, you know that there arestill substantial Mormon communities in northwest Mexico -- wasthat, by and large most of the Mormons were not happy there, thereligion had not done well there, they didn't feel comfortablethere, they wanted to go back to Utah where there friends wereand after 1914 did. And with them, the Indians had given them marijuana. Now onceyou get somebody back in Utah with the marijuana it all becomesvery easy, doesn't it? You know that the Mormon Church has alwaysbeen opposed to the use of euphoriants of any kind. So, somebodysaw them with the marijuana, and in August of 1915 the Church,meeting again in synod in Salt Lake City decreed the use ofmarijuana contrary to the Mormon religion and then -- and this ishow things were in Utah in those days -- in October of 1915, thestate legislature met and enacted every religious prohibition asa criminal law and we had the first criminal law in thiscountry's history against the use of marijuana. That digression into the early state marijuana laws aside, wewill now get back on the Federal track, the year is 1937 and weget the national marijuana prohibition -- the Marihuana Tax Act The Marihuana Tax Act of 1937 Now, first again, does everybody see the date, 1937? You mayhave thought that we have had a national marijuana prohibitionfor a very long time. Frankly, we haven't. The marijuana prohibition is part and parcel of that era whichis now being rejected rather generally -- the New Deal era inWashington in the late 30s. Number two, you know, don't you, that whenever Congress isgoing to pass a law, they hold hearings. And you have seen thesehearings. The hearings can be extremely voluminous, they go onand on, they have days and days of hearings. Well, may I say,that the hearings on the national marijuana prohibition were verybrief indeed. The hearings on the national marijuana prohibitionlasted one hour, on each of two mornings and since the hearingswere so brief I can tell you almost exactly what was said tosupport the national marijuana prohibition. Now, in doing this one at the FBI Academy, I didn't tell themthis story, but I am going to tell you this story. You want toknow how brief the hearings were on the national marijuanaprohibition? When we asked at the Library of Congress for a copy of thehearings, to the shock of the Library of Congress, none could befound. We went "What?" It took them four months tofinally honor our request because -- are you ready for this? --the hearings were so brief that the volume had slid down insidethe side shelf of the bookcase and was so thin it had slid rightdown to the bottom inside the bookshelf. That's how brief theywere. Are you ready for this? They had to break the bookshelfopen because it had slid down inside. There were three bodies of testimony at the hearings on thenational marijuana prohibition. The first testimony came from Commissioner Harry Anslinger,the newly named Commissioner of the Federal Bureau of Narcotics.Now, I think some of you know that in the late 20s and early 30sin this country there were two Federal police agencies created,the FBI and the FBN -- the Federal Bureau of Investigation, andthe Federal Bureau of Narcotics. In our book, I talk at great length about how different thehistory of these two organizations really are. But, the twoorganizations, the FBI and the FBN had some surface similaritiesand one of them was that a single individual headed each of themfor a very long time. In the case of the FBI, it was J. EdgarHoover, and in the case of the FBN it was Harry Anslinger, whowas the Commissioner of the Federal Bureau of Narcotics from 1930until 1962. Commissioner Anslinger gave the Government testimony and Iwill quote him directly. By the way, he was not working from atext that he had written. He was working from a text that hadbeen written for him by a District Attorney in New Orleans, a guynamed Stanley. Reading directly from Mr. Stanley's work,Commissioner Anslinger told the Congressmen at the hearings, andI quote, "Marihuana is an addictive drug which produces inits users insanity, criminality, and death." That was theGovernment testimony to support the marijuana prohibition fromthe Commissioner. The next body of testimony -- remember all of this took atotal of two hours -- uh .. You understand what the idea was,don't you? The idea was to prohibit the cultivation of hemp inAmerica. You all know, because there has been some initiativehere in California, that hemp has other uses than its euphoriantuse. For one, hemp has always been used to make rope. Number two,the resins of the hemp plant are used as bases for paints andvarnishes. And, finally, the seeds of the hemp plant are widelyused in bird seed. Since these industries were going to beaffected the next body of testimony came from the industrialspokesmen who represented these industries. The first person was the rope guy. The rope guy told afascinating story -- it really is fascinating -- the growth of ahemp to make rope was a principle cash crop right where I amfrom, Northern Virginia and Southern Maryland at the time of theRevolutionary War. But, said the rope guy, by about 1820 it gotcheaper to import the hemp we needed to make rope from the FarEast and so now in 1937 we don't grow any more hemp to make ropein this country -- it isn't needed anymore. If you heard that story, there are two things about it that Ifound fascinating. Number one, it explains the long-standingrumor that our forefathers had something to do with marijuana.Yes, they did -- they grew it. Hemp was the principal crop atMount Vernon. It was a secondary crop at Monticello. Now, ofcourse, in our research we did not find any evidence that any ofour forefathers had used the hemp plant for euphoriant purposes,but they did grow it. The second part of that story that, to me is even moreinteresting is -- did you see the date again - 1937? What did therope guy say? We can get all the hemp we need to make rope fromthe Far East, we don't grow it hear anymore because we don't needto. Five years later, 1942, we are cut off from our sources ofhemp in the Far East. We need a lot of hemp to outfit our shipsfor World War II, rope for the ships, and therefore, the FederalGovernment, as some of you know, went into the business ofgrowing hemp on gigantic farms throughout the Midwest and theSouth to make rope to outfit the ships for World War II. So, even to this day, if you are from the Midwest you willalways meet the people who say, "Gosh, hemp grows all alongthe railroad tracks." Well, it does. Why? Because these hugefarms existed all during World War II. But, the rope people didn't care. The paint and varnish peoplesaid "We can use something else." And, of theindustrial spokesmen, only the birdseed people balked. Thebirdseed people were the ones who balked and the birdseed personwas asked, "Couldn't you use some other seed?" These are all, by the way, direct quotes from the hearings.The answer the birdseed guy gave was, "No, Congressman, wecouldn't. We have never found another seed that makes a birdscoat so lustrous or makes them sing so much." So, on the ground that the birdseed people needed it -- didyou know that the birdseed people both got and kept an exemptionfrom the Marihuana Tax Act right through this very day forso-called "denatured seeds"? In any event, there was Anslinger's testimony, there was theindustrial testimony -- there was only one body of testimony leftat these brief hearings and it was medical. There were two piecesof medical evidence introduced with regard to the marijuanaprohibition. The first came from a pharmacologist at Temple University whoclaimed that he had injected the active ingredient in marihuanainto the brains of 300 dogs, and two of those dogs had died. Whenasked by the Congressmen, and I quote, "Doctor, did youchoose dogs for the similarity of their reactions to that ofhumans?" The answer of the pharmacologist was, "Iwouldn't know, I am not a dog psychologist." Well, the active ingredient in marijuana was first synthesizedin a laboratory in Holland after World War II. So what it wasthis pharmacologist injected into these dogs we will never know,but it almost certainly was not the active ingredient inmarijuana. The other piece of medical testimony came from a man named Dr.William C. Woodward. Dr. Woodward was both a lawyer and a doctorand he was Chief Counsel to the American Medical Association. Dr.Woodward came to testify at the behest of the American MedicalAssociation saying, and I quote, "The American MedicalAssociation knows of no evidence that marihuana is a dangerousdrug." What's amazing is not whether that's true or not. What'samazing is what the Congressmen then said to him. Immediatelyupon his saying, and I quote again, "The American MedicalAssociation knows of no evidence that marihuana is a dangerousdrug.", one of the Congressmen said, "Doctor, if youcan't say something good about what we are trying to do, whydon't you go home?" That's an exact quote. The next Congressman said,"Doctor, if you haven't got something better to say thanthat, we are sick of hearing you." Now, the interesting question for us is not about the medicalevidence. The most fascinating question is: why was this legalcounsel to the most prestigious group of doctors in the UnitedStates treated in such a high-handed way? And the answer makes aprinciple thesis of my work -- and that is -- you've seen it,you've been living it the last ten years. The history of drugs inthis country perfectly mirrors the history of this country. So look at the date -- 1937 -- what's going on in thiscountry? Well, a lot of things, but the number one thing wasthat, in 1936, President Franklin Roosevelt was reelected in thelargest landslide election in this country's history till then.He brought with him two Democrats for every Republican, all, oralmost all of them pledged to that package of economic and socialreform legislation we today call the New Deal. And, did you know that the American Medical Association, from1932, straight through 1937, had systematically opposed everysingle piece of New Deal legislation. So that, by 1937, thiscommittee, heavily made up of New Deal Democrats is simply sickof hearing them: "Doctor, if you can't say something goodabout what we are trying to do, why don't you go home?" So, over the objection of the American Medical Association,the bill passed out of committee and on to the floor of Congress.Now, some of you may think that the debate on the floor ofCongress was more extensive on the marijuana prohibition. Itwasn't. It lasted one minute and thirty-two seconds by my countand, as such, I will give it to you verbatim. The entire debate on the national marijuana prohibition was asfollows -- and, by the way, if you had grown up in Washington, DCas I had you would appreciate this date. Are you ready? The billwas brought on to the floor of the House of Representatives --there never was any Senate debate on it not one word -- 5:45Friday afternoon, August 20. Now, in pre-air-conditioningWashington, who was on the floor of the House? Who was on thefloor of the House? Not very many people. Speaker Sam Rayburn called for the bill to be passed on"tellers". Does everyone know "tellers"? Didyou know that for the vast bulk of legislation in this country,there is not a recorded vote. It is simply, more people walk pastthis point than walk past that point and it passes -- it's called"tellers". They were getting ready to pass this thingon tellers without discussion and without a recorded vote whenone of the few Republicans left in Congress, a guy from upstateNew York, stood up and asked two questions, which constituted theentire debate on the national marijuana prohibition. "Mr. Speaker, what is this bill about?" To which Speaker Rayburn replied, "I don't know. It hassomething to do with a thing called marihuana. I think it's anarcotic of some kind." Undaunted, the guy from Upstate New York asked a secondquestion, which was as important to the Republicans as it wasunimportant to the Democrats. "Mr. Speaker, does theAmerican Medical Association support this bill?" In one of the most remarkable things I have ever found in anyresearch, a guy who was on the committee, and who later went onto become a Supreme Court Justice, stood up and -- do youremember? The AMA guy was named William C. Woodward -- a memberof the committee who had supported the bill leaped to his feetand he said, "Their Doctor Wentworth came down here. Theysupport this bill 100 percent." It wasn't true, but it wasgood enough for the Republicans. They sat down and the billpassed on tellers, without a recorded vote. In the Senate there never was any debate or a recorded vote,and the bill went to President Roosevelt's desk and he signed itand we had the national marijuana prohibition. 1938 to 1951 Now, the next step in our story is the period from 1938 to1951. I have three stories to tell you about 1938 to 1951. The first of them. Immediately after the passage of thenational marijuana prohibition, Commissioner Anslinger decided tohold a conference of all the people who knew something aboutmarijuana -- a big national conference. He invited forty-twopeople to this conference. As part our research for the book, wefound the exact transcript of this conference. Ready? The first morning of the conference of the forty-two peoplethat Commissioner Anslinger invited to talk about marijuana, 39of them got up and said some version of "Gee, CommissionerAnslinger, I don't know why you asked me to this conference, Idon't know anything about marijuana." That left three people. Dr. Woodward and his assistant -- youknow what they thought. That left one person -- the pharmacologist from TempleUniversity -- the guy with the dogs. And what do you think happened as a result of that conference?Commissioner Anslinger named the pharmacologist from TempleUniversity the Official Expert of the Federal Bureau of Narcoticsabout marijuana, a position the guy held until 1962. Now, theirony of trying to find out what the drug did after it had beenprohibited -- finding out that only one person agrees with you --and naming him the Official Expert, speaks for itself. The next story from this time period was a particular favoriteof the police groups to whom I spoke at the FBI Academy, becauseit is a law enforcement story. After national marijuana prohibition was passed, CommissionerAnslinger found out, or got reports, that certain people wereviolating the national marijuana prohibition and using marijuanaand, unfortunately for them, they fell into an identifiableoccupational group. Who were flouting the marijuana prohibition?Jazz musicians. And so, in 1947, Commissioner Anslinger sent outa letter, I quote it verbatim, "Dear Agent So-and-so, Pleaseprepare all cases in your jurisdiction involving musicians inviolation of the marijuana laws. We will have a great nationalround-up arrest of all such persons on a single day. I will letyou know what day." That letter went out on, I think, October 24, 1947. Theresponses by the resident agents were all in the file. Myfavorite -- at the bottom line, there wasn't a single residentagent who didn't have reservations about this idea -- came fromthe Hollywood agent. This is the exact letter of the FBN agent incharge in Hollywood. "Dear Commissioner Anslinger, I have your letter of October 24. Please be advised that themusical community here in Hollywood are unionized and very tightwe have been unable to get an informant inside it. So, at thepresent time, we have no cases involving musicians in violationof the marihuana laws." For the next year and a half, Commissioner Anslinger got thosekinds of letters. He never acknowledged any of the problems thatthe agents said they were having with this idea and always wrotethem back the same letter. "Dear Agent so-and-so, Glad to hear you are working hard to give effect to mydirective of October 24, 1947. We will (and he always underlinedthe word 'will') have a great national round-up arrest ofmusicians in violation of the marijuana laws all on a single day.Don't worry, I will let you know what day." This went on -- and, of course, you know that some jazzmusicians were, in fact, arrested in the late 40's -- this allwent on until it ended just the way it began -- with somethingthat Anslinger said. I don't see anybody in here really oldenough to appreciate this point, but Commissioner Anslinger wastestifying before a Senate Committee in 1948. He was saying,"I need more agents." And, of course, the Senatorsasked him why. "Because there are people out there violating themarijuana laws." Well, you know what the Senators asked -- "Who?" And in a moment that every Government employee should avoidlike the plague, Anslinger first said, "Musicians." Butthen he looked up at that Senate committee and he gave them alittle piece of his heart and said the single line which provokedthe most response in this country's history about the non-medicaluse of drugs. Anslinger said, "And I don't mean goodmusicians, I mean jazz musicians." Friends, there is no way to tell you what a torrent ensued.Within 24 hours, 76 newspaper editorials slammed him, includingspecial editions the then booming trade press of the jazz musicindustry. With three days, the Department of the Treasury hadreceived fifteen thousand letters. bunches of them were still inbags when I got there -- never been opened at all. I opened afew. Here was a typical one, and it was darling. "Dear Commissioner Anslinger, I applaud your efforts to rid America of the scourge ofnarcotics addiction. If you are as ill-informed about that as youare about music, however, you will never succeed." One of the things that we had access to that really was funwas the Commissioner's own appointment book for all of his years.And, five days after he says "I don't mean good musicians, Imean jazz musicians." there is a notation: 10 AM --appointment with the Secretary of the Treasury." Well, Idon't know what happened at that appointment, but from thatappointment on, no mention is ever made again of the greatnational round-up arrest of musicians in violation of themarijuana laws all on a single day, much to the delight of theagents who never had any heart for it in the first place. The final story from this period is my favorite story fromthis period, by far, and, again, there is simply nobody here whois really old enough to appreciate this story. You know, if youtalk to your parents -- that's the generation we really need totalk to -- people who were adults during the late 30's and 40's.And you talk to them about marijuana in particular you would beamazed at the amazing reputation that marijuana has among thegeneration ahead of you as to what it does to its users. In the late 30's and early 40's marihuana was routinelyreferred to as "the killer drug", "the assassin ofyouth". You all know "reefer madness", right?Where did these extraordinary stories that circulated in thiscountry about what marijuana would do to its users come from? The conventional wisdom is that Anslinger put them over onAmericans in his effort to compete with Hoover forempire-building, etc. I have to say, in some fairness, that oneof the things that our research did, in some sense, was torehabilitate Commissioner Anslinger. Yes, there was some of thatbut, basically, it wasn't just that Anslinger was trying to dupepeople. The terrific reputation that marijuana got in the late 30s andearly 40s stemmed from something Anslinger had said. Doeseverybody remember what Anslinger said about the drug?"Marihuana is an addictive drug which produces in its usersinsanity, criminality, and death." Well, this time the magic word -- come along lawyers outthere, where's the magic word? -- Insanity. Marihuana use, saidthe Government, would produce insanity. And, sure enough, in the late 30s and early 40s, in fivereally flamboyant murder trials, the defendant's sole defense wasthat he -- or, in the most famous of them, she -- was not guiltyby reason of insanity for having used marijuana prior to thecommission of the crime. All right, it's time to take you guys back to class here. Ifyou are going to put on an insanity defense, what do you need?You need two things, don't you? Number one, you need an ExpertWitness. Where, oh where, in this story, are we going to find an expertwitness? Here it comes -- sure enough -- the guy from TempleUniversity -- the guy with the dogs. I promise you, you are notgoing to believe this. In the most famous of these trials, what happened was twowomen jumped on a Newark, New Jersey bus and shot and killed androbbed the bus driver. They put on the marijuana insanitydefense. The defense called the pharmacologist, and of course,you know how to do this now, you put the expert on, you say"Doctor, did you do all of this experimentation and soon?" You qualify your expert. "Did you write all aboutit?" "Yes, and I did the dogs" and now he is anexpert. Now you ask him what? You ask the doctor "What haveyou done with the drug?" And he said, and I quote,"I've experimented with the dogs, I have written somethingabout it and" -- are you ready -- "I have used the drugmyself." What do you ask him next? "Doctor, when you used thedrug, what happened?" With all the press present at this flamboyant murder trial inNewark New Jersey, in 1938, the pharmacologist said, and I quote,in response to the question "When you used the drug, whathappened?", his exact response was: "After two puffs ona marijuana cigarette, I was turned into a bat." He wasn't done yet. He testified that he flew around the roomfor fifteen minutes and then found himself at the bottom of atwo-hundred-foot high ink well Well, friends, that sells a lot of papers. What do you thinkthe Newark Star Ledger headlines the next day, October 12, 1938?"Killer Drug Turns Doctor to Bat!" What else do we need to put on an insanity defense? We needthe defendant's testimony -- himself or herself. OK, you putdefendant on the stand, what do you ask? "What happened onthe night of . ." "Oh, I used marijuana." "And then what happened?" And, if the defendant wants to get off, what is he or shegoing to say? "It made me crazy." You know what the women testified? In Newark they testified,and I quote, "After two puffs on a marijuana cigarette myincisor teeth grew six inches long and dripped with blood." This was the craziest business you ever saw. Every one ofthese so-called marijuana insanity defenses were successful. The one in New York was just outlandish. Two police officerswere shot and killed in cold blood. The defendant puts on themarijuana insanity defense and, in that case, there was nevereven any testimony that the defendant had even used marijuana.The testimony in the New York case was that, from the time thebag of marijuana came into his room it gave off "homicidalvibrations", so he started killing dogs, cats, andultimately two police officers. Commissioner Anslinger, sitting in Washington, seeing thesemarijuana insanity defenses, one after another successful, hewrites to the pharmacologist from Temple University and says,"If you don't stop testifying for the defense in thesematters, we are going to revoke your status as the OfficialExpert of the Federal Bureau of Narcotics." He didn't wantto lose his status, so he stopped testifying, nobody else wouldtestify that marijuana had turned them into a bat, and so theseinsanity defenses were over but not before marijuana had gottenquite a reputation, indeed. The next step -- and now we are going to move very quicklyhere -- in 1951. We get a whole new drug law called the Boggs Actand it is important to us for only two reasons. Number one, it reflects what I am going to call the formulafor drug legislation in this country. Here is the formula. Theformula really is always the same, think about it in ourlifetime. The formula is that someone, and by the way, that someone isusually the media, perceive an increase in drug use. What's theanswer? The answer in the history of this country is always thesame -- a new criminal law with harsher penalties in every singleoffense category. Where did the perception come from this time? Well, if youhave ever seen movies from this time period like High SchoolConfidential, the perception was that kids in high school werestarting to use drugs. What's the answer? The answer is alwaysthe same. The Boggs Act of 1951 quadrupled the penalties in everysingle offense category and, by the way, the Boggs Act had awhole new rationale for the marijuana prohibition. Do you remember the old rationale -- that marijuana was anaddictive drug which caused in its users insanity, criminality,and death? Just before Anslinger was to testify on the Boggs Act,the doctor who ran for the Government the Lexington, Kentuckynarcotics rehabilitation clinic testified ahead of Anslinger andtestified that the medical community knew that marijuana wasn'tan addictive drug,. It doesn't produce death, or insanity, andinstead of producing criminality, it probably produces passivity,said the doctor. Who was the next witness? Anslinger. And, if you see, that therug had been pulled out from under everything he had said in the1937 hearings to support the marijuana prohibition. In what Icall a really slick Federal shuffle -- Anslinger, you know, hadbeen bitten bad enough by what he said, he didn't want that again-- he said, the doctor is right, marijuana -- he always believed,by the way, that there was something in marijuana which producedcriminality -- is not an addictive drug, it doesn't produceinsanity or death but it is "the certain first step on theroad to heroin addiction." And the notion that marijuana wasthe stepping stone to heroin became, in 1951, the sole rationalefor the national marijuana prohibition. It was the first timethat marijuana was lumped with all the other drugs and nottreated separately, and we multiply the penalties in everyoffense category. By the way, I told you that the history of drug legislationreflects the history of the country. 1951, what's going on? TheKorean War, the Cold War. It didn't take the press a minute tosee this perceived use in drug use among high school kids as our"foreign enemies", using drugs to subvert the Americanyoung. In our book, we have ten or fifteen great politicalcartoons. My favorite is a guy with a big Fu Man Chu (mustache)labeled "Oriental Communism." He has a big needlemarked "Dope" and he has the American kids lying down-- "Free World" it is marked. There it was -- that ourforeign enemies were going to use drugs to subvert the Americanyoung. What did we do? We passed a new law that increased thepenalties in every offense category by a factor of four. Well, now once you buy it, the ball is going to roll likecrazy. 1956 and the Daniel Act 1956, we get another new drug law, called the Daniel Act,named for Senator Price Daniel of Texas. It is important to usfor only two reasons. One, it perfectly reflects the formulaagain. What is the formula? Somebody perceives an increase indrug use in this country and the answer is always a new criminallaw with harsher penalties in every offense category. Where did the perception in 1956 come from that there was anincrease in drug use? Answer: Anybody remember 1956? In 1956, wehad the first set ever of televised Senate hearings. And whosehearings were they? They were the hearings of Senator EstesKefauver of Tennessee about organized crime in America. These hearings, which everybody watched on their little setsshowed two things that we all know today, but it sure made theirsocks roll up and down then. Number one, there is organized crimein America and number two, it makes all its money selling drugs.There it was, that was all the perception we needed. We passedthe Daniel Act which increased the penalties in every offensecategory, that had just been increased times four -- times eight. With the passage of each of these acts, the states passedlittle Boggs acts, and little Daniel acts, so that in the period1958 to 1969, in the Commonwealth of Virginia, and Virginia wastypical, the most heavily penalized crime in the Commonwealth waspossession of marijuana, or any other drug. It led to a mandatory minimum sentence of twenty years, nopart of which you were eligible for parole or probation, and asto no part of it were you eligible for a suspended sentence. Just to show you where it was, in the same time period firstdegree murder in Virginia had a mandatory minimum sentence offifteen years. Rape, a mandatory minimum sentence of ten years.Possession of marijuana -- not to mention sales of marijuana withits mandatory minimum of forty years -- mandatory minimum oftwenty years. That is the situation in 1969 when we have a new drug law, thefirst one in this country's history that does not follow theformula. It is the 1969 Dangerous Substances Act. For he firsttime in this country's history, we have a perception of anincrease in drug use during the Sixties, but instead of raisingthe penalties, we lower them. And, further, in the DangerousSubstances Act of 1969, for the first time we finally abandon theso-called "taxing" mythology. In the 1969 Act, what the Federal law does is, it takes allthe drugs we know -- if you can't fill in this next blank, youare in trouble -- except two -- which two? Which two are nevergoing to be mentioned? Nicotine and alcohol. But, other thannicotine and alcohol -- every other drug. By the way, I tried this with the FBI for twenty years andthey wouldn't listen, and you won't listen either but, I am goingto try. If you are going to go out and talk about drugs andwhatever you are going to do with drugs, will you please discardthe entirely antiquated and erroneous word "narcotics."Narcotics are drugs that put people to sleep. Almost all of thedrugs that we are interested in today don't do that. So, in 1969, the Dangerous Substances Act gave up the effortto define what are narcotic drugs. What the 1969 act did, andwhat most state laws still do, is to classify all drugs exceptnicotine and alcohol by two criteria. What is the drug's medicaluse? And, what is the drug's potential for abuse? We put all the drugs, by those two criteria, in schedules, andthen we tie the penalties for possession, possession with intentto sell, sale, and sale to a minor to the schedule of the drug inquestion. Now, again, I am no good at this anymore, I have notkept up with the drug laws, I don't know who is in what schedule,and many states have abandoned the schedule but, to give you aflavor of it: The first schedule, Schedule One Drugs were drugsthat had little or no medical use and a high potential for abuse.What's going to go in there? LSD, marijuana, hashish, they areall in Schedule One -- little or no medical use and a highpotential for abuse. Then you get some medical use, high potential for abuse --what do you want there? Barbiturates, amphetamines,. Then we are going to get what? High medical use and highpotential for abuse. Morphine, codeine. Codeine is the best onebecause codeine is in almost every single prescription coughmedicine and it is addictive as can be. Then you go on down and get the antibiotics -- high medicaluse, almost no potential for abuse, and there you are. Once you schedule your drugs, you then tie the penalties forthe drugs to the schedule and then, because in 1969 they wantedto reduce the marijuana penalties they had to deal with marijuanaseparately and did so. But the 1969 act important for two reasons again: One, weabandoned the taxing mythology and; two, it was the first law inthis country's history that, instead of raising the penalties inevery offense category, lowered them. Well, then you know what happened. We get the War on Drugs.You know how it all went down. We got perceptions in the 80s thatthere was an increase in drug use, a great dramatic decision todeclare war on drugs and, predominantly, war on drug users. What I want to say to you is this, and this is where I thinksome of you are going to be a little surprised. You know as muchabout that process as I do. You watched it. You saw how we hadone law after another, raising the penalties so that as late as1990, thirty percent of the minority group population of the Cityof Baltimore who are male and between 20 and 29 are under courtsupervision for drugs. Thirty percent, that's the number you arelooking for. The War on Drugs, a very interesting war, because why? It wascheap to fight. It was cheap to fight at first -- why? You heardme in the "Recent Decisions" talk. What was last year'sbig moment, and the year before? The change in cheap and easyforfeiture. Criminal forfeiture was used to make this a costlesswar. That is, easy forfeiture from those who were caught allowedus to pay for the war in that way. I think we are going to havesome real questions about whether people want to pay for the waron drugs through their taxes because now the Court has madeforfeiture much, much more difficult in their overall concern forproperty rights. But here is what I think may surprise some of you. You guysknow as much about the War on Drugs as I do. I didn't come hearto talk, or to harangue, or to give you any opinions on thatpoint. I think it speaks for itself. It is a failure and I thinkit will be judged as a failure. What I wanted to bring youinstead was, instead of talking about that that everybody istalking about -- and you guys will ultimately resolve it and youguys are the ones who are seeing all the drug cases, day in andday out, and always will, until this changes. But, what I thoughtI could bring you was the part of the story you hadn't heard --how we got to where we were when the War on Drugs was declared. Conclusion - The Issue of Prohibition And one other thing I want to do with you this morning, andthat's this -- I want to say one thing. To tell you the realtruth, my interest isn't in drugs, or in the criminalization ofdrugs although I think we should abolish the criminal penaltiesfor drugs, and deal with it as the Europeans do in a medical way,but who cares? That's an opinion. What interests me though, isn't drugs. What interests me isthat larger issue, and the reason that I wrote the piece, and thereason they were my tenure pieces, I am interested in a muchlarger issue, and that is the idea of Prohibition -- the use ofcriminal law to criminalize conduct that a large number of usseem to want to engage in. And, for my purposes, -- now, Professor Bonnie went on to beassociated with NIDA and with all kinds of drug-relatedorganizations and continues to be interested in the drug laws --I am not. My interest is in criminal prohibitions and, for mypurposes, as a criminal law scholar, we could have used anyprohibition -- alcohol prohibition, the prohibition againstgambling that exists still in many states. How about theprohibition in England from 1840 to 1880 against the drinking ofgin? Not drinking, just gin -- got it? We could have used any ofthese prohibitions. We didn't. We chose the marijuana prohibitionbecause the story had never been told -- and it is an amazingstory. We could have used any of these prohibitions. We could haveused the alcohol prohibition. The reason we didn't is because somuch good stuff has been written about it. And are you aware ofthis? That every single -- you know how fashionable it is tothink that scholars can never agree? -- Don't you believe that --Every single person who has ever written seriously about thenational alcohol prohibition agrees on why it collapsed. Why? Because it violated that iron law of Prohibitions. What is theiron law of Prohibitions? Prohibitions are always enacted by US,to govern the conduct of THEM. Do you have me? Take the alcoholprohibition. Every single person who has ever written about itagrees on why it collapsed. Large numbers of people supported the idea of prohibition whowere not themselves, opposed to drinking. Do you have me? What?The right answer to that one is Huh? Want to hear it again? Large numbers of people supported the idea of prohibition whowere not themselves, opposed to drinking. Want to see it? Let me give you an example, 1919. You are a Republican inupstate New York. Whether you drink, or you don't, you are forthe alcohol prohibition because it will close the licensedsaloons in the City of New York which you view to be the corruptpatronage and power base of the Democratic Party in New York. Soalmost every Republican in New York was in favor of nationalalcohol prohibition. And, as soon as it passed, what do you thinkthey said? "Well, what do you know? Success. Let's have adrink." That's what they thought, "let's have adrink." "Let's drink to this." A great success,you see. Do you understand me? Huge numbers of people in this countrywere in favor of national alcohol prohibition who were notthemselves opposed to drinking. I just want to go back to the prohibition against the drinkingof gin. How could a country prohibit just the drinking of gin,not the drinking of anything else for forty years? Answer: Therich people drank whiskey and the poor people drank what? -- gin.Do you see it? Let's try the gambling prohibition. You know when I came toVirginia, this was a very lively issue, the gambling prohibition.By the way, I think it's a lively issue in California. Are youready for it? Have you ever seen the rhetoric that goes around the gamblingprohibition? You know what it is. Look, we have had a good time.We have been together yesterday, we have been together today, Ihave known a lot of you guys for ages. How about after the talk,we have a minute or two, let's go on up to your room and we willplay a little nickel, dime, quarter poker. Want to play somepoker this afternoon? Why not? It's a nice thing to do. Would we be outraged if the California State Police camebarreling through the door and arrested us for violation ofCalifornia's prohibition on gambling? Of course we would.Because, who is not supposed to gamble? Oh, you know who is notsupposed to gamble -- them poor people, that's who. My God, theywill spend the milk money. They don't know how to control it.They can't handle it. But us? We know what we are doing. That's it. Every criminal prohibition has that same touch toit, doesn't it? It is enacted by US and it always regulates theconduct of THEM. And so, if you understand that is the name ofthe game, you don't have to ask me, or any of the other peoplewhich prohibitions will be abolished and which ones won't becauseyou will always know. The iron law of prohibitions -- all of them-- is that they are passed by an identifiable US to control theconduct of an identifiable THEM. And a prohibition is absolutely done for when it does what?Comes back and bothers US. If, at any time, in any way, thatprohibition comes back and bothers us, we will get rid of it forsure, every doggone time. Look at the alcohol prohibition if youwant a quick example. As long as it is only THEM --- you know,them criminals, them crazy people, them young people, themminority group members --- we are fine. But any prohibition thatcomes back and bothers US is done for. Let's just try the marijuana prohibition as a quick one. Whodo you think was arrested 650,000 strong two years ago forviolation of the marijuana laws? Do you think it was all minoritygroup members? Nope. It was not. It was some very identifiablechildren of US -- children of the middle class. You don't have toanswer my opinion. No prohibition will stand -- ever-- when itcomes back and penalizes our children -- the children of US whoenacted it. And in fact, do you have any real doubt about that?Do you know what a fabulous sociological study we will be if webecome the first society in the history of the world to penalizethe sons and daughters of the wealthy class? Unheard of. And so, yeah, we will continue the War on Drugs for a whileuntil everybody sees its patent bankruptcy. But, let me say thatI am not confident that good sense will prevail. Why? Because welove this idea of prohibition. We really do. We love it in thiscountry. And so I will tell you what I predict. You will alwaysknow which ones are going out and which ones are coming in. And,can't you see the one coming right over the hill? Well, folks, weare going to have a new prohibition because we love this ideathat we can solve difficult medical, economic, and socialproblems by the simple enactment of a criminal law. We adorethis, and of course, you judges work it out, we have solved ourproblem. Do you have it? Our problem is over with the enactmentof the law. You and the cops work it out, but we have solved ourproblem. Here comes the new one? What's it going to be? No, it won't beguns, this one starts easy. This one is the Surgeon General haswhat? --Determined -- not "we want a little more checking itout", not "we need a few more studies", not"reasonable people disagree" -- "The SurgeonGeneral has determined that the smoking of cigarettes will killyou." Now, all you need, and here is my formula, for a newprohibition every time is what? We need an intractable,difficult, social, economic, or medical problem. But that is notenough. There has to be another thing. It has to divide by class--- by social or economic class, between US and THEM. And so, here it comes. ' You know the Federal Government has been spending a lot ofmoney since 1968 trying to persuade us not to smoke. And, indeed,the absolute numbers on smoking have declined very little. But,you know who has quit smoking, don't you? In gigantic numbers?The college-educated, that's who. The college-educated, that'swho doesn't smoke. Who are they? Tomorrow's what? Movers andkickers, that's who. Tomorrow's movers and kickers don't smoke.Who does smoke? Oh, you know who smokes out of all proportion totheir numbers in the society -- it is the people standing in yourcriminal courtrooms, that's who. Who are they? Tomorrow's movedand kicked, that's who. And, there it is friends, once it divides between the moversand kickers and the moved and kicked it is all over and it willbe all over very shortly. It starts with "You know, they shouldn't smoke, they arekilling themselves." Then it turns, as it has -- you see theads out here -- "They shouldn't smoke, they are killingus." And pretty soon, that class division will happen, wewill have the legislatures full of tomorrow's movers and kickersand they are going to say just what they are going to say anytime now. "You know, this has just gotta stop, and we got ananswer for it." We are going to have a criminal statute thatforbids the manufacture, sale, or possession of tobaccocigarettes, or tobacco products period. You know that the cigarette companies are expecting it. Whathave they been doing? They have been shifting all of theiroperations out of the United States and diversifying like crazy.Where are they going to sell their cigarettes? In China, that'swhere. And they are already moving, because they see it and I seeit. Ready? What are we going to have? You know what we are goingto have. One day -- when's it gonna happen, ten years, fifteen?-- some legislator will get up and, just as though it had neverbeen said before, "You know we gotta solve this smokingproblem and I got a solution -- a criminal prohibition againstthe manufacture, sale, or possession of tobacco cigarettes."And then you know what happens. Then everybody who did want acigarette here today, if there is anyone here who smokes, you aregoing to have to hide in the bathroom. And cigarettes are nolonger going to be three dollars a pack, they are going to bethree dollars a piece. And who's going to sell them to you? Whowill always sell them to you? The people who will sell youanything -- organized crime. You got the concept, we will gothrough the whole darn thing again because I am telling you thiscountry is hooked on the notion of prohibition. Let me conclude, and again this is my prediction -- I willtell you I don't think it is subject to opinion. Just look at it.Just take a look at what has happened now and what will happen. Iwill tell you how inexorable it is. If we get together here inthe year 2005, I will bet you that it is as likely as not thatthe possession of marijuana may not be criminal in this state.But the manufacture, sale, and possession of tobacco will be, andwhy? Because we love this idea of prohibitions, we can't livewithout them. They are our very favorite thing because we knowhow to solve difficult, social, economic, and medical problems --a new criminal law with harsher penalties in every category foreverybody. Contents | Feedback | Search DRCNet Library | Schaffer Library | Historical Research WT01-B26-6IA087-000632-B026-483http://206.61.184.43:80/schaffer/history/ophs.htm 206.61.184.43 19970122095244 text/html 91308HTTP/1.0 200 OKDate: Wednesday, 22-Jan-97 09:52:23 GMTServer: WebSitePro/1.1f (S/N wpo-0deb)Allow-ranges: bytesContent-type: text/htmlLast-modified: Saturday, 28-Dec-96 05:39:59 GMTContent-length: 91090 History of Legislative Control Over Opium, Cocaine, andTheir Derivatives Contents | Feedback | Search DRCNet Library | Schaffer Library | Historical Research THE HISTORY OF LEGISLATIVE CONTROL OVER OPIUM, COCAINE, ANDTHEIR DERIVATIVES by David F. Musto, MD Legislative control over dangerous drugs may be dated fromattempts in the nineteenth century to prevent acute poisoning bycertain substances that might be purchased in ignorance of theirlethal potential or might be too easily available to would-besuicides. Opium was being sold in a crude form containing about10 percent morphine, as well as in concoctions derived from crudeopium: paregoric, laudanum, and a solution in acetic acid knownas "black drop." Morphine had been isolated from opiumin 1805 by the German pharmacist, F. W. Serturner, but productionof the powerful active ingredient of opium on a large scale wasdelayed until the 1830s.1 From that time onward, in factories inGermany, Great Britain, and the United States, morphine wasproduced in great quantities. Thus when in 1868, Great Britaincame to enact pharmacy laws to control dangerous substances,"opium and all preparations of opium or of poppies" waslisted alongside such substances as oxalic acid as commoditiesthat could not be sold without being labeled "poison."' The Pharmacy Act of 1868 is an important symbol of legislativecontrol in a Western country. The act was not the most strictamong nations; perhaps the Prussian regulations were stricter andmore comprehensive, but establishment by the British of somelimitation on the availability of dangerous drugs-drugs thatwould eventually become more serious a problem for society asaddictive agents than as tools for suicide-was a policy alsofollowed by other European nations. It had an apparentlydiscouraging effect on the per capita consumption of opium,opiates, and cocaine in the late nineteenth century andcontributed to the low level of British consumption (at leastcompared to the American) right up to the 1960s.3 The experience of the United States stands in contrast toBritain's. The Pharmacy Act of 1868 was regulated in large partby the organized association of pharmacists, the PharmaceuticalSociety (established 1841). In order to retail, dispense, orcompound "poisons," or to assume the title of chemist,druggist, pharmacist, or dispensing druggist or chemist, theindividual had to be registered by the Pharmaceutical Society. Aswell as being the testing and registering body, the Society wasalso given the initial responsibility for adding new drugs to thepoison list. Thus the law, which ultimately would be enforced inBritish courts, was monitored by local members of thePharmaceutical Society as a tool in competition with unregistereddruggists, grocers, and anyone else who might attempt to purveythese drugs to the public. While the act presumably aided the public health by havingdangerous drugs sold or dispensed by individuals knowledgeableabout their qualities, it was also a convenient aid to the tradeof registered pharmacists. Although the drugs could be obtainedwith no specific restraint on the amount or frequency of sale,the bottles had to be labeled "poison." A strictercategory of substances also required that the purchaser be anacquaintance of the pharmacist or someone the pharmacist knew.This list included arsenic and "strychnine and all poisonousalkaloids and their salts." The impact of this modestobstacle to the acquirement of dangerous drugs should not beunderestimated. Further, the self-interest that would motivateregistered pharmacists to monitor breaches of the law provided anunpaid, but interested, drug enforcement cadre scatteredthroughout Great Britain. "Patent medicines" wereexcepted from these controls, and this led to a campaign againstthem later in the century, but the pure forms of the drugs, e.g.,morphine suitable for injection, were restricted in availabilityfrom the time of the Pharmacy Act onward.' In the United States,throughout the nineteenth century, both medicine and pharmacyremained essentially unorganized, although there were somephysicians and pharmacists attempting to organize theirprofessions. The American Medical Association, which was foundedin 1847 and which we now might think of as the dominant medicalorganization, was a small and nationally unrepresentative groupuntil about World War 1.5 The American PharmaceuticalAssociation, founded four years later, grew slowly and, like theAMA, lacked the authority to license practitioners. The pharmacyestablishment was divided sharply among drug manufacturers,wholesalers, and retailers, whose divergent interests the APhAtried to coordinate, but each segment of the profession came towork through its own organization: the National WholesaleDruggists' Association (1882), the National Association of RetailDruggists (1898), and many other groups.6 There was no nationalgroup for the health professions to which government could turnfor regulation, even if the American constitutional system hadpermitted such an arrangement. Licensing of pharmacists and physicians, which was the centralgovernment's responsibility in European nations, was, in theUnited States, a power reserved to each individual state. In theera of Andrew Jackson, any form of licensing that appeared togive a monopoly to the educated was attacked as a contradictionof American democratic ideals. State after state repealed themedical licensing laws adopted in earlier days. Practicalconcerns also supported repeal: Legislators preferred to leave itto the patients to decide which of the many competing theories ofmedicine was the best. Instead of moving toward a national systemof licensing for health professionals, therefore, individualstates were deregulating the professions. American medicalschools were similarly unregulated, and many flourished-some nobetter than diploma mills. The states did not beginreestablishment of medical licensing until the 1880s, and eventhen the movement was spotty, with a wide range of standards.'Pharmacists, also seeking to raise standards and limitcompetition, likewise fought at the state level for licensing,since the U.S. Constitution placed in the hands of states theregulation of the health professions. Although some requirementsfor labeling of over-the counter medicines would come with thePure Food and Drug Act of 1906 as an exercise of the federalright to regulate interstate commerce, in general, the nineteenthand early twentieth century interpretation of the Constitutionfavored a strict division between state and federal powers. The status of legislative control of dangerous drugs duringthe nineteenth century may be summed up as follows: The UnitedStates had no practical control over the health professions, norepresentative national health organizations to aid thegovernment in drafting regulations, and no controls on thelabeling, composition, or advertising of compounds that mightcontain opiates or cocaine. The United States not only proclaimeda free marketplace, it practiced this philosophy with regard tonarcotics in a manner unrestrained at every level of preparationand consumption. Through a slower pace of professional development, the UnitedStates also lagged behind Britain and other European countries inestablishing broadly based organizations representing thenation's physicians or pharmacists to which the centralgovernment could turn for regulation. Second, the form ofgovernment adopted in the United States, a federation of partlyindependent states, was a conscious attempt to preventestablishment of an all-powerful central governmentcharacteristic of Europe. In the nineteenth century, thisremarkably successful form of government entailed each statemaking its own regulation if it wished to; the result was anarray of controls that varied from one state to another. In fact,states made little attempt to control addictive drugs until quitelate in the last century, and those efforts did not prove veryeffective. During the first part of the nineteenth century, the amount ofopiates used in the United States may have been comparable tothat used in Britain, where some areas, notably the fen counties,had a fairly large per capita consumption. Inhabitants thereoften took a dose of laudanum or some form of opium daily to keepaway the fevers associated with the marshlands.8 More generally,parents reputedly purchased one or another form of opium to rubon the gums of teething infants or to spoon-feed a child toinduce sleep so that the mother without provision for child carecould work in the local factory. These accounts are anecdotal,but recent historical studies do suggest that the taking of someform of opium for pain, sleep, or to ward off illness was notuncommon. The occasional death of an infant from an overdose ofopium or the suicide of an adult by means of opium promptedparliamentary interest in the distribution and labeling of thedrug. In large measure, the 1868 Pharmacy Act was the result. Oneshould note however, that through the provisions of the act andthe designation of the Pharmaceutical Society as the mostresponsible body, the pharmacists also achieved some control overthe profession and a lead on the other health professions. Asomewhat similar victory for U.S. pharmacy would be found in thedetails of the Harrison Narcotic Act in 1914.9 In nineteenth-century America, the unimpeded importation ofopium and the free economy in opiates do give an advantage to thehistorian, for estimates of per capita consumption are morereliable when there are few restrictions on the importation,sale, and consumption of a product. Because the growth of poppieswithin the country and preparation of opium from them seem tohave been a minor contributor to American use, the importstatistics, begun in 1840 and continued to the present day, arereliable as a guide to domestic consumption until the HarrisonAct of 1914. Certainly the minimum level and the trend can beobserved. After the Harrison Act, these statistics grew lessreliable, for smuggling becomes a more uncertain variable, but wecan say that at least during the nineteenth century the annualper capita consumption rose steadily from about 12 grains in 1840(an average single dose being one grain) until the mid-1890s,when it reached 52 grains annually per capita. Then statisticsshow that average individual consumption gradually subsided up to1914, by which time the per capita rate had fallen back to thelevel of about 1880." In Great Britain, the per capitaconsumption declined during the latter half of the nineteenthcentury." During that same period, opium use in the UnitedStates rose dramatically. The peak of opiate addiction in theUnited States occurred about the turn of the century, when thenumber probably was close to 250,000 in a population of 76million, a rate so far never equaled or exceeded. 12 Heroin hadbeen introduced into the pharmacy in 1898 and had contrastingimpacts in Britain and the United States. In New York City, theaddiction capital of the United States, heroin became the drug ofchoice for recreational addicts, and the number of addicts wasmeasured in the tens of thousands by 1920. In Britain, theaddiction rate for heroin addicts by 1920 was minuscule. 13 Ofcourse, the use of drugs is determined by many factors, but Iwould like to suggest that the contrast in easy availability ofnarcotics in America and Britain-created by political and socialfactors removed from considerations of addiction-underlay thestrikingly different rates of addiction each country experiencedwell into this century. The rise in addiction with which we aremore familiar, that of the 1950s and more recently, appears to beassociated with additional factors that will be discussed later. Americans have something to learn from their earlier andextensive consumption of opiates, including heroin, and alsomassive consumption of cocaine, which occurred before World WarI. This era is forgotten. We commonly act as if the heroin"epidemic" of the 1960s or the current cocaine"epidemic" is a new phenomenon in the United States,that the widespread use of a drug implies that legalization or"decriminalization" is the only reasonable response.The history of attempts at legislative control in the UnitedStates suggests that other courses may be effective and thatthese alternatives to legalization appear to have reducedenormous opiate and cocaine consumption in the United Statesearlier in this century. Therefore, it is worthwhile to considerthese early efforts at narcotic limitation if we are to approachcontemporary policy issues with an appreciation of the range ofpolicy options that reduce or encourage ingestion of thesesubstances. For in spite of the great difference in addictionrates between the United States and Great Britain in 1920, theUnited States did reduce its addiction rate to a relatively smallnumber. On the other hand, the low heroin addiction rate in GreatBritain prior to the 1950s did not prove a protection againstdrug problems in that nation, although the level of use inBritain has not reached the proportions to which we areaccustomed in the United States. Clearly the social and legalfactors affecting drug use are complex, and there is no singleinfluence that determines a particular level of drug use andabuse. AMERICAN LEGISLATIVE CONTROL OVER OPIUM AND OPIATES TO 1914 The role of opium and its derivatives in the United States canbe traced independently from cocaine until 1914, when thesesubstances were linked together as "narcotics" throughthe Harrison Act. Technically, only the opiates are narcotics,that is, sleep-inducing, and they all have different effects.Nevertheless, most dangerous drugs, including cannabis, weregrouped under the rubric "narcotics" from at least the1920s until the 1960s. As mentioned above, opium was available in many forms derivedfrom crude opium long before the nineteenth century. In America,the two developments that spurred both consumption and concernabout opium were (1) the isolation of morphine and its injectioninto the body with hypodermic syringes and (2) the introductionof smoking opium, which had been brought to the United Statesmainly by a feared minority, Chinese laborers imported to helpbuild western railroads. The much greater ease of addictionthrough use of morphine compared to the more dilute formsemployed previously focused attention on the drug, medicalpractitioners, and modern technology in the form of thehypodermic syringe. Consumption of opium in the United States rose steadily beforeand after the Civil War. There had been complaints before the warabout "opium drunkards" by such prominent andprogressive physicians as Oliver Wendell Holmes, but in thesecond half of the century, physicians, as well as the generalpublic, widely deplored opium and morphine addiction. To beaddicted to morphine was to harbor a shameful secret to be hiddenfrom others at whatever cost, a point illustrated in EugeneO'Neill's moving play about his own family, Long Day's Journeyinto Night. Written in his later years, it was based on hismother's addiction by a thoughtless physician, and the pain ofthis memory had remained so great that O'Neill would not permitthe play's production during his lifetime. The leading Americansurgeon and the first professor of surgery at The Johns HopkinsHospital, William Stewart Halsted, was a morphine addict for thelast several decades of his life. His secret was kept hiddencarefully until the publication of Sir William Osler's privatediary in 1969." Osler had been Halsted's physician whileOsler was on the Hopkins faculty. Halsted's addiction did notappear to interfere with his work. Americans received opium and morphine not only from theirphysicians for pain; they could receive what they wanted, forwhatever reason they chose, over the counter or from mail ordercatalogues. The American free enterprise system, coupled with thefederal system of government, meant that a bottle heavily lacedwith morphine could be sold across state lines as an"addiction cure" and affirmed on the label to containno morphine whatsoever, quite within the law. States could passlaws restricting such advertising, but they were not inclined todo so. Patent medicine companies were the leading advertisers inAmerican newspapers. They developed an ingenious protection fromprying investigations or public pressure to reveal secretformulas, or from any state requirement to make only valid claimsfor effectiveness: The proprietary manufacturers included intheir lucrative contracts with newspapers a proviso that theadvertising agreement would be void if the state in which thenewspaper was published enacted any laws affecting the sale ormanufacture of the nostrums. 11 In the nation's capital, the manufacturers also fought offrequirements that their nostrums be labeled as to contents. Billsto enact such a law under the interstate commerce clause of theConstitution were defeated repeatedly, but in the 1890s a newreforming spirit was evident in the nation. These reforms wereextensive, ranging from control over the use of forest land, togovernment inspection of meat and other comestibles and lawsrelating to adulterants in foods, and to drugs considered unsafe.Attention to the danger of narcotics using the termbroadly-accompanied the peak of per capita consumption in theUnited States. It is clear that what were regarded as the mostnegative aspects of drug use led to the passage of the newlegislation. The simplest reform, correct labeling, was part ofthe Pure Food and Drug Act of 1906. Any over-the-counter medicine- commonly these would be "patent medicines"-had to belabeled correctly as to inclusion of any of the following drugs:morphine, cocaine, cannabis, or chloral hydrate. A long-desiredreform, it simply informed the purchaser whether any of thesedrugs were present; it did not prevent purchase or restrict theamount of the drug. 16 Nevertheless, reports at the time indicatethat the amount of these substances dropped from a third to ahalf as a response to public concern.17 Although the newspapersremained quiet, widely read magazines such as Collier's andLadies Home Journal railed against patent medicines, especiallyagainst morphine and cocaine. Even after passage of thetruth-in-labeling laws, the magazines continued their exposesunabated until the next major step, which was restriction on theavailability of the drugs themselves." Tracing the movement to restriction, as opposed to labelingaccuracy, requires a step back to the mid-nineteenth century.Patent medicines are thought to have created some addiction, butthe number of addicts is difficult to estimate. That physiciansaddicted or assisted in the addiction of patients is morecertain. The problem of iatroaddiction initially was approachedby limiting renewal of prescriptions for opiates. These legalcontrols were mostly in the form of additions to the healthstatutes and depended for their efficacy on the judgments ofphysicians and pharmacists. These controls would not, of course,affect interstate commerce in narcotics or the familiar patentmedicines, which still could be bought over the counter. Noconsistent police efforts to enforce these laws appear to havebeen undertaken.18 As the public and leaders of the health professions becamemore aware of the growing number of those addicted to opiates,chiefly morphine, state laws were amended to be more stringent,and the police occasionally staged crackdowns. As will berecalled, however, the professions were pretty much unorganizedand struggling to achieve mandatory licensing; a threat to takeaway a license could not hold much fear until a license wasrequired to begin with. Legislators also felt, or at leastclaimed, a helplessness when neighboring states did not enactstrict laws-a circumstance more familiar to us with variationsin- the legal drinking age between states-with the result thatenforcement was weak. This circumstance, combined with a poorlytrained medical profession, a lack of professional organization,and an absence of laws controlling either patent medicine orinterstate commerce in drugs, left local controls more symbolicthan effective. The nineteenth century's last decade brought the rise of whatwould come to be called the Progressive Movement, a set ofreforms usually taking the form of federal laws affecting theentire nation with the ostensible purpose of improving thenation's morals or resisting the selfish actions of the rich andpowerful. Alongside it grew a temperance, soon a prohibition,movement that would eventuate in the Eighteenth Amendmentmandating prohibition of alcohol distribution for nonmedicalpurposes in the United States. In many ways, of course, theantialcohol movement was part of the Progressive Era; itsstartling success and later dramatic repeal have given thealcohol issue a somewhat separate development in our minds, butthe interrelation between the battles against alcohol and againstnarcotics is an important one. The antialcohol crusade helpedestablish the attitude that there could be no compromise with theforces of evil, that "moderation" was a false conceptwhen applied to alcohol: Prohibition was the only logical ormoral policy when dealing with this great national problem. Bythe nineteenth century a new wave of state prohibition laws wasenacted. These were tempered by the contemporary constitutionalunderstanding that a state prohibition law did not preventpurchase of liquor from a "wet" state, for that wouldbe a form of interstate commerce and not subject to the states'powers. This assumption helped placate some doubters aboutprohibition, but the staunch fighters against alcohol also soughtto remove that loophole. This they did through the Webb-KenyonAct of 1913. Without going into the details of the broad andinvolved movement that led to national prohibition, we shouldnote that the significance for the control of narcotics is thatanother dangerous substance, over which there was even moredispute as to the means of control, progressed inexorably towarda policy of "no maintenance" and no compromise. Themoral question of how to deal with a dangerous substance wasbeing fought out over alcohol, but the case would be strongereven with narcotics when that issue was brought to nationaldeliberation. The means by which the narcotics issue arose at the federallevel was accidental. Certainly it would have come to theattention of Congress and the president eventually as a corollaryto the alcohol prohibition movement or as a way of controllingaddiction, which was becoming a target of journalist reformersand physicians. It was acquisition of the Philippines through theSpanish-American War that occasioned action by the federalgovernment. Again, in order to understand how the Philippines forced thecentral government to take action on opium, it is necessary toappreciate the divisions between federal and state powers thatwere so marked until the last half-century. The Philippines,unlike a state, came directly and wholly under the control of thefederal government. At last, Congress could not avoid makingdecisions on such matters as the local availability of opium.Opium had been provided to Chinese on the Philippine Islandsthrough a Spanish government monopoly. Civil Governor WilliamHoward Taft considered whether the monopoly should bereinstituted. It was his judgment that this would be reasonableand that the profits from the opium monopoly could be used tohelp educate Filipinos, a task the United States eagerly acceptedas it sought to provide a model government for its first colony.20 It was at the point in 1903, when this reinstitution waspassing through the Philippine government under the eye of CivilGovernor Taft, that the moral question of compromising with"evil" affected the future of opium's legalavailability in that land. Missionaries in Manila and in theUnited States had learned that "tainted money" fromopium sales was to be employed for education, and they besoughtPresident Theodore Roosevelt to prevent this moral wrong. Heordered Taft to stop the bill, and that was the end of it. Themood of moral leaders in the United States was sufficient duringthe first few years of this century to prevent any such"maintenance" program, even if it was restricted, aspromised, to the Chinese in the Philippines. This immediatereaction to allowing opium to be used for purely"recreational" purposes, coming even before the Foodand Drug Act, gave a signal as to how the federal governmentwould respond to later questions regarding the legal supply ofopium to individuals, not for medical reasons but for enjoymentor to satisfy their addiction. In response to the veto from Washington, Governor Taftappointed an Opium Investigation Committee to consider how otherAsian territories handled the opium problem. This committeeintroduces us to Bishop Charles Henry Brent, the ProtestantEpiscopal bishop of the Philippines, who had come out with Taftto help in Americanization of this new possession. Bishop Brentlater would become world famous for his pioneer efforts to launchthe ecumenical movement among Christian churches, but his secondclaim to fame was as a world leader against nonmedicinal uses ofnarcotics. He was appointed to the committee, which traveled toJapan, Formosa, Shanghai, Saigon, and Singapore examining howother nations dealt with the opium user. He and the other membersof the committee found the Japanese policy in Formosa, a Japanesepossession since its seizure from China in 1895, to be the mosteffective and enlightened. Japan opposed smoking opium but didnot try to stop confirmed addicts abruptly from indulging intheir habit. Japan, hoped to "mature out" the opiumsmokers and leave an opium-free colony. In Japan, itself, opiumuse was controlled stringently by the government, rare even amongChinese aliens, and strongly deprecated by Japanese society. The Philippine Opium Investigation Committee recommended that(1) male opium smokers over 21 should be registered in order toreceive opium from a reinstituted government monopoly and (2)after a three-year period, the amount provided the smokers bereduced gradually until the smokers had been completely weanedfrom the drug. 1 But Congress reacted more sternly. Congressdecreed immediate opium prohibition, except for medicinalpurposes, for all native Filipinos; non-Filipinos-mostlyChinese-were allowed a three-year period of use. Over 12,000non-Filipino opium users were registered, and their usual dosagewas maintained for two-and-onehalf years. During the final sixmonths of the three-year leniency period ending March 1908, theopium provided was gradually reduced to zero. For officialpurposes, opium smoking had stopped in the Philippine Islands.One additional point: The opium dispensing stations establishedunder these laws were the first American narcotic clinics,although their goal was not long-term maintenance but ratherregistration and detoxification. The Philippine situation forced the federal government to takea stand on opium use for nonmedicinal purposes, and the decisionwas to prohibit. To Congress, once the question was posed,compromise with narcotics was not a politically practicalalternative. The Philippines also gave the United Statesleadership of the international control of narcotics, a role itstill holds. It was apparent to the Opium Investigating Committeethat the solution to the Philippine opium problem lay in thecontrol of international trafficking in opium, as well as in thecurtailment of opium production in the original producing states,such as India, China, Burma, Persia, and Turkey, to name some ofthe most prominent sites for the cultivation of the opium poppy. At the time that the Philippines were perceived to be a victimof external sources of opium, the United States was havingincreasing problems with the Chinese Empire. Owing tomaltreatment of Chinese in the United States, merchants in Chinaplanned a voluntary embargo on American goods. This worriedAmerican industrialists, wholesalers, exporters, and the federalgovernment. China had also embarked on a vigorous effort to riditself of opium use and, employing draconian methods, was havingsome success. As a means to indicate good will to China, to aidthe Philippine opium problem, and to take an internationalleadership position on a moral issue of the times, the UnitedStates proposed, following Bishop Brent's suggestion to PresidentRoosevelt, to convene an international meeting at Shanghai toconsider the opium traffic among nations and to suggest ways inwhich China's antiopium campaign might be aided. Thus, the Shanghai Opium Commission came into being. It wouldmeet during February 1909, with Bishop Brent as its electedpresident. The group was designated a "commission"because the United States was unable to gain approval for a morepowerful convocation, a "conference," which underinternational law could draft a treaty that would, if ratified,bind the signatory states. A "commission," on the otherhand, could make findings of only fact or opinion. In addition tothe United States and China, those who accepted invitations toShanghai were Great Britain, France, the Netherlands, Persia,Japan, Italy, Austria-Hungary, Germany, Portugal, Siam, andRussia. Turkey accepted but did not send a representative. Persiawas represented by a local merchant. The resolutions adopted by the commission were merelyrecommendations and, even as such, had a comfortable vaguenessthat allowed a latitude of interpretations. For example,Resolution Three, taking cognizance of the near unanimousagreement that opium for nonmedicinal uses should be prohibitedor "carefully regulated," called upon nations to"reexamine" their laws. This could hardly be considereda clarion call for prohibition of nonmedical uses, but it wasBrent's goal to achieve a series of resolutions that at leastpointed in the direction of action to control traffic innarcotics, with the hope that a future conference would enact atreaty initiating such control." The road from the Shanghai Opium Commission to the Hague OpiumConference, which convened in December 1911 and resulted in theOpium Convention of 1912, was a tortuous one, but after theShanghai meeting, the United States continued to press for asecond and more significant gathering. Eventually, the nationsgathered in The Hague, and once again Bishop Brent was electedthe presiding officer. The Hague Opium Convention (which concerned cocaine as well asopium) placed the burden of narcotic control on the domesticlegislation of each nation. Chapter Three of the conventioncalled for control of each phase of the preparation anddistribution of medicinal opium, morphine, heroin, cocaine, andany new derivative that could be shown to have similar properties.24 The convention was not put into force by the dozen nations whoattended the First Opium Conference, for it was agreed that therequirements would be held in abeyance until all forty-six worldpowers had signed and ratified the convention. Eventually threeconferences were held, the second in 1913 and the third in 1914,only weeks before the outbreak of World War 1. A compromise wasreached regarding the implementation of the treaty: Any ratifyingnation was permitted to put the treaty into effect in 1915, evenif ratification had not been unanimous. But only seven nationsdid this by the end of the World War and the beginning of theVersailles treaty negotiations in 1919. The United Statessupported incorporating the Hague Convention into the Versaillestreaty, so that ratification of the treaty ending World War Iwould at the same time bring the nation under the requirements ofthe Hague Convention, which required national and domesticlegislation to control the preparation and distribution ofopiates and cocaine. Of course, the United States never didratify the Versailles treaty, but it had already ratified theHague Convention in 1913 and had put it into effect in 1915. Onesignificant result of the inclusion of the Hague Convention inthe Versailles treaty was the passage in Britain of the DangerousDrugs Act of 1920, an action taken not because of any seriousproblem with addiction but because, by ratifying the Versaillestreaty, Britain had committed itself to comprehensive domesticlegislation. 25 DOMESTIC NARCOTIC LEGISLATION IN THE UNITED STATES During the year or so prior to the Shanghai Opium Commission,the United States suggested topics to be discussed in 1909, andone of the topics was a report on domestic antinarcoticlegislation. Americans understood that strong and enforceddomestic legislation in other nations would result in diminishingthe flow of drugs into the United States, but would other nationsunderstand why the United States had no national antinarcoticlegislation whatsoever? Americans knew that federal-stateseparation of powers made a national antinarcotic law ratherdifficult, but the State Department decided that something shouldbe on the books when the U.S. delegation arrived in Shanghai. The simplest law that could be framed and stand a chance ofpassage by the U.S. Congress before the commission opened was onethat excluded from the United States opium not intended forlegitimate medical uses or, in other words, opium prepared forsmoking. Here there was an ironic combination of politicalfactors. The United States hoped one of the major effects of theShanghai Commission would be to placate China with regard to thepoor treatment given Chinese nationals in the United States. Suchtreatment was in violation of our treaty obligations with China.The impetus for banning smoking opium from the United States,however, had developed from the fear and loathing of the Chinese,who were associated intimately with this particular manner ofingesting opium. Thus, the negative American attitude towardChinese aliens gave the push that passed a "facesaving" law designed to show China the good will of theUnited States. After the law was enacted on February 9, 1909, it wasannounced dramatically in Shanghai to the other nations as proofof American sincerity.26 And yet no one in the Americandelegation or within the State Department had any illusions thatthis law would control domestic narcotic use. Additionallegislation was seen as imperative both to curtail the Americannarcotics problem and to display an American example to othernations where the implementation of narcotics control programswas essential to the solution of the American domestic problem. Dr. Hamilton Wright, a physician with political interests whohad been appointed opium commissioner by the State Department in1908, oversaw the State Department's preparation for the Shanghaimeeting, which included culling information from policedepartments, physicians, pharmaceutical houses, etc., regardingthe narcotic problem and consumption in the United States. BishopBrent was the chairman of the delegation, but after his elevationto the commission's presidency, Wright became the acting head.Back in Washington after the commission meeting, Wright took upthe battle for an international meeting that could frame a treatyand played a leading role in the preparation of domesticantinarcotic legislation. He had opposition within the StateDepartment on both questions, but he finally won the assent ofPhilander C. Knox, the secretary of state, and moved ahead. Wright, who combined an aggressive personal style withself-righteousness and a thirst for political preferment, wasless effective than he otherwise might have been. He never gotthe prize plum for which he yearned, the ministry to China, andhis chief claim for notability, the Anti-Narcotic Act of 1914,known even then as the "Harrison" Act, left him at themoment of achievement with almost no further role in theantinarcotic movement. Eventually, he volunteered to help thewounded on the western front during World War 1, was injured 27there in an automobile accident, and died in 1917 in Washington.His indomitable wife, Elizabeth Washburn Wright, carried on his28 battle for world control of narcotics until her death in 1952. In late 1909 Dr. Wright proposed a domestic law that would bebased on the federal government's power of taxation. Thealternative federal power was that over interstate commerce, butWright believed that taxation would result in a detailedaccounting of narcotics from their introduction into the UnitedStates to their distribution to manufacturers, wholesalers, andretailers, including pharmacists and physicians. Heavy fineswould be levied on anyone not keeping records accurately orselling and transferring these products without proper reportingand payment of taxes. Wright tried to solve the federal/state dichotomy in thismanner: The information obtained by this proposed law would bemade available to state boards of pharmacy and medicine, whichwould then take appropriate action to ensure that "theproper relations . . . should exist between the physician, thedispensing druggist, [and] those who have some real need of thedrugs.' "29 So it is evident that at this early stage, twoyears before the Hague Convention, Wright and the StateDepartment did not envision a federal role in policing therelationships between, say, an addict and his or her supplyingpharmacist or physician. The sanctity of the state's policepowers would be maintained; the federal government would supplyonly information. Reformers believed that the information,however, could lead a responsible state agency to take only oneaction, that is, to curb the supply of narcotics to those who didnot have a medical need for it-and "mere" addicts didnot fall into that category. The Foster Anti-Narcotic Bill (1910-1911) Republican Congressman David Foster of Vermont introducedWright's bill in April 1910. In addition to opium and cocaine, asin the eventual Harrison Act, the bill was aimed at cannabis(marijuana) and chloral hydrate, the same substances the Food andDrug Act of 1906 required to be revealed on labels. It did notallow small amounts of the drugs in mild remedies such as coughsyrup to be exempt from the stringent reporting requirements andtheir severe penalties. Druggists feared the multitude of stampsand labels at each stage; the fines, which would range from $500to $5,000; and the one-to-five-year jail sentences. The word"knowingly" did not qualify the prohibited actions,making it likely that simple errors without any intention todeceive would result in horrendous punishments. Although supportfor the bill could be found, the individuals in the drug tradewould not endorse the detailed and hazardous provisions of theFoster Bill. It never came to a vote in the Sixty-first Congress,which ended in March 1911.30 The next Congress was marked by a significant change: For thefirst time in almost two decades, the Democrats gained control ofthe House of Representatives. The South now had achieved newimportance, in that committee chairmanships changed hands. In theSixty-second Congress the Foster Bill became the Harrison Bill,named after Francis Burton Harrison, a New York City Democrat whoserved on the Foreign Relations Committee. Dr. Wright continuedhis difficult task of trying to obtain the most stringent billconsistent with winning essential political support from themedical and pharmaceutical interests and now from the DemocraticParty. In order to mitigate the severity of the original FosterBill, the drug trades established the National Drug TradeConference, which would represent the major trade associationsand try to reach a compromise position on the complexantinarcotic bill. The NDTC, which first met in Washington, D.C.,in January 1913, provided the most powerful influence on thewriting of what would become known as the Harrison Act." The attitude of the newly influential southern Democratstoward any potential invasion of states' rights now had to betaken more seriously. These politicians feared an interferencewith the South's local laws, which enforced racial segregationand Negro disenfranchisement. They remembered the era of"reconstruction," when the North ruled the Southfollowing 1865, and wanted to maintain the authority the whitecitizenry had subsequently won with the withdrawal of troops and"carpetbaggers." The narcotic control proposalsthreatened to intrude federal authority into the states,affecting local pharmacists and physicians and threatening toreach right into a neighborhood and send an individual to federalprison. Furthermore, this example of using the federal tax powerprimarily to achieve a moral end-for the taxes were not intendedto bring in a significant revenue but rather to force disclosureand compliance with rules of narcotics distribution-could be aprecedent for other concerns brewing in the United States, suchas protecting Negro voting rights in the South. Dr. Wright, therefore, faced a new set of attitudes in theDemocratic-controlled House. He reacted by stressing the impactof narcotics, especially cocaine, on Negroes. He attributedattacks on whites to the crazed Negro cocaine fiend. He alsoargued that many poor Negroes would not have the energy orknowledge to send away for the cocaine, so the conclusion must bethat northern businessmen who did not care about the South'sconcerns were shipping-via interstate commerce-cocaine toNegroes. Further, unscrupulous or ignorant employers were said tobe supplying cocaine to their Negro workers .32 One further concern about the precedent the antinarcotic lawwould provide related to the flourishing prohibition movement. Asprohibition was achieved in state after state, the loophole forat least the upper and middle classes was that alcohol could beordered across state lines and shipped into a dry state, forinterstate commerce was regulated by the federal government,which so far was not teetotal. The Webb-Kenyon Act of 1913,however, was passed to close this loophole, survived PresidentTaft's veto, and, much to the surprise of many, was declaredconstitutional by the Supreme Court. This occurrence removed oneof the stumbling blocks to the Harrison Bill, for now a nationalantinarcotic law could not serve as a precedent for curtailinginterstate commerce in a dangerous substance. In the course of all this maneuvering, no one rallied to thedefense of any of the drugs named for control except thatoccasionally cannabis was described by someone as nothabit-forming or not as serious as opium or cocaine. Perhapsbecause the cannabis problem was not seen to be serious orbecause the drug did not seem so dangerous, it was dropped fromthe proposed law. Chloral hydrate, a sleeping medicine, was alsodropped. The attitude toward opium and cocaine, however, wasalmost totally condemnatory. The only question was how to controltheir distribution most efficiently, since they had medicinalvalue but were also considered dangerously addicting. This was insharp contrast with alcohol; its use divided the nation, and hugelegitimate industries depended upon its continued consumption. The government and the trades eventually reached agreement onthe proposed law by moderating the record-keeping provisions,reducing penalties, and allowing the sale of patent medicineswith small amounts of narcotics in them. Representative Harrisonintroduced it in June 1913, and it was passed quickly by theHouse. In the Senate some amendments were offered, a few with anapparent goal of destroying the bill's chances of passage. InAugust of 1914, though, the Senate passed the bill, albeit with afew modifications that were compromised in Conference Committee.Finally, on December 17, 1914, President Wilson signed it intolaw, to become effective March 1, 1915. At last the United Stateshad redeemed its pledge to other nations that it would enact astringent law, as it had urged every other nation to do. The significance of the Harrison Act to strategists like Dr.Wright, though, was more than just the satisfaction of redeemingpledges made to questioning representatives of other nations. Forhim, the Harrison Act was the implementation of the HagueConvention of 1912, which called upon signatories to enactdomestic legislation controlling narcotics supplies anddistribution. Understood as the fulfillment of treatyobligations, the Harrison Act would have the authority to usurpthe states' police powers, for the Constitution in Article Sixgives treaties concluded by the United States supremacy over thelaws of states. This would resolve the problem of states' rightsinterfering with the ability of a national law to require auniform compliance with strict narcotics control .33 Unfortunately, the Supreme Court at first did not give a verystrict interpretation to the Harrison Act. In the first Jin FueyMoy case (1916), the Court declared by a six-to-two majority thatthe Harrison Act could not be understood as having been requiredby the Hague Convention and that physicians could prescribe asthey saw fit, even to simple addicts. 34 This decision was astunning blow to federal enforcement, which, from the first dayof the act's implementation, was directed at pharmacists andphysicians who sold prescriptions or treated addicts without anyintent to cure them. World War 1, arriving at almost the same time as the HarrisonAct, profoundly affected American attitudes, creating an intensedesire to purify the nation as it girded itself to fight fordemocracy against the barbarism of the Kaiser. The fall of Russiaand the spread of Bolshevism intensified fears of contagion andthe desire to be sure that the United States remained pure andstrong. Prohibition took giant strides during World War 1. TheProhibition Amendment in an early form nearly passed the House inDecember 1914, a week after the passage of the Harrison Act. In1916 it did pass, and by January 1919 Prohibition had become partof the Constitution as the Eighteenth Amendment. Earlier,Congress had passed wartime prohibition, which was intended tosave grain for the war effort as well as to promote efficiency inwar production plants. Similarly, a battle was being fought tooverturn the Jin Fuey Moy decision, which had weakened thegovernment's intention for the Harrison Act. A TreasuryDepartment committee reported that the number of addicts in thenation was over a million." These exaggerated figures, aswell as a fear about returning veterans having become addicted onthe battlefield and the specter of alcohol prohibition, whichmight drive alcoholics to morphine and cocaine, led to a newattempt to put teeth into the Harrison Act. This time thegovernment was successful. In March 1919, two months after the ratification of theEighteenth Amendment (which would go into effect a year later),the Supreme Court ingeniously decided, five to four, that to calla prescription for narcotics intended to supply a"mere" addict with maintenance doses was an error, forsuch a script could not be considered a true prescription givenin the proper conduct of medical practice. Since it was not aprescription, the issuing physician had conveyed narcoticswithout the required tax; he had therefore violated the HarrisonAct and could be arrested. The four dissenting justices were theconservatives, who argued that this was an invasion of states'police powers, while the majority, including Holmes and Brandeis,felt that more power had to be given the government if it was tocarry out its duty to protect the public from such an insidiousevil .36 At last, the intent of the reformers had been achieved:Simple maintenance was outlawed, and the federal government couldtake action nationwide to arrest and convict health professionalswho practiced it. Narcotics now had a no-maintenance policy,which a few months later would also be the policy for alcohol.Enforcement of both prohibitions would be the responsibility of aunit in the Bureau of Internal Revenue, reflecting the similarityof the two conceptions. Enforcement During the 1920s Several additional laws completed the early legislativestructure of American control of opium and cocaine. Some wereminor, such as a stipulation that no finished products such asheroin or morphine could be imported into the United States.37The law stated that only coca leaves and crude opium could beimported and that the finished products, cocaine, morphine,heroin, codeine, etc., were to be manufactured in Americanpharmaceutical factories, which were given a monopoly to producethese substances. This may have made up for revenues lost, as theamounts sold legally in the United States fell after the HarrisonAct. Other laws dealt with transshipment of drugs 38 across theUnited States for foreign markets. Heroin Perhaps the most important addition to the Harrison Act'scontrol of opiates and cocaine came in 1924, when the UnitedStates banned the importation of opium to be used for themanufacture of heroin.39 The observance of federal-stateboundaries is evident in this law, for it does not ban themanufacture of heroin altogether but only the importation ofcrude opium for that purpose. Just that much seemed to be withinthe power of the federal government. Also, this did not requirethe seizure of heroin legally available in the United States forcough medicines (the original claim for heroin's value) or forcertain other purposes, chiefly pain control or "twilightsleep" during child birth. Heroin had been made available commercially by the BayerCompany of Germany in 1898 as a superior cough suppressant.40 TheBayer Company believed that the addition of acetyl groups to thebasic molecule would make morphine more palatable, and thisproduct, diacetylmorphine, the company named Heroin, a trademarkthat was protected until Germany lost such protections as aresult of losing the First World War. Similarly, by adding anacetyl group to salicylic acid to make it less irritating to thestomach when taken for joint pains, the Bayer Company launchedanother successful venture. In 1899 the company named sodiumacetyl salicylic acid Aspirin, which similarly was protected bytrademark until World War 1. Few pharmaceutical firms can takecredit for naming and distributing two drugs that remain amongthe most popular in Western society even after nearly a hundredyears. Heroin essentially had been unrestricted in the United Statesprior to the Harrison Act, and by 1912 in New York City it hadreplaced morphine as the drug of recreational choice amongyouthful males, according to the records of Bellevue Hospital.The addictive nature of heroin had been recognized ratherquickly, for the AMA issued a warning in 1902. Heroin was popularbecause it could be inhaled by sniffing, like cocaine, as well asinjected by needle. When injected into the bloodstream, heroincrossed the blood-brain barrier more quickly than morphine andtherefore gave a more intense, but briefer, "high."During the years of intense concern over social control, whichbegan with the First World War, heroin became linked with malegang violence and the commission of crimes. Some believed thatheroin stimulated the user to commit crimes or at least providedthe courage to pull off a bank robbery or mugging. In the early1920s most of the crime in New York City was blamed on drug use,chiefly the opiates, including heroin.41 The preference for heroin over morphine by recreational users,and the belief that other opiates could fulfill heroin's role asa painkiller and cough suppressant, led to a move to ban heroinfor medical purposes. The heroin problem also contributed toAmerican fear of foreign nations after World War 1, for the drugwas being manufactured in other countries and then smuggled intothe United States. The Swiss drug industries, for example,produced large amounts of heroin, which found its way into thiscountry. Heroin's image as a foreign product popular with feareddomestic groups helped support an isolationist stance,illustrated by the American refusal to join or even recognize theLeague of Nations. Influential congressmen, such as Stephen G.Porter, Republican chairman of the House Committee on ForeignRelations, urged that all heroin production in the United Statesbe stopped. As an example he would try to get other nations 42 tofollow at the Geneva Opium Conferences of 1924 and 1925. The United States did enact the legislation sought byCongressman Porter, but it failed to achieve its goals at themeetings in Geneva. In fact, in disgust at the refusal of othernations to agree to curb production of poppies and coca bushes,the ultimate source of heroin 43 and cocaine, the United Stateswalked out of the conference. The United States, which hadfounded the world antinarcotic movement in Shanghai and TheHague, now saw it taken over by the League of Nations (as theVersailles treaty had mandated) and controlled by the verynations the United States sought to shame or force into anarcotics policy that the United States viewed as responsible.American participation in the worldwide effort then fell to a lowpoint until the 1930s, when participation was resumed ininternational meetings. By the outbreak of World War II, theUnited States was again achieving significant participation ininternational antidrug activities. AMERICAN DOMESTIC CONTROL TO THE MARIJUANA TAX ACT OF 1937 The use of cocaine, which had been in "soft" drinkslike Coca-Cola until 1903 and was available easily to sniff as atreatment for sinusitis or hay fever, fell precipitously afterreaching a peak somewhere around 1905. By the 1930s cocaine usehad receded, and during the 1950s physicians and narcotics agentsalike described cocaine use as a problem that once was serious inthe United States but now was practically absent. Several reasonsfor its reduced use can be suggested. The drug had beenintroduced as a wonder substance-Freud had called it the firstmedicine that worked as an antidepressant. The Parke-DavisCompany manufactured it after 1885 in many forms for drinking,smoking, inhaling, or rubbing on the skin. Within about a decade,warnings surfaced. Consumption peaked about twenty years afterits initial distribution, and around the same time the accountsof its effect on the lives of its users and its popularlybelieved-although questionable-special link with southern blackscreated in the public's mind an image so fearful that cocaine'seffects became the extreme against which other drugs would becompared. Cocaine's association with violence, paranoia, andcollapsed careers made laws against it by 1910 a popular matter.The first strict antinarcotic law in New York State was passed in1913 and was directed at cocaine. Al Smith, later to be ananti-Prohibition candidate for president and critic ofProhibition in his state while he was governor, drew the strictanticocaine measure in his early years as a state assemblyman.44The combination of strict laws and intense public support ofcontrol measures brought on a reduction in consumption, which, atthe peak of its popularity, must have seemed most unlikely if notimpossible. The effect of the Harrison Act, its court interpretations, andsupplementary legislation also appear to have reduced greatly thenumber of opiate addicts. The medical and pharmacy professionswere denied an easy way of providing drugs. Although it is clearthat only a fraction of either profession was liberal in theirprovision, this nevertheless had been enough to maintain a largenumber of users. It had been argued recently that therecreational users began to stand out more prominently, as themedically addicted and more sedate group declined in numbers, andthat the relatively small number of addicts in the United States,about 50,000 in 1940, would have had an "underworld" orunsavory character even without the Harrison 45 Act'scriminalization of drug use. This point of view contrasts sharplywith the argument that the Harrison Act changed citizens who werenormal except for their addiction into criminals who had 46 toviolate the law to obtain their daily supply of opiates. Whateverthe reason, the number of those addicted fell from about aquarter million around 1900 to much less than half that number byWorld War II. The war effectively reduced supplies of narcoticsto the United States, and in 1945 the United States probably hadits lowest number of opiate addicts since the mid-nineteenthcentury. The rise of addiction after World War 11 may have builton the core of addicts left in the nation, but the dynamics ofthe addiction epidemic that began in the 1960s appear in certainrespects to have had a different character. NARCOTIC CLINICS, 1913-1925 In order to close the story of the decline in addiction after1900, it is necessary to consider the legendary narcotic clinicsthat, like the Philippine opium dispensaries, were intended todeal with addicts who no longer could receive opiate or cocainesupplies from local physicians .47 The first in the United Stateswas opened in 1912 by Charles Terry, the public health officer ofJacksonville, Florida, where he provided both opiates and cocaineto men and women, blacks and whites. Dr. Terry went on to becomea student of the opium problem in the United States and compileda classic book of reports, excerpts from articles, andstatistical information in The Opium Problem,published in 1928 and co-authored by Mildred Pellens. Other clinics followed, particularly after the TreasuryDepartment, in enforcement of the Harrison Act, prosecuted orthreatened with prosecution health professionals who suppliedaddicts indefinitely. A series of clinics in New England wereestablished at the suggestion of officials of the InternalRevenue Bureau. In New York State, the crackdown on druggists andphysicians emanated from state law, and clinics were establishedin upper New York State through state planning and authorization.Registration of addicts was permitted so that physicians wouldrestrict maintenance to those already addicted. In New York City, the Health Department did not wish toprovide opiates, morphine, and heroin on an indefinite basis butdid open a clinic at the city Health Department headquarters.This clinic provided heroin, but only as an inducement toregistration and eventual detoxification and rehabilitation.About 7,500 addicts registered, received their drug of choice indosages gradually decreased until uncomfortably small, usuallythree to eight grains of morphine daily, and were offeredcurative treatment. Most declined to be cured. Those who didreceive treatment, at North Brother Island, seemed bothunappreciative and very liable-the estimate was 95 percent - toreturn to narcotics available on the street or from a physicianor druggist. The Treasury Department, armed with fresh Supreme Courtdecisions of March 1919, started to close down the clinics, alongwith prosecuting the dispensing physicians and druggists. Oneargument was that the availability of easy maintenance inhibitedcures and also that giving legal permission for maintenanceclinics undercut the Treasury Department's position when itbrought action against a professional for reckless provision ofdrugs. From a legal point of view, the "reckless"provider was obeying the tax laws, as was the clinic, unless thefederal government wanted to get into the question of medicalcompetence, which was a state, not a federal, concern. Gradually the clinics were closed, the last one in 1925 inKnoxville, Tennessee. Some had been operated poorly, others quiteresponsibly with community support. Yet, because of theintricacies of the tax powers under which the federal lawoperated, all were closed, even if unfair harassment wasnecessary to discourage the operation. The number of registrantswas not large, about 3,000 if we exclude the New York Cityclinic, which was not intended for maintenance but for bait toget addicts into detoxification. The number of addicts registeredunder the New York State law, which provided for maintenance notonly in clinics but also from private physicians and pharmacists,eventually totaled about 13,000 in 1920. It can be assumed,therefore, that the clinics were not a major element in themaintenance of addiction in the United States. One side note: The13,000 addicted registrants in New York State in 1920 add up tothe largest number of legally supplied addicts recorded in anyWestern country this century, a number not approached yet byBritain under the socalled "British System." Althoughthe "American System" preceded and surpassed in sizeany scheme attempted then or subsequently in Britain, it was infact the large number of addicts in America that made maintenanceso unwieldy and unpopular. The demise of the clinics left drug peddlers and individualmembers of the health professions as the major targets of thefederal government. Generally, the physicians did not wish totreat addicts, nor did they have any sympathy with addicts. Thosephysicians who, for whatever reason, did continue to treataddicts with maintenance doses were threatened and arrested,unless the maintenance had been approved by the local narcoticagent. Some maintenance was permitted, but only on a case-by-caseevaluation. From reports prepared by agents upon investigatingnarcotic clinics, it appears that an acceptable life-style was arequirement for permission to be maintained.48 A theory had been advocated, mostly among maintainingphysicians in New York City, that longstanding addiction changedthe body's physiology in such a way that opiates were necessaryfor the patient to remain normal.49 Too little opiate and thepatient would experience withdrawal, too much and the patientwould be "high," but just the right amount would allownormal feelings and behavior. This, of course, is close to the argument made in the 1950s byDrs. Dole and Nyswander to justify methadone maintenance. After aseries of scientific studies shortly after World War 1, thegovernment concluded otherwise .50 Those physicians who insistedon maintaining patients without approval from a narcotics agentran a serious risk of arrest and, if convicted, loss of a medicallicense and time in a federal penitentiary. In spite of thedanger, of course, some physicians supplied narcotics withoutrestraint or with very poor judgment, but evidence shows thatother, responsible physicians were entrapped without good reasonin order to boost the number of an agent's arrests and therebybolster his chances for promotion.51 An aura of fear, therefore,accompanied a physician's decision to give an opiate to apatient, especially a new patient. On the other hand, thecasualness with which physicians once handed out morphine or someother opiate was reduced considerably. Along with the rejection of maintenance, physiciansunfortunately had no effective medical cure available foraddiction. Several had been promoted in many forms in thenineteenth and early twentieth century, but each had been foundto have no scientific merit .52 The problem devolved into adecision of whether to stop opiates abruptly and thereby causethe patient to go directly into full Withdrawalthe so-called"cold turkey" approach-or gradually to reduce theopiate over a few days or a few weeks. Because the addictedperson frequently has a threshold of average daily consumptionbelow which the user becomes acutely uncomfortable, and because ayearning for heroin or morphine often persists for months oryears after the beginning of withdrawal, the decision to detoxifyabruptly or gradually usually was a difficult path for thepatient. Nevertheless, detoxification was the preferred route forlegal reasons. Two ancient warnings about detoxification, thatthe patient would die in withdrawal, or that a supply cutoffwould precipitate a rash of suicides, did not materialize. During the 1920s and 1930s the number of addicts diminished inthe United States. Grossly exaggerated estimates came fromantidrug entrepreneurs like Captain Richmond Pearson Hobson, whohad been a Prohibition advocate before unleashing his energiesagainst heroin and later marijuana as the head of severalnational and international voluntary groups." Captain Hobsonattacked heroin in a most melodramatic manner, claiming therewere 4 million addicts in the United States and comparing themall to lepers. In spite of Hobson, the concern over opiateaddicts and cocaine users declined during the two decades afterWorld War I. MARIJUANA TAX ACT OF1937 With the battle against opiate addiction apparently at a morestable, less alarming level in the 1930s and the use of cocainehaving declined dramatically, a new dangerous drug appeared onthe American horizon: marijuana. Marijuana smoking arrived in theUnited States with Mexican farm workers who had crossed theborder, mostly to labor in agricultural fields in the Southwestand in sugar beet fields as far north as Montana and Michigan.During the prosperous 1920s, about half-a-million farm workerscame to the United States, but as the Depression's widespreadunemployment laid an increasingly heavy burden on the country'scitizens, the Mexicans became an unwelcome group, encouraged inall ways to return to Mexico. Entwined with the troubles theywere said to cause local citizens was the Mexicans' custom ofgrowing marijuana for their own use. Hence, marijuana was linkedto violence, dissolute living, and Mexican aliens.53 The greatest fear of marijuana in the United States lay in theWest and Southwest. The government was importuned to take action,but the recent experience with alcohol prohibition (which hadended in 1933) made the Federal Bureau of Narcotics (FBN) and itshead, Harry J. Anslinger, formerly of the Prohibition Bureau,hesitant to get involved in a drug that grew domestically andprolifically. Cocaine and heroin were both foreign imports andtherefore, at least theoretically, could be regulated moreeasily, but marijuana appeared to be almost impossible to curb,let alone eradicate. The FBN tried to address this drug byincluding it in a recommended uniform state narcotic law thatwould leave to localities the question of prosecution andallocation of enforcement resources. Then a curious law intendedto reduce the number of machine guns provided the federalgovernment with a mechanism to attack marijuana nationally and atthe federal level. The Firearms Act of 1934 decreed that a machine gun could notbe transferred in any way without the payment of a transfer tax(from which law enforcement personnel were exempted). As odd asthis mechanism may sound, the law was upheld by the Supreme Courtin 1937 as a legitimate use of the power of taxation for a moralobjective. Within weeks of this decision, the TreasuryDepartment, which housed the FBN, appeared before Congress askingfor a transfer tax for marijuana. Without a stamp permit and theproper tax stamps, marijuana could not be sold, bartered, orgiven away. Congress quickly approved the bill, and PresidentFranklin Roosevelt signed it into law later in 1937.Unfortunately for the enforcement of this law, the FBN did notreceive any more money or agents. Therefore, the FBN relied onobnoxious descriptions of marijuana to do the job. The substancewas described to the public as a danger at least equal to cocaineor morphine, and the penalties for its illegal use or possessionwere severe. Because use of marijuana does not seem to have beengreat in the 1930s, the law's extraordinary severity did notconcern the general public until the 1960s, when thousands ofusers were arrested as marijuana's popularity burgeoned.Furthermore, the contrast between the effects of marijuanaobserved in the 1960s and the longstanding claims of the FBNregarding marijuana led to a problem concerning the credibilityof official statements, which still affects popular perceptions. WORLD WAR II TO THE PRESENT The Second World War ended with relatively few opiate addictsand very little use of cocaine or marijuana in the United States.The only closely controlled drug rising in use was alcohol,consumption of which had increased in per capita rates since therepeal of Prohibition. During all this period, sleeping pills andother barbiturates were prescribed widely but did not appear tobe a similar problem. The same holds true for the amphetamines,which had been made available in the 1930s and continued to bemanufactured and prescribed without restriction. Treatment of hard-core addicts did take place at the twofederal narcotics hospitals in Lexington, Kentucky, and FortWorth, Texas. Each was, in fact, a prison in which addicts weretreated and forced to detoxify, but the patients/prisonersfrequently resumed their drug habits when they returned to theirprevious environments. Around 1950 a younger age group began tobe admitted for heroin addiction, an abuse that reached a veryhigh level in 1970 and remains high today. This threat elicitedtwo responses. First, the federal government enacted more severelaws that levied mandatory sentences for conviction of dealing innarcotics. The laws, enacted in 1951 and 1956, are the peak oflegal penalties against narcotics, including marijuana, in theUnited States.55 The second response reflected the domestic and internationaltensions of the time. The heroin menace-and it should bereemphasized that cocaine and marijuana were not seen as anythingbut potentially major problems in the 1950s-was ascribed to theinfiltration of the drug trade by Chinese Communists who hadtaken over the China mainland in 1949. The Red Chinesepurportedly sent heroin to the United States to undermine ourdemocracy and at the 56 same time obtain specie, for which theyhad a desperate need. By the 1970s, however, the United Stateswas defending the People's Republic of China against the samecharge, now levied by Soviet newspapers.57 Such are the vagariesof international relations and the domestic drug problem. Heroin addicts in the 1950s mainly were young malesconcentrated in black and Hispanic urban ghettos. These addictsconcerned the federal government, as well as reform-mindedlawyers, academics, and physicians. The latter groups found theharsh penalties and the loathing attitude toward the addicts tobe inhumane. Leaders of this countermovement included sociologistProfessor Alfred Lindesmith and the attorney Rufus King. Theybelieved a more relaxed approach would be much more successful,as well as more kind. Rather than depriving addicts of heroin,heroin should be provided them. Rather than jailing addicts, theyshould be hospitalized, if necessary, or just left alone.58 This alternative view competed with the more hard-line styleof law enforcement exemplified by Commissioner Anslinger. Afterforty or more years, treating addicts medically, which had beenpopular before World War I and had then been found inadequate tothe task of reducing addiction, became part of public policy inthe 1960s. Methadone, a synthetic opiate developed in Germany inWorld War 11, was used by Dole and Nyswander to providemaintenance under theories similar to those which had justifiedmaintenance prior to the restrictive Supreme Court decisions in1919. This marked a major break in American narcotic controlpolicies; maintenance again was legal, although not with heroinor morphine. Along with the possibility of maintenance, other milder formsof control were invoked by the federal government. Civilcommitment to a narcotic treatment center,, thought more humanethan prison sentences, became possible legally in 1966, althoughin subsequent years this did not prove a practical method eitherto reduce addiction or to cure addicts in any marked number.59 Also in the 1960s, an enthusiasm for drug consumption of allkinds, polydrug abuse, replaced the habitual use of one or twodrugs, which had been more common in the past. Marijuana becamevery popular with young people, and then gradually its popularityexpanded in both directions to even younger and to older ages.Psychedelic drugs, such as LSD, appeared on the scene, along withinjectable methedrine or "speed." Drugs came tosymbolize opposition to the government and older mores. Theturmoil and dissension caused by the Vietnam War added to thesense of alienation many young people already felt from the oldergeneration, which frowned on drug use other than alcohol andtobacco. In addition to cultural alienation and the rapidincrease in multidrug use, the drug problem in the 1960s wasintensified by the extraordinarily large number of young peoplein the ages most likely to experiment with drugs; the post-WorldWar 11 "baby boom" generation had reached the teenageyears. By 1970, marijuana was used commonly, and research was showingthat it did not have the awful effects ascribed to it from the1930s onward. Various groups and individuals initiated movementsto legalize the substance, perhaps along the lines of tobacco.The drug situation was perceived by the public and the federalgovernment to be so bad and yet so difficult to control that thisseemed a good time to reevaluate the nation's entire policy. ANational Commission on Marijuana and Drug Abuse was establishedin 1971. In general, the members of the commission reflectedtraditional views on the subject of drug control, and thereforeit was with even greater impact that the commission recommendedin its first report, "Marijuana: A Signal ofMisunderstanding," that the substance be"decriminalized." By decriminalization was not meantlegalization but a step short of that position: Marijuanapossession for individual use no longer would be a crime, but itssale and distribution would be against the law. The purpose ofcontrol at this stage would be to relieve law enforcementagencies of the nuisance of arresting individual users andthereby allow more resources to be concentrated on investigatinglarge-scale crime and more dangerous drugs.6o The notion of"decriminalization" proved difficult for all tounderstand. Some foreign nations considered it to meanlegalization. President Nixon refused to receive the report inpublic or to comment on it except to affirm that marijuana wasnot going to be legalized if he had anything to say about it. The second and final report, published in 1973, dealt withdrugs more broadly.60 It attempted to draw attention to theactual, measurable damage done by drugs, reflected in hospitaladmissions and drug-related deaths, as opposed to the myths thathad evolved around many of them. Heroin, for example, wasmisperceived as causing more deaths annually than barbiturates.This approach intended to make more rational the discussion overdrug policy, but it also laid the groundwork for the inclusion ofcigarettes and alcohol in the antidrug crusade. It de-emphasized,however, the effects a drug such as cocaine has on judgment andefficiency, the less quantifiable but still real aspects of druguse. The enforcement of laws against individual possession or useof marijuana has fallen in the United States to a very low level.Moreover, dealers in relatively small amounts are reportedly notprosecuted either, because the largest dealers and smugglers, whoare involved with tons, not ounces or pounds of marijuana,require all the time of officials. There has been a de factodecriminalization throughout large parts of the country, even iflaws against individual use remain on the books. Possession ofmarijuana in some states is a small-scale misdemeanor, and thepenalty is a ticket, like a parking violation. Yet, the frequencyof marijuana use by high school seniors has been dropping since1978, and this reduction, coupled with a more conservativenational mood, has slowed further moves toward formal federaldecriminalization or more liberality in the drug laws. The rise in cocaine's availability and popularity, for thesecond time this century, has further complicated the control ofdrugs in the United States. The fact that first millions shoulduse marijuana, then millions more take cocaine raises questionsabout the ability of local and national governments to controlnarcotics. The corruption that follows the drug traffic and therestraints on resources that may be allocated to drug controlcombine to leave a sense of frustration with enforcement policy.What will be the result of these trends? It all remainsuncertain. We appear to be in an era of widespread drug use thatwould seem to make reasonable the revocation of antidrugstatutes. We should recall, however, that a similar conditionprevailed around 1900, shortly before an onslaught against druguse led to a substantial reduction in the use of opiates, heroin,cocaine, and alcohol. That such a national response could occurmust make us pause before offering predictions for the future. Footnotes 1. Rudolf Schmitz, "Friedrich Wilhelm Serturner and theDiscovery of Morphine," Pharmacy in History 27 (1985):61-74. 2. 31 and 32 Vict. ch. 121, 1868: Act to Regulate the Sale ofPoisons and Alter and Amend the Pharmacy Act 1852 (1868 PharmacyAct). 3. Virginia Berridge and Griffith Edwards, Opium and thePeople: Opiate Use in Nineteenth-Century England (New York: St.Martin's, 1981), pp. 147-49, 227, 254. 4. Ibid., pp. 113-31. 5. James G. Burrow, AMA: Voice of American Medicine(Baltimore: Johns Hopkins Press, 1963), pp. 51-52, 62ff. 6. Glenn Sonnedecker, Krerners and Urdang's History ofPharmacy, 4th ed. (Philadelphia: Lippincott, 1976), pp. 198-212. 7. R. H. Shryock, Medical Licensing in America, 1650-1965(Baltimore: Johns Hopkins Press, 1967), p. 32ff. 8. Virginia Berridge, "Fenland Opium Eating in theNineteenth Century," British Journal of Addiction 72 (1977):275-84. David F. Musto, The American Disease: Origins of Narcotic Control (New Haven: Yale University Press, 1973), p. 54ff. 10. Ibid., p. 3 11. Berridge and Edwards, Opium and the People, p. 14517f. 12. Musto, American Disease, p. 5; David T. Courtwright, DarkParadise: Opiate Addiction in America before 1940 (Cambridge:Harvard University Press, 1982), chap. 1, "The Extent ofOpiate Addiction," pp. 9-34. Opiate addiction is the regularuse of opiates to prevent painful and uncomfortable bodily andpsychic symptoms that would occur if the drug's use were abruptlystopped. Estimates of the number of addicts in the United Stateshave often been susceptible to ideological and politicalinfluences. After carefully considering contemporary surveys,importation statistics, and other estimates, and subjecting hisfindings to modern statistical analysis, Professor Courtwrightconcluded that the highest rate of addiction in the United Statesoccurred in the 1890s at the maximum rate of 4.59 per 1,000.Today that rate would result in 1. I million addicts, about twicethe current official estimate. 13. Musto, American Disease, p. 236. 14. Wilder Penfield, "Halsted of Johns Hopkins: The Manand His Problem as Described in the Secret Records of William0sler," Journal of the American Medical Association 210(1969): 2214-18. 15. James Harvey Young, The Toadstool Millionaires: A SocialHistory of Patent Medicines before Federal Regulation,(Princeton, N.J.: PrincetonUniversity Press,1961), p. 21 1 ff. 16. Public Law No. 384, 59th Congress, Session 1, 30 June1906. Section 8 names the drugs that need to be listed on thelabel. 17. J. P. Street, "The Patent Medicine Situation,"American Journal of Public Health 7 (1917):1037-42. Young, Toadstool Millionaires, p. 213ff. 19. Martin 1. Wilbert and Murray Gait Metter, Digest of Lawsand Regulations in Force in the United States Relating to thePossession, Use, Sale and Manufacture of Poisons andHahit-Forming Drugs, Public Health Bulletin no. 56, Nov. 1912(Washington, D.C.: Government Printing Office, 1912). 20. Musto, American Disease, p. 25ff. 21. Report of the Committee Appointed by the PhilippineCommission to Investigate the Use of Opium and the TrafficTherein .... Bureau of Insular Affairs, War Department, 1905. 22. Musto, American Disease, pp. 261-62. 23. Arnold H. Taylor, American Diplomacy and the NarcoticsTraffic, 1900-1939 (Durham, N.C.: Duke University Press, 1969),pp. 47-81. 24. Ibid., p. 82ff. 25. Berridge and Edwards, Opium and the People, p. 268. 26. United States 60th Congress, Public Law No. 221. An Act toprohibit the importation and use of opium for other thanmedicinal purposes. Approved 9 February 1909. 27. Musto, American Disease, pp. 31-37, 40-45, 61-62. 28. Ibid., pp. 31, 198, 202. 29. Ibid., p. 41. 30. Ibid., pp. 40-48. 31. Ibid., pp. 54-68. 32. Hamilton Wright, "Report on the International OpiumQuestion as Seen within the United States and ItsPossessions," in Opium Problem: Message from the Presidentof the United States, Senate Document no. 377, 61st Congress, 3rdSession, 21 February 1910, p. 49. 33. Hamilton Wright to Charles Evans Hughes, 28 June 1916, inPapers of Dr. Hamilton Wright, U.S. National Archives, RecordGroup 43, entry 36. 34. U.S. v. Jin Fuey Moy, 241 U.S. 394 (1916). 35. Special Committee of Investigation, Appointed March 25,1918, by the Secretary of the Treasury: Traffic in Narcotic Drugs(Washington, D.C.: Government Printing Office, 1919). 36. Webb et al. v. U.S., 249 U.S. 96 (1919); U.S. v. Doremus,249 U.S. 86 (1919). 37. 67th Congress, Public Law No. 227. To amend the act ofFebruary 9, 1909, as amended, to prohibit the importation and useof opium for other than medicinal purposes. Approved 26 May 1922. 38. 68th Congress, Public Law No. 274. Prohibiting theimportation of crude opium for the purposes of manufacturingheroin. Approved 7 June 1924, Section 2. 39. Ibid., Section 1. 40. David F. Musto, "Early History of Heroin in theUnited States," in P. G. Bourne, ed., Addiction (New York:Academic Press, 1974), pp. 175-85. 41. Gerhard Kuhne, "Statement of Gerhard Kuhne, Head ofthe Identification Bureau, New York City Department ofCorrection," in Conference on Narcotic Education: Hearingsbefore the Committee on Education of the House ofRepresentatives, December 16, 1925 (Washington, D.C.: GovernmentPrinting Office, 1926), p. 175. 42. Prohibiting the Importation of Opium for the Manufactureof Heroin: Hearings on HR 7079, House of Representatives,Committee on Ways and Means, 68th Congress, Ist Session, 3 April1924 (Washington, D.C.: Government Printing Office, 1924), p.41ff. 43. Taylor, American Diplomacy and Narcotics Traffic, p.2OOff. 44. Musto, American Disease, pp. 6-8; Laws of New York, 1913,ch. 470, pp. 9984-91, approved 9 May 1913. 45. Courtwright, Dark Paradise, pp. 146-47. 46. Alfred R. Lindesmith, The Addict and the Law (New York:Vintage Books, 1965), pp. 3-34. 47. Musto, American Disease, pp. 151-81. 48, Ibid., p. 167ff. 49. Ernest Bishop, The Narcotic Drug Problem (New York:Macmillan, 1920); see also, David F. Musto, "Social andPolitical Influences on Addiction Research," in SeymourFisher and Alfred M. Freedman, eds., Opiate Addiction: Originsand Treatment (Washington, D.C.: Winston, 1973), pp. 93-98. 50. David F. Musto, "The American Antinarcotic Movement:Clinical Research and Public Policy," Clinical Research 19(1970): 601-5. 51. H. T. Nugent, Field Supervisor of the Fl3N, Fourth AnnualConference of Pharmaceutical Law Enforcement Officials, Toronto,Canada, 25 August 1932, Stenographic typescript of Proceedings,Archives of the American Pharmaceutical Association, Washington,D.C., box 31, pp. 86-87. 52. Musto, American Disease, pp. 69-90. 53. Ibid., pp. 190-94. 54. David F. Musto, "Marijuana Tax Act of 1937,"Archives of General Psychiatry 26 (1972):101-8. 58. Lindesmith, Addict and the Law; Rufus King, The DrugHang-up: America's Fifty Year Folly (New York: Norton, 1972). 59. Narcotic Addict Rehabilitation Act of 1966, Public Law89-273, 89th Congress, approved 8 November 1966. 55. 82nd Congress, Public Law No. 255, approved 2 November 1951; 84th Congress, Public Law No. 728, approved 18 July 1956. 56. H. J. Anslinger and W. F. Tomkins, Traffic in Narcotics(New York: Funk and Wagnalls, 1953), pp. 69-116. 57. For example, "Poisoners: How the Maoists SmuggleOpium," Literaturnaya gazeta, 19 March 1969, translated andreprinted in Current Digest of Soviet Press (Ann Arbor, Mich.:Joint Committee on Slavic Studies, 1969), vol. 21, p. 7. 60. Marijuana: ASignal of Misunderstanding: First Report of the NationalCommission on Marijuana and Drug Abuse (Washington, D.C.:Government Printing Office, 1972), p. 150ff. 61. Drug Usein America: Problem in Perspective, Second Report of theNational Commission on Marijuana and Drug Abuse (Washington,D.C.: Government Printing Office, 1973). Contents | Feedback | Search DRCNet Library | Schaffer Library | Historical Research WT01-B26-7IA087-000632-B027-29http://206.61.184.43:80/schaffer/history/histsum.htm 206.61.184.43 19970122095300 text/html 50558HTTP/1.0 200 OKDate: Wednesday, 22-Jan-97 09:52:50 GMTServer: WebSitePro/1.1f (S/N wpo-0deb)Allow-ranges: bytesContent-type: text/htmlLast-modified: Saturday, 28-Dec-96 05:39:05 GMTContent-length: 50340 Some Events in the History of Drugs A Summary of Historical Events Some Events in the History of Drugs 5000 B.C. The Sumerians use opium, suggested by thefact that they have an ideogram for it which has been translatedas HUL, meaning "joy" or "rejoicing." [AlfredR. Lindesmith, *Addiction and Opiates.* p. 207] 3500 B.C. Earlist historical record of the productionof alcohol: the description of a brewery in an an Egyptianpapyrus. [Joel Fort, *The Pleasure Seekers*, p. 14] 3000 B.C. Approximate date of the supposed origin ofthe use of tea in China. 2500 B.C. Earlist historical evidence of the eating ofpoppy seeds among the Lake Dwellers on Switzerland. [AshleyMontagu, The long search for euphoria, *Refelections*, 1:62-69(May-June), 1966; p. 66] 2000 B.C. Earliest record of prohibitionist teaching,by an Egyptian priest, who writes to his pupil: "I, thysuperior, forbid thee to go to the taverns. Thou art degradedlike beasts." [W.F. Crafts *et al*., *Intoxicating Drinksand Drugs*, p. 5] 350 B.C. Proverbs, 31:6-7: "Give strong drink tohim who is perishing, and wine to those in bitter distress; letthem drink and forget their poverty, and remember their misery nomore." 300 B.C. Theophrastus (371-287 B.C.), Greek naturalistand philosopher, records what has remained as the earliesundisputed reference to the use of poppy juice. 250 B.C. Psalms, 104:14-15: "Thou dost causegrass to grow for the cattle and plants for man to cultivate,that he may bring forth food from the earth, and wine to gladdenthe heart of man. 350 A.D. Earliest mention of tea, in a Chinesedictionary. 4th century St. John Chrysostom (345-407), Bishop ofConstantinople: "I hear man cry, 'Would there be no wine! Ofolly! O madness!' Is it wine that causes this abuse? No, for ifyou say, 'Would there were no light!' because of the informers,and would there were no women because of adultery." [Quotedin Berton Roueche, *The Neutral Spirit*, pp. 150-151] 450 Babylonian Talmud: "Wine is at the head ofall medicines; where wine is lacking, drugs are necessary."[Quoted in Burton Stevenson (Ed.), *The Macmillan Book ofProverbs*, p. 21] c. 1000 Opium is widely used in China and the farEast. [Alfred A. Lindensmith, *The Addict and the Law*, p. 194] 1493 The use of tobacco is introduced into Europe byColumbus and his crew returning from America. c. 1500 According to J.D. Rolleston, a British medicalhistorian, a medieval Russian cure for drunkenness consisted in"taking a piece of pork, putting it secretly in a Jew's bedfor nine days, and then giving it to the drunkard in a pulverizedform, who will turn away from drinking as a Jew would frompork." [Quoted in Roueche, op. cit. p. 144] c. 1525 Paracelsus (1490-1541) introduces laudanum, ortincture of opium, into the practice of medicine. 1600 Shakespeare: "Falstaff. . . . If I had athousand sons the / first human principle I would teach themshould / be, to foreswear thin portion and to addict themselvesto sack." ("Sack" is an obsolete term for"sweet wine" like sherry). [William Shakespeare,*Second Part of King Henry the Forth*, Act IV, Scene III, lines133-136] 17th century The prince of the petty state of Waldeckpays ten thalers to anyone who denounces a coffee drinker.[Griffith Edwards, Psychoactive substances, *The Listener*, March23, 1972, pp. 360-363; p.361] 17th century In Russia, Czar Michael Federovitchexecutes anyone on whom tobacco is found. "Czar AlexeiMikhailovitch rules that anyone caught with tobacco should betortured until he gave up the name of the supplier." [Ibid.] 1613 John Rolf, the husband of the Indian princessPocahontas, sends the first shipment of Virginia tobacco fromJamestown to England. c. 1650 The use of tobacco is prohibited in Bavaria,Saxony, and in Zurich, but the prohibitions are ineffective.Sultan Murad IV of the Ottoman Empire decrees the death penaltyfor smoking tobacco: "Whereever there Sultan went on histravels or on a military expedition his halting-places werealways distinguished by a terrible rise in executions. Even onthe battlefield he was fond of surprising men in the act ofsmoking, when he would punish them by beheading, hanging,quartering or crushing their hands and feed. . . . Nevertheless,in spite of all the horrors and persecution. . . the passion forsmoking still persisted." [Edward M. Brecher et al., *Licitand Illicit Drugs*, p. 212] 1680 Thomas Syndenham (1625-80): "Among theremedies which it has pleased the Almighty God to give to man torelieve his sufferings, none is so universal and efficacious asopium." [Quoted in Louis Goodman and Alfred Gilman, *ThePharmacological Basis of Theraputics*, First Edition (1941), p.186] 1690 The "Act for the Encouraging of theDistillation of Brandy and Spirits from Corn" is enacted inEngland. [Roueche, op. cit. p. 27] 1691 In Luneberg, Germany, the penalty for smoking(tobacco) is death. 1717 Liquor licenses in Middlesex (England) aregranted only to those who "would take oaths of allegianceand of belief in the King's supremacy over the Church"[G.E.G. Catlin, *Liquor Control*, p. 14] 1736 The Gin Act (England) is enacted with the avowedobject of making spirits "come so dear to the consumer thatthe poor will not be able to launch into excessive use ofthem." This effort results in general lawbreaking and failsto halt the steady rise in the consumption of even legallyproduced and sold liquor. [Ibid., p. 15] 1745 The magistrates of one London division demandedthat "publicans and wine-merchants should swear that theyanathematized the doctrine of Transubstantiation." [Ibid.,p. 14] 1762 Thomas Dover, and English physician, introduceshis prescription for a diaphoretic powder," which herecommends mainly for the treatment of gout. Soon named"Dover's powder," this compound becomes the most widelyused opium preparation during the next 150 years. 1785 Benjamin Rush publishes his *Inquiry into theEffects of Ardent Spirits on the Human Body and Mind*; in it, hecalls the intemperate use of distilled spirits a"disease," and estimates the annual rate of death dueto alcoholism in the United States as "not less than 4000people" in a population then of less than 6 million. [Quotedin S. S. Rosenberg (Ed.), *Alcohol and Health*, p. 26] 1789 The first American temperance society is formedin Litchfield, Connecticut. [Crafts et. al., op. cit., p. 9] 1790 Benjamin Rush persuades his associates at thePhiladelphia College of Physicians to send an appeal to Congressto "impose such heavy duties upon all distilled spirits asshall be effective to restrain their intemperate use in thecountry." [Quoted in ibid.] 1792 The first prohibitory laws against opium in Chinaare promulgated. The punishment decreed for keepers of opiumshops is strangulation. 1792 The Whisky Rebellion, a protest by farmers inwestern Pennsylvania against a federal tax on liquor, breaks outand is put down by overwhelming force sent to the area by GeorgeWashington. Samuel Taylor Coleridge writes "Kubla Khan"while under the influence of opium. 1800 Napoleon's army, returning from Egypt, introducescannibis (hashish, marijuana) into France. Avante-garde artistsand writers in Paris develop their own cannabis ritual, leading,in 1844, to the establishment of *Le Club de Haschischins.*[William A. Emboden, Jr., Ritual Use of Cannabis Sativa L.: Ahistorical-ethnographic survey, in Peter T. Furst (Ed.), *Fleshof the Gods*, pp. 214-236; pp. 227-228] 1801 On Jefferson's recommendation, the federal dutyon liquor was abolished. [Catlin, op. cit., p. 113] 1804 Thomas Trotter, an Edinburgh physician, publishes*An Essay, Medical, Philosophical, and Chemical on Drunkennessand Its Effects on the Human Body*: "In medical language, Iconsider drunkenness, strictly speaking, to be a disease,produced by a remote cause, and giving birth to actions andmovements in the living body that disorder the functions ofhealth. . . The habit of drunkenness is a disease of themind." [Quoted in Roueche, op. cit. pp. 87-88] 1805 Friedrich Wilhelm Adam Serturner, a Germanchemist, isolates and describes morphine. 1822 Thomas De Quincey's *Confessions of an EnglishOpium Eater* is published. He notes that the opium habit, likeany other habit, must be learned: "Making allowance forconstitutional differences, I should say that *in less that 120days* no habit of opium-eating could be formed strong enough tocall for any extraordinary self-conquest in renouncing it, evensuddenly renouncing it. On Saturday you are an opium eater, onSunday no longer such." [Thomas De Quincey, *Confessions ofan English Opium Eater* (1822), p. 143] 1826 The American Society for the Promotion ofTemperance is founded in Boston. By 1833, there are 6,000 localTemperance societies, with more than one million members. 1839-42 The first Opium War. The British force uponChina the trade in opium, a trade the Chinese had declaredillegal.. [Montagu, op. cit. p. 67] 1840 Benjamin Parsons, and English clergyman,declares: ". . . alcohol stands preeminent as a destroyer. .. . I never knew a person become insane who was not in the habitof taking a portion of alcohol every day." Parsons listsforty-two distinct diseases caused by alcohol, among theminflammation of the brain, scrofula, mania, dropsy, nephritis,and gout. [Quoted in Roueche, op. cit. pp. 87-88] 1841 Dr. Jacques Joseph Moreau uses hashish intreatment of mental patients at the Bicetre. 1842 Abraham Lincoln: "In my judgment, such of usas have never fallen victims, have been spared more from theabsence of appetite, than from any mental or moral superiorityover those who have. Indeed, I believe, if we take habitualdrunkards as a class, their heads and their hearts will bear anadvantageous comparison with those of any other class."[Abraham Lincoln, Temperance address, in Roy P. Basler Ed.), *TheCollected Works of Abraham Lincoln, Vol. 1, p. 258] 1844 Cocaine is isolated in its pure form. 1845 A law prohibiting the public sale of liquor isenacted in New York State. It is repealed in 1847. 1847 The American Medical Association is founded. 1852 Susan B. Anthony establishes the Women's StateTemperance Society of New York, the first such society formed byand for women. Many of the early feminists, such as ElizabethCady Stanton, Lucretia Mott, and Abby Kelly, are also ardentprohibitionists. [Andrew Sinclar, *Era of Excess*, p. 92] 1852 The American Pharmaceutical Association isfounded. The Association's 1856 Constitution lists one of itsgoals as: "To as much as possible restrict the dispensingand sale of medicines to regularly educated druggests andapothecaries. [Quoted in David Musto, *The American Disease*, p.258] 1856 The Second Opium War. The British, with help fromthe French, extend their powers to distribute opium in China. 1862 Internal Revenue Act enacted imposing a licensefee of twenty dollars on retail liquor dealers, and a tax of onedollar a barrel on beer and twenty cents a gallon on spirits.[Sinclare, op. cit. p 152] 1864 Adolf von Baeyer, a twenty-nine-year-oldassistant of Friedrich August Kekule (the discoverer of themolecular structure of benzene) in Ghent, synthesizes barbituricacid, the first barbiturate. 1868 Dr. George Wood, a professor of the theory andpractice of medicine at the University of Pennsylvania, presidentof the American Philosophical Society, and the author of aleading American test, *Treatise on Therapeutics*, describes thepharmacological effects of opium as follows: "A sensation offullness is felt in the head, soon to be followed by a universalfeeling of delicious ease and comfort, with an elevation andexpansion of the whole moral and intellectual nature, which is, Ithink, the most characteristic of its effects. . . . It seems tomake the individual, for the time, a better and greater man. . .. The hallucinations, the delirious imaginations of alcoholicintoxication, are, in general, quite wanting. Along with thisemotional and intellectual elevation, there is also increasedmuscular energy; and the capacity to act, and to bear fatigue, isgreatly augmented. [Quoted in Musto, op. cit. pp. 71-72] 1869 The Prohibition Party is formed. Gerrit Smith,twice Abolitionist candidate for President, an associate of JohnBrown, and a crusading prohibitionist, declares: "Ourinvoluntary slaves are set free, but our millions of voluntaryslaves still clang their chains. The lot of the literal slave, ofhim whom others have enslaved, is indeed a hard one;nevertheless, it is a paradise compared with the lot of him whohas enslaved himself to alcohol." [Quoted in Sinclar, op.cit. pp. 83-84] 1874 The Woman's Christian Temperance Union is foundedin Cleveland. In 1883, Frances Willard a leader of the W.C.T.U.forms the World's Woman's Christian Temperance Union. 1882 The law in the United States, and the world,making "temperance education" a part of the requiredcourse in public schools is enacted. In 1886, Congress makes sucheducation mandatory in the District of Columbia, and interritorial, military, and naval schools. By 1900, all the stateshave similar laws. [Crafts et. al., op. cit. p. 72] 1882 The Personal Liberty League of the United Statesis founded to oppose the increasing momentum of movements forcompulsory abstinence from alcohol. [Catlin, op. cit. p. 114] 1883 Dr. Theodor Aschenbrandt, a German armyphysician, secures a supply of pure cocaine from thepharmaceutical firm of Merck, issues it to Bavarian soldiersduring their maneuvers, and reports on the beneficial effects ofthe drug in increasing the soldiers' ability to endure fatigue.[Brecher et. al. op. cit. p. 272] 1884 Sigmund Freud treats his depression with cocaine,and reports feeling "exhilaration and lasting euphoria,which is in no way differs from the normal euphoria of thehealthy person. . . You perceive an increase in self-control andpossess more vitality and capacity for work. . . . In otherwords, you are simply more normal, and it is soon hard to believethat you are under the influence of a drug." [Quoted inErnest Jones, *The Life and Work of Sigmund Freud, Vol. 1, p. 82] 1884 Laws are enacted to make anti-alcohol teachingcompulsory in public schools in New York State. The followingyear similar laws are passed in Pennsylvania, with other statessoon following suit. 1885 The Report of the Royal Commission on Opiumconcludes that opium is more like the Westerner's liquor than asubstance to be feared and abhorred. [Quoted in Musto, op. cit.p. 29] 1889 The John Hopkins Hospital, in Baltimore,Maryland, is opened. One of its world-famous founders, Dr.William Stewart Halsted, is a morphine addict. He continues touse morphine in large doses throughout his phenomenallysuccessful surgical career lasting until his death in 1922. 1894 The Report of the Indian Hemp Drug Comission,running to over three thousand pages in seven volumes, ispublished. This inquiry, commissioned by the British government,concluded: "There is no evidence of any weight regarding themental and moral injuries from the moderate use of these drugs... . . Moderation does not lead to excess in hemp any more thanit does in alcohol. Regular, moderate use of ganja or bhangproduces the same effects as moderate and regular doses ofwhiskey." The commission's proposal to tax bhang is neverput into effect, in part, perhaps, because one of thecommissioners, an Indian, cautions that Moslem law and Hinducustom forbid "taxing anything that gives pleasure to thepoor." [Quoted in Norman Taylor, The pleasant assassin: Thestory of marihuana, in David Solomon (Ed.) *The MarijuanaPapers*, pp. 31-47, p. 41] 1894 Norman Kerr, and English physician and presidentof the British Society for the study of Inebriety, declares:"Drunkenness has generally been regarded as . . . a sin avice, or a crime. . . [But] there is now a consensus ofintelligent opinion that habitual and periodic drunkenness isoften either a symptom or sequel of disease . . . . The victimcan no more resist [alcohol] than an man with ague can resistshivering. [Quoted in Roueche, op. cit., pp. 107-108] 1898 Diacetylmorphine (heroin) is synthesized inGermany. It is widely lauded as a "safe preparation freefrom addiction-forming properties." [Montagu, op. cit. p.68] 1900 In an address to the Ecumenical MissionaryConference, Rev. Wilbur F. Crafts declares: "No Christiancelebration of the completion of nineteen Christian centuries hasyet been arranged. Could there be a fitter one than the generaladoption, by separate and joint action of the great nations ofthe world, of the new policy of civilization, in which GreatBritian is leading, the policy of prohibition for the nativeraces, in the interest of commerce as well as conscience, sincethe liquor traffic among child races, even more manifestly thanin civilized lands, injures all other trades by producingpoverty, disease, and death. Our object, more profoundly viewed,is to create a more favorable environment for the child racesthat civilized nations are essaying to civilize andChristianize." [Quoted in Crafts, et. al., op. cit., p. 14] 1900 James R. L. Daly, writing in the *Boston Medicaland Surgical Journal*, declares: "It [heroin] possesses manyadvantages over morphine. . . . It is not hypnotic; and there isno danger of acquiring the habit. . . ." [Quoted in Henry H.Lennard et. al. Methadone treatment (letters),*Science*,179:1078-1079 (March 16), 1973; p. 1079] 1901 The Senate adopts a resolution, introduced byHenry Cabot Lodge, to forbid the sale by American traders ofopium and alcohol "to aboriginal tribes and uncivilizedraces." Theses provisions are later extended to include"uncivilized elements in America itself and in itsterritories, such as Indians, Alaskans, the inhabitants ofHawaii, railroad workers, and immigrants at ports of entry."[Sinclar, op. cit. p. 33] 1902 The Committee on the Acquirement of the DrugHabit of the American Pharmaceutical Association declares:"If the Chinaman cannot get along without his 'dope,' we canget along without him." [Quoted in ibid, p. 17] 1902 George E. Petty, writing in the *Alabama MedicalJournal*, observes: "Many articles have appeared in themedical literature during the last two years lauding this newagent . . . . When we consider the fact that heroin is a morphinederivative . . . it does not seem reasonable that such a claimcould be well founded. It is strange that such a claim shouldmislead anyone or that there should be found among the members ofour profession those who would reiterate and accentuate itwithout first subjecting it to the most critical tests, but suchis the fact." [Quoted in Lennard et. al., op. cit. p. 1079] 1903 The composition of Coca-Cola is changed, caffeinereplacing the cocaine it contained until this time. {Musto, op.cit. p. 43] 1904 Charles Lyman, president of the InternationalReform Bureau, petitions the President of the United States"to induce Great Britain to release China from the enforcedopium traffic. . . .We need not recall in detail that Chinaprohibited the sale of opium except as a medicine, until the salewas forced upon that country by Great Britian in the opium war of1840." [Quoted in Crafts et al., op. cit. p. 230] 1905 Senator Henry W. Blair, in a letter to Rev.Wilbur F. Crafts, Superintendent of the International ReformBureau: "The temperance movement must include all poisonoussubstances which create unnatural appetite, and internationalprohibition is the goal." [Quoted in ibid.] 1906 The first Pure Food and Drug Act becomes law;until its enactment, it was possible to buy, in stores or by mailorder medicines containing morphine, cocaine, or heroin, andwithout their being so labeled. 1906 *Squibb's Materia Medical* lists heroin as"a remedy of much value . . . is is also used as a mildanodyne and as a substitute for morphine in combatting themorphine habit. [Quoted in Lennard et al., op. cit. p. 1079] 1909 The United States prohibits the importation ofsmoking opium. [Lawrence Kolb, *Drug Addiction*, pp. 145-146] 1910 Dr. Hamilton Wright, considered by some thefather of U.S. anti-narcotics laws, reports that Americancontractors give cocaine to their Negro employees to get morework out of them. [Musto, op. cit. p. 180] 1912 A writer in *Century* magazine proclaims:"The relation of tobacco, especially in the form ofcigarettes, and alcohol and opium is a very close one. . . .Morphine is the legitimate consequence of alcohol, and alcohol isthe legitimate consequence of tobacco. Cigarettes, drink, opium,is the logical and regular series." And a physician warns:"[There is] no energy more destructive of soul, mind, andbody, or more subversive of good morals than the cigarette. Thefight against the cigarette is a fight for civilization."[Sinclar, op. cit., p. 180] 1912 The first international Opium Convention meets atthe Hague, and recommends various measures for the internationalcontrol of the trade in opium. Supsequent Opium Conventions areheld in 1913 and 1914. 1912 Phenobarbital is introduced into therapeuticsunder the trade name of Luminal. 1913 The Sixteenth Amendment, creating the legalauthority for federal income tax, is enacted. Between 1870 and1915, the tax on liquor provides from one-half to two-thirds ofthe whole of the internal revenue of the United States,amounting, after the turn of the century, to about $200 millionannually. The Sixteenth Amendment thus makes possible, just sevenyears later, the Eighteenth Amendment. 1914 Dr. Edward H Williams cites Dr. Christopher Kochs"Most of the attack upon white women of the South are thedirect result of the cocaine crazed Negro brain." Dr.Williams concluded that " . . Negro cocaine fiends are now aknown Southern menace." [New York Times, Feb. 8, 1914] 1914 The Harrison Narcotic Act is enacted, controllingthe sale of opium and opium derivatives, and cocaine. 1914 Congressman Richard P. Hobson of Alabama, urginga prohibition amendment to the Constitution, asserts:"Liquor will actually make a brute out of a Negro, causinghim to commit unnatural crimes. The effect is the same on thewhite man, though the white man being further evolved it takeslonger time to reduce him to the same level." Negro leadersjoin the crusade against alcohol. [Ibid., p. 29] 1916 The *Pharmacopoeia of the United States* dropswhiskey and brandy from its list of drugs. Four years later,American physicians begin prescribing these "drugs" inquantities never before prescribed by doctors. 1917 The president of the American Medical Associationendorses national prohibition. The House of Delegates of theAssociation passes a resolution stating: "Resolved, TheAmerican Medical Association opposes the use of alcohol as abeverage; and be it further Resolved, That the use of alcohol asa therapeutic agent should be discourages." By 1928,physicians make an estimated $40,000,000 annually by writingprescriptions for whiskey." [Ibid. p. 61] 1917 The American Medical Association passes aresolution declaring that "sexual continence is compatiblewith health and is the best prevention of venerealinfections," and one of the methods for controlling syphilisis by controlling alcohol. Secretary of the Navy Josephus Danielsprohibits the practice of distributing contraceptives to sailorsbound on shore leave, and Congress passes laws setting up"dry and decent zones" around military camps."Many barkeepers are fined for selling liquor to men inuniform. Only at Coney Island could soldiers and sailors changeinto the grateful anonymity of bathing suits and drink withoutmolestation from patriotic passers-by." [Ibid. pp. 117-118] 1918 The Anti-Saloon League calls the "liquortraffic" "un-American," pro-German,crime-producing, food-wasting, youth-corrupting, home-wrecking,[and] treasonable." [Quoted in ibid. p. 121] 1919 The Eighteenth (Prohibition) Amendment is addedto the U.S. Constitution. It is repealed in 1933. In the sameyear, violent crime drops two-thirds and does not reach the samelevels again until after World War II. 1920 The U.S. Department of Agriculture publishes apamphlet urging Americans to grow cannabis (marijuana) as aprofitable undertaking. [David F. Musto, An historicalperspective on legal and medical responses to substance abuse,*Villanova Law Review*, 18:808-817 (May), 1973; p. 816] 1920-1933 The use of alcohol is prohibited in theUnited States. In 1932 alone, approximately 45,000 personsreceive jail sentences for alcohol offenses. During the firsteleven years of the Volstead Act, 17,971 persons are appointed tothe Prohibition Bureau. 11,982 are terminated "withoutprejudice," and 1,604 are dismissed for bribery, extortion,theft, falsification of records, conspiracy, forgery, andperjury. [Fort, op. cit. p. 69] 1921 The U.S. Treasury Department issues regulationsoutlining the treatment of addiction permitted under the HarrisonAct. In Syracuse, New York, the narcotics clinic doctors reportcuring 90 per cent of their addicts. [Lindesmith, *The Addict andthe Law*, p. 141] 1921 Thomas S. Blair, M.D., chief of the Bureau ofDrug Control of the Pennsylvania Department of Health, publishesa paper in the *Journal of the American Medical Association* inwhich he characterizes the Indian peyote religion a "habitindulgence in certain cactaceous plants," calls the beliefsystem "superstition" and those who sell peyote"dope vendors," and urges the passage of a bill inCongress that would prohibit the use of peyote among the Indiantribes of the Southwest. He concludes with this revealing pleafor abolition: "The great difficulty in suppressing thishabit among the Indians arises from the fact that the commercialinterests involved in the peyote traffic are strongly entrenched,and they exploit the Indian. . . . Added to this is thesuperstition of the Indian who believes in the Peyote Church. Assoon as an effort is made to suppress peyote, the cry is raisedthat it is unconstitutional to do so and is an invasion ofreligious liberty. Suppose the Negros of the South had CocaineChurch!" [Thomas S. Blair, Habit indulgence in certaincactaceous plants among the Indians, *Journal of the AmericanMedical Association*, 76:1033-1034 (April 9), 1921; p. 1034] 1921 Cigarettes are illegal in fourteen states, andninety-two anti-cigarette bills are pending in twenty-eightstates. Young women are expelled from college for smokingcigarettes. [Brecher et al., op. cit. p. 492] 1921 The Council of the American Medical Associationrefuses to confirm the Associations 1917 Resolution on alcohol.In the first six months after the enactment of the Volstead Act,more than 15,000 physicians and 57,000 druggests and drugmanufacturers apply for licenses to prescribe and sell liquor.[Sinclair, op. cit., p. 492] 1921 Alfred C. Prentice, M.D. a member of theCommittee on Narcotic Drugs of the American Medical Association,declares "Public opinion regarding the vice of drugaddiction has been deliberately and consistently corruptedthrough propaganda in both the medical and lay press. . . . Theshallow pretense that drug addiction is a 'disease'. . . . hasbeen asserted and urged in volumes of 'literature' by self-styled'specialists.'" [Alfred C Prentice, The Problem of thenarcotic drug addict, *Journal of the American MedicalAssociation*, 76:1551-1556; p. 1553] 1924 The manufacture of heroin is prohibited in theUnited States. 1925 Robert A. Schless: "I believe that most drugaddiction today is due directly to the Harrison Anti-NarcoticAct, which forbids the sale of narcotics without a physician'sprescription. . . . Addicts who are broke act as *agentprovocateurs* for the peddlers, being rewarded by gifts of heroinor credit for supplies. The Harrison Act made the drug peddler,and the drug peddler makes drug addicts." [Robert A.Schless, The drug addict, *American Mercury*, 4:196-199 (Feb.),1925; p. 198] 1928 In a nationwide radio broadcast entitled"The Struggle of Mankind Against Its Deadlist Foe,"celebrating the second annual Narcotic Education Week, RichmondP. Hobson, prohibition crusader and anti-narcotics propagandist,declares: "Suppose it were announced that there were morethan a million lepers among our people. Think what a shock theannouncement would produce! Yet drug addiction is far moreincurable than leprosy, far more tragic to its victims, and isspreading like a moral and physical scourge. . . . Most of thedaylight robberies, daring holdups, cruel murders and similarcrimes of violence are now known to be committed chiefly by drugaddicts, who constitute the primary cause of our alarming crimewave. Drug addiction is more communicable and less curable thatleprosy. . . . Upon the issue hangs the perpetuation ofcivilization, the destiny of the world, and the future of thehuman race." [Quoted in Musto, *The American Disease*, p.191] 1928 It is estimated that in Germany one out of everyhundred physicians is a morphine addict, consuming 0.1 grams ofthe alkaloid or more per day. [Eric Hesse, *Narcotics and DrugAddiction*, p. 41] 1929 About one gallon of denatured industrial in tenis diverted into bootleg liquor. About forty Americans permillion die each year from drinking illegal alcohol, mainly as aresult of methyl (wood) alcohol poisoning. [Sinclare, op. cit. p.201] 1930 The Federal Bureau of Narcotics is formed. Manyof its agents, including its first commissioner, Harry J.Anslinger, are former prohibition agents. 1935 The American Medical Association passes aresolution declaring that "alcoholics are validpatients." [Quoted in Neil Kessel and Henry Walton,*Alcoholism*, p. 21] 1936 The Pan-American Coffee Burreau is organized topromote coffee use in the U.S. Between 1938 and 1941 coffeeconsumption increased 20%. From 1914 to 1938 consumption hadincreased 20%. [Coffee, *Encyclopedia Britannica* (1949), Vol. 5,p. 975A] 1937 Shortly before the Marijuana Tax Act,Commissioner Harry J. Anslinger writes: "How many murders,suicides, robberies, criminal assaults, hold-ups, burglaries, anddeeds of maniacal insanity it [marijuana] causes each year,especially among the young, can only be conjectured."[Quoted in John Kaplan, *Marijuana*, p. 92] 1937 The Marijuana Tax Act is enacted. 1938 Since the enactment of the Harrison Act in 1914,25,000 physicians have been arraigned on narcotics charges, and3,000 have served penitentiary sentences. [Kolb, op. cit. p. 146] 1938 Dr. Albert Hoffman, a chemist at SandozLaboratories in Basle, Switzerland, synthesizes LSD. Five yearslater he inadvertently ingests a small amount of it, and observesand reports effects on himself. 1941 Generalissimo Chiang Kai-shek orders the completesuppression of the poppy; laws are enacted providing the deathpenalty for anyone guilty of cultivating the poppy, manufacturingopium, or offering it for sale. [Lindesmith, *The Addict and theLaw*, 198] 1943 Colonel J.M. Phalen, editor of the *MilitarySurgeon*, declares in an editorial entitled "The MarijuanaBugaboo": "The smoking of the leaves, flowers, andseeds of Cannibis sativa is no more harmful than the smoking oftobacco. . . . It is hoped that no witch hunt will be institutedin the military service over a problem that does not exist."[Quoted in ibid. p. 234] 1946 According to some estimates there are 40,000,000opium smokers in China. [Hesse, op. cit. p. 24] 1949 Ludwig von Mises, leading modern free-marketeconomist and social philosopher: "Opium and morphine arecertainly dangerous, habit-forming drugs. But once the principleis admitted that is the duty of government to protect theindividual against his own foolishness, no serious objections canbe advanced against further encroachments. A good case could bemade out in favor of the prohibition of alcohol and nicotine. Andwhy limit the governments benevolent providence to the protectionof the individual's body only? Is is not the harm a man caninflect on his mind and soul even more disastrous than any bodilyevils? Why not prevent him from reading bad books and seeing badplays, from looking at bad paintings and statues and listening tobad music? The mischief done by bad ideologies, surely, is muchmore pernicious, both for the individual and for the wholesociety, than that done by narcotic drugs." [Ludwig vonMises, *Human Action*, pp. 728-729] 1951 According to United Nations estimates, there areapproximately 200 million marijuana users in the world, the majorplaces being India, Egypt, North Africa, Mexico, and the UnitedStates. [Jock Young, *The Drug Takers*, p. 11] 1951 Twenty thousand pound of opium, three hundredpounds of heroin, and various opium-smoking devices are publiclyburned in Canton China. Thirty-seven opium addicts are executedin the southwest of China. [Margulies, China has no drugproblem--why? *Parade*, 0ct. 15 1972, p. 22] 1954 Four-fifths of the French people questioned aboutwine assert that wine is "good for one's health," andone quarter hold that it is "indispensable." It isestimated that a third of the electorate in France receives allor part of its income from the production or sale of alcoholicbeverages; and that there Is one outlet for every forty- fiveinhabitants. [Kessel and Walton, op. cit. pp. 45, 73] 1955 The Prasidium des Deutschen Arztetages declares:"Treatment of the drug addict should be effected in theclosed sector of a psychiatric institution. Ambulatory treatmentis useless and in conflict, moreover, with principles of medicalethics." The view is quoted approvingly, as representativeof the opinion of "most of the authors recommendingcommitment to an institution," by the World HealthOrganization in 1962. [World Health Organization, *The Treatmentof Drug Addicts*, p. 5] 1955 The Shah of Iran prohibits the cultivation anduse of opium, used in the country for thousands of years; theprohibition creates a flourishing illicit market in opium. In1969 the prohibition is lifted, opium growing is resumed understate inspection, and more than 110,000 persons receive opiumfrom physicians and pharmacies as "registered addicts."[Henry Kamm, They shoot opium smugglers in Iran, but . . ."*The New York Times Magazine*, Feb. 11, 1973, pp. 42-45] 1956 The Narcotics Control Act in enacted; it providesthe death penalty, if recommended by the jury, for the sale ofheroin to a person under eighteen by one over eighteen.[Lindesmith, *The Addict and the Law*, p. 26] 1958 Ten percent of the arable land in Italy is underviticulture; two million people earn their living wholly orpartly from the production or sale of wine. [Kessel and Walton,op. cit., p. 46] 1960 The United States report to the United NationsCommission on Narcotic Drugs for 1960 states: "There were44,906 addicts in the United States on December 31, 1960 . .." [Lindesmith, *The Addict and The Law*, p. 100] 1961 The United Nations' "Single Convention onNarcotic Drugs of 10 March 1961" is ratified. Among theobligations of the signatory states are the following: "Art.42. Know users of drugs and persons charges with an offense underthis Law may be committed by an examining magistrate to a nursinghome. . . . Rules shall be also laid down for the treatment insuch nursing homes of unconvicted drug addicts and dangerousalcoholics." [Charles Vaille, A model law for theapplication of the Single Convention on Narcotic Drugs, 1961,*United Nations Bulletin on Narcotics*, 21:1-12 (April-June),1961] 1963 Tobacco sales total $8.08 billion, of which $3.3billion go to federal, state, and local taxes. A news releasefrom the tobacco industry proudly states: "Tobacco productspass across sales counters more frequently than anythingelse--except money." [Tobacco: After publicity surge SurgeonGeneral's Report seems to have little enduring effect, *Science*,145:1021-1022 (Sept. 4), 1964; p. 1021] 1964 The British Medical Association, in a Memorandumof Evidence to the Standing Medical Advisory Committee's SpecialSub- committee on Alcoholism, declares: "We feel that insome very bad cases, compulsory detention in hospital offer theonly hope of successful treatment. . . . We believe that somealcoholics would welcome compulsory removal and detention inhospital until treatment is completed." [Quoted in Kesseland Walton, op. cit. p. 126] 1964 An editorial in *The New York Times* callsattention to the fact that "the Government continues to bethe tobacco industry's biggest booster. The Department ofAgriculture lost $16 million in supporting the price of tobaccoin the last fiscal year, and stands to loose even more because ithas just raised the subsidy that tobacco growers will get ontheir 1964 crop. At the same time, the Food for Peace program isgetting rid of surplus stocks of tobacco abroad."[Editorial, Bigger agricultural subsidies. . .even more fortobacco, *The New York Times*, Feb. 1, 1964, p. 22] 1966 Sen. Warren G. Magnuson makes public a program,sponsored by the Agriculture Department, to subsidize"attempts to increase cigarette consumption abroad. . . .The Department is paying to stimulate cigarette smoking in atravelogue for $210,000 to subsidize cigarette commercials inJapan, Thailand, and Austria." An Agriculture Departmentspokesman corroborates that "the two programs were preparedunder a congressional authorization to expand overseas marketsfor U.S. farm commodities." [Edwin B. Haakinsom, Senatorshocked at U.S. try to hike cigarette use abroad, *SyracuseHerald-American*, Jan. 9, 1966, p. 2] 1966 Congress enacts the "Narcotics AddictRehabilitation Act, inaugurating a federal civil commitmentprogram for addicts. 1966 C. W. Sandman, Jr. chairman of the New JerseyNarcotic Drug Study Commission, declares that LSD is "thegreatest threat facing the country today . . . more dangerousthan the Vietnam War." [Quoted in Brecher et al., op. cit.p. 369] 1967 New York State's "Narcotics AddictionControl Program" goes into effect. It is estimated to cost$400 million in three years, and is hailed by GovernmentRockefeller as the "start of an unending war . . ."Under the new law, judges are empowered to commit addicts forcompulsory treatment for up to five years. [Murray Schumach, Planfor addicts will open today: Governor hails start, *The New YorkTimes*, April 1, 1967] 1967 The tobacco industry in the United States spendsan estimated $250 million on advertising smoking. [Editorial, Itdepends on you, *Health News* (New York State), 45:1 (March),1968] 1968 The U.S. tobacco industry has gross sales of $8billion. Americans smoke 544 billion cigarettes. [Fort, op. cit.p. 21] 1968 Canadians buy almost 3 billion aspirin tabletsand approximately 56 million standard does of amphetamines. About556 standard doses of barbituates are also produced or importedfor consumption in Canada. [Canadian Government's Commission ofInquiry, *The Non-Medical Uses of Drugs*, p. 184 1968 Six to seven percent of all prescriptions writtenunder the British National Health Service are for barbituates; itis estimated that about 500,000 British are regular users.[Young, op. cit. p. 25] 1968 Brooklyn councilman Julius S. Moskowitz chargesthat the work of New York City's Addiction Services Agency, underits retiring Commissioner, Dr. Efren Ramierez, was a"fraud," and that "not a single addict has beencured." [Charles G. Bennett, Addiction agency called a"fraud," *New York Times*, Dec. 11, 1968, p. 47] 1969 U.S. production and value of some medicalchemicals: barbituates: 800,000 pounds, $2.5 million; aspirin(exclusive of salicylic acid) 37 milliion pounds, value"withheld to avoid disclosing figures for individualproducers"; salicylic acid: 13 million pounds, $13 million;tranquilizers: 1.5 million pounds, $7 million. [*StatisticalAbstracts of the United States*, 1971 92nd Annual Edition, p. 75] 1969 The parents of 6,000 secondary-level students inClifton, New Jersey, are sent letters by the Board of Educationasking permission to conduct saliva tests on their children todetermine whether or not they use marijuana. [Saliva tests askedfor Jersey youths on marijuana use, *New York Times*, Apr. 11,1969, p. 12] 1970 Dr. Albert Szent-Gyorgyi, Nobel Laureate inMedicine and Physiology, in reply to being asked what he would doif he were twenty today: "I would share with my classmatesrejection of the whole world as it is--all of it. Is there anypoint in studying and work? Fornication--at least that issomething good. What else is there to do? Fornicate and takedrugs against the terrible strain of idiots who govern theworld." [Albert Szent-Gyorgyi, in *The New York Times*, Feb.20, 1970, quoted in Mary Breastead, *Oh! Sex Education!*, p. 359] 1971 President Nixon declares that "America'sPublic Enemy No. 1 is drug abuse." In a message to Congress,the President calls for the creation of a Special Action Officeof Drug Abuse Prevention. [The New Public Enemy No. 1, *Time*,June 28, 1971, p. 18] 1971 On June 30, 1971, President Cvedet Sunay ofTurkey decrees that all poppy cultivation and opium productionwill be forbidden beginning in the fall of 1972. [Patricia M Waldet al. (Eds.), *Dealing with Drug Abuse*, p. 257] 1972 Myles J. Ambrose, Special Assistant AttorneyGeneral of the United States: "As of 1960, the Bureau ofNarcotics estimated that we had somewhere in the neighborhood of55,000 addicts . . . they estimate now the figure is 560,000.[Quoted in *U.S. News and World Report*, April 3, 1972, p. 38] 1972 The Bureau of Narcotics and Dangerous Drugsproposes restricting the use of barbituates on the ground thatthey "are more dangerous than heroin." [Restrictionsproposed on barbituate sales, *Syracuse Herald-Journal*, Mar 16,1972, p. 32] 1972 The house votes 366 to 0 to authorize "a $1billion, three-year federal attack on drug abuse." [$1billion voted for drug fight, *Syracuse Herald-Journal*, March16, 1972, p. 32] 1972 At the Bronx house of corrections, out of a totalof 780 inmates, approximately 400 are given tranquilizers such asValium, Elavil, Thorazine, and Librium. "'I think they [theinmates] would be doing better without some of the medication,'said Capt. Robert Brown, a correctional officer. He said that ina way the medications made his job harder . . . rather thanbecoming calm, he said, an inmate who had become addicted to hismedication 'will do anything when he can't get it.'" [RonaldSmothers, Muslims: What's behind the violence, *The New YorkTimes*, Dec. 26, 1972, p. 18] 1972 In England, the pharmacy cost of heroin is $.04per grain (60 mg.), or $.00067 per mg. In the United States, thestreet price is $30 to $90 per grain, or $.50 or $1.50 per mg.[Wald et al. (Eds.) op. cit. p. 28] 1973 A nationwide Gallop poll reveals that 67 percentof the adults interviewed "support the proposal of New YorkGovernor Nelson Rockefeller that all sellers of hard drugs begiven life imprisonment without possibility of parole."[George Gallup, Life for pushers, *Syracuse Herald-American*,Feb. 11, 1973] 1973 Michael R. Sonnenreich, Executive Director of theNational Commission on Marijuana and Drug Abuse, declares:"About our years ago we spent a total of $66.4 million forthe entire federal effort in the drug abuse area. . . . This yearwe have spent $796.3 million and the budget estimates that havebeen submitted indicate that we will exceed the $1 billion mark.When we do so, we become, for want of a better term, a drug abuseindustrial complex.: [Michael R. Sonnenreich, Discussion of theFinal Report of the National Commission on Marijuana and DrugAbuse, *Villanova Law Review*, 18:817-827 (May), 1973; p. 818] 1972 Operation Intercept. All vehicles returning fromMexico are checked by Nixon's order. Long lines occur and, asusual no dent is made in drug traffic. 1977 The Joint Committee of the New York BarAssociation concludes that the Rockefeller drug laws, thetoughest in the nation, have had no effect in reducing drug usebut have clogged the courts and the criminal justice system tothe point of gridlock. 1981 Congress ammends the 1878 Posse Comitatus Act,which forbids the armed forces to enforce civil law, so that themilitary could provide surveillance planes and ships forinterdiction purposes. 1984 U.S. busts 10,000 pounds of marijuana on farms inMexico. The seizures, made on five farms in an isolated sectionof Chihuahua state, suggest a 70 percent increase in estimatesthat total U.S. consumption was 13,000 to 14,000 tons in 1982.Furthermore, the seizures add up to nearly eight times the 1300tons that officials had calculated Mexico produced in 1983. [theSan Francisco Chronicle, Saturday, November 24, 1984] 1985 Pentagon spends $40 million on interdiction. By1990, the General Accounting Office will report that themilitary's efforts have had no discernible impact on the flow ofdrugs. 1986 The Communist Party boss, Boris Yeltsin said thatthe Moscow school system is rife with drug addiction, drunkennessand principles that take bribes. He said that drug addiction hasbecome such a problem that there are 3700 registered addicts inMoscow. [The San Francisco Chronicle, Sept. 22, 1986, p. 12] Returnto Cliff Schaffer's Main Page WT01-B26-8IA087-000632-B027-53http://206.61.184.43:80/schaffer/history/baum1.htm 206.61.184.43 19970122095309 text/html 17310HTTP/1.0 200 OKDate: Wednesday, 22-Jan-97 09:53:01 GMTServer: WebSitePro/1.1f (S/N wpo-0deb)Allow-ranges: bytesContent-type: text/htmlLast-modified: Saturday, 28-Dec-96 05:39:24 GMTContent-length: 17092 Excerpts from Smoke and Mirrors Excerpts from Smoke and Mirrors by Dan Baum, 1996 Dan Baum has written what may be the best modern history ofthe political doings behind the War on Drugs over the last 30years. You can find a copy through your local bookstore, or visitDan Baum's Website: http://members.aol.com/danbaum/baum.html. William Bennett When William Bennett moved across town from the Department ofEducation to be "czar" at the Office of National DrugControl Policy, he brought his people with him. All white, allmale, none with law enforcement or social-service experience,some had been with Bennett the entire eight years since his debutat the National Endowment for the Humanities. Bennett's men held themselves above the mere budget-cutters,tax-slashers, regulation-busters, and states-rightsers thatcomprised the broader executive branch. John Walters, Bennett'schief of staff at Education and author of the punitive SchoolsWithout Drugs, had been to meetings of Ed Meese's Drug PolicyBoard and had been appalled at their inanity. Everybody was sobusy jockeying for position that nobody ever ventured an honestopinion or original idea. Bennett's office, on the other hand,prided itself on being one continuous philosophy forum, withgreat questions of political theory and national purpose thestuff of daily conversation. Envisioning themselves a kind ofideological Bennettista cavalry to the Republican infantry,Bennett's crew saw their mission at the drug office asfundamentally identical to that at Education or the Endowment: Toreform America's character, by force if necessary. It would have been okay with them to be assigned teenpregnancy, abortion, welfare -- any platform from which toharangue the public about values and exact punishment fortransgression. "Drugs are the hill we're fighting over atthe moment, but the war is much bigger than that," BruceCarnes, Bennett's budget director, would say. "Our fight isany issue that has a shade on character." The "hill" they'd just been given to fight over,though, wasn't just any piece of political turf, but was thehottest hot-button issue of the decade. More than half thecountry believed drugs to be the America's worst problem.Majorities favored mandatory drug tests for all citizens,warrantless police searches of suspected dealers' homes, androadblocks to search cars randomly. This wasn't mere nakedpaintings or politically correct social studies textbooks. Thiswas a chance to preach and kick ass on the nation's brightly litcenter stage. Even before Bennett's Senate confirmation, his men beganplotting their course. The same 1988 law that created the drugczar's office also required it to produce a drug-control strategyby September, and there was no time to waste. Bennett himselfwasn't around much. He'd checked himself into a $700-a-weektherapeutic resort to kick his two-pack-a-day cigarette habit. But in the lofty and freewheeling style to which they'dbecome accustomed, Bennett's core group of advisors began layingout the assumptions on which national drug policy would hereafterbe based. At this point, the United States had been fighting its War onDrugs for twenty years. Despite the billions spent, the millionsimprisoned, and the loss of liberties to both drug user andnon-user alike, drugs were cheaper, more potent, and used byyounger children than when Nixon started the War. The drugcartels were wealthier and more sophisticated than ever. Thenumber of cocaine dependents had grown. Drug violence, unheard ofat the start of the Drug War, now terrorized poor neighborhoods.Drug combatants died daily; just the number of slain innocentbystanders had tripled in the two years prior to Bush'sinauguration. Rather than evaluate the efficacy of the War onDrugs and the wisdom of pursuing it, Bennett and his men merelyshuffled the deck one more time. Under Nixon, heroin was the big bad drug. Halfway throughCarter's reign, marijuana nudged it aside. As the public'spassion to fight marijuana waned, cocaine was thrust forward todraw fire. Then crack. The Drug War front shifted endlessly too,from the border to the streets to Bolivia to the money-launderingbanks to the suburbs and back to the border again. Now it was the Bennettistas' turn, and they achieved the mostradical recasting of the country's "drug problem" yet:Drugs would no longer be discussed as a health problem. The physical dangers of illegal drugs had always been theDrug War's causa belli. Even the "zero tolerance"policy of the late Reagan years was couched in the rhetoric of"instantaneous addiction" and "the poisoning ofour children": health terminology. That had to stop. Because if the drug issue was going toserve the Bennettistas' decade-long crusade to police thenation's character, drug abuse needed to be placed in the samecategory as offensive art, multicultural teaching, and ethicalrelativism: a matter of morality. "The simple fact is that drug use is wrong,"Bennett decreed. "And the moral argument, in the end, is themost compelling argument." Terence Pell, Bennett's personallawyer from Education and now the drug office's chief counsel,put it this way: "We have to believe. If you think drugs arebad, that they make people bad neighbors, horrible parents,dangerous drivers and what have you, then you think drugs arebad. There's a moral dimension." If drugs are a health problem then addicts are"sick," and that cast them in a sympathetic light theBennettistas felt addicts didn't deserve. The decision to takedrugs that first time, after all, is voluntary. Walters directlyattacked the old approach. "The health people say 'nostigma,'" he would say, "and I'm for stigma." The medical model of drug abuse was to Bennett's men aphilosophic and practical morass. If you base prohibition ondrugs' health effects, what do you say to the millions ofoccasional users who convincingly claim to be uninjured by thedrugs they took? If you acknowledge that heavy drug users aresick, you create an expectation that the government will treatthem. The biggest problem with basing a prohibitive drug policy onthe health risks, though, was the invitation to comparisons. Theyear the chain-smoking Bennett became drug czar, tobacco killedsome 395,000 Americans -- more than died in both world wars.Alcohol directly killed 23,000 and another 22,400 on thehighways. The Natural Resources Defense Council in Marchpublished a report, widely praised by medical authorities,estimating that as many as 5,500 Americans would develop cancerfrom the pesticides they ate during their preschool years. Theincidence of breast cancer in American women had more thandoubled since World War II, owing largely to dioxin and otherpollutants. Cocaine, on the other hand, killed 3,308 people thatyear, slightly less than died from anterior horn cell disease.Heroin and other opiates killed 2,743. And no death frommarijuana has ever been recorded. Drugs damage without killing, of course, but even here otherpreventable health problems put illegal drugs in deep shade. TheGeneral Accounting Office, Congress's non-partisan investigativeagency, estimated that some 350,000 people were using cocainedaily in 1989. While that's a big number, 15 times that manychildren were going to bed hungry at least once a month thatyear, 50 times that many Americans were sleeping on the streets,and 100 times that many had no health insurance. Discussing drugs as a moral problem obviated suchcomparisons. If the case could be made that drug use is simplywrong, then it wouldn't matter that some people use drugs safely,that alcohol and tobacco kill more people than reefer and smack,that more American than European children know hunger. The Bennettistas worked hard to address the inconsistenciesof their approach. Their most glaring problem was the new drugczar himself. By any medical definition, Bennett was a drugaddict, so dependent on nicotine after giving up the drug in itssmokable form that he now carried everywhere a pack of nicotinechewing gum and was up to 40 milligrams of nicotine a day --about as much as in two packs of cigarettes. Alcohol was another problem. Bennett's drug office had noCongressional mandate to address it, his mainstream constituencyenjoyed it, and the alcohol industry's mulitmillion-dollar lobbywouldn't stand for further restrictions on booze. So the drugoffice needed somehow to place alcohol on the "moral"side of the line. No small trick. Aside from the cirrhosis andhighway deaths, booze was implicated in violent crime to a muchgreater degree than any illegal drug. The Justice Departmentfound that half of those convicted of homicide in 1989 were usingalcohol at the time of the killing, while fewer than six percentsaid they were on drugs alone. Bennett's men tiptoed through the minefield of alcohol andtobacco. John Walters took the position that marijuana, cocaine,and heroin, "enslave people" and "prevent themfrom being free citizens" in a way that alcohol and tobaccodo not. Bruce Carnes decided that drug taking was"life-denying," and "inward," but thatalcohol and tobacco were not. Illegal drugs, Bennett said in aspeech that May, "obliterate morals, value, character, ourrelations with each other and our relation to God." None ofthese conclusions was based on science, but collectively they hadthe effect of royal fiat. The Bennettistas also relied on a neat bit of tautology:marijuana, heroin, and cocaine are immoral because they areillegal. Why are they illegal? Because they are immoral.Compliance, not health, was the real issue. "Now that thegovernment has spoken to the subject that drugs areunlawful," said Paul McNulty, a Bennettista soul-matedirecting communications at the Justice Department, "aperson who disobeys the law has made a moral choice and should bedealt with appropriately." Bennett freely admitted drugenforcement was but an instrument of a wider agenda, calling for"the reconstitution of legal and social authority throughthe imposition of appropriate consequences for drug dealing anddrug use." "The drug crisis," he told theWashington Hebrew congregation, "is a crisis of authority,in every sense of the term, 'authority." Consequently, "a massive wave of arrests is a toppriority for the War on Drugs," Bennett announced.Washington, D.C. had arrested 45,000 of its citizens for drugs inthe two years prior to Bennett's appointment, "withoutmaking an appreciable dent in either the drug trade or the murderrate," Newsweek noted. But Bennett wanted more of the same.On the day he was sworn in, he declared the city a "highintensity drug trafficking area" and unveiled a massive planto fight drugs in the nation's capital. More than eighty federalagents would bolster the city's drug squad. A curfew would sweepthe streets of minors after 11 p.m. A judge ruled the curfewunconstitutional, but the mood was infectious. Some members ofCongress suggested declaring de facto martial law -- placing theD.C. police under federal control and sending in the Army andNational Guard. Of the $100 million Bennett wanted spent in D.C.,95 percent was for law enforcement. Of that, more than half wouldgo to a new prison, and until that could be built, Bennettproposed converting abandoned military buildings into makeshiftdrug prisons. As for the purpose of all this new incarceration,Bennett was characteristically blunt: "I'm not a person whosays that the first purpose of punishment isrehabilitation," he told Congress. "The first purposeis moral, to exact a price for transgressing the rights ofothers." Elvis Presley The year ended on an odd note for the War on Drugs. Four daysbefore Christmas 1971, Egil Krogh's phone rang. It was DwightChapin, from Bob Haldeman's staff. "The King is here," Chapin said. "King who?" Krogh asked. "No kings on thepresident's schedule today." "Not just any two-bit king," Chapin answered."The King. Elvis. The King of Rock." Elvis Presley had appeared that morning at the Northwest Gateof the White House and handed the guard a nearly illegiblesix-page letter on American Airlines stationery. He was anadmirer of the president, Presley wrote, and he wanted to helpspread Nixon's anti-drug message. He was well positioned, too:."The drug culture, the hippie elements, the SDS, BlackPanthers, etc. do not consider me as their enemy or as they callit The Establishment." To dispel any doubts as to his ownloyalty, Presley added in bold underline, "I call it Americaand I love it!" Then Presley made his pitch. "I can and will do moregood if I were made a Federal Agent at Large. . . . All I need isthe Federal credentials." Presley was registered at a nearby hotel under the name JonBurrows. "I will be here for as long as it takes to get thecredentials of a Federal Agent," Presley wrote. "I havedone an in-depth study of drug abuse and Communist brainwashingtechniques and I am right in the middle of the whole thing whereI can and will do the most good." Though he didn't mention it in the note to Nixon, Presley wasa collector of police badges. And he was a dopehound of legendaryexcess. But in the squareball Nixon White House, Presley foundperhaps the only people in the United States who didn't knowthat. Krogh certainly didn't. He took the letter at face value. At 12:30, the King was relieved of his present for the chiefexecutive - a nickel-plated .45 automatic, complete withammunition -- and ushered into the office of the president. Nixon was dressed like Nixon: blue suit, white shirt, tie.Elvis was dressed like Elvis: black velvet jacket, chest hair,gold medallions, sunglasses and a belt buckle big as a dinnerplate. He pulled up a sleeve to exhibit cufflinks the size ofhamsters. As Nixon bent close to examine them, Elvis launchedinto a tirade against the Beatles, who he accused of beinganti-American. "You know," Nixon said. "Those who use thedrugs are the protesters. You know, the ones who get caught up indissent and violence. They're the same group of youngpeople." "Mr. President," Elvis said, "I'm on yourside. I want to be helpful. And I want to help get people torespect the flag because that's getting lost." Then Elvis got to the point. "Mr. President, can you getme a badge from the Narcotics Bureau?" Krogh was afraid of this. He'd already called the number-twoman at BNDD who earlier that day had thrown Elvis out. Elvis hadgone there before stopping at the Northwest gate, and offered a$5,000 "donation" to BNDD in return for a badge. Nixon, not knowing any of that, looked uncertainly at Krogh."Bud, can we get him a badge?" "If you want to give him a badge, I think we can get himone." "I'd like to do that. See that he gets one." Elvis then did something nobody had ever done in the NixonOval Office; he gathered the president up in his arms and gavehim a big bear hug. The staff was stunned; the photographerdidn't even get a picture. Nixon endured it stiffly, handed outpresidential tie clasps, and dismissed the King with a hearty paton the shoulder. And so it came to pass that on the day Elvis Presley died ofa drug overdose in 1977, he was a credentialed Special Assistantin the Bureau of Narcotics and Dangerous Drugs. CliffSchaffer's Home Page WT01-B26-9IA087-000632-B027-79http://206.61.184.43:80/schaffer/history/drug_law_timeline.htm 206.61.184.43 19970122095320 text/html 15425HTTP/1.0 200 OKDate: Wednesday, 22-Jan-97 09:53:10 GMTServer: WebSitePro/1.1f (S/N wpo-0deb)Allow-ranges: bytesContent-type: text/htmlLast-modified: Saturday, 28-Dec-96 05:40:05 GMTContent-length: 15207 Drug Law Timeline Contents | Feedback | Search DRCNet Library | Schaffer Library | Historical Research Drug Law Timeline Significant Events in the History of our Drug Laws Year Event 1600s Colonial laws required farmers to grow hemp because it was used for ropes and sails on ships. A good hemp industry was important to the shipping industry. 1700s Hemp was the primary crop grown by George Washington at Mount Vernon, and a secondary crop grown by Thomas Jefferson at Monticello. 1844 Cocaine was synthesized 1845 A law prohibiting the public sale of liquor is enacted in New York State. It is repealed in 1847. 1847 The American Medical Association is founded. 1860s Opiates see widespread use as a pain killer for injured soldiers during the Civil War. Opiates were the first real miracle drugs because they allowed the patient to be anesthetized while the doctor performed surgery. Before the advent of opiates, the most common surgery was a simple amputation. That is, the doctor got several big strong people to hold the patient down and then literally sawed off an arm or a leg while the patient screamed in pain. For this reason, a good doctor was a fast doctor. Battlefield hospitals during the Civil War commonly had large piles of severed arms and legs. The use of opiates as anesthesia gave doctors time to work on the patient and actually made modern surgery possible. 1869 The Prohibition Party is formed. Gerrit Smith, twice Abolitionist candidate for President, an associate of John Brown, and a crusading prohibitionist, declares: "Our involuntary slaves are set free, but our millions of voluntary slaves still clang their chains. The lot of the literal slave, of him whom others have enslaved, is indeed a hard one; nevertheless, it is a paradise compared with the lot of him who has enslaved himself to alcohol." [Quoted in Sinclar, op. cit. pp. 83-84] 1870s The first laws against opium smoking were passed in San Francisco and Virginia City. Opium itself was not outlawed and remained available in any number of over-the-counter products. Only the smoking of opium was outlawed, because that was a peculiarly Chinese habit and the laws were specifically directed at the Chinese. The white people in the communities feared that Chinese men were luring white women to have sex in opium dens. The patent medicine industry started its rise. Because there were no restrictions on advertising, labeling, or contents of any products the patent medicine industry made up all sorts of concoctions including the opiates, cocaine, and other drugs, and sold them with the most extravagant advertising claims. This led to a rise in addiction. Addiction was poorly understood. Morphine and heroin were recommended as remedies for alcohol addiction. French Wine of Coca: Invigorating Tonic became a popular soft drink because it contained cocaine. It went on to become Coca-Cola and, together with other similar drinks like Pepsi-Cola, made the soda fountain a common part of the neighborhood pharmacy. 1874 The Woman's Christian Temperance Union is founded in Cleveland. In 1883, Frances Willard a leader of the W.C.T.U. forms the World's Woman's Christian Temperance Union. 1882 The law in the United States, and the world, making "temperance education" a part of the required course in public schools is enacted. In 1886, Congress makes such education mandatory in the District of Columbia, and in territorial, military, and naval schools. By 1900, all the states have similar laws. [Crafts et. al., op. cit. p. 72] The Personal Liberty League of the United States is founded to oppose the increasing momentum of movements for compulsory abstinence from alcohol. [Catlin, op. cit. p. 114] 1884 Sigmund Freud treats his depression with cocaine, and reports feeling "exhilaration and lasting euphoria, which is in no way differs from the normal euphoria of the healthy person. . . You perceive an increase in self-control and possess more vitality and capacity for work. . . . In other words, you are simply more normal, and it is soon hard to believe that you are under the influence of a drug." [Quoted in Ernest Jones, *The Life and Work of Sigmund Freud, Vol. 1, p. 82] Freud later died of effects of tobacco-induced cancer. He was able to break his addiction to cocaine, but could not break his addiction to cigar smoking even though most of the lower part of his face had been removed by cancer surgery. Laws are enacted to make anti-alcohol teaching compulsory in public schools in New York State. The following year similar laws are passed in Pennsylvania, with other states soon following suit. 1906 The Pure Food and Drug Act was passed, forming the Food and Drug Administration and giving it power to regulate foods and drugs, and requiring labeling of contents on foods and drugs. The most important effect on the drug problem was the demise of the patent medicine industry. Drug addiction began a dramatic drop. 1914 The Harrison Tax Act was passed, effectively outlawing the opiates and cocaine. 1915 Utah passed the first state anti-marijuana law. Mormons who had gone to Mexico in 1910 returned smoking marijuana. It was outlawed at a result of the Utah legislature enacting all Mormon religion prohibitions as criminal laws. 1922 Narcotic Drug Import and Export Act - Intended to eliminate use of narcotics except for legitimate medicinal use 1924 Heroin Act -Makes it illegal to manufacture heroin 1937 Marijuana Tax Act Applies controls over marijuana similar to narcotics 1938 Food, Drug and Cosmetic Act FDA given control over drug safety, Drugs redefined: effect body even in absence of disease, Establishes class of drugs available by Prescription (Company determines status) 1942 Opium Poppy Control Act Prohibits growing poppy w/o license 1951 Durham-Humphrey Amendment Established more specific guidelines for prescription drugs: habit forming, safety, and evaluation of new drugs 1951 Boggs Amendment to the Harrison Narcotic Act Mandatory sentences for narcotic violations 1956 Narcotics Control Act Intends to impose even more severe penalties for narcotics violations 1965 Drug Abuse Control Amendments (DACA) Strict controls over amphetamines, barbiturates, LSD, etc. 1966 Narcotic Addict Rehabilitation Act (NARA) Allows treatment as an alternative to jail 1968 DACA Amendments Provides that sentence may be suspended and record expunged if no further violations within 1 year 1970 Comprehensive Drug Abuse and Control Act Replaces and updates all previous laws concerning narcotics and other dangerous drugs. Empasis on law enforcement. 1972 Drug Abuse Office and Treatment Act Establishes federally funded programs for prevention and treatment 1973 Methadone Control Act Regulates methadone licensing 1973 Heroin Trafficking Act Increases penalties for distribution 1973 Alcohol, Drug Abuse, and Mental Health Administration (ADAMHA) Consolidates NIMH, NIDA, and NIAAA under umbrella organization 1973 Drug Enforcement Administration (DEA) Remodels Bureau of Narcotics and Dangerous Drugs into DEA 1974 and 1978 Drug Abuse Treatment and Control Amendments Extends 1972 act 1978 Alcohol and Drug Abuse Education Amendments Sets up education programs within Department of Education 1980 Drug Abuse Prevention, Treatment, and Rehabilitation Amendments Extends prevention education and treatment programs 1984 Drug Offenders Act Sets up special programs for offenders and organizes treatment 1986 Analogue (Designer Drug) Act Makes use of substances with similar effects and structure to existing illicit drug illegal 1988 Anti-Drug Abuse Act Establishes oversight office: National Drug Control Policy 1992 ADAMHA Reorganization Transfers NIDA, NIMH, and NIAAA to NIH and incorporates ADAMHA's programs into the Substance Abuse and Mental Health Services Administration (SAMHSA) Contents | Feedback | Search DRCNet Library | Schaffer Library | Historical ResearchWT01-B26-10IA087-000632-B027-113http://206.61.184.43:80/schaffer/history/soldis.htm 206.61.184.43 19970122095403 text/html 87163HTTP/1.0 200 OKDate: Wednesday, 22-Jan-97 09:53:48 GMTServer: WebSitePro/1.1f (S/N wpo-0deb)Allow-ranges: bytesContent-type: text/htmlLast-modified: Saturday, 28-Dec-96 05:38:28 GMTContent-length: 86945 Mythical Roots of US Drug Policy - Soldier's Disease andAddicts in the Civil War Contents | Feedback | Search DRCNet Library | Schaffer Library | Historical Research THE MYTHICAL ROOTS OF U.S. DRUG POLICY: SOLDIER'S DISEASE AND ADDICTS IN THE CIVIL WAR by Jerry Mandel* 1779 Haight St. San Francisco, CA 94117 Special thanks to Marvin Scott for kind encouragement andsuperb editing. THE MYTHICAL ROOTS OF U.S. DRUG POLICY: SOLDIER'S DISEASE AND ADDICTION IN THECIVIL WAR Abstract Soldier's Disease -- widespread addiction following massiveadministration of opiates during the Civil War -- is the earliestand most often repeated example of a drug problem before thenarcotics laws. The story exemplifies several basic themes usedin support of continued drug prohibition -- addiction is easy toacquire, hard to kick, and is a publicly noticed, i.e. asocial,problem. Soldier's Disease, though, is a myth. Not one caseof addiction was reported in medical records or the literature ofthe time; under ten references were made in the NineteenthCentury to addiction the cause of which was the Civil War; and noperjorative nickname for addicted veterans, like Soldier'sDisease, appeared in the literature until 1 9 15, and it did notbecome part of the Conventional Wisdom of drug experts untilalmost a century after Appomattox. THE MYTHICAL ROOTS OF U.S. DRUG POLICY: SOLDIER'S DISEASE AND ADDICTS IN THE CIVILWAR myth ... 1: a usu. traditional story of ostensiblyhistorical events that serves to unfold part of the world view ofa people or explain a practice, belief, or natural phenomena ... 3... b: an ill-founded belief held uncritically esp. by aninterested group. Webster's New Collegiate Dictionary, 1973 The earliest (and often the only) example of opiate addictionas a social problem which is frequently cited by drug experts is Soldier'sDisease -- widespread addiction resulting from widespreadopiate use in the Civil War. Most writers who report Soldier'sDisease devote no more than three sentences to it. It is thebrevity, clarity, "catchiness," and conceptualimplication of "Soldier's Disease" which accounts forthe contemporary significance of such a fleeting reference.Possibly the lengthiest and most graphic description of opiateuse in the Civil War, resulting in massive addiction amongveterans, was provided by Gerald Starkey, a century after thatwar: In 1862 (sic) the Civil War broke out.... They would chargeeach other, literally pound chains down cannons and fire pointblank at the enemy and these young men were presented to theirfield surgeons with terrible shrapnel wounds ... along withterrible pain. About all the field surgeon could do was use the two newinvented tools that had been presented to him in the previousfive or six years I the hypodermic needle and syringe, along withMorphine Sulfate .... They injected the young wounded veteranswith huge amounts of Morphine daily (every four hours) to killtheir pain.... It was necessary for the surgeons to dofull-quarter amputations -- literally take the arms and legs offright at the start of the body, usually to stop infectiousgangrene. In 1865 there were an estimated 400,000 young War veteransaddicted to Morphine.... The returning veteran could be. .identified because he had a leather thong around his neck and aleather bag (with) Morphine Sulfate tablets, along with a syringeand a needle issued to the soldier on his discharge.... (T)hiswas called the "Soldier's Disease." (Starkey, 1971:482-84)1 The lesson to be learned from "Soldier's Disease"involves four linked hypotheses, phrased as fact, which form aparadigm justifying today's U.S. Drug policy. This paradigm is: Free access to opiates sooner or later breeds a massive use ofopiates. Widespread use of opiates leads to a lot of addicts. Addiction is long-term, often enough, forever. Addiction is a publicly manifest problem. In sum, free availability leads to a social problem. The historical record shows, however, that Soldier's Diseaseis a fanciful reconstruction of the past by writers I 00 years ormore after the Civil War. There was not, to my knowledge, asingle mention of Soldier's Disease, Army Disease, or any othersobriquet referring to addicted veterans, until a half -centuryafter the Civil War; not one addict was noted in any writing orstatistic compiled during or immediately after the Civil War; andreports of addicted veterans who began using during that War areonly rarely mentioned throughout the rest of the 19th Century. Soldier's Disease is a modern creation that has very little todo with the facts of 19th Century drug use. Rather, it is an ideawhich fits, which shores up, modern drug policies. It is anassertion about what opiates are supposed to do, applied to apast situation. In the next part -- Section I -- of this paper, the relevanceof Soldier's Disease to contemporary drug policy is addressed.Soldier's Disease is the only tale of a pre-Harrison Act opiateproblem which a self-respecting scholar in recent years couldpoint to as a pre-1914 social problem due to opiates. In Section2, the modern creation of Soldier's Disease, and its recentpopularity among drug experts, is shown by noting the first whomention the concept and when, a generation or two later, itbecame accepted by scholars of all persuasions. Then the focusturns to the historical evidence which would test, in order, thefour steps in the above paradigm. In Section 3 the questions are:"were opiates widely used by soldiers during the CivilWar?" and "was addiction among them widespread duringthe war?" In Section 4 the questions are: "wasthere wide-scale addiction among veterans after thewar?" and "was this a publicly manifest problem?"What follows is the evidence for answering these four questions:in order, " a tentative yes...... no," "no,"and "no." The conclusions will expand further on howthe mythic and the actual situation of Civil War opiate userelates to the current Drug policy debate. 1. The Relevance of Soldier's Disease To Contemporary U.S. Drug Policy The paradigm justifying U.S. opiate policy -- availabilityleads to use; use leads to addiction; addiction is long-term; andaddiction becomes a publicly manifest problem -- conveys the ideathat unavoidable Social consequences of free accessto opiates justify the enormous costs of contemporary U.S. drugpolicy. Of all the stories about the "bad old days"when opiates were legal, only Soldier's Disease providesconvincing I. evidence" that opiate availability led to a publiclymanifest problem, beyond merely a substantial increase in thenumbers of addicts. Thus, only the tale of Soldier's Diseasedemonstrates Step 4 of the paradigm. The very phrase"Soldier's Disease" connotes a publicly manifestproblem. Otherwise, the tales told about opiates before the lawsbanning them were either too far-fetched to be repeated in moderntimes, or reflect a social problem only if you believe theparadigm, (and often not even then). During and just before 1914,the type of stories carried by the press about opiates did notindicate a social problem which might lead to a need forprohibition, and the absence of media coverage of the HarrisonAct during the year it was passed by Congress further suggeststhe irrelevance of opiate use to a social problem. There were, in the medical as well as the mass media of thelate 19th and early 20th Centuries, occasional alarms soundedabout other publicly manifest opiate problems, but no scholar inrecent years believes that these were real or significant. (Forexample, the press periodically reported an opium problem,particularly white women smoking opium in Chinatown, with Chinesemen. A racist, not an opiate problem). Even the moralisticanti-opium writers of about a century ago, with rare and oftenunbelievable exceptions, did not point to a publicly noticedproblem.2 Today, there are imputed social problems, but not a demonstratedone, beyond Soldier's Disease. Historians David Musto andDavid Courtwright (Musto, 1972:2-4; and Courtwright, 1982:16-28)extend a tradition3 of research into the megatonnage of opiatesannually imported into the U.S. from well before the Civil Warthrough the early 20th Century. Additionally, opiates weretypically a key ingredient in patent medicines, and there was ahuge national campaign against them resulting in the Pure Foodand Drug Act. Neither the level of imports nor the widespread useof opiates in patent medicines, in the absence of belief in aparadigm such as we noted, suggest anything beyond widespreadavailability. The medical literature of the 19th Century is filled withdiscussions about opiates, many written by experts who believedits use was terrible. To them, a loss of "moral will,"perhaps best exemplified by secretiveness, including husbands andwives keeping large scale addictions hidden from their spousesfor many years,4 was a major problem. Addicts were deemed liars,which was only natural given the opprobrium attached to addictionin much of U.S. society long before there were drug laws. Themedical and pharmaceutical literature also had an on-goingcontest, essentially, to report the oldest, most long-time,addict with the largest habit. None of the above indicates thatthe behavior of 19th or early 20th Century addicts was a publiclyevident problem. In the years just before national drug prohibition, there wasbarely a sign of an opiate-caused social problem, Two newspapers,to my knowledge, were indexed for 1906-1912 -- the New York Timesand the San Francisco Call.5 In each, there were three basictypes of stories: recent state laws which were forerunnersof the Harrison Act in that they criminalized opiate use; arrests(over half being of Chinese Americans); and internationalstories. Opiates are assumed to be "evil" but the onlyallusion to a possible social consequence in any Times story isheadlined "Says Opium Aids Music Composers.-6 The onlypublic problem with opiates recounted in the Call, besides whitewomen in Chinese opiate dens7 and problems which result from thelocal laws, is lethargy among the troops at The Presidio.("It destroys the vitality of the user, and would in timemake the soldier a useless charge.") (S.F. Call, 1910b) 8 The year the nation's major opiate prohibition law was passed,the mass media, (at least the New York Times, San FranciscoChronicle, Washington Post, and the Hearst Press), gave virtuallyno coverage to Congressional discussion or passage of theHarrison Act, or when it was signed into law or took effect.(Aldrich, 1979) Fourteen months after it was signed, a medicaljournal presented the results of a one-question survey -"Inyour opinion what are the five most useful and important drugs inthe materia medica?" -- answered by teachers at leadingmedical schools. "Not only did it (opium) receive 102 votesout of 107, but in 60 instances it was named first."(Robinson, 1916) What the above suggests is not only that the rationales tojustify opiate prohibition circa 1914 could not be repeated byself-respecting scholars as rationales for continuedprohibition today, but that hardly a rationale was offered atall. The Harrison Act crept in on tip-toes, called a tax act,with no fanfare, no public interest or debate. When, a few yearslater, it became clear that this was a criminal law withconsiderable consequences, there was a brief flurry of criticismand a rationale provided for continuing opiate prohibition,namely the vileness and criminality of "junkies" andthe criminal cartels supplying them. Obviously, the consequencesof the law provided the rationale for justifying the law, butthere were not that many opiate addicts and it was not that big asocial problem for the debate to continue. "Evidence" of a social problem is needed to justifyopiate prohibition only when such prohibition is a significantsocial issue (which it was not in the years preceding theHarrison Act) and when criticism of drug laws crescendoes. Onlythen do scholars reconsider the rationales for the drug laws, andturn to the historical record for insights into contemporaryconcerns. It is only in these periods when the four parts of theparadigm, enunciated above, have to be demonstrated ifcontemporary drug policy is to be accepted. It is the final step-- the manifestation of a problem, in public -- which makes theother three socially significant. The only currently citedexample of the complete paradigm, in the absence of opiateprohibition, is Soldier's Disease ... and it's a myth. 2. Tracking The Develogment of The MM A. It's Roots The earliest portrayal of Soldier's Disease among Civil Warveterans appeared as World War I erupted over Europe (also theyear the Harrison Act, took effect). In "The Curse ofNarcotism in America -- A Reveille," Marks, a Yaleprofessor, intended to alert the U.S. to an enormous addictionproblem among Civil War veterans that would be replicated inanother war: Did you know that there is practically no old American familyof Civil War reputation which has not had its addicts?.... (I)twas the "army disease" because of its prevalence?....(W)ith the war that hangs over us, the drug evil will spread intoa giantism of even more terrible growth than the present?....(T)here are something like 4,000,000 victims of opium and cocainein this country today? (Marks, 1915:315)9 Marks feared the return of the "hydra-headeddrug-curse" of the Civil War, but others writing duringWorld War I about the consequences of combat upon drug use amongservicemen made no reference to the War Between the States.(Crothers, 1916; N.Y. Times, 1917; Stanley, 1918; and Weber,1918) In the nine years after World War I, a handful of authorsmentioned Civil War-related addiction, though none mentioned ArmyDisease or any such synonym. (Bishop, 1919 and 1920; IllinoisMedical journal, 192 1; World's Work, 1924; and Fell, 1924). "Army Disease" was next noted in The OpiumProblem. Terry and Pellens' encyclopedic work of 1928, whichbecame "regarded as the single most comprehensive work inthe field" only several decades later.10 (Ball, 1970) ForTerry and Pellens, "the Civil War gave it (chronic opiumintoxication) a considerable impetus (which) seems definitelyestablished." (Terry and Pellens, 1928: 5) Between 1928 andthe late 1950's, only a handful of scholars noted "ArmyDisease" (Terry, 193 1; Woods, 193 1: Dai, 1937: Barnes,1939; and Lindesmith, 1947), and even in the early 1960's it wasinfrequently mentioned (Isbell, 1960 and 1963; Kolb, 1960 and1962; Clausen, 196 1; Maurer and Vogel, 1962; and Sonnedecker,1963), though prior to the drug explosion of the mid- 1960'sthere were few scholars in the drug field. For the experts whothe past quarter century have claimed Soldier's Disease, if theycite any reference it is typically Terry and Pellens. B. The Contemporary Conventional Wisdom Since 1964, Soldier's Disease, in essence, was mentioned inabout 100 works by drug experts, half of these since 1973.11 Itwas also mentioned in several studies by prestigious governmentagencies and Drug and Crime Commissions.12 Among the experts aremany renowned critics of U.S. drug policies -- including EdwardBrecher, Alan Dershowitz, John Kaplan, Arnold Trebach and NormanZinberg. In the early 1970's a few writers questioned thefactuality of Soldier's (Kramer, 1971 and 1972; Swatos, 1972;Musto, 1973; and Quinones, 1975), but shortly thereafter theywere rebutted in a detailed historical analysis. (Courtwright,1978 and 1982)13 Since the mid- 1970's the mention of Soldier'sDisease has diminished, maybe because the critics had an impactor because most experts stopped probing the roots of U.S. drugpolicy after the early 1970's. Soldiers Disease is, however, still mentioned by many experts... and no one, yet, has responded to Courtwright. Though briefly stated, a consistent theme involving threecomponents is reiterated by almost all the cited drug experts,the only variation being in the synonyms used. First, morphine inparticular, and opiates in general, were administered by naivedoctors "indiscriminately" (also termed "promiscuous", "imprudent","uncontrolled", "overdosage","ignorant", etc.). Second, as a consequence of suchmedical naivete, addiction among soldiers was massive (alsotermed "prevalent", "commonplace","thousands", wholesale usage","rampant", etc.). Third, so widespread was theaddiction among soldiers and veterans that it became known asSoldier's Disease (also termed "army disease","soldier's illness", or "soldier'ssickness."),14 The only clear disagreement is the few who estimate the numberof addicted Civil War veterans. Some claim 45,000 (Ashley, 1972and 1978; Geis, 1973; Health PAC, 1970; and Kenny, 1972); others400,000. (H. Jones and Jones, 1977; Lingeman, 1969; Schwartz,1980; Starkey, 197 1; Summers et. al., 1975; and Westin andShaffer, 1972) Since no writer in either camp provides one cluefor their claim, the possibility that both estimates arose out ofthe thin air circa 1970 is not ruled out. Is today's conventional wisdom about Soldier's Disease anintellectual version of the children's game of Telephone where asimple message, after innumerable repetitions, becomes distortedand a new "catchy" message takes on a life of its own... or have recent writers captured the essence of opiateaddiction in a past era? That depends on the evidence during andjust after the Civil War. 3. Opiate Use and Addiction During The Civil War A. The Need For and Use Of Opiates During the Civil War, and at least until 1914, opiates wereconsidered the best medicine for controlling dysentery anddiarrhea and for containing the pain from war wounds. The SurgeonGeneral's history of the just ended Civil War was often lavish inits praise of opium. "Opium -- this medicine merits first place amongthese remedies. It was used almost universally in all cases ofsevere wounds, and was particularly useful in penetrating woundsof the chest, in quieting the nervous system and, indirectly inmoderating hemmorhage. (US Surgeon General, 1870 :645) But, how great was the need? How widely was it used? Given theneed, and the use, of opiates then, how many soldier addicts werethere in the Civil War? Official records from the Civil War show more incidents ofsevere illness for which opiates were the main remedy thanthere were wounds. More died from disease than were killedin battle or succumbed to wounds (For Union troops, 62%"disease," 19% "battle," and 12%"Wounds" of 360,000 deaths among Union troops).(Duncan, 1912:397) Union medical records (for medical problems,not deaths) show approximately 1,400,000 acute and 200,000chronic cases of diarrhea or dysentery, 250,000 wounds, and300,000 cases, combined, of typhoid, typhus, continued fever,venereal disease, scurvy, delerium tremens, insanity andparalysis. (Brooks, 1966:127) There were 30,000 amputationsreported performed by the Union's doctors. (US Surgeon General,1883) Among Confederate prisoners, 32% of the almost 19,000 whodied in captivity in the north succumbed to diarrhea ordysentery. (Brooks, 1966:126) In Andersonville prison fromFebruary 1864 to April 1865, of 12,541 recorded Union soldiercaptives who died, 45% did so from diarrhea or dysentery, andonly 7% from wounds, gangrene or "debility." (USSurgeon General, 1879:32) There was obviously a great needfor opiates. Civil War physicians frequently dispensed opiates. TheSecretary of War just after 1865 stated the Union Army was issued10 million opium pills, over 2,840,000 ounces of other opiatepreparations (such as laudunum or paregoric which, by weight,were well under half opium), and almost 30,000 ounces of morphinesulphate. (Courtwright, 1978:106-7 and 1982) B. Not One Report of Addiction In The Field Yet for all the quantities dispensed, there was not onereport from 1861-1865 of an addicted soldier. Could opiate addiction pass unnoticed, and have noconsequences, among troops living in raw conditions and oftenmoving from one place to another? Could so much morphine andopium preparations get used without generating a single addict? The 30,000 ounces of morphine is most easily explained.Probably, most of it was dusted or rubbed intowounds or, during anesthetization, rubbed into rawtissue. (Adams, 1952; and Brooks, 1966) In the campaign ofFredericksburg in December of 1862, "hypodermic syringeswere unknown, such drugs as morphine being doled out on the pointof a knife" by surgeons. (Duncan, 1985: 200) By the end ofthe war, the hypodermic needle was beginning to be used, inplaces -- "roughly 19 per cent of Union Army physicians werecapable of administering morphine hypodermically.... and evenfewer Confederate physicians were (so) capable."(Courtwright, 1978:105) Whether the hypodermic administration ofmorphine during the Civil War was extremely rare as some haveclaimed (US Surgeon General, 1888:547) or as others have impliedby their failure to note such use in medical histories of the war(Courtwright, 1978:104-105), or was frequent as one neurologistnoted (Courtwright, 1978:106), there is not one case mentionedwhere morphine was injected for pleasure, or to stave offwithdrawal pains. The Civil War lasted four years, with 1,500,000 three yearenlistments on the Union side. Thus, those ten million opiumpills dispensed by Union doctors average roughly two per soldierper year (assuming the pills survived combat conditions). Priorto amputations or other battlefield surgery, the patientroutinely expected and was routinely given one of these pills.Similarly, the 2,84 1,000 ounces of opiate preparations works outto about a half -ounce per Union soldier per year. Thoughphysicians argued about the benefits of opiates for the relief ofpain which accompanied "the fluxes" (diarrhea anddysentery), "the partisans of opium were very much in themajority" and used opium for dysentery and other forms offlux including "chronic fluxes." Army physicians"united opium with almost every medicine employed to checkthe progress of the disease," and despite typical failure tocure returned "almost always to opium as the drug which atleast alleviated, if it did not cure." Where the sufferingsof the patient were very great and continuous, and wheresleeplessness and restlessness had become a medical danger,opiates were highly recommended, even by the otherwise skepticalphysician. (US Surgeon General, 1879: 743-747) Again, applyingbasic arithmetic, and taking into account that there were manymore than the reported 1.6 million cases of dysentery anddiarrhea, it is easy to understand why there were periodicshortages of opiates. As with morphine, there is not a singlereport during the Civil War of a soldier rising opium forpleasure, and the single claim of opiates used to stave offwithdrawal pains (published 16 years after the War) was the"confession" of an officer charged with "desertingin the face of the enemy, and sentenced to be shot."15(Nolan, 1881) Though modern writers have accused the military doctors in theCivil War of not fully appreciating the addictive qualities ofopiates, one historian of Civil War medicine writes thatphysicians in the field did not fully appreciate the benefits ofopium. Tincture of opium and paregoric were always available, butnowhere in the records does one get the impression that they wereused routinely in the management of the fluxes. (Brooks, 1966:117) Morphine, too, may well have been underused, to judge from aleading, albeit unusual, neurologist at the time, S. WeirMitchell, who: (S)colded the medical profession for its reluctance in usingthis mighty painkiller, pointing out that some patients' agonieswere so severe the choice must lie between Morphine andamputation. (Adams, 1952:138) The naivete of military physicians regarding the negativeeffects of opiates, often noted shortly after the Civil War, hadto do basically with their misunderstanding the medical effectsof opiates, not the addictive properties of the drug.16 (USSurgeon General, 1879:735-750) There were no reports of addiction in situations which, acentury or so later, generated numerous such references. For theCivil War, one virtually never reads of a soldier sufferingwithdrawal pains, or dying of an OD; or a physician in the fieldbesieged for an opiate for feeding a habit (as distinct fromeasing pain or controlling diarrhea). In Wait Whitman'sdescription of the 80,000 to 100,000 sick and wounded he saw in600 hospital visits during three years of the Civil War, he notesthat many patients craved tobacco, sweets, or alcohol, yet henever once mentions opium. (Whitman, 1895) The sickness formsubmitted by physicians to the Surgeon General from mid- 1 862 tothe end of the war listed 152 categories of disease, including"serpent bite," "apoplexy,""insanity," "night blindness,""poisoning," "inebriation," "deliriumtremens" and "chronic alcoholism", but notaddiction or opiate deprivation. (US Surgeon General, Pt. 1, V.1). In the Surgeon General's history of the Civil War,"nostalgia ... .army itch .... poisoning .... alcoholism.... and venereal disease," but not opiate use, are singledout for special comment. Under "nostalgia" the problemof boredom is given prominence and smoking tobacco, drinkingalcohol, and gambling are singled out for their "sedativeinfluence," to "pass the dull hours" in lieu ofsatisfying the craving for excitement. (US Surgeon General, 1888:886) In sum, there is no hard evidence of addicts during theCivil War, and it is hard to believe it would have been missedhad addiction been significant. C. Not One Report of Addiction Immediately After The CivilWar If addiction among Civil War veterans was significant, itshould have been most noticed in the immediate post-War years.There were 63,000 soldiers whose chronic diarrhea carried onafter the war, (Adams, 1889) and over 20,000 survivors ofamputations reported by Union doctors. (US Surgeon General, 1883)When the Civil War ended, and veterans filled the prisons, NewYork State prison keepers at Auburn and Sing-Sing told ofcontraband smuggled into prisons, such as "whiskey,tobacco... yellow covered literature.... sugar, tea, coffee,butter, pies, cakes, liquor, looking glasses, combs, brushes,etc.", yet opiates were not mentioned. (North AmericanReview, 1867:572-74) In the Mississippi State Hospital, whoseadmission records of the mentally ill go back to 1855, the firstnarcotism case was recorded in 1884. (Jaquith, 1965) The editionof the United States Dispensatory, (the enormous physician's deskreference of the time), which appeared just after the Civil Wardevotes 27 pages to "opium" without noting the CivilWar. (Wood and Bache, 1868) Surely a significant minority ofthose 63,000 diarrhetics and 30,000 amputees were advised to takeopiates by their physicians, and willingly took what at the timewas the best relief of their problems. Yet only two references toveterans who began using opiates during the Civil War werepublished before 1880. (Day, 1868; and Oliver, 1872) (A thirdpre-1880 case-history of an addicted veteran, cited by some asdemonstrating Soldier's Disease, started using opiates after thewar). (Anon, 1876) D. The Logic For Claiming The Existence of ManyCivil War Addicts How, then, could recent experts agree on massive addictionduring the Civil War? Almost certainly it has to do with trust inthe statements of Terry and Pellens without bothering to checkthe original sources. The one exception -- the one historian whohas checked those sources and maintains the validity of addictionduring the Civil War -- is Courtwright, who believes thataddiction must exist ... even though it is not in evidence. Formorphine, Courtwright cites S. Weir Mitchell's claim that 40,000morphine injections were given at one army hospital in one year.This number is far beyond any other -- in fact, except for itthere would be no consideration of the widespread use ofmorphine other than what was rubbed and dusted into wounds.Courtwright considers the claim "puzzling, to say theleast," (and there are reasons for doubting Weir,personally),17 but he concludes if that number "is even halfcorrect, it seems impossible that a substantial portion of thepatients ... did not end the war as addicts.""Impossible" as it seems, not a single addict wasreported during the Civil War. Courtwright also notes "the frequency and casualness withwhich opiates were administered" and states that "vastquantities of opium preparations other than morphine weredispensed under circumstances (such as to those with chronicdiarrhea, dysentery or malaria) which could very easily lead toaddiction." The only trouble is "very easily" didnot occur. Disregarding the lack of documentation on a single addictduring the Civil War, Courtwright contends "that the warcontributed to the spread of addiction," and "offerthe fighting, sick and wounded veterans greatly expandedthe pool for iatrogenic addiction." (Courtwright,1982:55-56, emphasis added) Since opiates were widelyadministered in the early as well as last years of the Civil War,it is hard to imagine why addiction would only developafter the war. Nonetheless, accepting Courtwright's contentionfor the moment, the test of the validity of Soldier's Diseasethus depends on analysis of post-war addiction among veterans. 4. Reports of Addicted Veterans Through the 19thCentury Were it not for Horatio Day's The Opium Habit,published in 1868, the modern day notion of Soldier's Diseasemight never have developed. The latter of these two sentences byDay (quoted by Terry and Pellens) is, by far, the most widelycited writing on Soldier's Disease: The events of the last few years [Civil War] haveunquestionably added greatly to their [confirmed opium eaters']number. Maimed and shattered survivors from a hundredbattlefields, diseased and disabled soldiers released fromhostile prisons, anguished and hopeless wives and mothers made soby the slaughter of those who were dearest to them, have found,many of them, temporary relief from their sufferings in Opium. (Day, 1868:1) This remark, quoted by several modern writers,18 is the onlyreference to the Civil War in Day's 335 page tome. Day recountsmany types of persons who were addicts, but not one specific caseof a soldier or veteran.19 in context, Day's two-sentenceallusion to the Civil War suggests an extremely minor problemrecounted by an encyclopedic problem-seeker. A. Courtwright's Evidence Is Skimpy Courtwright recognizes that "army disease" was notan "epidemic," but still concludes: "It ispossible to document numerous references to addicted veteransboth as a class and as individuals." (Courtwright, 1978:1 11) Using the same evidence, and more, I reach oppositeconclusions. Why? In Dark Paradise: Opiate Addiction In America Before 1940,Courtwright cites 1 18 books and articles published between theCivil War and the end of the century (Courtwright, 1982) yet inhis studies of Soldier's Disease he lists nine references toaddicted veterans, and only five appeared in the 19th Century2Oand were to veterans who had used opiates during the Civil War.Adding two more which I uncovered (Earle, 1880; Nolan, 188 1),and including two other brief and vague references (Crothers,1892 and 1893), this averages one reference every 4 years between18651899. The overwhelming majority of articles about opiate usewritten in the fifteen years following Appomatox, includingseveral by writers who presented lists of the types of people whowere addicts, do not single out the Civil War,21 nor can I findsuch a reference in newspapers of the time.22 None of these nine sources demonstrates that opiate addictionby Civil War veterans was of social significance. In addition tothose previously quoted (Day and Nolan, who writes of the alibiused by a deserter), there were three references by the mostprolific writers of the period, Mattison and Crothers (twice).23Mattison's sole mention appears at the end of his career, 3 yearsafter the War ended. (Mattison, 1898) Crothers wroteprolifically. If a "drug problem" could be unearthed,trust Crothers to lead the digging party.24 In the context of hisencyclopedic writings, Crothers' few mentions of the Civil Warsuggests its role in subsequent addiction was miniscule.(Crothers, 1892 and 1893) Further, when World War I broke out inEurope, Crothers urged combat physicians_to use opiatesliberally, and fears of a subsequent addiction problem weregroundless. (Crothers, 1916) Two other references are of toneaddicts, one -- of a long-time successful minister --demonstrating the difficulty of detecting addiction at the time.(Russell, 1887; and Keeley, 198 1) B. "Only Your Pharmacist Knows For Sure" The two other references suggest that for a while, in someplaces, there were some addicted veterans ... reported by thosewho would notice addicts even if the general public did notrecognize them -- i.e. the apothecaries who sold opiates. Terryand Pellens, reviewing an 1 878 study , noted that evenphysicians did not recognize the extent of addiction: Druggists were in a much better position to know the truth.... when counter sales were legal, and as a matter of commonpractice, physicians were called upon only by those opiate usersseeking (cure). (Terry and Pellens, 15) A Massachusetts study of 1871 "consulted" 20-30druggists and got mailed responses from 125 physicians. 40 ofthese physicians did not know of a single case of "opiumeating," and of 46 who commented on whether "theinjurious use of opium has increased of late years," 6 1 %answered it had not and another 13% answered it was diminishing.Only one physician, but at least two druggists, stated thatopiate use begun during the late war was an important cause foraddiction. (Oliver, 1872) Without denying the significance ofthis report, these mentions of addicted veterans had noramifications in the drug literature at the time. It was a statepublication with very limited circulation, the few summaries orreviews of the report in the medical literature at the time didnot mention the Civil War,25 and save for Terry and Pellens'lengthy excerpt from it in 1928 we might never have known thatsome pharmacists, at least, recognized that addicted veterans, asa class, were among the ranks of addicts.26 In Chicago in 1880, 50 pharmacists were surveyed about thecause of addiction of their regular opiate using customers. Themost mentioned were " rheumatism and neuralgia" (38each); "some" respondents, (but less than four),believed addiction was caused by sickness and pain and/or the"loss of property and position in society" due to therecent war. (Earle, 1880) (On another government survey, ofdoctors in Michigan in 1878, the Civil War was not mentioned).(Marshall, 1966) In toto, these surveys indicate that there was a small,temporary phenomenon of addicted veterans, which was not a socialproblem in the sense that anyone but a few pharmacists recognizedit in the quarter century after the Civil War. C. "Any" Vs. "Many" No one doubts that all the opiates used to alleviate the painfrom all the chronic diseases and continuous pain resulting fromthe Civil War resulted in some soldiers using and becomingaddicted to opiates. The issue, however, is not whether therewere any addicted veterans but if there were many.Courtwright's contention that "a substantial numberof them (veterans) eventually became addicted to opium ormorphine," and that "two events, the Civil War and thespread of hypodermic medication, triggered a massive increasein iatrogenic opium and especially morphine addiction,"(emphasis not in the original). (Courtwright, 1982) isunwarranted. In arguing that the importance of Soldier's Disease should notbe discounted, Courtwright stresses the importance on later 19thCentury addiction of the wrenching impact that War had on societyas a whole, such as the loss of loved ones, property, fortunesand social position. By such reasoning, any social event orcondition which occurs in reasonable proximity before an increasein drug use can be considered a "cause." Ergo, the ironhorse can be blamed for late 19th century addiction, or moviesand television for the increased drug problems of the last fewdecades. (In the Massachusetts study noted above, morepharmacists reported state restrictions on the use of alcohol a"cause" of recent opiate use than reported the CivilWar). However, Soldier's Disease is cited in the drug literaturethe past few decades to imply something quite specific -- namely,the presence of opiates, outside of strict and knowledgeablemedical control, ipso facto causes massive publicly notedaddiction, Nothing less. 5. Soldier's Disease and Drug Policy In sum, Soldier's Disease proves to be another myth. Inreality, the widespread use of opiates during the Civil Wargenerated so infinitesimal a problem that only two or threeapothecaries, and two or three of the most encyclopedic drugexperts, even speculated on the possibility of addicted soldiersfrom that War for almost half a century. Soldier's Disease didnot become the Conventional Wisdom until almost a century afterthat war. Implicit in the concept of Soldier's Disease are four aspectsof addiction which, together, are a paradigm used to justifycurrent opiate laws -- easy access leads to widespread use,addiction is easy to acquire, hard to kick, and its consequencesare powerful and publicly obvious. In the popular contemporaryidiom, the paradigm consists of "it's so good, don't eventry it once"; "once an addict, always an addict";and in the image of the "junkie". (Belief in thisparadigm, in the early 1970's, led many experts, and particularlycritics of U.S. military policy, to sound the tocsin about opiateuse by GIs for inevitably this would lead to a huge problem ofaddicted veterans ... which it didn't)27 Since each aspect of theparadigm is contradicted by the historical evidence, Soldier'sDisease is a mythic reconstruction of the past to make itcoincide with contemporary assumptions. How significant is the paradigm in justifying opiate laws?Each year over the past two decades the nation has spent billionsin drug law enforcement, resulting in an annual average of over ahalf million drug arrests, and has spent billions for tryingthose arrestees and incarcerating scores of thousands of them.Until the mid-1980's, when cocaine replaced opiates as the mostoften used and most frightening "hard drug," thedangers of opiate addiction formed the core of the nation'sperceived drug problem and most of the prisoners serving drugsentences had been convicted on opiate charges. Additionally,drugs are a major economic alternative for young poor people, aswell as a major source of police corruption. None of this --neither the public money, arrests, incarcerations, thecompetitive illegal economy, and police corruption -existedregarding drugs until there were prohibitory laws. How significant is Soldier's Disease for the paradigm whichshows opiate availability ipso facto causes a massive socialproblem? As noted in Section I of this paper, there is no otherpre-Harrison Act example of a currently believable socialproblem. Though an ancient and seemingly minor issue, addictionamong Civil War veterans functions as a lynchpin or cornerstone.Strip away Soldier's Disease, and the only problem suggested bythe paradigm are the medical consequences of addiction, whichoccurs in a large percentage of opiate users. The facts aboutaddiction among the Civil War's soldiers and veterans indicatesthat widespread addiction, too, is a natural result of freeaccess to drugs. The facts about Civil War drug use indicate open availabilityand no recognizable negative consequences; the facts, the pastfew generations, show extremely limited access to opiates and animmense "drug problem." It is in the illegal contextthat the modern "opiate problem" arises, rather than ina legal context such as the Civil War. The chemistry lesson ofthe Civil War is that opiates per se do not cause the problem,the context does. FOOTNOTES 1 The imagery of the "leather thong around hisneck and a leather bag" is, to my knowledge, unique toStarkey. 2 Occasionally a moralistic author of the late 19th Centurycited a social problem with opiates which no-one else evernoticed, but two problems were repeated enough to warrantcomment. T.D. Crothers in several articles claimed that morphine,in particular, led to crime. According to one scholar who studiedthe period, "No other writer ... asserts the strength andubiquity of this association .... (and) it is extremely difficultto accept the validity of his position." (Swatos, 1972),though at least one other expert claimed, as an alibi in a trialfor a property crime, (Kane, 1882b), that the cost of opiatesforced some persons with huge habits to steal. Still, before thelaws all but the extremely poor could easily afford any sizehabit. Crothers' unique assertions about opiate-caused crime cannot justify a policy which generates the extraordinarydrug-related crime of today. There were also occasional reports that addicts were lethargicand neglectful of personal hygiene and business. However, thetypes of people on 19th Century lists of addicts, were typicallyin demanding jobs. That, said the experts at the time, was whythey sought the "stimulating" effects of opiates. Themany reports of people not knowing their spouses were long termaddicts suggests that the lethargy and inattentiveness tobusiness was hardly blatant. Aside from the racist comments aboutopiate use in Chinatowns, the allegation that opiates effectedthe performance of a class of persons, such as impeding theperformance of soldiers (S.F. Call, 19 1 Ob), was rare. 3 Terry and Pellens, in their encyclopedic classic The OpiumProblem, also report import statistics, as does Kane, the authorof the longest scholarly work in the early 1880's. (Terry andPellens, 1928:50-5 1; and Kane, 1880). 4 "It has been reported that for many years husbands andwives, to say nothing of other members of a family, have lived incomplete ignorance of the existence of this condition in one orthe other." (Terry and Pellens: 2) 5 The S.F. Call index is on index cards at theUniversity of California, Berkeley library. 6 The full headline of this story is: Says Opium Aids Music Composers Jean Laporte Declares Many Owe Much of TheirFame to Smoking The Drug Colleagues Support Him Two Well Known Musicians Say a Few Pipes a Day Are No WorseThan Cigarettes - Doctors Contradict Them (N.Y. Times, 1912) 7 The obvious racism manifest in such headlines as"Crafty Chinese Are Doubly Accused" (S.F. Call, 1910a),becomes a "social problem" when white women areinvolved, as suggested by the following headline: 200 Seized In 62 Drug Dens Police and Detectives Sweep Chinatown, Battering In Doors ofOpium Places Two White Women Are Captured In Dragnet. (S.F. Call, 191lb) The S.F. Call on occasion linked opiate use to crime orlunacy, but each time the details indicated the problem was aresult of the law. (S.F. Call, 1910c and d, and 1911a) New YorkCity's Commissioner of Corrections said that if addicts aredeprived of opiates on arrest, "normal persons ... veryfrequently go insane." (N.Y. Times, 1914) 9 Estimates of the number of opiate addicts and "cocainefiends" circa 1915 varied enormously. Marks' estimated4,000,000; a U.S. Public Health Service expert estimated aminimum of 70,000 and, elsewhere, " I 18,000.... (and)granting (a) somewhat improbable assertion ... a maximum not morethan 187,000 users of opium," (Marks, 1915; Wilbert, 1914and 1915). 10 Had The Opium Problem gained earlier recognition asa classic, Soldier's Disease might have been the conventionalwisdom of drug experts before the late 1950's. The original 1928printing of 400 copies not sold out for decades. A 1 970 reprintsold much better. 11 Soldier's Disease citations attributable to specificauthors, starting with 1973, are: Abel, 1982; Ashley, 1978; Bean,1974; Bedworth and D'Elia, 1973; Bellis, 198 1; Blaine, Bozzettiand Ohlson, 1973; Brown, 1973; Califano, 1982; Conrad andSchneider, 1980; Coombs et. al., 1976; Courtwright, 1978 and1982; M. Cox, 1984; Cuskey, Johannes and Premkunar, 1973;Dershowitz, 1973; Ferguson, 1975; Finlator, 1973; Fuqua, 1978;Geis, 1973; Goode, 1984; Hofmann and Hofmann, 1975; Jacobs andFehr, 1987; H. Jones and Jones, 1977; Kaplan, 1983; King, 1974;Kittrie, 1974; Levine, 1973; Milby, 1981; Morrell, 1973; Muuss,1974; Pike and Goldstein, 1973; Rice, 1980; Roffman, 1973 and1976; Rublowsky, 1974; Rydell, 1980; Saper, 1974; Schwartz, 1980;Seymour and Smith, 1987; Shroeder, 1980; Smith and Seymour, 1986;Spain, 1975; Stephens and Slatin, 1974; Stimmel, 1975; Summerset. al., 1975; Trebach, 1982; Weinswig, 1973; Young et. al.,1977; and Zinberg, 1984. 12 Soldier's Disease was cited in publications by severalinfluential government agencies and prestigious commissionscreated to address the drug issue. Starting with 1973, referencesto Soldier's Disease can be found in: Los Angeles Sheriff'sDepartment, 1974; National Commission on Marihuana, 1973;Organized Crime Task Force, 1984; President's Commission onOrganized Crime, 1986; Strategy Council, 1975; U.S. AttorneyGeneral, 1984: and U.S. Department of H.E.W., 1975. 13 Despite my many criticisms, I respect Courtwright'sjudiciousness and his willingness to grapple with the issue(which no other expert who claims Soldier's Disease has done), Herecognizes and responds to contrary evidence, and criticizessimplistic recitations of Soldier's Disease. 14 Of the authors the past 30 years who reportwidespread addiction by Civil War veterans, over a third mentionSoldier's Disease, a third denote Army Disease, an occasionalauthor labels it Soldier's Illness or Soldier's Sickness, and theothers describe the phenomenon without noting a sobriquet. 15 The officer confessed at his trial that he was"suffering for want of the drug (opium) ... (and) so greatwas the craving that he temporarily deserted his post to ...obtain it, though knowing that his life would thereby beforfeited." (Nolan, 188 1). This smacks of tales from the1930's of murderers caught red-handed who, desperate to avoid theelectric chair, claimed marijuana "caused" their crime. 16 The failure to note opiate addiction as a significantproblem was not due to the absence of the concept of addictionduring and just after the Civil War, The commissioners of thePrison Association of New York in 1866 reported that men "ofa low order of morals ... (were) addicted to habits of profanityand intemperance." (North American Review, 1867:570) 17 An article on opiates by Mitchell -- on the effects ofopiates on birds -confirms him as an eccentric scientist. (BostonMSJ, 1870) Weir found that morphia did not induce steep"beyond a slight tendency to quietude, which we can never besure is not due to the habit of the wounded or sick pigeon ofseeking a remote corner and remaining at rest," but"used hypodermically in excessive amounts ... act asexcitants .... (and) in the duck they approach nearest to thetypical strychnic spasm." Weir also found "greatdifficulty with which pigeons, especially old birds, are poisonedby opiates." In All or part of Day's two sentences on the Civil War arequoted by five 20th Century writers, (Brecher et. al., 1972;Courtwright, 1978; Cuskey, Premkunar and Sigel, 1972; Quinones, 1975; and Terry andPellens, 1928), and closely paraphrased without attribution bysome others. 19 Calkins, Day's contemporary, refers to over 200 cases in Opiumand the Opium Appetite. but not one soldier who began opiateuse between 1861-65. 20 Courtwright and Terry and Pellens cite addicted Civil Warveterans who came to public attention in the 20th Century asevidence of that war's impact on subsequent addiction. Besideslending credence to the phenomenon they also demonstrate thatsuch addiction was benign and unnoticed. The octogenarians citedin 1928 by Terry and Pellens ("today in more than one oldsoldiers' home are cases of chronic opium addiction which datefrom this (Civil War) period") (Terry and Pellens, 69), orthe 82 year old Confederate veteran who "had been shot inthe head during the Civil War" and "had been addicted55 years" under medical supervision since then, (Waldorf,1973), reveal that the addiction of veterans was not a socialproblem, and not even a medical problem untilprohibition of opiates. 21 Apart from Courtwright's citations, of the 29 books orlargest articles about opiates, published between 1865-1879,which I have located, there is not an original reference tosoldiers addicted during the Civil War. (Brown, 1972: Calkins,1867 and 1871; Chaille, 1876; M.D., 1878; Frost, 1870; Gibbons,1870: Gould, 1878; Harrington, 1878; Ingals, 1877 and 1878;Layard, 1874 and 1878; Lippincott's, 1868; Ludlow, 1867;Mattison, 1876 a and b, and 1878 a and b; McFarland, 1877;National Quarterly Review, 1870; Parrish, 1869 and 1873; PopularScience, 1875; The Probe, 1869 a and b: Richet, 1878; R.S., 1869;and Warren, 1867). Several times as many articles were shorterpieces, and likewise made no mention of addiction linkedto the Civil War. 22 Four lengthy newspaper articles during the 1870's, aboutnon-Chinese opiate use, do not mention soldiers or veterans ofthe Civil War. (New York Daily Herald, 1877 and 1878; and NewYork Times, 1877 and 1878). 23 Two of the four 20th Century sources cited by Courtwrightwere also works by Crothers. (Crothers, 1900 and 1902). 24 Headings of 7 of the 18 chapters in Crothers' book Morphinismand Narcomanias From Other Drugs are "Chloralism ....Chioroformism .... Coffee Addiction .... Tea Inebriety ....Tobacco Inebriety .... Ether Inebriety .... (and) Addictions FromOther Drugs," these "others" including arsenic,ginger, cologne and lavender. (Crothers, 198 lb) 25 Three reviews of the 1872 Massachusetts study appeared inmedical journals at the time. None mentioned the Civil War (Amer.J of Medical Sciences, 1872; and Lancet, 1873), and one evenconsidered the reports of opiate habituation "exaggerated.... a piece of scandal," witness that in its subsequentannual report the Massachusetts Board of Health made "noallusion whatsoever to the subject (of opiates)" (MedicalTimes, 1873). 26 Morgan provides a lengthier excerpt of the 1872Massachusetts study than did Terry and Pellens, but omits thephysician's, and two pharmacists', comments. The single sentencerelevant to the Civil War -- "The taste for opium eatingamong soldiers retired from the army is alluded to by a few ofour correspondents" -- follows a listing of other causes ofaddiction, (injudicious prescribing, depressed nervous systems,overwork with deficient nutrition, a vicious mode of life, andintemperance). 27 In several fundamental respects, the opiate use of soldiersand veterans of the Vietnam War is not analogous to the Civil Warsituation, though the fears about what widespread opiate useamong GIs would engender once they were mustered out exactlyparallels the fears implicit in Soldier's Disease. The soldierswho used opiates in the Civil War did so to alleviate the painfrom wounds, and to help cure "the fluxes," but usingsuch drugs "to get high" or to reduce stress were theessential reasons for opiate use by Vietnam era GIs. In so far asa few veterans continued regularly using opiates in the 1970'sand 1980's, they contributed to a social problem because, in thecontext of illegality, any regular opiate use tends to be afinancial burden and criminal problem. The counterparts of theseGIs, a century earlier, went unnoticed. Further, the fact that somany GIs abandoned opiate use once out of Vietnam can be arguedas a demonstration of the effects of the U.S. approach of massivetreatment opportunities and massive enforcement. The handful ofaddicted veterans after the Civil War would suggest thatsuppression is not the root cause of why regular opiate usersquit before becoming addicted. REFERENCES Abel, Ernest 1982 Marijuana: The First Twelve Thousand Years, N.Y.,McGrawHill. (P. 189) Adams, George Worthington 1952 Doctors in Blue, N.Y., Henry Schuman. (Especially Pp.50-5 1, 116-19 and 228-29) Adams, J.F.A., 1889 "Substitutes For Opium In Chronic Diseases,"Boston Medical and Surgical Reporter, 21:351-56. Aldrich, Michael 1979 The Dope Chronicles - 1850-1950, ed. by Gary Silver withtext by Michael Aldrich, San Francisco. Harper and Row. (P, 9) American journal of the Medical Sciences 1872 "Report of the State Board of Health ofMassachusetts," 64:156-57. Anon 1876 Opium Eating, An Autobiographical Sketch By An Habituate, Philadelphia, Claxton, Remsen, and Haffelfinger. Ashley, Richard 1972 Heroin, N.Y., St. Martin's Press. (P. 5) 1978 "Opiates," in Andrew Kowl (ed.), High TimesEncyclopedia of Recreational Drugs, N.Y., Stonehill PublishingCo. (P. 224) Ball, John 1970 Foreward to the Reprint Edition of Terry and Pellens, TheOpium Problem, Montclair, New Jersey, Patterson Smith. (P. v) Ball, John and Carl Chambers, eds. 1970 The Epidemiology of Opiate Addiction in the UnitedStates, Springfield, Ill., Charles C. Thomas, Publisher. (Pp.41-43) Barnes, Harry Elmer 1939 Society In Transition, NY, Prentice-Hall. (P. 805) Bean, Philip 1974 The Social Control of Drugs, N.Y., John Wiley & Sons.(P. 18) Bedworth, Albert, and Joseph D'Elia 1973 Basics of Drug Education, N.Y., Baywood Publishing Co.(P. 147) Bellis, David 1981 Heroin and Politicians, Westport, Conn., Greenwood Press.(P. 5) Billings, John 1905 "Medical Reminiscences of the Civil War,"Transactions of the College of Physicians (Philadelphia),27:115-21. Bishop, Ernest S. 1919 "Legitimate Use of Narcotics In War Time,"American journal of Public Health, 9:321-29. 1920 The Narcotic Drug Problem, N.Y., Macmillan. (Pp. 24-5) Blaine, Jack, Louis Bozzetti and Kiell Ohlson 1973 "The Narcotic Analgesics: The Opiates," P. 60in Drug Use In America - Problem In Perspective, Technical Papersof the Second Report of the National Commission On Marijuana andDrug Abuse, Appendix Vol. 1, Patterns and Consequences of DrugUse, Washington D.C., U.S. Government Printing Office. Boston Medical and Surgical journal 1870 "Effect of Opium and Its Derivative Alkaloids,"V. n.s. 5:99-1 00. Brecher, Edward and Editors of Consumer Reports 1972 Licit and Illicit Drugs, Boston, Little Brown. (Pp. 3 andI 1) Brooks, Stewart 1966 Civil War Medicine, Springfield, Illinois, Charles C.Thomas Publisher. (Especially Pp. 65, 88, 117 and 126-27) Brown, Bertram 1973 "The Treatment and Rehabilitation of NarcoticAddicts In The United States", Pp. 127-28 in Drug Use InAmerica - Problem In Perspective, Technical Papers of the SecondReport of the National Commission On Marijuana and Drug Abuse,Appendix Vol. IV, Treatment and Rehabilitation, Pt. 2 "TheTreatment of Drug Dependence," Washington D.C., U.S.Government Printing Off ice. Brown, H. James [1872] An Opium Cure Based Upon Science, Skill and MaturedExperi- 1972 ence, in Gerald Grob (ed.) American Perspectives of DrugAddiction, Five Studies, 1872-1912, N.Y., Arno Press. Calkins, Alonzo 1867 "Opium and Its Victims," Galaxy, 4:25-36. 1871 Opium and The Opium Appetite, Philadelphia, J.B.Lippincott. Chaille, Stanford 1876 "The Opium Habit, and 'Opium-Mania Cures'," NewOrleans Medical and Surgical journal, NS 3:767-75. Clausen, John 1961 "Drug Addiction, P. 24 in Robert Merton and R.Nisbet (eds.), Contemporary Social Problems, N.Y., Harcourt Brace Jovanovich Inc. (Reprinted in Paul Rock (ed.), Drugs and Politics, New Brunswick, New Jersey, Transaction Books). Conrad, Peter and Joseph Schneider 1980 Deviance and Medicalization: From Badness To Sickness,St. Louis, C.V. Mosby Co. (P. II 4) Coombs, Robert, Lincoln Fry, and Patricia Lewis 1976 Socialization In Drug Abuse, Cambridge, Massachusetts,Schenckman Publishing Co. (P. 27) Courtwright, David 1978 "Opiate Addiction As A Consequence of The CivilWar," Civil War History, 24: 1 0 1 -1 1. 1982 Dark Paradise: Opiate Addiction in America Before 1940,Cambridge, Massachusetts, Harvard University Press. 1983 "The Hidden Epidemic: Cocaine Use In The South,1880-1920," journal of Southern History, 49:57-72. Cox, Meg 1984 "The Drug Trade: Abuse of Narcotics In U.S. Is by NoMeans A Recent Phenomenon," Wall Street Journal, December 3,1984. (P. 20) Crothers, T. D. 1892 "Some New Studies of the Opium Disease,"journal of the American Medical Association, 18:227-33, [1893] The Disease of Inebriety From Alcohol, Opium and Other 1981a Narcotic Drugs, The American Association for the Studyand Cure of Inebriety, T.C. Crothers (ed.), New York, Arno Press.(P. 323) 1899 "Criminal Morphomania," journal of the AmericanMedical Association, 33:388-91. 1900 "New Sources of Danger In The Use of Opium,"journal of the American Medical Association, 35:338-42. [1902] Morphinism and Narcomanias From Other Drugs, New York, 1981b Arno Press. 1916 "Hypnotics in the Treatment of Inebriety,"American journal of Clinical Medicine, 23:218-21. Cuskey, Walter, Johannes Ipsen and T. Premkunar 1973 "An Inquiry Into The Nature of Changes In BehaviorAmong Drug Users In Treatment," P. 199 in Drug Use InAmerica Problem In Perspective, Technical Papers of the SecondReport of the National Commission On Marijuana and Drug Abuse,Appendix Vol. IV, Treatment and Rehabilitation, Pt. 2 "TheTreatment of Drug Dependence," Washington D.C., U.S.Government Printing Office, D., M. 1878 The Personal Experiences of An Ex-Opium Habitue,"Medical Record, 13:399-400. Dai, Bingham [1937] Opium Addiction In Chicago, Montclair, New Jersey,Patterson 1970 Smith. (P. 35) Day, Horace 1868 The Opium Habit, With Suggestions As To The Remedy, N.Y.,Harper Brothers. Dershowitz, Alan 1973 "Constitutional Dimensions of CivilCommitment," P, 41 1 in Drug Use In America - Problem InPerspective, Technical Papers of the Second Report of theNational Commission On Marijuana and Drug Abuse, Appendix Vol.IV, Treatment and Rehabilitation, Pt. 3 "Drug Dependence andthe Legal System," Washington D.C., U.S. Government PrintingOffice. Duncan, Louis C. [1912] The Medical Department of the United States Army In The 1985 Civil War, Gaithersberg, Maryland, Butternut Press. Earle, Charles Warrington 1880 "The Opium Habit" Chicago Medical Review,2:442-46. (Reprinted in H. Wayne Morgan (ed.), Yesterday'sAddicts American Society and Drug Abuse, 1865-1920, Norman,Oklahoma, 1974). Federal Bureau of Investigation 1980-87 Crime In America - Uniform Crime Reports, annual, Washington D.C., GPO. Fell, Robert 1924 "The Social Aspects of Morphine Addiction,"Institutional Quarterly, (Illinois Department of Public Welfare),15:103-08. Ferguson, Robert 1975 Drug Abuse Control, Boston, Holbrook Press. (Pp.40-1) Finlator, John 1973 The Drugged Nation - A Narc's Story, N.Y., Simon andSchuster. (P. 9) Frost, C.P. 1870 "Opium: Its Uses and Abuses," Transactions ofthe Vermont Medical Society, 1869-70, 131-47. Fuqua, Paul 1978 Drug Abuse: Investigation and Control, N.Y., GreggDivision/ McGraw-Hill. (Pp. 26-7) Geis, Gilbert 1973 Not The Law's Business? .... Homosexuality, Abortion,Prostitution, Narcotics, and Gambling, Rockville, MD, N.I.M.H.Center for Studies of Crime and Delinquency. (P, 109) Gibbons, H. 1870 "Letheomania: the Result of the Hypodermic Injectionof Morphia," Pacific Medical and Surgical journal, N.S.3:481-95. Goode, Erich 1984 Drugs In American Society, 2nd Edit,, N.Y., AlfredKnopf.(P.217) Gould, S.W. 1878 "The Opium Habit," Medical and SurgicalReporter, 38:496-97. Harrington, H.L. 1878 "Hypodermic Use of Morphia," Chicago Medicaljournal and Examiner, 37:73-5. Health Policy Advisory Center 1970 "Drug Law History: Politics and Prohibition,"Health/PAC Bulletin, (No Volume No.):2-4. Hofmann, Frederick and Adele Hofmann 1975 A Handbook on Drug and Alcohol Abuse - The BiomedicalAspects, N.Y., Oxford University Press. (P. 37) Illinois Medical journal 1921 "Drug Addiction From The Lay Point of View,"Illinois Medical journal, 39:7 1. Ingals, Fletcher 1877 "Danger From Hypodermic Injections," ChicagoMedical journal and Examiner, 35:184-86. 1878 "Danger From The Hypodermic Injection ofMorphine," Chicago Medical journal and Examiner, 36:491-46. Isbell, Harris 1960 "Clinical Research On Addiction In The UnitedStates," P. II 4 in Robert Livingston (ed.), Narcotic DrugAddiction Problems, Proceedings of Symposium on the History ofNarcotic Drug Addiction, 1958, Public Health Service PublicationNo. 1050, Washington D.C., U.S. Government Printing Office. 1963 "Historical Development of Attitudes Toward OpiateAddiction in The United States," Pp. 154-69 in SeymourFarber and Roger Wilson (eds.), Conflict and Creativity, (Part IIof Control of the Mind), N.Y., McGraw-Hill. Jacobs, Michael and Kevin Fehr 1987 Drugs and Drug Abuse: A Reference Text, 2nd Edition,Toronto, Addiction Research Foundation. (P. 1 1 2) (Also see lstEdition, 1983, P. 371). Jaquith, W.L. 1965 "The Treatment of Narcotism In Mississippi,"journal of the Mississippi State Medical Association, 6:15-7. Jones, Hardin and Jones, Helen 1977 Sensual Drugs - Deprivation and Rehabilitation of theMind, Cambridge and N.Y., Cambridge University Press. (P. 189) Kane, H.H. 1882a Opium-Smoking In America and China, N.Y., Putnam's Sons. 1882b "Some Medico-Legal Aspects of Morphia-Taking,"Alienist and Neurologist 3:419-433. Kaplan, John 1983 The Hardest Drug - Heroin and Public Policy, Chicago,University of Chicago Press. (P. 6 1) Keeley, Leslie 1881 The Morphine Eater: or From Bondage to Freedom, Dwight,Illinois, C. L. Palmer Co. Kenny, Maxine 1972 "Drug Law History - Politics and Prohibitions,"Pp. I I 0 - I I in Frank Browning and the Editors of Ramparts(eds.), Smack!, N.Y., Harrow Books (Harper Row). King, Rufus 1974 'The American System': Legal Sanctions to Repress DrugAbuse," P. 18 in James Inciardi and Carl Chambers (eds.)Drugs and the Criminal justice System, Beverly Hills, CA, SagePublications, Kittrie, Nicholas [19711 The Right To Be Different - Deviance and EnforcedTherapy. 1974 Penguin Books. (P. 217) Kolb, Lawrence, 1960 "Factors That Have Influenced the Management andTreatment of Drug Addicts," in Robert Livingston, (ed.),Narcotic Addiction Problems, Bethesda, MD, U.S. Department ofHealth, Education and Welfare, Public Health Service. 1962 Drug Addiction - A Medical Problem, Springfield, Ill.,Charles C. Thomas Publisher. (P. 145) Kramer, John 1971 "Introduction to the Problem of Heroin Addiction inAmerica," journal of Psychedelic Drugs, 4:15-2 1. 1972 "A Brief History of Heroin Addiction inAmerica," in David Smith and George Gay (eds.), "It'sSo Good, Don't Even Try It Once," Englewood Cliffs, NewJersey, Prentice-Haft. (P. 35) Layard, James Coulter 1874 "Morphine," Atlantic Monthly, 33:697-712. 1878 "Curing The Opium Habit - The Treatment In TheBinghampton Asylum," N.Y. Times, September 27. (Letter ToThe Editor) Levine, Samuel 1973 Narcotics and Drug Abuse, Cincinatti, W.H. Anderson Co.(P. 69) Lindesmith, Alfred 1947 Opiate Addiction, Bloomington, Indiana, Principia Press.(P. 196) (Also see 1968 revision, Addiction and Opiates, Chicago,Aldine. (P. 225) Lingeman, Richard R. 1969 Drugs From A to Z: A Dictionary, N.Y., McGraw-Hill. (P. I1) Lippincott's Magazine 1868 "Opium Eating," (unsigned), Lippincott'sMagazine, 1:404-09. Literary Digest 1919 "The Drug Disease," Literary Digest, 61:29-30. Los Angeles County Sheriff's Department 1974 Narcotics and Dangerous Drugs. (Section 2, P. 12) Ludlow, Fitzhugh 1867 "What Shall They Do To be Saved?", Harpers,35:377-87. Marks, Jeannette 19 15 "The Curse of Narcotism In America - AReveille," American journal of Public Health, 5:314-22. Marshall, 0. [1878] "The Opium Habit In Michigan," in JohnO'Donnell and John Ball 1966 (eds.), Narcotic Addiction, Pp. 45-54. (Reprinted fromAnnual Michigan State Board of Health, 1878, 6:63-73). Mattison, J.B. 1876a "The Impending Danger," Medical Record, 11:69-7 1. 1876b "Opium Inebriety," Medical Record, 11:793-97. 1878a "Clinical Notes On Opium Habituation," MedicalRecord, 14:66-7. 1878b "The Responsibility of the Profession In TheProduction of Opium Inebriety," Medical and SurgicalReporter, 38:101-04. 1898 "Narcotic Inebriety In America," North AmericanReview, 166:254-55, Maurer, David and Victor Vogel [1954] Narcotics and Narcotic Addiction, Second Edition,Springfield, 1962 Illinois, Charles C. Thomas Publisher. (P. 6) McFarland, S.F. 1877 "Opium Inebriety and the Hypodermic Syringe,"Transactions of the Medical Society of the State of New York, (NoVolume): 289-93. Medical Times 1873 "Opium-Eating In Massachusetts," editorial,(Philadelphia) Medical Times, 3:520. Milby, Jesse 1981 Addictive Behavior and Its Treatment, New York, SpringerPublishing Co. (P. 242) Morgan, H. Wayne 1974 Yesterday's Addicts - American Society and Drug Abuse,1865-1920, Norman, Oklahoma, University of Oklahoma Press. Morrell, Michael 1973 " Maintenance Of Opiate Dependent Persons In TheUnited States: A Legal Medical History," Drug Use In AmericaProblem In Perspective, Technical Papers of the Second Report ofthe National Commission On Marijuana and Drug Abuse, AppendixVol. IV, Treatment and Rehabilitation, Pt. 3 "DrugDependence and the Legal System," Washington D.C., U.S.Government Printing Office. (P. 517) Musto, David 1973 TheAmerican Disease, New Haven, Yale University Press.(Pp. 1-2, 251) Muuss, Rolf E. 1974 "Legal and Historical Aspects of Drug Abuse InHistorical Perspective," Adolescence, 9:495-507. National Commission On Marihuana and Drug Abuse 1973 Drug Use In America: Problem In Perspective, WashingtonD.C., U.S. Government Printing Office. (P. 15) National Quarterly Review 1870 "Opium and the Opium Trade," National QuarterlyReview, 20:288-310. New York Daily Tribune 1877 "Opium and Its Consumers," July 10, 1877,(Unsigned). (P. 2) 1878 "Increase of a Dangerous Vice - The Opium HabitMorphia Syringes - Comments On Their Use By ProminentPhysicians," December 26, 1878, (Unsigned). (P. 8) New York Times 1877 "The Opium Habits Power - Its Extent In The UnitedStates," December 30, 1877, (unsigned). (P. 8) 1878 "The Opium Habits Power - Popular ErrorsCorrected," January 6, 1878, (unsigned). (P. 5) 1912 "Says Opium Aids Music Composers," January 21,1912, (unsigned). (Pt. 4, P. 12) 1914 "New Prison For Drug Users," June 30, 1914,(unsigned). (P. 7) 1917 "War Is Increasing The Drug-Consuming Habit,"April 29, 19 1 7 (unsigned). (Section 8, P. 5) Substantiallyreprinted in "The War and The Dope Habit," LiteraryDigest 54:1776-77. (June 9, 1917) Nolan, D.W. 1881 "The Opium Habit," Catholic World 33:827+. (P.83 1) North American Review 1867 "The Reformation of Prison Discipline," (NoAuthor), 105:55582. O'Donnell, John and John Ball 1966 Narcotic Addiction, N.Y., Harper & Row. (P. 1) Oliver, F.E. 1872 Massachusetts State Board of Health, Third Annual Report(For 1871), Boston, Wright and Potter, State Printers, (Pp.162-77). (Summarized in 1872, "Report of the State Board ofHealth of Massachusetts," American journal of the MedicalSciences, 64:156-57; reprinted, in part, Pp. 43-52 in H. WayneMorgan (ed.), Yesterday's Addicts; excerpted in Terry andPellens'The Opiate Problem, which is partly reprinted, Pp. 41-43in John Ball and Carl Chambers (eds.), The Epidemiology of OpiateAddiction in the United States. Organized Crime Drug Enforcement Task Force 1984 Annual Report of the Organized Crime Drug EnforcementTask Force Program - March 1984, Washington D.C. (P. 4) Parrish, Joseph 1869 "Opium Smoking," The Probe, 1:59-6 1. 1873 "Opium Intoxication," (Reported by T.D.Crothers), Medical and Surgical Reporter, 29:361-64. Pike, Andrew and Eric Goldstein 1973 " History of Drug Use In The Military," DrugUse In America Problem In Perspective, Technical Papers of theSecond Report of the National Commission On Marijuana and DrugAbuse, Appendix Vol. 1, Patterns and Consequences of Drug Use, Pt. 5"Drug Use In Selected Populations," Washington, D.C.,U.S. Government Printing Office. (P. II 15) Popular Science 1875 "The Use of Narcotics," (Reprinted FromChamber's journal, England), (No Author), 7:611-17. President's Commission on Organized Crime 1986 America's Habit: Drug Abuse, Drug Trafficking, andOrganized Crime, Washington D.C., U.S. Government PrintingOffice. (Pp. 190-91) Probe 1869a "Hypodermic Use of Opium," (No Author), TheProbe, 1:7-9. 1869b "Thoughts of An Opium," (No Author), TheProbe, 1:87-90. Quinones, Mark 1975 "Drug Abuse During The Civil War,"International journal of the Addictions, 10:1007-20. Rice, Jerry 1980 "A Chronicle of Federal Drug Enforcement Law,"(accompanying photo essay), Drug Enforcement (US Drug EnforcementAdministration), December, V. 7. (P. 4) Richet, Charles 1878 "Opium and Its Antidote," Popular Science,12:555-59. Robinson, Victor 1916 "A Symposium on Drugs," Medical Review ofReviews, 22:15-26. Roffman, Roger 1973 "Heroin and Social Welfare Policy," SocialWork, 18:22-32. 1976 "Addiction Concepts and the VietnamExperience," Urban and Social Change Review, 9:16-8. Rublowsky, John 1974 The Stoned Age: A History of Drugs In America, New York,G, P. Putnam's Sons (Capricorn Books). (Pp. 129-3 1) Russell, Ira 1887 "Opium Inebriety," Medico-Legal journal,5:144-50. Rydell, Wendy 1980 Drugs, North Miami, Florida, Merit Publications. (Pp.121-22) S., R. 1869 "Thirty Grains A Day," The Probe, 1:50-3. San Francisco Call 1910a "Crafty Chinese Are Doubly Accused," February4, 19 1 0, (unsigned). (P. 16) 1910b "Opium Dreams Grave Menace To Local Army,"August 29, 19 1 0, (unsigned). (Pp. I + 2) 1910C "Drug Habit City's Worst Evil," (by CharlersFickert), December 15, 1910. (P. 1) 1910d "Time For A General Crusade Against The OpiumEvil," (editorial), December 16, 1910. 1911 "200 Seized In 62 Drug Dens," November 26, 1911, (unsigned). (P. 17) Saper, Anthony 1974 "The Making of Policy Through Myth, Fantasy andHistorical Accident: The Making of America's NarcoticsLaws," British journal of Addiction, 69:183-193. (P.184) Schwartz, Linda 1980 Heroin: The Strongest Thing You Can Buy Without APrescription, (Pamphlet), Phoenix, Arizona, Do It Now Foundation. Seymour, Richard and David Smith 1987 Drug Free - A Unique, Positive Approach to Staying Out ofAlcohol and Other Drugs, NY, Sarah Lazin Books, 1987. (P. 37) Shroeder, Richard 1980 The Politics of Drugs, 2nd Edition, Washington D.C.,Congressional Quarterly Inc. (Pp. 3 and 77) Smith, David and George Gay 1972 "It's So Good, Don't Even Try It Once",Englewood Cliffs, New Jersey, Prentice-Hall. Smith, David and Rick Seymour 1986 "Abuse Folio -- Opiates," High Times,(reprinted from High Times, March 1984). (P. 30) Sonnedecker, Glenn 1963 "Emergence of the Concept of Opiate Addiction,"journal Mondial de Pharmacie. (Reprinted Pp. 14-22 in RobertLivingston (ed.), Narcotic Drug Addiction Problems, WashingtonD.C., U.S. Public Health Service. Spain, James 1975 "The United States, Turkey and the Poppy," MiddleEast journal, 29(3):295-307. Stanley, L.L. 1918 "Drugs and Crime," journal of Criminal Law andCriminology, 9:341. Starkey, Gerald 1971 "The Use and Abuse of Opiates andAmphetamines," Pp. 48 1 484 in Patrick Healy and James Manak(eds.), Drug Dependence and Abuse Resource Book, Chicago,National District Attorney's Association. Stephens, Richard and Gerald Slatin 1974 "The Street Addict Role: Toward The Definition of aType," Drug Forum, 3:375-89. Stimmel, Barry 1975 Heroin Dependency - Medical, Economic and Social Aspects, N.Y., Stratton Intercontinental Medical Book Corp. (P. 4) Strategy Council on Drug Abuse 1975 Federal Strategy For Drug Abuse-and Drug TrafficPrevention, 1975, Washington D.C., U.S. Government PrintingOffice. (P. 5) Summers, Marcia, James Trost, E. Leif Zerkin, et. al. 1975 Our Chemical Culture - Drug Use and Misuse, Madison,Wisconsin, Stash Press. Swatos, William H. Jr. 1972 "Opiate Addiction in the Late Nineteenth Century.- AStudy of the Social Problem, Using Medical journals of thePeriod," International journal of the Addictions, 7:739-53. Terry, Charles E. 1931 "Development and Causes of Opium Addiction As ASocial Problem," journal of Educational Sociology, 4:335-42. Terry, Charles E. and Mildred Pellens [ 1928] The Opium Problem, Montclair, New Jersey, PattersonSmith. 1970 Trebach, Arnold 1982 The Heroin Solution, new Haven, Conn., Yale UniversityPress. (P. 38) United States Attorney General's Office 1984 Organized Crime Drug Enforcement Task Force Program, 1983Annual Report, Washington D.C. (P. 4) United States Department of Health, Education and Welfare,Alcohol, Drug Abuse, and Mental Health Administration 1975 Treatment of Drug Abuse: An Overview, NationalClearinghouse for Drug Abuse Information, Report Series 34, No.1, DHEW Publication No. (ADM)75-197. Rockville, MD. Waldorf, Dan, Martin Orlick and Craig Reinarman 1974 Morphine Maintenance - The Shreveport Clinic 1919-1923, Washington D.C., The Drug Abuse Council. (P. 20, 30-31) Warren, Edward 1867 "A Lecture On The Sub-cutaneous Injection ofMorphia," Medical and Surgical Reporter, 16:101-4. Weber, Albert 1918 "Drugs and Crime," journal of Criminal Law andCriminology, 9:351. Weinswig, Melvin H. 1973 Use and Misuse of Drugs Subject To Abuse, N.Y., Pegasus.(P. 19) Westin, Av and Stephanie Shaffer 1972 Heroes and Heroin, N.Y., Pocket Books. (P. 8) Whitman, Wait [1895] The Wound Dresser, edited by Richard Maurice Bucke,Boston, 1975 Folcroft Library Editions. (Orig. Boston, Small, Maynard& Co.) Wilbert, Martin 1914 "Sale and Use of Cocaine and Narcotics," PublicHealth Service Reports, 29: 3180-3183 (November 27, 1914), U.S.Public Health Service. (P. 3183) 1915 "The Number and Kind of Drug Addicts," PublicHealth Service Reports, 30(2):2289-2294, U.S. Public HealthService. (Pp. 2291-92) Wood, George B. and Franklin Bache 1868 United States Dispensatory, 12th Edition, Philadelphia,Lippincott + Co. (Pp. 609-32) Woods, Arthur 1931 Dangerous Drugs, New Haven, Conn., Yale University Press.P. 12) World's Work 1924 "Drug Addiction Decreasing in the UnitedStates," World's Work, 49:17. Young, Lawrence, Linda Young, Marjorie Klein, Donald Klein,and D. Beyer 1977 Recreational Drugs, N.Y., Berkley Book. (P. 167) Zinberg, Norman 1984 Drug Set and Setting, New Haven, Conn., Yale Un. Press.(P. 26) CliffSchaffer's Home Page Contents | Feedback | Search DRCNet Library | Schaffer Library | Historical ResearchWT01-B26-11IA087-000632-B027-142http://206.61.184.43:80/schaffer/history/prohibit.htm 206.61.184.43 19970122095413 text/html 36831HTTP/1.0 200 OKDate: Wednesday, 22-Jan-97 09:54:03 GMTServer: WebSitePro/1.1f (S/N wpo-0deb)Allow-ranges: bytesContent-type: text/htmlLast-modified: Saturday, 28-Dec-96 05:38:43 GMTContent-length: 36613 Prohibition and Violence by Richard Hamm "American Prohibitionists and Violence, 1865-1920" by Richard Hamm Today I want to post part of a paper I delivered at a Meetingof the Alcohol and Temperance History Group as an AffiliatedSociety of the American Association for the History of Medicine,at its 68th Annual Meeting at Pittsburgh in May 1995. At thattime I said I wasn't planning to publish it, for various reasons,but I have been urged by people whose views I value todisseminate it, so I placed it-in pieces-on the List serve of theATHG. It brought forth a good string, so I have agreed to placethis piece (essentially the Pittsburgh paper) on the Web page ofthe ATHG. The prohibitionists were social reform agitators who sought amajor change in their society's customs. Social reformers havebeen, of course, a nearly constant presence in American societysince the early 19th century. Accounts of many social reformers'campaigns, often deal with the violence inflicted upon reformersseeking change in society and the violence engaged in by somereformers to achieve their ends. Indeed, violence, even killingand attempted killing, seems almost endemic to the history ofsocial reforms in the United States. But, with the special casesof the Women's crusades of 1873 and Carry Nation aside, the vast-and ever-growing literature on the temperance movement payslittle attention to the issue of violence.(1) This gap is aserious deficiency. There are two limits to my work. First, I am most interestedin violence in its most dramatic and drastic forms, killing orattempting to kill people. So I will be talking mostly ofkillings, attempted killings, and mobbings (because after allthey can easily lead to killings). Second, I am talking aboutviolence in respons to or as a part of agitation and not violenceattendant to law enforcement. Thus I am going to pass oversilently the many studies, popular and not, of moonshining,bootlegging, and violence.(2) Violence in resistance to law orviolence undertaken by law officers is somewhat separate fromviolence associated with a social reform movement's agitation forchange. Such violence grows out the state's presumption to have amonopoly of force and its willingness to resort to force to gainthe ends of its policy. To break the law of the state is to riskits use of violence against you, hence the likelihood that thelaw breaker will engage in violence. Law enforcement and violencego together hand and glove. But within these limits there still broad area of violence tobe explored as reform and violence also seem to go together. Wecan break down violence associated with reform into two largecategories. First, violence, used by their opponents, to stopreformers from agitating. Second, violence by reformers directedat achieving their ends-in their view, a righteous violence. Abrief look of some reforms in American history shows theexistence of these two types of violence. Violence to deter reform, for example, surfaces in studiesand memory of the civil rights movement. The literature is filledwith works that explore the violence directed against civilrights advocates in the American South in the 1950s and 1960s. Weall know of the bombing of the Birmingham churches, the mobbingof sit in protesters and freedom riders, and the killing ofGoodman, Schwerner and Chaney.(3) Similarly, contemporarycommentary on the anti-abortion movement has focused on the waveof violence against doctors and workers at women's healthcenters, most notably in the cases of Pensacola shootings and therecent the shootings in Brookline. Historians of abolitionists, perhaps the most deeply studiedof all social reform movements, have delineated both types ofviolence in that crusade. They have explored the manyanti-abolitionist mobs of the Jacksonian era, including thatwhich mobbed and killed the abolitionist editor Eliajah Lovejoyin 1837. Also, they have spent considerable effort exploring theforces and meaning of John Brown's and other abolitionists'willingness to engage in terrorism to bring about the end ofslavery.(4) But virtually no where in the vast scholarly studiesof the prohibition movement are there similar studies of theprohibitionists and violence. Its not because violence is notthere On the issue of deadly violence against agitators, the recentscholarly literature is almost silent on the subject but the drysthemselves recorded that it happened. The temperance movement atits peak, sought to encourage the faithful and to preserve therecords of its achievements and struggles by publishing, amongother things, prohibition encyclopedias. Two standard referencebooks produced by the drys, The Pocket Cyclopedia ofTemperance (1916) and Standard Encyclopedia of the AlcoholProblem (1925-1930) show that drys included information onviolence against prohibitionists. Both works contain articles onso called "Temperance Martyrs." Indeed, scatteredthrough the six volumes and 2940 page Standard Encyclopediaare many accounts of mobbings, attempted killings, and killingsof drys. Some of the stories in the Standard Encyclopediaare classics. For instance, it details in the article onPennsylvania how a county chairman of the Anti-Saloon League wasshot at in 1913, but "fortunately the bullet, intended forhis heart, was arrested by a copy of the bible which he carriedunder his arm." The article includes a picture of the pagewhere the bullet was stopped. While such miraculous tales wererare, pedestrian tales of violence were common in the temperancemovement.(5) I have combined the counts of the Standard Encyclopediaand the Pocket Encyclopedia to come up with some ball parkfigures of the violence directed against prohibitionists. Thesenumbers exclude from them prohibitionists who suffered violenceas a result of official or unofficial law enforcement or (fromthe sources available) who suffered violence in uncertaincircumstances. For example, a minister who denounced violators ofa state prohibition law and sought to bring private prosecutionsin the courts and suffered violence would be in this estimateengaging in unofficial law enforcement and is not included in thefigures of prohibitionist agitators who experienced violence.Including such persons would roughly double the number ofassaults and triple the number of the killings. Combining the twolists, I have found the names of six drys who between 1874 and1908 were killed over their advocacy of their cause. At leastanother nineteen drys were mobbed, beaten, shot at, or had theirhomes (or businesses) dynamited for their support oftemperance.(6) Without a doubt, advocating prohibition was a dangerousbusiness for some of its agitators. On the other hand, thetemperance advocates seemed not to have engaged in violenceagainst their enemies. I know of no prohibitionist who engaged inviolence to the point of killing to bring about their goal of adry nation. Some prohibitionists, Carry Nation being the mostprominent though certainly not alone, did engage in direct actionagainst liquor sellers, destroying their place of business andtheir stock through violent means. Assaults on people sometimesemerged from such attacks. But such "hatchetation"aside, the prohibitionists did not seem to engage violence thatcould lead to killing. I would like to is explain two things.First, why the violence against drys has received so littleattention. And second, explain the relative dearth of righteousviolence by drys. Why does the scholarly literature not contain muchinformation on the topic of violence against prohibitionistagitators? One explanation can be dismissed out of hand, that isthat those who the opponents perpetuated their deeds against weretoo obscure to make an impact. Among the six prohibitionistkilled, are a doctor, a judge, a minister, four editors of reformor other newspapers (including the minister), and a United StatesSenator. (The Senator is Edward Carmack of Tennessee.) If youturn toward those who suffered assaults or mobbing for agitationon the temperance question, the trend is similar with editors andministers predominating. Those attacked included figures of somerenown in temperance history; for example Albert Banks-clergyman,dry editor, and propagandist- was shot and wounded and Samuel W.("Sam") Small- journalist, dry, and evangelist-wasmobbed and beaten. The violence occurred in all areas of thenation, though the South and West seem disproportionallyrepresented, and extended from the decade after the Civil Warthrough the second decade of the 20th century. It should appearmuch more prominently in the scholarly literature. Two general causes seem to explain why the violence againstprohibitionists for their agitation has received so littleattention. First, contentions from the time of the killing orother violence that the violence had nothing to do withprohibition may have led scholars not to consider the topic.Second, and more importantly, there was little place for accountsof such violence in the evolving scholarly interpretations ofprohibition. I know of at least one example of a dry killed over hisadvocacy of prohibition where non-prohibitionists sourcesasserted that he "was not slain because of his convictionsbut" because of a "personal difficulty."(7) Ifother killings and attacks have similar conflicting accounts (andlogic would indicate that they should, as it was in the interestsof the opponents of prohibition to downplay violence againsttheir enemies) it is likely that scholars have been misdirectedaway from the topic of violence against dry agitators. But, thereis little evidence that scholars have paid any attention to thetopic at all. While scholarly interpretations of prohibition have changeddramatically over time, all of them share the trait that theyeither have little room in their frameworks for discussions ofviolence or have a tendency to turn scholars away from approachesand sources that would explore issues violence. Since World WarII, scholarly interpretations of prohibition have been marked bytwo large trends. First, there is the focus on the social statusof the members of the movement.(8) Second, there is the questionof how, if at all, prohibition related to the reform movements ofthe day: populism, progressivism, and women's rights.(9) Scholarsworking in the field have thus tended to mine the sources toanswer questions about these concerns. Thus by combing membershiprolls, church records, tax records, census data, and othersources they have told us much about the social status of theprohibitionists. Similarly in exploring the links betweenanti-monopolism, regulation, peace reform, women's suffrage,divorce reform, and anti-prostitution (just to name some)scholars have illuminated the connections of the movement toother reforms. But in doing these things they have mostlyeschewed writing narratives of movement history that would haveconfronted the sources that raise the questions of violenceagainst drys and violence by drys.(10) It is to violence by drysthat I would like to turn now. One thing is clear about violence by drys: there was no dryequivalent to John Brown, there was no dry equivalent to MichaelF. Griffin or John Salvi The closest that the prohibitionmovement ever came to such figures was Carry Nation. Nation'strashing of saloons is the stuff of American legend and folklore.Moreover it has been the subject of some scholarly work.(11) Thusa look at Nation and her movement in the context of the righteousviolence of other movements is illuminating. When we talk about figures in reform movements adoptingviolence, two things stand out. First that they believed thattheir violence is justified; violence-even killing-has become anacceptable means of bringing about the change that they want.Second, they act violently because they perceive that theirmovement is loosing ground. Hence John Brown's moral certainty ofthe evil of slavery and belief that sin could only be expatiatedby the spilling of blood convinced him that violence wasacceptable. He, in turn, convinced others to fight and kill withhim in Kansas and Virginia because, after the Compromise of 1850with its Fugitive Slave Law and the Kansas Nebraska Act repealingthe Missouri compromise, for the abolitionists crusade theirenemies seemed to have gained the upper hand.(12) Similarly, thejustifiable homicide argument used by the advocates of violencein the anti-abortion movement give them a moral base for theiractions.(13) Significantly, also, the first killing byanti-abortionists came after it became clear that the SupremeCourt was not going to overturn Roe v. Wade , the second came after a pro-abortion candidate was electedpresident. How do these two factors, developing a view that seethe violence as acceptable and acting out of fear of failure ofthe reform play out in the prohibition movement and in the careerof Carry Nation? There was a potential for developing an ideology of righteousviolence, in the prohibition movement. And evidence of it doesnot rest alone on the career of Carry Nation. Before I turn toNation and her ideas for justifying her violence, let me turn toanother source that show that drys did enunciate such ideas. The1915 novel Quarrytown, written by Douglas Dobbins andpublished by the American Issue Publishing (the press of companyof the Anti-Saloon League) shows community organized righteousviolence in a favorable light. In this fictionalized account ofthe struggle against the return of saloons to a stone quarryingtown, the drys ultimately resort to violence. At the opening the town is dry and virtually free of crime.But the dry utopia vanishes, as neither law nor community actionoffer adequate protection from the evil trade. Drys fail to blockthe issuing of a liquor license at a state liquor licensing board(dominated by politicians beholden to the organized liquorinterest), a dry organized boycott falters when its denounced bya new editor of the town's newspaper, and citizen prosecutions ofthe saloon keeper for violations of the law falter beforecorrupted juries. Thus the saloon spreads crime and disorderthroughout the community, literally turning brother againstbrother in drunken brawls. After all other means have been triedthe dry townsmen resort to violence. One night after the saloonis shut, they engage a Boston Tea Party type raid on it,destroying its fixtures and stock. When the newspaper editorcondemns the act as lawlessness he is ostracized by the town.When the saloon keeper rebuilds, the temperance men of the townblow up the establishment with three separate dynamite bombs, thefirst being set away from where the proprietor slept to allow himtime to escape. Moreover, the local minister preached a sermon inadvance of the act calling for the blowing up of "everyhell-hole in the United States tomorrow with dynamite!" Andin case the message was not clear, the dynamite works. The saloonkeeper never came back and the town was the better for it: nomurders, or assaults, no wife beatings, and no squandering offood and education money on whisky occur within its borders.(14) Without ever saying it in so many words, this publication ofthe Anti-Saloon League legitimated violence against saloons. Butit did so in a rather limited way. Violence was not the firstresort, but the last resort for the drys of Quarrytown. Its onlybecause law and boycotts have failed them, and only after liquorbegins to wreck havoc in their community do they take action. Andtheir first action, does not threaten life or limb. Even thebombing is planned to allow the saloon keeper to escape harm.Similarly, Carry Nation carried the conviction that her violencewas justified and resorted to violence only after other means hadfailed. Once you get past the myth and hype, Nation's short career asa saloon smasher is revealing of the potential of righteousviolence in the prohibition movement. Nation captured thenational imagination in 1900 when she began single-handedlydestroying dives in Kansas. Her actions were quickly overshadowedby the hucksterism to which she resorted to keep her agitationgoing: the selling of hatchets and the appearances at resortslike Coney Island. She remained a national figure until her deathin 1911. Nation was motivated, like many drys, by a personalreligious belief that liquor selling was sinful. Indeed, in herautobiography she recounting receiving visions from God showingher the evils of liquor. And she adopted violence only afterother she had tried other means.(15) In 1900 Nation lived in state that had a two decade old, andwidely violated, policy of prohibition. Moreover, it must of haveseemed to her that the temperance movement was in a rut. In hertown of Medicine Lodge, working with the WCTU she closed thetown's seven bars through the tried a true techniques of thewomen's crusade of 1873: picketing with song, prayer, and moralappeals to the sellers and purchasers. These were techniques thathad been used against legal saloons, in Kansas there were nothingbut illegal ones. Moreover, for a decade now in Kansas the policyhad been widely violated, often with the contrivances of thestate's political leaders. And at the national level thetemperance movement was stalled. Between 1889 and 1907 no stateadopted prohibition. WCTU had lost its driving force with thedeath of Frances Willard in 1898 and the Prohibition Party hadsplintered into two warring camps. The leading temperanceorganizations seemed unable to advance the cause or indeed tostop the rollback movements in various states with prohibition.Hence, with conviction, and at a time when the movement wasfaltering, Nation turned away from moral suasion and turned toviolence. As she explained, "If there's anything that's weakand worse than useless it's this moral suasion. I despise it.these hell traps of Kansas have fattened for twenty years onmoral suasion."(16) And her violence struck a chord among some temperanceadvocates. While some debated the value of violence, othersjoined Nation. She soon headed an organization of several hundredsimilarly minded saloon foes. And, in a two month period,following her lead this group, and others, engaged in vigilanteaction against saloons in Kansas's major cities, Topeka andWichita. Mobbings and riots swept the cities; people were beatenand shots were fired in anger. And among some temperance workersthe violence was welcome. One woman letter writer to a WCTU paperwrote: "What if a few people do get killed[?] . . . I'mtired of this sentimental gush about 'stopping before it comes tobloodshed. . . .' I for one, hope a thousand more of them will besmashed in Kansas before she stops." The response to Nation,shows that the potential for righteous violence existed in thetemperance crusade.(17) Which raises new questions: Why was there only one CarryNation? Part of the answer lays in the changing circumstances ofthe prohibition movement. Soon after Nation's actions in Kansas,the Anti-Saloon League emerged as the dominate organization inthe temperance movement. And the League's techniques of politicallobbying, official law enforcement, and public opinion buildingchanged the fortunes of the crusade. For example, take the topicof national legislation; the League's Washington Office, between1902 and 1919, pressured the United States Congress to enact lawsthat: prohibited the sale of liquor in federal buildings, bannedthe transport of liquor through the mails, ended liquor sales innational soldiers' homes, retained a law excluding all alcoholicbeverages from Army posts, created Oklahoma as a dry state, andlimited and then prohibited the transportation of liquor into drystates. A similar record of success can be found in theprohibitionists' campaigns in the states in the same period.(18)The very success of the drys in gaining what they wanted throughthe political process made righteous violence redundant. This pattern of potential righteous violence in theprohibition crusade and the mostly unstudied violence usedagainst drys by their opponents, suggest that we need to lookmore deeply into prohibition as a reform movement. As Robin Roomwrote over twenty years ago, "we must attempt to understandthe antiliquor movement . . . as a massive, sustained organizedeffort with a highly developed set of tactics and coherent,tangible goals." (19) Indeed, if we seek a usable past, onethat might help deal with current social reform crusades, sayagainst abortion or cigarettes, it is imperative that we look,far deeper than I have here, into tactics, strategies, andcontexts, of the temperance crusade to see how they prompted orretarded violence. Richard F. Hamm SUNY Albany hamm@csc.albany.edu Notes (1) Typical of the treatment of the topic of violence and theprohibitionists can be found in examining the three availablesurveys of the movement's history. Norman Clark, Deliver UsFrom Evil: An Interpretation of American Prohibition(NewYork: W. W. Norton & Co., 1976) and Paul Aaron and DavidMusto, "Temperance and Prohibition In America: A HistoricalOverview" in Mark H. Moore and Dean Gernstein, eds., Alcoholand Public Policy: Beyond the Shadow of Prohibition(Washington, DC: National Academy Press, 1981), 127-181 devote nospace to the topic. Jack S. Blocker, Jr. American TemperanceMovements: Cycles of Reform(Boston: Twayne Publishers, 1989),30- 34, 59-64, 74-79 mentions violence in connection withenforcement of the Maine Law and in the direct action of thewomen's crusades of 1873 and their precursors. Moreover, MarkLender, editor, Dictionary of American Temperance Biography(Westport CT: Greenwood Press, 1984) does not contain a sketch ofany prohibitionists killed, either as response to agigation orbecause law enforcement activities. Three works discuss the role of violence associated withtemperance reform. Jed Dannebaum, Drink and Disorder:Temperance Reform in Cincinnati from the Washington Revival tothe WCTU (Urbana and Chicago: University of Illinois Press,1984) and Jack S. Blocker Jr., "Give to the Winds ThyFears": The Women's Temperance Crusade, 1873-1874(Westport, CN: Greenwood Press, 1985); Robert Bader, Prohibitionin Kansas (Lawrence: University Press of Kansas, 1986). On liquor law enforcement before national prohibition see:Stephen Cresswell, Mormons, Cowbosy, Moonshiners, andKlansmen: Federal Law Enforcment in the South and West, 1870-1893 (Tuscaloosa: University of Alabama Press, 1991); WilliamF. Holmes, "Moonshining and Collective Violence: Georgia,1889- 1895," Journal of American History 67 (1980):589-611; William F. Holmes, "Whitecapping: Agrarian Violencein Mississippi, 1902-1906," Journal of Southern History35 (1969): 165-185; Wilbur R. Miller, Revenuers andMoonshiners: Enforcing Federal Liquor Law in the Mountain South,1865-1900 (Chapel Hill: University of North Carolina Press,1991). (2) Indeed, certain killings connected to the civil rightscrusade have been used to illuminate the very nature of themovement and its opponents. See for example, Seth Cagin andPhilip Dray, We Are Not Afraid: The Story of Goodman,Schwerner and Chaney and the Civil Rights Campaign forMississippi (New York: Bantam Books, 1988) and HerbertShapiro, White Violence and Black Response From Reconstructionto Montgomery (Amherst: University of Massachsetts Press,1988). (3)On the topic of abolitionist violence and their reactionsto violence see, Jane H. Pease and William Pease,"Confrontation and Abolition in the 1850s," Journalof American History 58 (1972): 923-937; John Demos, "TheAntislavery Movement and the Problem of Violent 'Means,'" NewEngland Quarterly 37 (1964): 501-526; Lewis Perry, RadicalAbolitionism: Anarchy and the Government of God in AntislaeryThought (Ithaca, Cornell University Press, 1973); MichaelFellman, "Rehearsal for the Civil War: Antislavery andProslavery at the Fighting Point in Kansas, 1854-1856," inLewis Perry and Michael Fellman, Antislavery Reconsidered: NewPerspectives on the Abolitionists (Baton Rouge: LouisianaUniversity Press, 1979), 287-307; Silvan S. Tomkins, "ThePsychology of Commitment: The Constructive Role of Violence andSuffering for the Individual and for His Society, in MartinDuberman, editor, The Antislavery Vanguard: New Essays on theAbolitionists (Princeton: Princeton University Press, 1965),270-298. On violence directed against abolitionists see "Gentlemanof Property and Standing:" Anti-Aboliton Mobs in JacksonianAmerica (New York: Oxford University Press, 1970). Beyondspecific works that deal with violence, three surveys of theabolitionist crusade show how intergal the topics of violence areto the reform's history as they devote attention to both theviolence against and by abolitionists: Ronald G. Walters, TheAntislavery Appeal: American Abolitionism After 1830 (NewYork: Norton, 1978); Merton L. Dillon, The Abolitionists: theGrowth of a Dissenting Minority (Dekalb: Northern IllinoisUniversity Press, 1974) and James B. Stewart, Holy Warriors:The Abolitionists and American Slavery (New York: Hill andWang, 1976). (4) Clarence T. Wilson, Deets Picket, and Harry G. McCain,editors, The Pocket Cyclopedia of Temperance (Topeaka:Temperance Society of Methodist Epsicopal Church, revisededition, 1916), 155-162; Ernest Cherrington, ed., StandardEncyclopaedia of the Alcohol Problem 6 volumes (Westerville,OH: American Issue Publishing Co., 1925-1930), 2618-2620, alsofor example see 85, and 1800-1801, & 2133 (bible story); evenmidway through the crusade, drys were recording the suffering oftheir martyrs, see: Cyclopaedia of Temperance and Prohibition(New York: Funk and Wagnalls, 1891), 201-202. (5) The list, derrived from SEAP and Pocketincludes: Dr. J. W. Beal and Judge D. R. Cox both killed inMalden, Missouri on Februray 18 1907; Edward W. Carmack, UnitedStates Senator from Tennessee, shot November 9, 1908 inNashville; Sam D. Cox, editor and publisher of The Sentinelkilled in Minatare, Nebraska on December 20 1906: Roderick D.Gambrell, editor of The Sword and Shield killed inJackson, Mississippi on May 5, 1887; Rev. John R. Moffett, editorof Anti-Liquor shot on November 11, 1892 in DanvilleVirginia; and Joseph B. Rucker editor of the Somerset Reporterkilled in Somerset, Kentucky on September 19, 1892. Two of thesekillings have received scholarly treatment, Paul Isaac, Prohibitionand Politics: Turbulent Decades in Tennessee, 1885-1920(Knoxville: University of Tennessee Press, 1965) and Richard F.Hamm, "The Killing of John R. Moffett and the Trial of J. T.Clark: Race, Prohibition, and Politics in Danville,1887-1893," Virginia Magazine of History and Biography101 (1993): 375-404 (6) This is the case of John R. Moffett, for details see:Hamm, "Killing." The assertion that Moffett did not diefor his convictions generated a controversy between the slainman's brother and William Copeland, editor of the Danville paperat Moffett's death and later editor of the Times Dispatch.See: S. H. Thompson, The Life of John R. Moffett (Salem:McClung & White, 1895), 141-144. Richmond Times Dispatch,April 17, 1903, 4; Correspondence between W. W. Moffett &Richmond Times Dispatch Concerning Reverend John R.Moffett" bound typescript, Virginia Baptist HistoricalSociety, Botwright Library, University of Richmond, Richmond;Richmond Times Dispatch May 26, 1903, 4; Guide, WalterScott Copeland Papers #5497, E. J. Jordan, Jr., compiler, RareBooks and Manuscripts Alderman Library, University of Virginia. (7) After the pioneering work of Joseph Gusfield on thesocial status of temperance reformers, scholars rushed to testthis theory, and for nearly a generation, the study ofprohibition focused, as the title of one article put it, on"The Prohibitionists Who Were They?" Joseph R.Gusfield, Symbolic Crusade: Status Politics and the AmericanTemperance Movement (Urbana: University of Illinois Press,1963); Jack Blocker, Jr. "Modernity of Prohibitionists"and Charles A. Isetts, "A Social Profile of WCTU Crusade:Hillsboro, Ohio" in Jack Blocker Jr., ed., Alcohol Reformand Society: the Liquor Issue in Social Context (Westport,CN: Greenwood Press, 1979), 99-110, 149-170; Robert A. Hohner,"The Prohibitionists: Who Were They?" South AtlanticQuarterly 68 (1969): 491-505; Jack S. Blocker Jr., "Giveto the Winds Thy Fears": The Women's Temperance Crusade,1873-1874 (Westport, CN: Greenwood Press, 1985). The salienceof relgious idenity and the prohibition issue emerged as a topicin political histories. Richard Jenson, The Winning of theMidwest, Social and Political Conflict, 1888-1896 (Chicago:University of Chicago Press, 1971); Paul Kleppner, The Crossof Culture: A Social Analysis of Midwestern Politics, 1885-1900(New York: MacMillian Free Press, 1970); Jed Dannebaum,"Immigrants and Temperance: Ethnocultural Conflict inCincinnati, 1845-1860" Ohio History 87 (Autumn 1978):125-139. (8) On the issue of whether prohibition should be considereda progressive reform, Richard Hofstader in The AmericanPolitical Tradition (New York: Vintage Books, 1954) and in Ageof Reform (New York: Vintage Books, 1955) and AndrewSinclair, Era of Excess: A Social History of the ProhibitionMovement (New York: Harper and Row, 1962) argued no. JohnBurnham in "New Perspectives on the Prohibition 'Experiment'of the 1920s" Journal of Social History 2 (1968):51-68; and James Timberlake in Prohibition and the ProgressiveMovement, 1900-1920 (Cambridge: Harvard University Press,1963) challenged that view. Jack S. Blocker, Jr., Retreat fromReform: The Prohibition Movement in the United States, 1890-1913(Westport: Greenwood Press, 1976) plotted the temperancemovement's abandonment of broader social reform to concentrate onprohibition alone. Works by, Norman Clark and Austin Kerr,utilizing the organizational interpretation of Robert Wiebe,placed prohibition firmly within the panapoly of progressivereforms. See Clark, Deliver Us From Evil; K. Austin Kerr, Organizedfor Prohibition: A New History of the Anti-Saloon League (NewHaven, CN: Yale University Press, 1985). On the organizationalinterpretation see: Louis Galambos, "The EmergingOrganizational Synthesis of Modern American History," BusinessHistory Review 44 (Autumn 1980): 279-90; Samuel P. Hays, Responseto Industrialism, 1885-1914 (Chicago: University of ChicagoPress, 1957), 48- 70; Alfred D. Chandler, Jr., The VisibleHand: The Managerial Revolution in American Business(Cambridge, MA, Harvard University Press, 1977); Louis Galambos,"Technology, Political Economy, and Professionalization:Central Themes of the Organizational Synthesis," BusinessHistory Review 57 (Winter 1983): 471-93. Recently, the workon temperance reform has focused on its relationship with largerquestion of reform in the history of women. Ruth Bordin, Womanand Temperance (Philadelphia: Temple University Press, 1981),15-33; Barbara Leslie Epstein, The Politics of Domesticity:Women, Evangelism and Temperance in Nineteenth Century America(Middletown, CN: Wesleyan University Press, 1981, 1986); RuthBordin, Francis Willard: A Biography (Chapel Hill, NC:University of North Carolina Press, 1986); Ian Tyrrell, Woman'sWorld Woman's Empire: the Woman's Christian Temperance Union inInternational Perspective, 1880-1930 (Chapel Hill, NC:University of North Carolina Press, 19. (9) I am as guilty as any other scholar in the field, seeRichard F. Hamm, Shaping the Eighteenth Amendment: TemperanceReform, Legal Culture, and the Polity, 1880-1920 (ChapelHill: University of North Carolina Press, 1995). We do not have agood modern history of the Prohibition Party, though Blocker, Retreatis a good start; similarily WCTU histories have tended to trailoff with Frances Willard's death. Where such narratives are to befound are in the local studies of an area or region. Localstudies which have looked at the mechanics of the movement likeRobert L. Hampel, Temperance and Prohibition in Massachusetts,1813- 1852 (Ann Arbor, MI: UMI Research Press, 1982); haveoften focused on areas that did not have significant outbreaks ofviolence during temperance agitation. (10) The only full length biolgraphies of Nation are old andnegative, Herbert Asbury, Carry Nation (New York: Knopf,1929) and Robert Lewis Taylor, Vessel of Wrath: The Life andTimes of Carry Nation (New York: Signet Books, 1966). Therecent work by Robert Bader is more sympathic and connects herclearly to events in Kansas. Robert S. Bader, "Mrs.Nation," Kansas History 7 (1984/5): 246-262; and Prohibition,133-155. Nation is desperately in need of a biography whichcould use the insights of women's history, gender relations, andtemperance studies to illuminate her career. The place to beginsuch a reinterpretation of Nation is her autobiography, Carry A.Nation, The Use and Need of the Life of Carry A. Nation(Topeka, KA: F. M. Stevens and Sons, 1909). (11) Stephen B. Oates, To Purge This Land with Blood: ABiography of John Brown (New York: Harpers, 1970); Dillon, Abolitionists119,-243; Stewart, Holy,147-148, 151-161, 164-177;Walters, Antislavery, 28-33. (12) Lisa Belkin, "Kill For Life," New YorkTimes Magazine October 30, 1994, 47-50, 62, 76, 80;"Rescuing a City's Reputation," Transcript "AllThings Considered" August 26, 1994, 9-16. (13) Douglas Dobbins, Quarrytown (Westerville:American Issue Publishing, 1915), 48-48, 51-67, 71-80, 100-107,155-159, 184-189, 201-207. (14) Bader, Prohibition, 134-155; Taylor, Vessel,62-94, 113-142 (15) Quoted in Bader, Prohibition, 140; Hamm, Shaping,123-129. (16) Quoted in Bader, Prohibition, 149-150. (17) Blocker, Retreat, 197-234; Hamm, Shaping,155- 255; SEAP, 177, 207, 2725. (18) Robin Room, "Governing Images and the Prevention ofAlcohol Problems," Preventative Medicine 3 (1974):11-23, 11. Returnto Cliff Schaffer's Home Page WT01-B26-12IA087-000632-B027-177http://206.61.184.43:80/schaffer/history/murd3.htm 206.61.184.43 19970122095427 text/html 15406HTTP/1.0 200 OKDate: Wednesday, 22-Jan-97 09:54:17 GMTServer: WebSitePro/1.1f (S/N wpo-0deb)Allow-ranges: bytesContent-type: text/htmlLast-modified: Saturday, 28-Dec-96 05:38:48 GMTContent-length: 15188 Hemp Around Their Necks by Harry Anslinger Hemp Around Their Necks From The Murderers THE STORY OF THE NARCOTIC GANGS By HARRY J. ANSLINGER U. S. Commissioner of Narcotics and WILL OURSLER FARRAR, STRAUS AND CUDAHY, NEW YORK, 1961 In 1930 there was no federal law against smoking marijuana,and the average American citizen in an average community hadprobably never heard of "reefers" or "tea" orother words in the argot of marijuana users. But by the middlethirties we began to see the serious effects of marijuana on ouryouth. An alarming increase in the smoking of marijuana reefersin 1936 continued to spread at an accelerated pace in 1937.Before this, use of reefers had been relatively slight andconfined to the the Southwest, particularly along the Mexicanborder. Seizures by state officers in these two years, however, hadincreased a hundred percent and by hundreds of pounds. Reports Ireceived from thirty states showed an "invasion" bythis drug, either by cultivation or underworld importation. Marijuana was something new and adventuresome. The angle-wisemobsters were aiming their pitch straight at the mostimpressionable age group-America's fresh, post-depression crop ofteenagers. One adolescent gave a picture to an agent of a typical"smoker" in an apartment or "pad": "The room was crowded. There were fifty people but itseemed like five hundred. It was like crazy, couples lying all,over the place, a woman was screaming out in the hall, two,fellows were trying to make love to the same girl and this, girlwas screaming and crying and not making any sense. Her clotheswere mostly pulled off and she was snickering and blubbering andtrying to push these two guys away.... The place was nothing butsmoke and stink and these funny little noises I could hear butthey were way out, that far I could hardly hear them and theywere right there in the room, that laughing and crying and themusic and all that stuff. It was crazy wild. But I didn't want todo anything, I didn't want to sleep with those women or likethat. I just wanted to lie down because the room seemed big andEke a great tremendous crowd like at a ball game or something. .. ." Made from the hemp plant known as Cannabis sativa americana,marijuana is almost a twin brother to Cannabis sativa indica,otherwise called hashish. There are said to be almost threehundred names for the varieties of the hemp weed. In some partsof Asia it is called bhang; in South Africa it is called dagga.It is also challed chira and ganja. And many other names. The hemp weed grows best in warm climates but has also beenfound along roadsides north of Boston. It grows to heights offrom five and a half to fifteen or sixteen feet. Its leaves,seeds and flowers contain a substance which when chewed or smokedproduces hallucinatory effects. Elaborate technical processes have been developed for themanufacture of Cannabis cigarettes from the resin in the plants.Although pharmacists have never been able to isolate completelythe nature of the Cannabis "principal" that producesthe narcotic effect, it is known to exist in the fringes or hairson the leaves and in the flowers, and in the thick resin thatflows through the stalk and other parts of the plant. Cannabis grows wild in many parts of the world, and iscultivated in India, and illegally in certain areas of Africa,Mexico, Brazil and the United States. It also grows wild in partsof the United States, although we have been able to root the wildCannabis out of most communities. Origins of hemp weed are ancient. Rites that go backthousands of years, in temples long vanished, may wen haveevolved around the effects of some variant of the hemp weed.Worshipers of the Hindu god Siva were said to use Cannabisindica. In the eleventh century A.D., the Mohammedan sect calledthe Assassins, used hashish in so-called religious observances.They made homicide a high ritualistic art. Their name itself istoday a synonym for murder. Marijuana effects on the average user are described in abrochure we published in the Bureau for the information of laygroups. "The toxic effect produced by the active narcoticprinciple of Cannabis sativa, hemp, or marijuana," thereport states, "appear to be exclusively to the higher nervecenters. The drug produces first an exhaltation with a feeling ofwell being, a happy, jovial mood, usually; an increased feelingof physical strength and power, and a general euphoria isexperienced. Accompanying this exaltation is a stimulation of theimagination followed by a more or less delirious statecharacterized by vivid kaleidoscopic visions, sometimes of apleasing sensual kind, but occasionally of a gruesome nature.Accompanying this delirious state is a remarkable loss in spatialand time relations; persons and things in the environment looksmall; time is indeterminable; seconds seem like minutes andhours like days. "Those who are accustomed to habitual use of the drugare said eventually to develop a delirious rage after itsadministration during which they are temporarily, at least,irresponsible and prone to commit violent crimes. The prolongeduse of this narcotic is said to produce mentaldeterioration." One of the great difficulties with Cannabis is itsunpredictability. Physicians who have made hundreds of tests withCannabis report that there is no way to predict what effect ithave on the individual, both under controlled and noncontrolledconditions. One man has no reaction at all; the next may goberserk and try to stab somebody or harm himself. The medicalprofession after many such experiments was forced to drop thenarcotic as a possible analgesic because of this unpredictablequality. Much of the most irrational juvenile violence and that haswritten a new chapter of shame and tragedy is traceable directlyto this hemp intoxication. A gang of boys tear the clothes fromtwo school girls and rape the screaming girls, one boy after theother. A sixteen-year-old kills his en tire family of five inFlorida, a man in Minnesota puts a bullet through the head of astranger on the road; in Colorado husband tries to shoot hiswife, kills her grandmother instead and then kills himself. Everyone of these crimes had been proceeded (sic) by the smoking of one or more marijuana "reefers."As the marijuana situation grew worse, I knew action had to betaken to get the proper legislation passed. By 1937 under mydirection, the Bureau launched two important steps First, alegislative plan to seek from Congress a new law that would placemarijuana and its distribution directly under federal control.Second, on radio and at major forums, such that presentedannually by the New York Herald Tribune, I told the story of thisevil weed of the fields and river beds and roadsides. I wrotearticles for magazines; our agents gave hundreds of lectures toparents, educators, social and civic leaders. In networkbroadcasts I reported on the growing list of crimes, includingmurder and rape. I described the nature of marijuana and itsclose kinship to hashish. I continued to hammer at the facts. I believe we did a thorough job, for the public was alertedand the laws to protect them were passed, both nationally and atthe state level. We also brought under control the wild growingmarijuana in this country. Working with local authorities, wecleaned up hundreds of acres of marijuana we and uprooted plantssprouting along the roadsides. The 1937 law does not prohibit the sale of marijuana b puts atax of $100.00 an ounce on any sale or transfer of drug and makessuch sale or transfer illegal without proper registration andapproval from the Bureau. Possession without proper authorizationcan bring a prison term. The Marijuana Tax Act is patterned in general after theHarrison Act, but with some major technical variations,principally based on the fact that while marijuana is used inlaboratory tests it is not used for medical purposes. There were still some WPA gangs working in those days and weput them to good use. just outside the nation's capital, for somesixty miles along the Potomac River, on both banks, marijuana wasgrowing in profusion; it had been planted there originally byearly settlers who made their own hemp and cloth. The workerscleaned out tremendous river bank crops, destroying plants, seedsand roots. AR through the Midwest also, WPA workers were used forthis clean-up job. The. wild hemp was rooted out of America. During the Second World War, after Axis powers in the FarEast and Europe cut off our access to countries where hemp wasgrown for the making of cord and cloth, we developed, understrict controls, our own hemp growing program on the richfarmlands of Minnesota. Less than one thousandth of one percentwas ever diverted into illegal channels. After the war thisproduction stopped and the fields went back to ,corn and wheat.With the war's end, however, the narcotic branch of theunderworld was given a new lift by the publication of anextraordinary document which has come to be known as the LaGuardia Report. The title was a misnomer, it was actually a report of acommittee on marijuana which had been appointed by the"Little Flower" of New York to give an objectivepicture of marijuana from a scientific point of view. La Guardiawas always not only an honest official who warred against thesyndicate "tin horns," as he called them, but was alsoa good friend of Bureau of Narcotics. In Congress he foughtconsistently for increases for our Bureau to help us to achievethe power needed to do our job. The men who issued this document were men of science doctors,technicians, authorities Published as a book by the JacquesCattell Press in 1945, the report bore the tide: The MarijuanaProblem in the City of New York: Sociologic Medical,Psychological and Pharmacological Studies, by the Mayor'sCommittee on Marijuana. This report declared, in effect, that those who had beendenouncing marijuana as dangerous, including myself and expertsin the Bureau, were not only in error, but were spreadingbaseless fears about the effects of smoking Cannabis. I say thereport was a government printed invitation to youth andadults-above all to teenagers-to go ahead and smoke all thereefers they felt like. Relying solely on a series of experiments with a group of 77prisoners who volunteered to make the tests, the Mayor's expertsasserted that they found no major menace in the use of thisnarcotic, which they termed "a mild drug smoked by boredpeople for the sake of conviviality." The report further claimed that there was "noapparent" connection between "the weed" and crimesof violence, that smoking it did not produce aggressiveness orbelligerence as a rule, that it could be used for a number ofyears without causing serious mental or physical harm and thatwhile it might be habit forming it could be given up abruptlywithout causing distress; in other words, it did not produce thebodily dependence found in heroin, cocaine, morphine and otherdrugs. Finally, the report suggested that the drug is so mild thatit might well be used successfully as a substitute in the processof curing addiction to other drugs, or even in the treatment ofchronic alcoholism. Doctors and other authorities who studied the effects of thisdrug, however, tore the report apart for its inaccuracies andmisleading conclusions. The Journal of the American MedicalAssociation joined the. Bureau in condemning it as unscientific. "For many years medical scientists have consideredCannabis a dangerous drug," the Journal's editorial of April26, 1945 stated. "Nevertheless. . . . the Mayor's Committeeon Marijuana submits an analysis by seventeen doctors of tests on77 prisoners and, on this narrow and thoroughly unscientificfoundation, draws sweeping and inadequate conclusions whichminimize the harmlessness of marijuana. Already the book has doneharm. One investigator has described some tearful parents whobrought their 16-year-old boy to a physician after he had beendetected in the act of smoking marijuana. . . . The boy said hehad read an account of the La Guardia committee report and thiswas his justification for using marijuana.. A criminal lawyer for marijuana drug peddlers has alreadyused the La Guardia report as a basis to have defendants set freeby the Court. "The value of the conclusions," continued theeditorial, "is destroyed by the fact that the experimentswere conducted on 77 confined criminals. Prisoners were obligedto be content with the quantities of drug administered.Antisocial behavior could not have been noticed, as they wereprisoners. At liberty some of them would have given free rein totheir inclinations and would probably not have stopped at thedose producing 'the pleasurable principle. . . .' Publicofficials will do well to disregard this unscientific, uncriticalstudy, and continue to regard marijuana as a menace where it ispurveyed," the Journal concluded. There can be no doubt of the damage done by the report.Syndicate lawyers and spokesmen leaped upon its giddy sociologyand medical mumbo-jumbo, cited it in court cases, tried to spreadthe idea that the report had brought marijuana back into thefolds of good society with a full pardon and a slap on the backfront the medical profession. The lies continued to spread. They cropped up on paneldiscussions, in public addresses by seemingly informedindividuals. They helped once again, in a new and profitabledirection, to bewilder the public and make it unsure of its ownjudgments. This carefully nurtured public doubt was to pay offwith extra millions in the pockets of the hoods. One killer whohelped to nourish that doubt-a hoodlum called Lepke took amulti-million-dollar cut in exchange for the terror inspired bythe mere mention of his name. CliffSchaffer's Home Page WT01-B26-13IA087-000632-B027-205http://206.61.184.43:80/schaffer/history/dequinc1.htm 206.61.184.43 19970122095514 text/html 34154HTTP/1.0 200 OKDate: Wednesday, 22-Jan-97 09:54:32 GMTServer: WebSitePro/1.1f (S/N wpo-0deb)Allow-ranges: bytesContent-type: text/htmlLast-modified: Saturday, 28-Dec-96 05:39:14 GMTContent-length: 33936 Confessions of an English Opium Eater Confessions of an English Opium Eater by Thomas de Quincey THE PLEASURES OF OPIUM It is so long since I first took opium, that if it had been atrifling incident in my life, I might have forgotten its date:but cardinal events are not to be forgotten; and fromcircumstances connected with it, I remember that it must bereferred to the autumn of 1804. During that season I was inLondon, having come thither for the first time since my entranceat college. And my introduction to opium arose in the following way. Froman early age I had been accustomed to wash my head in cold waterat least once a day: being suddenly seized with toothache, Iattributed it to some relaxation caused by an accidentalintermission of that practice; jumped out of bed; plunged my headinto a basin of cold water; and with hair thus wetted went tosleep. The next morning, as I need hardly say, I awoke withexcruciating rheumatic pains of the head and face, from which Ihad hardly any respite for about twenty days. On the twenty-firstday, I think it was, and on a Sunday, that I went out into thestreets; rather to run away, if possible, from my torments, thanwith any distinct purpose. By accident I met a collegeacquaintance who recommended opium. Opium! dread agent ofunimaginable pleasure and pain! I had heard of it as I had ofmanna or of Ambrosia, but no further: how unmeaning a sound wasit at that time! what solemn chords does it now strike upon myheart! what heart-quaking vibrations of sad and happyremembrances! Reverting for a moment to these, I feel a mysticimportance attached to the minutest circumstances connected withthe place and the time, and the man (if man he was) that firstlaid open to me the Paradise of Opium-eaters. It was a Sundayafternoon, wet and cheerless: and a duller spectacle this earthof ours has not to show than a rainy Sunday in London. My roadhomewards lay through Oxford-street; and near "the /stately/Pantheon," (as Mr. Wordsworth has obligingly called it) Isaw a druggist's shop. The druggist -- unconscious minister ofcelestial pleasures! -- as if in sympathy with the rainy Sunday,looked dull and stupid, just as any mortal druggist might beexpected to look on a Sunday; and, when I asked for the tinctureof opium, he gave it to me as any other man might do: andfurthermore, out of my shilling, returned me what seemed to bereal copper halfpence, taken out of a real wooden drawer.Nevertheless, in spite of such indications of humanity, he hasever since existed in my mind as the beatific vision of animmortal druggist, sent down to earth on a special mission tomyself. And it confirms me in this way of considering him, that,when I next came up to London, I sought him near the statelyPantheon, and found him not: and thus to me, who knew not hisname (if indeed he had one) he seemed rather to have vanishedfrom Oxford-street than to have removed in any bodily fashion.The reader may choose to think of him as, possibly, no more thana sublunary druggist: it may be so: but my faith is better: Ibelieve him to have evanesced,{1} or evaporated. So unwillinglywould I connect any mortal remembrances with that hour, andplace, and creature, that first brought me acquainted with thecelestial drug. Arrived at my lodgings, it may be supposed that I lost not amoment in taking the quantity prescribed. I was necessarilyignorant of the whole art and mystery of opium-taking: and, whatI took, I took under every disadvantage. But I took it: -- and inan hour, oh! Heavens! what a revulsion! what an upheaving, fromits lowest depths, of the inner spirit! what an apocalypse of theworld within me! That my pains had vanished, was now a trifle inmy eyes: -- this negative effect was swallowed up in theimmensity of those positive effects which had opened before me --in the abyss of divine enjoyment thus suddenly revealed. Here wasa panacea - a [pharmakon nepenthez] for all human woes: here wasthe secret of happiness, about which philosophers had disputedfor so many ages, at once discovered: happiness might now bebought for a penny, and carried in the waistcoat pocket: portableecstasies might be had corked up in a pint bottle: and peace ofmind could be sent down in gallons by the mail coach. But, if Italk in this way, the reader will think I am laughing: and I canassure him, that nobody will laugh long who deals much withopium: its pleasures even are of a grave and solemn complexion;and in his happiest state, the opium-eater cannot present himselfin the character of /Il Allegro/: even then, he speaks and thinksas becomes /Il Penseroso/. Nevertheless, I have a veryreprehensible way of jesting at times in the midst of my ownmisery: and, unless when I am checked by some more powerfulfeelings, I am afraid I shall be guilty of this indecent practiceeven in these annals of suffering or enjoyment. The reader mustallow a little to my infirm nature in this respect: and with afew indulgences of that sort, I shall endeavour to be as grave,if not drowsy, as fits a theme like opium, so anti-mercurial asit really is, and so drowsy as it is falsely reputed. And, first, one word with respect to its bodily effects: forupon all that has been hitherto written on the subject of opium,whether by travelers in Turkey (who may plead their privilege oflying as an old immemorial right), or by professors of medicine,writing /ex cathedra/, -- I have but one emphatic criticism topronounce -- Lies! lies! lies! I remember once, in passing abook-stall, to have caught these words from a page of somesatiric author: -- "By this time I became convinced that theLondon newspapers spoke truth at least twice a week, viz. onTuesday and Saturday, and might safely be depended upon for --the list of bankrupts." In like manner, I do by no meansdeny that some truths have been delivered to the world in regardto opium: thus it has been repeatedly affirmed by the learned,that opium is a dusky brown in colour; and this, take notice, Igrant: secondly, that it is rather dear; which I also grant: forin my time, East-India opium has been three guineas a pound, andTurkey eight: and, thirdly, that if you eat a good deal of it,most probably you must -- do what is particularly disagreeable toany man of regular habits, viz. die.{2} These weightypropositions are, all and singular, true: I cannot gainsay them:and truth ever was, and will be, commendable. But in these threetheorems, I believe we have exhausted the stock of knowledge asyet accumulated by man on the subject of opium. And therefore,worthy doctors, as there seems to be room for furtherdiscoveries, stand aside, and allow me to come forward andlecture on this matter. First, then, it is not so much affirmed as taken for granted,by all who ever mention opium, formally or incidentally, that itdoes, or can, produce intoxication. Now reader, assure yourself,/meo periculo/, that no quantity of opium ever did, or couldintoxicate. As to the tincture of opium (commonly calledlaudanum) /that/ might certainly intoxicate if a man could bearto take enough of it; but why? because it contains so much proofspirit, and not because it contains so much opium. But crudeopium, I affirm peremptorily, is incapable of producing any stateof body at all resembling that which is produced by alcohol; andnot in /degree/ only incapable, but even in /kind/: it is not inthe quantity of its effects merely, but in the quality, that itdiffers altogether. The pleasure given by wine is alwaysmounting, and tending to a crisis, after which it declines: thatfrom opium, when once generated, is stationary for eight or tenhours: the first, to borrow a technical distinction frommedicine, is a case of acute - the second, of chronic pleasure:the one is a flame, the other a steady and equable glow. But themain distinction lies in this, that whereas wine disorders themental faculties, opium, on the contrary (if taken in a propermanner), introduces amongst them the most exquisite order,legislation, and harmony. Wine robs a man of his self possession:opium greatly invigorates it. Wine unsettles and clouds thejudgment, and gives a preternatural brightness, and a vividexaltation to the contempts and the admirations, the loves andthe hatreds, of the drinker: opium, on the contrary, communicatesserenity and equipoise to all the faculties, active or passive:and with respect to the temper and moral feelings in general, itgives simply that sort of vital warmth which is approved by thejudgment, and which would probably always accompany a bodilyconstitution of primeval or antediluvian health. Thus, forinstance, opium, like wine, gives an expansion to the heart andthe benevolent affections: but then, with this remarkabledifference, that in the sudden development of kind-heartednesswhich accompanies inebriation, there is always more or less of amaudlin character, which exposes it to the contempt of theby-stander. Men shake hands, swear eternal friendship, and shedtears -- no mortal knows why: and the sensual creature is clearlyuppermost. But the expansion of the benigner feelings, incidentto opium, is no febrile access, but a healthy restoration to thatstate which the mind would naturally recover upon the removal ofany deep- seated irritation of pain that had disturbed andquarrelled with the impulses of a heard originally just and good.True it is, that even wine, up to a certain point, and withcertain men, rather tends to exalt and to steady the intellect: Imyself, who have never been a great wine-drinker, used to findthat half a dozen glasses of wine advantageously affected thefaculties -- brightened and intensified the consciousness -- andgave to the mind a feeling of being "ponderibus libratasuis:" and certainly it is most absurdly said, in popularlanguage, of any man, that he is /disguised/ in liquor: for, onthe contrary, most men are disguised by sobriety; and it is whenthey are drinking (as some old gentleman says in Athenaeus), thatmen [eantonz emfanixondin oitinez eidin]. -- display themselvesin their true complexion of character; which surely is notdisguising themselves. But still, wine constantly leads a man tothe brink of absurdity and extravagance; and, beyond a certainpoint, it is sure to volatilize and to disperse the intellectualenergies: whereas opium always seems to compose what had beenagitated, and to concentrate what had been distracted. In short,to sum up all in one word, a man who is inebriated, or tending toinebriation, is, and feels that he is, in a condition which callsup into supremacy the merely human, too often the brutal, part ofhis nature: but the opium-eater (I speak of him who is notsuffering from any disease, or other remote effects of opium)feels that the diviner part of his nature is paramount; that is,the moral affections are in a state of cloudless serenity; andover all is the great light of the majestic intellect. This is the doctrine of the true church on the subject ofopium: of which church I acknowledge myself to be the only member-- the alpha and the omega: but then it is to be recollected,that I speak from the ground of a large and profound personalexperience: whereas most of the unscientific{3} authors who haveat all treated of opium, and even of those who have writtenexpressly on the materia medica, make it evident, from the horrorthey express of it, that their experimental knowledge of itsaction is none at all. I will, however, candidly acknowledge thatI have met with one person who bore evidence to its intoxicatingpower, such as staggered my own incredulity: for he was asurgeon, and had himself taken opium largely. I happened to sayto him, that his enemies (as I had heard) charged him withtalking nonsense on politics, and that his friends apologized forhim, by suggesting that he was constantly in a state ofintoxication from opium. Now the accusation, said I, is not/prima facie/, and of necessity, an absurd one: but the defence/is/. To my surprise, however, he insisted that both his enemiesand his friends were in the right: "I will maintain,"said he, "that I /do/ talk nonsense; and secondly, I willmaintain that I do not talk nonsense upon principle, or with anyview to profit, but solely and simply, said he, solely andsimply, -- solely and simply (repeating it three times over),because I am drunk with opium; and /that/ daily." I repliedthat, as to the allegation of his enemies, as it seemed to beestablished upon such respectable testimony, seeing that thethree parties concerned all agreed in it, it did not become me toquestion it; but the defence set up I must demur to. He proceededto discuss the matter, and to lay down his reasons: but it seemedto me so impolite to pursue an argument which must have presumeda man mistaken in a point belonging to his own profession, that Idid not press him even when his course of argument seemed open toobjection: not to mention that a man who talks nonsense, eventhough "with no view to profit," is not altogether themost agreeable partner in a dispute, whether as opponent orrespondent. I confess, however, that the authority of a surgeon,and one who was reputed a good one, may seem a weighty one to myprejudice: but still I must plead my experience, which wasgreater than his greatest by 7000 drops a day; and, though it wasnot possible to suppose a medical man unacquainted with thecharacteristic symptoms of vinous intoxication, it yet struck methat he might proceed on a logical error of using the wordintoxication with too great latitude, and extending itgenerically to all modes of nervous excitement, connected withcertain diagnostics. Some people have maintained, in my hearing,that they had been drunk on green tea: and a medical student inLondon, for whose knowledge in his profession I have reason tofeel great respect, assured me, the other day, that a patient, inrecovering from an illness, had got drunk on a beef-steak. Having dwelt so much on this first and leading error, inrespect to opium, I shall notice very briefly a second and athird; which are, that the elevation of spirits produced by opiumis necessarily followed by a proportionate depression, and thatthe natural and even immediate consequence of opium is torpor andstagnation, animal and mental. The first of these errors I shallcontent myself with simply denying; assuring my reader, that forten years, during which I took opium at intervals, the daysucceeding to that on which I allowed myself this luxury wasalways a day of unusually good spirits. With respect to the torpor supposed to follow, or rather (ifwe were to credit the numerous pictures of Turkish opium-eaters)to accompany the practice of opium-eating, I deny that also.Certainly, opium is classed under the head of narcotics; and somesuch effect it may produce in the end: but the primary effects ofopium are always, and in the highest degree, to excite andstimulate the system: this first stage of its action alwayslasted with me, during my novitiate, for upwards of eight hours;so that it must be the fault of the opium-eater himself if hedoes not so time his exhibition of the dose (to speak medically)as that the whole weight of its narcotic influence may descendupon his sleep. Turkish opium-eaters, it seems, are absurd enoughto sit, like so many equestrian statues, on logs of wood asstupid as themselves. But that the reader may judge of the degreein which opium is likely to stupify the faculties of anEnglishman, I shall (by way of treating the questionillustratively, rather than argumentively) describe the way inwhich I myself often passed an opium evening in London, duringthe period between 1804-1812. It will be seen, that at leastopium did not move me to seek solitude, and much less to seekinactivity, or the torpid state of self- involution ascribed tothe Turks. I give this account at the risk of being pronounced acrazy enthusiast or visionary: but I regard /that/ little: I mustdesire my reader to bear in mind, that I was a hard student, andat severe studies for all the rest of my time: and certainly hada right occasionally to relaxations as well as the other people:these, however, I allowed myself but seldom. The late Duke of Norfolk used to say, "Next Friday, bythe blessing of Heaven, I purpose to be drunk:" and in likemanner I used to fix beforehand how often, within a given time,and when, I would commit a debauch of opium. This was seldom morethan once in three weeks: for at that time I could no haveventured to call every day (as I did afterwards) for "/aglass of laudanum negus, warm, and without sugar/." No: as Ihave said, I seldom drank laudanum, at that time, more than oncein three weeks: this was usually on a Tuesday or a Saturdaynight; my reason for which was this. In those days Grassini sangat the Opera: and her voice was delightful to me beyond all thatI had ever heard. I know not what may be the state of the Opera-house now, having never been within its walls for seven or eightyears, but at that time it was by much the most pleasant place ofpublic resort in London for passing an evening. Five shillingsadmitted one to the gallery, which was subject to far lessannoyance than the pit of the theatres: the orchestra wasdistinguished by its sweet and melodious grandeur from allEnglish orchestras, the composition of which, I confess, is notacceptable to my ear, from the predominance of the clangorousinstruments, and the absolute tyranny of the violin. The choruseswere divine to hear: and when Grassini appeared in someinterlude, as she often did, and poured forth her passionate soulas Andromache, at the tomb of Hector, &c. I question whetherany Turk, of all that ever entered the Paradise of opium-eaters,can have had half the pleasure I had. But, indeed, I honour theBarbarians too much by supposing them capable of any pleasuresapproaching to the intellectual ones of an Englishman. For musicis an intellectual or a sensual pleasure, according to thetemperament of him who hears it. And, by the bye, with theexception of the fine extravaganza on that subject in TwelfthNight, I do not recollect more than one thing said adequately onthe subject of music in all literature: it is a passage in the/Religio Medici/{4} of Sir T. Brown; and, though chieflyremarkable for its sublimity, has also a philosophic value,inasmuch as it points to the true theory of musical effects. Themistake of most people is to suppose that it is by the ear theycommunicate with music, and, therefore, that they are purelypassive to its effects. But this is not so: it is by there-action of the mind upon the notices of the ear, (the /matter/coming by the senses, the /form/ from the mind) that the pleasureis constructed: and therefore it is that people of equally goodear differ so much in this point from one another. Now opium, bygreatly increasing the activity of the mind generally, increases,of necessity, that particular mode of its activity by which weare able to construct out of the raw material of organic sound anelaborate intellectual pleasure. But, says a friend, a successionof musical sounds is to me like a collection of Arabiccharacters: I can attach no ideas to them. Ideas! my good sir? there isno occasion for them: all that class of ideas, which can beavailable in such a case, has a language of representativefeelings. But this is a subject foreign to my present purposes:it is sufficient to say, that a chorus, &c. of elaborateharmony, displayed before me, as in a piece of arras work, thewhole of my past life -- not, as if recalled by an act of memory,but as if present and incarnated in the music: no longer painfulto dwell upon: but the detail of its incidents removed, orblended in some hazy abstraction; and its passions exalted,spiritualized, and sublimed. All this was to be had for fiveshillings. And over and above the music of the stage and theorchestra, I had all around me, in the intervals of theperformance, the music of the Italian language talked by Italianwomen: for the gallery was usually crowded with Italians: and Ilistened with a pleasure such as that with which Weld thetraveller lay and listened, in Canada, to the sweet laughter ofIndian women; for the less you understand of a language, the moresensible you are to the melody or harshness of its sounds: forsuch a purpose, therefore, it was an advantage to me that I was apoor Italian scholar, reading it but little, and not speaking itat all, nor understanding a tenth part of what I heard spoken. These were my Opera pleasures: but another pleasure I hadwhich, as it could be had only on a Saturday night, occasionallystruggled with my love of the Opera; for, at that time, Tuesdayand Saturday were the regular Opera nights. On this subject I amafraid I shall be rather obscure, but, I can assure the reader,not at all more so than Marinus in his life of Proclus, or manyother biographers and auto-biographers of fair reputation. Thispleasure, I have said, was to be had only on a Saturday night.What then was Saturday night to me more than any other night? Ihad no labours that I rested from; no wages to receive: whatneeded I to care for Saturday night, more than as it was asummons to hear Grassini? True, most logical reader: what you sayis unanswerable. And yet so it was and is, that, whereasdifferent men throw their feelings into different channels, andmost are apt to show their interest in the concerns of the poor,chiefly by sympathy, expressed in some shape or other, with theirdistresses and sorrows, I, at that time, was disposed to expressmy interest by sympathising with their pleasures. The pains ofpoverty I had lately seen too much of; more than I wished toremember: but the pleasures of the poor, their consolations ofspirit, and their reposes from bodily toil, can never becomeoppressive to contemplate. Now Saturday night is the season for the chief, regular, andperiodic return of rest to the poor: in this point the mosthostile sects unite, and acknowledge a common link ofbrotherhood: almost all Christendom rests from its labours. It isa rest introductory to another rest: and divided by a whole dayand two nights from the renewal of toil. On this account I feelalways, on a Saturday night, as though I also were released fromsome yoke of labour, had some wages to receive, and some luxuryof repose to enjoy. For the sake, therefore, of witnessing, uponas large a scale as possible, a spectacle with which my sympathywas so entire, I used often, on Saturday nights, after I hadtaken opium, to wander forth, without much regarding thedirection or the distance, to all the markets, and other parts ofLondon, to which the poor resort on a Saturday night, for layingout their wages. Many a family party, consisting of a man, hiswife, and sometimes one or two of his children, have I listenedto, as they stood consulting on their ways and means, or thestrength of their exchequer, or the price of household articles.Gradually I became familiar with their wishes, theirdifficulties, and their opinions. Sometimes there might be heardmurmurs of discontent: but far oftener expressions on thecountenance, or uttered in words, of patience, hope, andtranquility. And taken generally, I must say, that, in this pointat least, the poor are far more philosophic than the rich - thatthey show a more ready and cheerful submission to what theyconsider as irremediably evils, or irreparable losses. Whenever Isaw occasion, or could do it without appearing to be intrusive, Ijoined their parties; and gave my opinion upon the matter indiscussion, which, if not always judicious, was always receivedindulgently. If wages were a little higher, or expected to be so,or the quartern loaf a little lower, or it was reported thatonions and butter were expected to fall, I was glad: yet, if thecontrary were true, I drew from opium some means of consolingmyself. For opium (like the bee, that extracts its materialsindiscriminately from roses and from the soot of chimneys) canoverrule all feelings into a compliance with the master key. Some of these rambles led me to great distances: for anopium-eater is too happy to observe the motion of time. Andsometimes in my attempts to steer homewards, upon nauticalprinciples, by fixing my eye on the pole-star, and seekingambitiously for a north-west passage, instead of circumnavigatingall the capes and head-lands I had doubled in my outward voyage,I came suddenly upon such knotty problems of alleys, suchenigmatical entries, and such sphynx's riddles of streets withoutthoroughfares, as must, I conceive, baffle the audacity ofporters, and confound the intellects of hackney- coachmen. Icould almost have believed, at times, that I must be the firstdiscoverer of some of these /terrae incognitae/, and doubted,whether they had yet been aid down in the modern charts ofLondon. For all this, however, I paid a heavy price in distantyears, when the human face tyrannized over my dreams, and theperplexities of my steps in London came back and haunted mysleep, with the feeling of perplexities moral or intellectual,that brought confusion to the reason, or anguish and remorse tothe conscience. Thus I have shown that opium does not, of necessity, produceinactivity or torpor; but that, on the contrary, it often led meinto markets and theatres. Yet, in candour, I will admit thatmarkets and theatres are not the appropriate haunts of theopium-eater, when in the divinest state incident to hisenjoyment. In that state, crowds become an oppression to him;music even, too sensual and gross. He naturally seeks solitudeand silence, as indispensable conditions of those trances, orprofoundest reveries, which are the crown and consummation ofwhat opium can do for human nature. I, whose disease it was tomeditate too much, and to observe too little, and who, upon myfirst entrance at college, was nearly falling into a deepmelancholy, from brooding too much on the sufferings which I hadwitnessed in London, was sufficiently aware of the tendencies ofmy own thoughts to do all I could to counteract them. -- I was,indeed, like a person who, according to the old legend, hadentered the cave of Trophonius: and the remedies I sought were toforce myself into society, and to keep my understanding incontinual activity upon matters of science. But for theseremedies, I should certainly have become hypochondriacallymelancholy. In after years, however, when my cheerfulness wasmore fully re-established, I yielded to my natural inclinationfor a solitary life. And, at that time, I often fell into thesereveries upon taking opium; and more than once it has happened tome, on a summer-night, when I have been at an open window, in aroom from which I could overlook the sea at a mile below me, andcould command a view of the great town of Liverpool, at about thesame distance, that I have sate, from sun-set to sun-rise,motionless, and without wishing to move. I shall be charged with mysticism, behmenism, quietism,&c. but /that/ shall not alarm me. Sir H. Vane, the younger,was one of our wisest men: and let my readers see if he, in hisphilosophical works, be half as unmystical as I am. -- I say,then, that it has often struck me that the scene itself wassomewhat typical of what took place in such a reverie. The townof Liverpool represented the earth, with its sorrows and itsgraves left behind, yet not out of sight, nor wholly forgotten.The ocean, in everlasting but gentle agitation, and brooded overby a dove-like calm, might not unfitly typify the mind and themood which then swayed it. For it seemed to me as if then first Istood at a distance, and aloof from the uproar of life; as if thetumult, the fever, and the strife, were suspended; a respitegranted from the secret burthens of the heart; a sabbath ofrepose; a resting from human labours. Here were the hopes whichblossom in the paths of life, reconciled with the peace which isin the grave; motions of the intellect as unwearied as theheavens, yet for all anxieties a halcyon calm: a tranquility thatseemed no product of inertia, but as if resulting from mighty andequal antagonisms; infinite activities, infinite repose. Oh! just, subtle, and mighty opium! that to the hearts ofpoor and rich alike, for the wounds that will never heal, and for"the pangs that tempt the spirit to rebel," bringestand assuaging balm; eloquent opium! that with thy potent rhetoricstealest away the purposes of wrath; and to the guilty man, forone night givest back the hopes of his youth, and hands washedpure from blood; and to the proud man, a brief oblivion forWrongs unredress'd, and insults unavenged; that summonest to thechancery of dreams, for the triumphs of suffering innocence,false witnesses; and confoundest perjury; and dost reverse thesentences of unrighteous judges: -- thou buildest upon the bosomof darkness, out of the fantastic imagery of the brain, citiesand temples, beyond the art of Phidias and Praxiteles -- beyondthe splendour of Babylon and Hekatompylos: and "from theanarchy of dreaming sleep," callest into sunny light thefaces of long-buried beauties, and the blessed householdcountenances, cleansed from the "dishonours of thegrave." Thou only givest these gifts to man; and thou hastthe keys of Paradise, oh, just, subtle, and mighty opium! ----- {1} /Evanesced:/ -- this way of going off the stage of lifeappears to have been well known in the 17th century, but at thetime to have been considered a peculiar privilege of blood-royal,and by no means to be allowed to druggists. For about the year1686, a poet of rather ominous name (and who, by the bye, didample justice to his name), viz. Mr. Flat-man, in speaking of thedeath of Charles II. expresses his surprise that any princeshould commit so absurd an act as dying; because, says he, Kings should disdain to die, and only /disappear./ They should /abscond/, that is, into the other world. {2} Of this, however, the learned appear latterly to havedoubted: for in a pirated edition of Buchan's /DomesticMedicine/, which I once saw in the hands of a farmer's wife whowas studying it for the benefit of her health, the Doctor wasmade to say -- "Be particularly careful never to take abovefive- and-twenty /ounces/ of laudanum at once;" the truereading being probably five- and-twenty /drops/, which are heldequal to about one grain of crude opium. {3} Amongst the great herd of travellers, &c. who showsufficiently by their stupidity that they never held anyintercourse with opium, I must caution my readers especiallyagainst the brilliant author of /"Anastasius."/ Thisgentleman, whose wit would lead one to presume him anopium-eater, has made it impossible to consider him in thatcharacter from the grievous misrepresenta-tion which he gives ofits effects, at pp. 215-17, of vol. I. - Upon consideration itmust appear such to the author himself: for, waiving the errors Ihave insisted on in the text, which (and others) are adopted inthe fullest manner, he will himself admit, that an old gentleman"with a snow-white beard," who eats "ample dosesof opium," and is yet able to deliver what is meant andreceived as very weighty counsel on the bad effects of thatpractice, is but an indifferent evidence that opium either killspeople prematurely, or sends them into a madhouse. But, for mypart, I see into this old gentleman and his motives: the fact is,he was enamoured of "the little golden receptacle of thepernicious drug" which Anastasius carried about him; and noway of obtaining it so safe and so feasible occurred, as that offrightening its owner out of his wits (which, by the bye, arenone of the strongest). This commentary throws a new light uponthe case, and greatly improves it as a story: for the oldgentleman's speech, considered as a lecture on pharmacy, ishighly absurd: but, considered as a hoax on Anastasius, it readsexcellently. {4} I have not the book at this moment to consult: but Ithink the passage begins -- "And even that tavern music,which makes one man merry, another mad, in me strikes a deep fitof devotion," &c. CliffSchaffer's Home Page WT01-B26-14IA087-000632-B027-233http://206.61.184.43:80/schaffer/history/canada1.htm 206.61.184.43 19970122095528 text/html 9321HTTP/1.0 200 OKDate: Wednesday, 22-Jan-97 09:55:21 GMTServer: WebSitePro/1.1f (S/N wpo-0deb)Allow-ranges: bytesContent-type: text/htmlLast-modified: Saturday, 28-Dec-96 05:39:18 GMTContent-length: 9104 The Politics of Canada's Drug Laws. Panic and Indifference The Politics of Canada's Drug Laws. P.J. Giffen, Shirley Endicott and Sylvia Lambert. A study in the Sociology of Law. (Highly recomended.) <Begin Quoted Text pgs 66-68> Another important claimant for credit in bringing about thelegislation was a young Conservative in Vancouver, H. H. Stevens.Stevens became a very vocal MP during the narcotics debates ofthe 1920s, and personally introduced several importantamendments. His zeal for narcotic drug prohibition was kindledduring his early investigations of the problem. According to his own account, when he learned about thegambling and opium trade being carried on in Vancouver'sChinatown, he took the following actions: I took it up with the Chief of Police, but he just brushed meoff. Then I went down into Chinatown itself, and visited thegambling joints and also saw personally the Chinese preparing rawopium for the market. When the Chief of Police refused to takeany action, I used to publish in the _Vancouver News Advertiser_exactly what I had seen the night before. This I did for severalweeks. It created quite a sensation in Vancouver, and as a resultthe civic authorities discharged the Chief and appointed Mr.Chamberlain. This man, when he became Chief of Police, did anexcellent job in clearing up Chinatown(29). He described his role in bringing about the first opium Actas follows: (In 1908) I was responsible for the matter being brought tothe attention of the then government. I remember taking some veryprominent eastern gentlemen around Pacific Coast cities andshowing them the effects and use of these drugs. They returned toOttawa and put it up to Sir Wilfred Laurier, and the result wasthe Bill that was introduced(13d,p.2899). <SNIP> The motives of H. H. Stevens and of the city councils areopen to question. They appear in this instance to have beenconcerned about moral reform and civic order but all wereassociated with anti-Chinese policies in other contexts. Stevenscame to be recognized as the "the city's leadinganti-Oriental spokesman" (30, p.91), in Parliament as atlocal rallies. Civic politicians, too, had an anti-Chineserhetoric as part of their election kit and, once elected, usuallysupported the use of municipal ordinances and licensing powersfor discriminatory purposes. <SNIP> The League's (Vancouver Anti-Opium League) representations toKing(Mackenzie) included an urgent telegram at the time when theBill was being sent to the Senate and the opium manufacturerswere lobbying for a moratorium to protect their financialinterests. INFORM GOVERNMENT NOT TO LET MANUFACTURERS DELAY LEGISTAION.CHINESE AT LARGE FAVOUR IMMEDIATE SUPPRESSION(2d). <End pgs 66-68> <Begin pg 203> THE PUBLIC Interested sections of the public became very vocal andactive during the same period in in demanding more severepenalties. The cry for heavier punishment was the result of adrug scare created almost entirely by alarmist stories in themass media. The stories, of which Emily Murphy's articles in_Maclean's_ were a prime example, reinforced pre-existinghostility to Orientals and augmented the horrifying spectre ofthe "dope fiend." The negative racial stereotypes andalarming drug mythology, spread by people who claimed to havefirst-hand knowledge, were accepted uncritically. The immediateresult of these fears and hostility was the emergence of aBritish Columbia drug lobby in 1921, with the straightforwardgoals of compulsory imprisonment and whipping for all traffickersand, where possible, deportation. Public fears about narcoticdrugs were particularly intense in British Columbia, the provincewith the largest concentration of Chinese immigrants.Accordingly, the greatest pressure on legislators for severepenalties originated in that province. Much of the demand forgreater punitiveness was linked to animus against the Chinese anda desire to get rid of them, seen most clearly in the proposalfor deportation. <End Quoted Text pg 203.> APPENDIX 2 - Persons Convicted of Offences Against the Opiumand Narcotic Drug Act by country of Birth 1922-1969(1) YEAR TOTAL Non-China(2) China % Other(3) 1922 1,858 733 1,117 60.1 1923 1,297 688 604 46.6 4 1924 997 327 633 66.5 5 1925 835 366 469 56.2 1926 743 240 495 66.5 7 1927 491 133 353 71.9 3 1928 608 187 412 67.8 7 1929 616 110 506 82.1 **** 82.1 % ***** 1930 461 164 281 60.9 1 1931 316 147 169 53.5 1932 NA 1933 230 108 122 53.0 1934 218 93 125 57.3 1935 165 101 64 38.3 1936 182 136 55 30.2 1937 220 177 35 15.9 8 1938 183 142 40 21.9 1939 226 192 24 10.6 11 1940 234 199 32 13.7 3 1941 273 241 31 11.4 1 1942 136 130 5 3.7 1 1943 136 128 8 5.9 1944 194 167 27 13.9 1945 212 199 13 6.1 1946 247 220 27 10.9 1947 341 321 16 4.7 4 1948 316 304 0 - 12 1949 353 350 2 .6 1 1950 356 346 5 1.4 5 1951 353 338 10 2.8 5 1952 367 359 5 1.4 3 1953 337 325 9 2.7 3 1954 306 291 11 3.6 4 1955 349 400 8 2.3 1 1956 382 377 0 - 5 1957 400 393 5 1.3 2 1958 488 486 1 .2 1 1959 565 560 3 .5 2 1960 467 460 3 .6 4 1961 464 459 3 .6 2 1962 334 277 1 .3 56 1963 318 309 5 1.6 4 1964 325 314 8 2.5 3 1965(4) 377 375 2 1966 428 418 10 1967 958 903 55 1968 1,372 1,326 46 1969 2,200 1,961 239 (1) From Criminal Statistics 1922 to 1969 (2) Includes Canada, the British Isles, the BritishCommonwealth, the United States and Europe. (3) Includes Asia and "not stated." (4) Chinese data no longer specified. --- APPENDIX 3 - Number of Aliens Deported from Canada havingbeen Convicted of Offences Under the Opium and Narcotic Drug Act from 1922to 1944(1) YEAR CHINESE US Citizens Others 1922 4 11 0 1923 92 29 9 1924 125 24 5 1925 88 24 7 1926 86 10 1 1927 55 13 1 1928 69 5 4 1929 59 6 4 1930 60 7 4 1931 70 1 5 1932 53 7 6 1933 81 1 5 1934 59 5 3 1935 60 6 3 1936 23 1 3 1937 16 1 1 1938 16 2 2 1939 22 3 0 1940 26 2 2 1941 14 1 1 1942 1 1943 1 1944 4 2 (1) From Annual Report, Department of Pensions and NationalHealth, 1934-5, Table 5, p. 110 and Annual Report, Department of NationalHealth and Welfare, 1944-5, Table 5, p.25. --- APPENDIX 6 - Possession Offences: Individual Drugs, 1922-1972 YEAR OPIUM MORPHINE COCAINE HEROIN MARIJUANA OTHER 1922 272 66 93 - - 665 1923 155 79 43 - - 564 1924 48 41 19 - - 276 <SNIP> 1929 56 26 10 12 - 285 (first one for heroin) <SNIP> 1937 39 23 3 64 4 18 (first year including marijuana) <SNIP> 1955 2 7 - 242 8 34 1956 - - - 29 1 322 1957 - 6 - 274 5 31 (No further opium charges after 1955) <SNIP> 1963 - 15 1 222 29 26 1964 - 13 1 227 39 18 1965 - 20 2 222 42 35 1966 - 21 1 193 112 50 1967 16 - 281 447 55 1968 - 10 1 199 817 49 1969 - 6 2 185 1,476 58 1970 201(2) 5,399 1971 1972 630 10,695(2) (1) Criminal Statistics (2) From Bureau of Dangerous Drugs, Health Protection Branch,Health and Welfare Canada 9/3/73. Source : CliffSchaffer's Home Page WT01-B26-15IA087-000632-B027-339http://206.61.184.43:80/schaffer/history/saved1867.htm 206.61.184.43 19970122095643 text/html 68547HTTP/1.0 200 OKDate: Wednesday, 22-Jan-97 09:56:31 GMTServer: WebSitePro/1.1f (S/N wpo-0deb)Allow-ranges: bytesContent-type: text/htmlLast-modified: Sunday, 19-Jan-97 10:58:39 GMTContent-length: 68331 What Shall They Do to Be Saved - 1867 Contents | Feedback | Search DRCNet Library | Schaffer Library | Historical Research Harper's magazine 35, Aug. 1867, pp. 377-87 What Shall They Do to Be Saved? I have just returned from forty-eight hours'friendly and professional attendance at a bedside where I wouldfain place every young person in this country for a single hourbefore the Responsibilities of Life have become the sentinels andHabit the jailor of his Will. My patient was a gentleman of forty, who forseveral years of his youth occasionally used opium, and, for thelast eight has habitually taken it. During these eight years hehas made at least three efforts to leave it off, in each instancediminishing his dose gradually for a month before its entireabandonment, and in the most successful one holding the enemy atbay but for a single summer. In two cases he had no respite ofagony from the moment he dropped till he resumed it. In the thirdcase, a short period of comparative repose succeeded the firstfiery battle, but in the midst of felicitations on his victory hewas attacked by the most agonizing hemicranial headaches(resulting from what I now fear to have been already permanentdisorganization of the stomach), and went back to his nepenthe ina state of almost suicidal despair, only after the torture hadcontinued for weeks without a moment's mitigation. He had first learned its seductions, as happenswith the vast majority of Anglo-Saxon opium-eaters, through amedical prescription. An attack of inflamed cornea was treatedwith caustic applications, and the pian assuaged by internaldoses of M'Munn's Elixir. When my friend came out of his darkroom and bandages at the end of a month he had consumed twentyounces of this preparation, whose probable distinction from thetincture known as laudanum I point out below in the note. [FN*] ________ * Mr. Frank A. Schlitz has kindly made for me aspecial analysis of M'Munn's Elixir which seems to prove that theprocess of its preparation amounts to more than thedenarcotization of opium, which is spoken of on the wrapper ofeach vial. As nearly as can be ascertained, M'Munn's Elixir issimply an aqueous infusion of opium--procured by the ordinarymaceration--and preserved from decomposing by the subsequentaddition of a small portion of alcohol. Narcotin being absolutelyinsoluble in water is eliminated as the circular says. This facealong would not account for the difference between its action andthat of laudanum. This is explained by the fact that all theother alkaloids possess diverse rates of solubility in water, andexist in M'Munn's Elixir in very different relative proportionsfrom those which they bear to each other in the alcoholictincture called laudanum. _____ Here it may not be superfluous to say that theformer preparation has all the essential properties of thelatter, save certain of the constipatory and stupefyingtendencies which, by a private process known to the assigns ofthe inventor, have been so masked or removed that it possesses inmany cases an availableness which the practitioner can notdespise, though compelled by the secrecy of its formula to rankit among quack medicines. The amount of it which my friend hadtaken during this month's eclipse represents an ounce of dry gumopium--in rough measurement a piece as large as a French billiardball. I thus particularize because he had never previously beenaddicted to the drug; had inherited a sound constitution, anddiffered from any other fresh subject only in the intensity ofhis nervous temperament. I wish to emphasize the fact that thesystem of a mere neophyte, with nothing to neutralize the effectsof the drug save the absorbency, so to speak, of the pain fromwhich it was given, could so rapidly adapt itself to them as todemand an increase of the dose in such an alarming ratio. Thereare certain men to whom opium is as fire to tow, and my friendwas one of these. On the 1st of October he sensibly perceived thetrifling dose of fifty drops; on the first of November he wastaking, without increased sensation, an ounce vial of"M'Munn" daily. From that time--totally ignorant of theterrible trap which lay grinning under the bait he dabbledwith--he continued to take opium at short intervals for severalyears. When by the physician's orders he abandoned"M'Munn," on the subsidence of the eye-difficulty, hissymptoms were uneasy rather than distressing, and disappearedafter a few days' oppression at the pit of the stomach and a fewnights' troubled dreaming. But he had not forgotten the sweetdissolving views at midnight, the great executive achievements atnoonday, the heavenly sense of a self-reliance which dare goanywhere, say anything, attempt anything in the world. He had notforgotten the nonchalance under slight, the serenity in pain, theapathy to sorrow, which for one month set him calm as Boodh inthe temple-splendors of his darkened room. He had not forgottenthat the only perfect peace he had ever experienced was there,and he remembered that peace as something which seemed to blendall the assuaged passion and confirmed dignity of old age withthat energy of high emprise which thrills the nerves of manhood.He had tasted as many sources of earthly pleasure as any man Iever knew; but the ecstasies of form and color, wine, Eros,music, perfume, all the luxuries of surrounding which wealthcould purchase or high-breeding appreciate, were as nothing tohim in comparison with the memory of that time on which hisfamily threw away their sympathy when they called it his"month of suffering." Accordingly, without much more instinct ofconcealment than if it were an occasional tendency to some slightconvivial excess, he had resort to M'Munn, in ounce doses,whenever the world went wrong with him. If he had a headache or atoothache; if the weather depressed him; if he had a certain"stint" of work to do without the sense of native vigorto accomplish it; if he was perplexed and wished to clear hishead of passion; if anxieties kept him awake; if irregularitiesdisturbed his digestion--he had always one refuge certain. Nofateful contingency could pursue him inside M'Munn's enchantedcircle. He was a young and wealthy bachelor, living the life of arefined bon vivant; an insatiable traveler, surrounded byflatterers, and without a single friend who loved him enough towarn him of his danger excepting those who, like himself, weretoo ignorant to know it. After three years of dalliance he becamean habitual user of opium, and had been one for eight years whenI was first called to him. By the time that the daily habit fasteneditself he had learned of other opiate preparations than M'Munn's,and finding a certain insufficiency characterize that tincture ashe increased the size of the dose, had recourse to laudanum,which contains the full native vigor of the drug unmodified. Thisnauseated him. He had the same experience with gum opium, opiumpills, and opium powder; so that he was driven to that form ofexhibition which sooner or later naturally strikes almost everyopium-eater as the most portable, energetic, andinstantaneous--morphia or one of its salts. My friend usuallykept the simple alkaloid in a paper, and dissolved it as heneeded it in clear water, sometimes substituting an equivalent of"Magendie's Solution," which contains sixteen grams ofthe salt diffused through an ounce of water by the addition of afew drops of sulfuric acid. When I first saw him he had reached adaily dose of twelve grains of sulphate of morphia, and onoccasions of high excitement had increased his dose withoutexaggerating the sensible effect to nearly twenty. The twelvewhich formed his habitual per diem were divided into two equaldoses, one taken immediately after rising, the other just beforesundown. As yet he had not begun to feel the worstphysical effects which sooner or later visit the opium-eater. Hisdigestion seemed unimpaired so long as he took his morphiaregularly; he was sallow and somewhat haggard, but thus far nodistressing biliary symptoms had manifested themselves; his sleepwas always dreamy, and he woke at short intervals during thenight, but invariably slept again at once, and had so adjustedhimself to the habit as to show no signs of suffering fromwakefulness; his hand was steady; his muscular system easilyexhausted, but by no means what one would call feeble. As hehimself told me, he had come to the conclusion to emancipatehimself because opium-eating was a horrible mental bondage. Thephysical power of the drug over him he only realized whenattempting its abandonment. Its spiritual thralldom was hishourly misery. He was connected by blood and marriage withseveral of the best families in the land. Money had not beenstinted in his education, and his capabilities were as great ashis advantages. He was one of the bravest, fairest, most generousnatures I ever came in contact with; was versatile as a YankeeCrichton; had ridden his own horse in a trotting match and beatenBill Woodruff; had carried his own little 30-ton schooner fromthe Chesapeake to the Golden Gate through the Straits ofMagellan; had swum with the Navigators' Islanders, shot buffalo,hunted chamois, and lunched on mangosteens at Penang. Through allhis wanderings the loftiest sense of what was heroic in humannature and divine in its purified form, the monitions of a mosttender conscience, and the echoes of that Puritan education whichabove all other schemes of training makes human responsibilityterrible, had gone with him like his tissue. He saw the good andgreat things within reach of a fulfilled manhood, and of a suddenwaked up to feel that they could on earth never be his. He wasnaturally very truthful, and, although the invariable tendency ofopium-eating is to extirpate this quality, could not flatterhimself. Other minds around him responded to a sudden call as hisown did not. Every day the need of energy took him more bysurprise. The image-graving and project-buildingcharacteristic of opium, which comes on with a sense of genialradiation from the epigastrium about a quarter of an hour afterthe dose, had not yet so entirely disappeared from its effect onhim, as it always does at a later stage of the indulgence. Butinstead of being an instigation to the delightful reveries whichensued on his earlier doses, this peculiarity was now anexecutioner's knot in the hands of Remorse. He was daily andnightly haunted by plans and pictures whose feverish unrealbeauty he remembered having seen through a hundred times. ThoseFata Morgana plans, should he again waste on them the effort ofconstruction? The result had been a chaos of aimless, ineffectualdays. Those pictures, why were they brought again to mock him?Were they not horrible impossibilities? Were they not, throughthe paralysis of his executive faculties, mere startlinglikenesses of Disappointment? In his opium dreams he had seen hisown ships on the sea; commerce bustling in his warehouse; moneyoverflowing in this bank; babies crowing on his knee; a wifenestling at his breast; a basso voice of tremendous natural powerand depth scientifically cultivated to its utmost power ofpleasing artists or friends; a country estate on the Hudson, orat Newport, with emerald lawns sloping down to the amber river onthe leek-green sea; the political and social influence of a greatlandholder. How pleasurably he had once perceived all thesepossible joys and powers! How undeludedly he now saw theirimpossible execution! So, coming to me, he told me that his object intrying to leave off opium was to escape from these horribleghosts of a life's unfulfilled promise. Only when he tried toabandon opium did he realize the physical hold the drug had onhim. Its spiritual thralldom was his hourly misery. For three months I tried to treat him in hisown house, here in the city. A practitioner of any experienceneed not be told with what success. I could reduce him to a doseof half a grain of sulphate of morphia a day, keep him there oneweek, and making a morning call at the expiration of that timediscover that some nocturnal nervous paroxysm had necessitatedeither a return to five grains or a use of brandy (which, thoughno drinker, he tried to substitute) sufficient to demand a muchlarger dose of opium in its reaction. He had lost most of hisnear connections, and not for one hour could any hired attendanthave withstood his appeal, or that marvelous ingenuity by which,without appeal, the opium-eater obtains the drug which, to him,is like oxygen to the normal man. This ingenuity manifests itself in subterfugesof a complicated construction and artistic plausibility whichmight have puzzled Richelieu; but it is really nothing to wonderat when we recollect the law of nature by which any extremeagony, so long as it continues remediable, sharpens andconcentrates all a man's faculties upon the one single object ofprocuring the remedy. If my house is on fire, I run to thehydrant by a mere automatic operation of my nerves. If my leg iscaught in the bite of a paying-out hawser, my whole brain focusesat once on that single thought, "an axe.' If I am enduringthe agony which opium alone can cause and cure, every faculty ofmy mind is called to the aid of the tortured body which wants it.When a man has used opium for a long time the condition of hisbrain supervening on his deprivation of the drug for a period oftwenty-four hours is such as very frequently to render himsuicidal. Cottle tells us how Coleridge one day took a walk alongBristol wharves, and sent his attendant down the pier to inquirethe name of a vessel, while he slipped into a druggist's on thequay and bought a quart of laudanum; but in no fibre of hisnature could Cottle conceive the awful sense of a forcedespotizing it over his will, a degradation descending on hismanhood, which Coleridge felt as he concentrated on that onesingle cry of his animal nature and the laudanum which it spokefor, fall the faculties of construction and insight which hadcreated the "Ancient Mariner" and the "Aids toReflection." Likewise I suppose there are very few peoplewho could patiently regard the fact that one of the very purestand bravest souls I ever knew had become so demoralized by theperseverance of disease and suffering as to deal like a lawyerwith his best friends, and shuffle to the very edge of falsehood,when his nature clamored for opium. I was particular to tell himwhenever I detected any evasion (an occasion on which his shameand remorse were terrible to witness) that I, personally, hadnonetheless respect for him. I knew he was dominated, and in nosense more responsible for breaking his resolution than he wouldhave been had he vowed to hold his finger in the gas-blaze untilit burned off. In this latter case the mere translation ofchemical decomposition into pain, and round the automaticnerve-arc into involuntary motion, would have drawn his fingerout of the blaze, as it did in the cases of Mutius Sevola andCranmer, if they ever attempted the feat credited them bytradition. In his case the abandonment of opium brought on anagony which took his actions entirely out of voluntary control,eclipsing the higher ideals and heroisms of his imagination atonce, and reducing him to that automatic condition in which thenervous system issues and enforces only those edicts which arecounseled by pure animal self- preservation. Whatever may havebeen the patient's responsibility in beginning the use ofnarcotics or stimulants (and I usually find, the case ofopium-eaters, that its degree has been very small indeed,therapeutic use often fixing the habit forever before a patienthas convalesced far enough even to know what he is taking)habituation invariably tends to reduce the man to the automaticplane, in which the will returns wholly to the tutelage ofsensation and emotion, as it was in infancy; while all theIntellectual, save Memory, and the most noble and imperishableamong the Moral faculties may survive this disorganization foryears, standing erect above the remainder of a personalitydefrauded of its completion to show what a great and beautifulhouse might have been built on such strong an shapely pillars.Inebriates have been repeatedly known to risk imminent death ifthey could not reach their liquor in any other way. The graspwith which liquor holds a man when it turns on him, even after hehas abused it for a lifetime, compared with the ascendancypossessed by opium over the unfortunate habituated to it for buta single year, is as the clutch of an angry woman to the embraceof Victor Hugo's Pieuvre. A patient whom, after habitual use ofopium for ten years, I met when he had spent eight years more inreducing his daily dose to half a grain of morphia, with a viewto its eventual complete abandonment, once spoke to me in thesewords: "God seems to help a man in getting out ofevery difficulty but opium. There you have to claw your way outover red-hot coals on your hands and knees, and drag yourself bymain strength through the burning dungeon- bars." This statement does not exaggerate the feelingof many another opium- eater whom I have known. Now, such a man is a proper subject, not forreproof, but for medical treatment. The problem of his case needembarrass nobody. It is as purely physical as one of small-pox.When this truth is as widely understood among the laity as it isknown by physicians, some progress may be made in staying thefrightful ravages of opium among the present generation. Now,indeed, it is a difficult thing to prevent relatives fromexacerbating the disorder and the pain of a patient, who, fromtheir uninformed standpoint, seems as sane and responsible asthemselves, by reproaches at which they would shudder, as at anyother cruelty, could they be brought to realize that their friendis suffering under a disease of the very machinery of volition;and no more to be judge harshly for his acts than a wound forsuppurating or the bowels for continuing the peristaltic motion. Finding--as is common with all physicians Ihave found so many times before--that no control of the casecould be obtained while the patient stayed at home, and deeplyrenewing my often-experienced regret that the science andChristian charity of this country have perfected no scheme bywhich either inebriates or opium-eaters may be properly treatedin a special institution of their own, I was at lengthreluctantly compelled to send my friend to an ordinary water-cureat some distance from town. The cause of my reluctance was not the prospectof a too liberal use of water, for by arrangement with the headsof the establishment I was able to control that as I chose;moreover, an employment of the hot-bath in what would ordinarilybe excess is absolutely necessary as a sedative throughout thefirst week of the struggle. I have had several patients whomduring this period I plunged into water at 110 degrees Fahrenheitas often as fifteen times in a single day--each bath lasting aslong as the patient experienced relief. In some cases thisElysium coming after the rack has been the only period for amonth in which the sufferer had anything resembling a doze. Myreluctance arose from the necessity of sending a patient in suchan advanced state of the opium disease so far away from me that Imust rely on reports written by people without my eyes, forkeeping personally au courant with the case; that I must consultand prescribe by letter, subject to the execution of my plans bymen, who, though excellent and careful, were ignorant of mytheories of treatment, and had never made this particular diseasea specialty. I accordingly sent Mr. A. away to the water-cure,all friendless and alone to fight the final battle of his lifeagainst tougher odds than he had ever before encountered. At notime in my life have I realized with greater bitterness thehelplessness of a practitioner who has no institution of his ownto take such cases to than when I shook his poor, dry sallow handand bade him goodbye at the station. As I said in the beginning, I am just home fromseeing the result. Mr. A. has fared as special cases always dowhere there is no special provision for them. To speak plainly,he had been badly neglected; and that, undoubtedly, without theslightest intention on the part of the heads of the house to doother than their duty. Six weeks ago I heard from the firstphysician that any friend was entirely free from opium, and,though still suffering, was steadily on the mend. I had nofurther news from him till I was called to his bedside by a notewhich said he feared he was dying, penciled in a hand astremulously illegible as the confession of Guy Fawkes. I was withhim by the earliest train I could take, after arranging with aneighbor for my practice, and found him in a condition which ledhim to say, as I myself said at the commencement of this article:"Would to God that every young person could stand for asingle hour by this bedside before Life's responsibilities havebecome the sentinels and Habit the jailer of the Will!" I had not been intelligently informedrespecting the progress of his case. He had been better at notime when I was told he was so, though his freedom from opium hadbeen of even longer duration than I was advised. For ninety dayshe had been without opium in any form. The scope of sountechnical an article leaves no room to detail what had beendone for him as alleviation. His prostration had been so greatthat he could not correspond with me himself until the moment ofhis absolutely extremity; and only after repeated entreaties totelegraph to myself and his family had been refused on the groundthat his condition was not critical, he managed to get off thepoor scrawl which brought me to his side. For the ninety days he had been going withoutopium he had known nothing like proper sleep. I desire to beunderstood with mathematical literalness. There had been periodswhen he had been semi-conscious; when the outline of things inhis room grew vaguer and for five minutes he had a dull sensationof not knowing where he was. This temporary numbness was the onlystate which in all that time simulated sleep. From the hour hefirst refused his craving, and went to the battlefield of bed, hehad endured such agony as I believe no man but the opium-eaterhas ever known. I am led to believe that the records of fatallesion, mechanical childbirth, cancerous affection, the stakeitself, contains no greater torture than a confirmed opium-eaterexperiences in getting free. Popularly this suffering is supposedto be purely intellectual-- but nothing can be wider of thetruth. Its intellectual part is bad enough, but the physicalsymptoms are appalling beyond representation. The look on theface of the opium sufferer is indeed one of such keen mentalanguish that outsiders may well be excused for supposing that isall. I shall never forget till my dying day that awful Chineseface which actually made me rein my horse at the door of theopium hong where it appeared, after a night's debauch, at sixo'clock one morning when I was riding in the outskirts of aPacific city. It spoke of such a nameless horror in its owner'ssoul that I made the sign for a pipe and proposed, in"pigeon English," to furnish the necessary coin. TheChinaman sank down on the steps of the hong, like a man hearingmedicine proposed to him when he was gangrened from head to foot,and made a gesture, palms downward, toward the ground, as one whosaid, "It has done its last for me--I am paying the maturedbills of penalty." The man had exhausted all that opiumcould give him; and now, flattery past, the strong one kept hisgoods in peace. When the most powerful alleviative known tomedical science has bestowed the last Judas kiss which isnecessary to emasculate its victim, and, sure of the prey,substitutes stabbing for blandishment, what alleviative, strongerthan the strongest, shall soothe such doom? I may givechloroform. I always do in the denouement of badcases--ether--nitrous oxide. In employing the first two agents Isecure rest, but I induce death nine cases out of ten. Nothing isbetter known to medical men than the intolerance of the system tochloroform or ether after opium. Nitrous oxide I am stillexperimenting with, but its simple undiffused form is toopowerful an agent to use with a patient who for many days must behourly treated for persevering pain. So the opium-eater is leftas entirely without anesthetic as the usual practice leaves himwithout therapeutic means. Both here and abroad opium-eaters havediscovered the fact that, in an inveterate case, where opiumfails to act on the brain through the exhausted tissues of thestomach, bichloride of mercury in combination with the dosebehaves like a mordant in the presence of a dye, and, so tospeak, precipitates opium upon the calloused surfaces of themucous and nervous layers. This expedient soon exhausts itself ina death from colliquative diarrhea, produced partly by the finaldecompositions of tissue which the poisonously antisepticproperty of opium has all along improperly stored away; partly bythe definite corrosions of the new addition to the dose. But inno case is there any relief to a desperate case of opium-eatingsave death. Remembering that Chinaman's faced I can notwonder at the popular notion regarding the abandonment of opium.Men say it is a mental pain; because spiritual woe is theexpression of the sufferer's countenance. And so it is, but thiswoe is underlain by the keenest brute suffering. Let me sketchthe opium-eater's experience on the rugged road upward. Let us suppose him a resolute man, who means tobe free, and with that intent has reduced to a hundred drops thedaily dose which for several years had amounted to an ounce oflaudanum. I am not supposing an extreme case. An ounce oflaudanum is a small per diem for any man who has taken hisregular rations of the drug for a twelvemonth. In the majority ofcases I have found an old habitue's daily portion to exceedthree, or the equivalent of that dose in crude opium or morphia;making seventy-two grains of the gum or twelve of its mostessential alkaloid. In one most interesting case I found a manwho having begun on the first of January with one half a grain ofsulphate of morphia for disease, at the end of March was, to allappearance, as hopeless an opium-eater as ever lived, takingthirty-two grains of the salt per day in the form of Magendie'sSolution. This, however, was an unusual case. According to myexperience the average opium-eater reaches twelve grains ofmorphia [microfiche illegible]... and may live after that totreble the amount: the worst case I ever knew attaining a dose ofninety grains, or one and a half of the drachm vials ordinarilysold. I am happy, in passing, to add that for more than two yearsboth the extreme cases just mentioned have been entirely cured. If the opium-eater has been in the habit ofdividing his daily dose he begins to feel some uneasiness withinan hour after his first deprivation, but it amounts to nothingmore than an indefinite restlessness. In any case his firstwell-marked opium torments occur early after he has been withoutthe drug for twenty-four hours. At the expiration of that time he begins tofeel a peculiar corded and tympanic tightness about theepigastrium. A feverish condition of the brain, which sometimesamounts to absolute phantasia, now ensues, marked off intoperiods of increasing excitement by a heavy sleep, which, aftereach interval, grows fuller of tremendous dreams, and breaks upwith a more intensely irritable waking. I have held a man's handwhile he lay dreaming about the thirty-sixth hour of hisstruggle. His eyes were closed for less than a minute by thewatch, but he awoke in a horrible agony of fear from what seemedto have been a year-long siege of some colossal and demoniacVicksburg. After the opium-eater has been for forty-eighthours without his solace this heavy sleep entirely disappears.While it stays it never lasts over half an hour at a time, and isso broken by the crash of stupendous visions as not to amount toproper slumber. During its period of continuance the opium-eaterwoos its approaches with an agony which shows his instinct of thecoming weeks of sleeplessness. It never rests him in any validsense. It is a congestive decomposition rather than any normalreconstruction of the brain. He wakes out of it each time with aheart more palpitating; in a perspiration more profuse; with agreater uncertainty of sense and will; with a more confusedmemory; in an intenser agony of body and horror of hopelessness. Every nerve in the entire frame now suddenlyawakes with such a spasm of revivification that no parallel agonyto that of the opium-eater at this stage can be adduced, unlessit be that of the drowned person resuscitated by artificialmeans. Nor does this parallel fully represent the suffering, forthe man resuscitated from drowning re-oxidizes all his surpluscarbon in a few minutes of intense torture, while the anguishwhich burns away that carbon and other matter, properly effete,stored away in the tissues by opium, must last for hours, days,and weeks. Who is sufficient for this long, long pull? From the hour this pain begins to manifestitself it continues (in any average case of a year's previoushabituation to the drug) for at least a week without one second'slull or exhaustion. A man may catch himself dozing between spasmsof tic-douloureux or toothache; he never doubts whether he isawake one instant in the first week after dropping his opium. Onepatient whom I found years ago at a watercure followed thewatchman all night on crutches through his tour of inspectionaround the establishment. Other people, after walking a longtime, shift from chair to chair in their rooms, talking toanybody who may happen to be present in a low-voiced, suicidalmanner, which inexperience finds absolutely blood-freezing. Latersuch rock to and fro, moaning with agony, for hours at a time,but saying nothing. Still others go to their beds at once, andlie writhing there until the struggle is entirely decided. I havelearned that this last class is generally the most hopeful. The period during which this pain is tocontinue depends upon two elements. 1st. How long has the patient habitually takenopium? 2d. How much constitutional strength remains tothrow it off? "How much has he taken in theaggregate?" is practically not an equivalent of the firstquestion. I have found an absolutely incurable opium-eater whohad never used more than ten grains of morphia per diem; but hehad been taking it habitually for a dozen years. In another casethe patient had for six months repeated before each meal theten-grain dose which served the other all day; but he was a manwhose pluck under pain equaled a woman's, and after a fortnight'sanguish of such horror that one could scarcely witness it withoutbeing moved to tears came out into perfect freedom. The formerpatient, although he had never in any one day experienced suchpowerful effects from opium as the latter, had used the drug solong that every part of his system had reconstructed itself tomeet the abnormal conditions, and must go through a secondprocess of reconstruction, without any anodyne to mask the painresulting from its decomposition, before it could again tolerateexistence of the normal kind. If opium were not an anodyne theterrible structural changes which it works would cause nosurprise; it would be felt eating out its victim's life like somuch nitric acid. During the early part of the opium-eater'scareer these structural changes go on with a rapidity whichpartly accounts for the vast disengagements of nervous force, theexhilaration, the endurance of effort, which characterize thisstage, later to be substituted by utter nervous apathy. By thetime the substitution occurs something has taken place throughoutthe physical structure which may be rudely likened to the finalequilibrium of a neutral salt after the effervescence between anacid and an alkali. So to speak, the tissues have now combinedwith their full equivalent of all the poisonous alkaloids inopium. Further use of it produces no new disengagements ofnervous force; the victim may double, quadruple his dose, but hemight as well expect further ebullition by adding moreaqua-fortis to a satisfied nitrate as to develop with opiumexhilarating currents in a tissue whose combination with thatdrug have already reached their chemical limit. FN* _____ *FN Isay "chemical" because so much it is possible to knownexperientally; and the very interesting examination of suchhigher forces as constantly seem to intrude in any nervousdisturbance would here involve the discussion of a theoretical"vital principle"-- something apart from and betweenthe soul and physical activities--which scientific men areuniversally abandoning. ___ The opium-eater now only continues his habit topreserve the terrible static condition to which it has reducedhim, and to prevent that yet more terrible dynamic condition intowhich he comes with every disturbance of equilibrium; a conditionof energetic and agonizing dissolutions which must last untilevery fiber of wrongly changed tissue is burned up and healthilyreplaced. Though I have called the early reactions of opiumrapid, they are necessarily much less so than those produced by asimple chemical agent. No drug approaches it in the possession ofcumulative characteristics; its dependence on the time elementmust therefore be always carefully considered in treating a case.This fact leads us to understand the other element in thequestion, how long the torments of the opium-fighter mustcontinue. Having ascertained the chronology of his case, we mustsay, "Given this period of subjection, has the patientenough constitutional vigor left to endure the period ofreconstruction which must correspond to it?" ** FN -------** (FN) Not correspond day by day. At that rate a reformingopium-eater (I use the particle in the physical sense, for veryfew opium-eaters are more to blame than any other sick persons)must pay a "shent per shent" which no constitutioncould survive. The correspondence is simply proportional. ------- I am naturally sanguine, and began my study ofopium-eaters with the belief that none of them were hopeless.Experience has taught me that there is a point beyond which anyconstitution--especially one so abnormally sensitive as theopium-eater's--can not endure keen physical suffering withoutdeath from spinal exhaustion. I once heard the eminent Dr.Stevens say that he made it a rule never to attempt a surgicaloperation if it must consume more than an hour. Similarly, I havecome to the conclusion never to amputate a man from hisopium-self if the agony must last longer than three months.Uneasiness--corresponding to the irritations of dressing astump--may continue a year longer; and few victims of the habitoutlive a certain opium-prurience, which has also its analogue inthe occasional titillation of a healed wound--these arecomparatively tolerable; but, if we expect to save a patient'slife, we must not protract an agony which so absolutelyinterferes with normal sleep as that of the opium-eater's forlonger than three months in the case of any constitution I havethus far encountered. Usually as early as the third day after itsabandonment (unless the constitution has become so impaired bylong habituation that there will probably be no vital reaction)opium begins to show its dissolutions from the tissue by aprofuse and increasingly acrid bilious diarrhea, which must notbe checked if diagnosis has revealed sufficient constitutionalvigor to justify any attempt at abandonment of the drug.Hemorrhoids may result; they must be topically treated; mildastringents may be used when the tendency seems getting out ofeventual control; bland foods must be given as often as theusually fastidious appetite will tolerate them; the only tonicmust be beef-tea--diffusible stimulus invariably increasing theagony, whether in the form of ale, wine, or spirits. Short ofthreatened collapse, the bowels must not be retarded. There isnothing in the faintest degree resembling a substitute for opium,but from time to time various alleviates, which can not bediscussed in an untechnical article, may be administered withbenefit. The spontaneous termination of the diarrhea willindicate that the effete matters we must remove have been mainlyeliminated, and that we may shortly look for a marked mitigationof the pain, followed by conditions of great debility butincreasingly favorable to the process of reconstruction. Thatprocess, yet more than the alleviate, demands a book rather thanan article. I have intentionally deferred any descriptionof the agony of the opium struggle as a sensation, until Ireturned from depicting general symptoms, to relate theparticular case which is my text. The sufferings of the patient,from whom I have just returned, are so comprehensive as almost tobe exhaustively typical. When simple nervous excitement had for two daysalternated with the already mentioned intervals of deliriousslumber, a dull, aching sensation began manifesting itselfbetween his shoulders and in the region of the loins. Appetitefor food had been failing since the first denial of that foropium. The most intense gastric irritability now appeared in theform of an aggravation of the typantic tightness, corrosive acidructations, heartburn, water-brash, and a peculiar sensation, aspainful as it is indescribable, of self-consciousness in thewhole upper part of the digestive canal. The best idea of thislast symptom may be found by supposing all the nerves ofinvoluntary motion which supply that tract with vitality,suddenly to be gifted with the exquisite sensitiveness to theirown processes which is produced by its correlative object in someorgan of special sense--the whole organism assimilating itself toa retina or a finger-tip. Sleep now disappeared. This initiatedan entire month during which the patient had not one moment ofeven partial unconsciousness. In less than a week from the beginning thesymptoms indicated a most obstinate chronic gastritis. There wasa perpetual sense of corrosion at the pit of the stomach verylike that which characterizes the fatal operation of arsenic.There was less action of the liver than usually indicates asalvable case, and no irritation of the lowest intestines. Paripassu with the gastritic suffering, the neuralgic pain spreaddown the extremities from an apparent center between the kidneys,through the trunk, from another line near the left margin of theliver, and through the whole medullary substance of the brainitself. Although I was so unfortunate as not to be beside himduring this stage, I can still infallibly draw on my wholeexperience for information regarding the intensity of this pain.Tic-douloureux most nearly resembles it in character. Like thatagonizing affection, it has periods of exacerbation; unlike it,it has no intervals of continuous repose. Like tic-douloureux,its sensation is a curiously fluctuating one, as if pain had beenfluidized and poured in trickling streams through the tubules ofnerve tissue which are affected by it; but, unlike that, itaffects every tubule in the human body--not a single diseasedlocality. Charles Reade chaffs the doctors very wittily in"Hard Cash" on their penchant for the word"hyperaesthesia," but nothing else exactly defines thatexaggeration of nervous sensibility which I have invariably seenin opium-eaters. Some of them were hurt by an abrupt slighttouch, and cried out at the jar of a heavy footstep like apatient with acute rheumatism. Some developed sensitiveness withthe progress of expurgating the poison, until their very hair andnails felt sore, and the whole surface of the skin suffered fromcold air or water like the lips of a wound. After all, utterlyunable to convey an idea of the kind of suffering, I must contentmyself by repeating, of its extent, that no prolonged pain of anykind known to science can equal it. The totality of theexperience is only conceivable by adding this physical torture toa mental anguish which even the Oriental pencil of De Quincey hasbut feebly painted; an anguish which slays the will, yet leavesthe soul conscious of its murder; which utterly blots out hope,and either paralyzes the reasoning faculties which might suggestencouragements, or deadens the emotional nature to them asthoroughly as if they were not perceived; an anguish whichsometimes includes just, but always a vast amount of unjustself-reproach which brings every failure and inconsistency, everymisfortune or sin of a man's life as clearly before his face ason the day he was first mortified or degraded by it--before hisface, not in one terrible dream, which is once for all over withsunrise, but as haunting ghosts, made out by the feverish eyes ofthe soul down to the minutest detail of ghastliness, and neverleaving the side of the rack on which he lies for a moment ofdark or daylight, till sleep, at the end of a month, first dropsout of heaven on his agony. A third element in the suffering must brieflybe mentioned. It results directly from the others. It is thatexhaustion of nervous power which invariably ensues on protractedpain of mind or body. it proceeds beyond reaction to collapse ina hopeless case; it stops this side of that in a salvable one. On reaching his room I found my friendbolstered upright in bed, with a small two-legged crutch at handto prop his head on when he became weary of the perpendicularposition. This had been his attitude for fifty days. Whether fromits impeding his circulation, the distribution of his nervouscurrents, or both, the prostrate posture invariably brought oncessation of the heart and the sense of intolerable strangling.His note told me he was dying of heart disease, but, as Iexpected, I found that malady merely simulated by nervoussymptoms, and the trouble purely functional. His food wasarrowroot or sago, and beef-tea. Of the vegetable preparation hetook perhaps half a dozen tablespoonfuls a day; of the animalvariable quantities, averaging half a pint per diem. This, thoughsmall, was far from the minimum of nutriment upon which life hasbeen supported through the most critical periods. Indeed, I haveknown three patients tided over stages of disease otherwisedesperately typhoid by beef-tea baths, in which the proportion ofozmazone was just perceptible, and the sole absorbing agency wasa faint activity left in the pores of the skin. But thesepatients had suffered no absolute disorganization. Thepractitioner had to encounter a swift specific poison, not tomake over tissues abnormally misconstructed by its long insidiousaction. On examination I discovered facts which I had oftenfeared, but never before absolutely recognized, in my friend'scase. The stomach itself, in its most irreproducible tissue, hadundergone a partial but permanent disorganization. The substanceof the organ itself had been altered in a way for which scienceknows no remedy. Hereafter, then, it can only be rechanged bythat ultimate decomposition which men call death. Over theopium-eater's coffin at least, thank God! a wife and sister canstop weeping and say, "He's free." I called to my friend's bedside a consultationof three physicians and the most nearly related survivor of hisfamily. I laid the case before them; assisted them to a fullprognosis; and invited their views. I spent two nights with myfriend. I have said that during the first month of trial he hadnot a moment of even partial unconsciousness. Since that timethere had been perhaps ten occasions a day, when for a periodfrom one minute in length to five, his poor, pain-wrinkledforehead sank on his crutch, his eyes fell shut, and to outsidershe seemed asleep. But that which appeared sleep was internally tohim only one stupendous succession of horrors which confusedlysucceeded each other for apparent eternities of being, and endedwith some nameless catastrophe of woe or wickedness, in a wakingmore fearful than the stage volcanically ruptured by it. Duringthe nights I sat by him these occasional relaxations, as Ilearned, reached their maximum length, my familiar presenceacting as a sedative, but from each of them he woke bathed inperspiration from sole to crown; shivering under alternateflushes of chill and fever; mentally confused to a degree whichfor half an hour rendered every object in the room unnatural andterrible to him; with a nervous jerk, which threw him quite outof bed, although in his waking state two men were requisite tomove him; and with a cry of agony as loud as any underamputation. The result of our consultation was a unanimousagreement not to press the case further. Physicians have nobusiness to consider the speculative question, whether deathwithout opium is preferable to life with it. They are called tokeep people on the earth. We were convinced that to deprive thepatient longer of opium would be to kill him. This we had noright to do without his consent. He did not consent, and I gavehim five grains of morphia** FN ----- ** (FN) To the younger menof the profession rather than to the public generally I need hereto say that this dose is not as excessive as it would naturallyappear to be in the case of a man who had used no form of opiumfor ninety days. When you have to resume the drug go cautiously.But you will generally find the amount of it required to producethe sedative effects in any case which returns to opium, afterabandonment of a long habituation, startlingly large, and slow inits effects. ----- between 8 and 12 o'clock on the morning of theday I had to return here. He was obliged to eat a few mouthfulsof sago before the alkaloid could act upon his nervous system. Ineed only point out the significance of this indication. Theshallower lying nervous fibers of the stomach had becomedefinitely paralyzed, and such digestion as could be perfectedunder these circumstances was the only method of getting thestimulant in contact with any excitable nerve-substance. In otherwords, mere absorbent and assimilative tissue was all of himwhich for the purpose of receiving opium partially surviveddisorganization of the superficial nerves. Of that survivingtissue, one mucous patch was irredeemably gone. (This particularfact was the one which cessation from opium more distinctlyunmasked.) At noon he had become tolerably comfortable; before Ileft (7 p.m.) he had enjoyed a single half hour of something likenormal slumber. He will have to take opium all his life.Further struggle is suicide. Death will probably occur at anyrate not from an attack of what we usually consider disease, butfrom the disintegrating effects on tissue of the habit itself.So, whatever he may do, his organs march to death. He will haveto continue the habit which kills him only because abandoning itkills him sooner; for self-murder has dropped out of the purviewof the moral faculties and become a mere animal question of time.The only way left him to preserve his intellectual facultiesintact is to keep his future daily dose at the tolerable minimum.Henceforth all his dreams of entire liberty must be relegated tothe world to come. He may be valuable as a monitor, but in theexecutive uses of this mighty modern world henceforth he cannever share. Could the immortal soul find itself in a moreinextricable, a more grisly complication? In publishing his case I am not violating thatHippocratic vow which protects the relations of patient andadviser; for, as I dropped my friend's wasted hand and stepped tothe threshold, he repeated a request he had often made to me,saying: "It is almost like Dives asking for amessenger to his brethren; but tell them, tell all young men,what it is, 'that they come not into this torment.'" Already perhaps--by the mere statement of thecase--I might be considered to have fulfilled my promise. Butsince monition often consists as much in enlightenment asintimidation, let me be pardoned for briefly presenting a fewconsiderations regarding the action of opium upon the humansystem while living, and the peculiar methods by which the drugencompasses its death. What is Opium? It is the most complicated drug in thePharmacopeia. though apparently a simple gummy paste, itpossesses a constitution which analysis reveals to contain noless than 25 elements, each one of them a compound by itself, andmany of them among the most complex compounds known to modernchemistry. Let me concisely mention these by classes. First, at least three earthy salts--thesulphates of lime, alumia, and potassa. Second, two organic andone simpler acid--acetic (absolutely vinegar), meconic (one ofthe most powerful irritants which can be applied to theintestines through the bile), and sulfuric. All three existuncombined in the gum, and free to work their will on the mucoustissues. A green extractive matter, which comes in all vegetalbodies developed under sunlight, next deserves a place by itself,because it is one of the few organic bodies of which no rationalanalysis has ever been pretended. Though we cannot state theconstitution of this chlorophyll, we know that, except by turningacid in the stomach, it remains inert on the human system, as onemight imagine would happen if he swallowed a bunch of greengrass. Lignin, with which it is always associated, is mere woodyfiber, and has no direct physical action. In no instance has anystomach been found to digest it save an insect's-- somenaturalists thinking that certain beetles make their horny wing-cases of that. I believe one man did think he had discovered asolvent for it in the gastric juice of the beaver, but that viewis not widely entertained. So far as it exists in opium it canonly act as a foreign substance and a mechanical irritant to thehuman bowels. Next come two inert, indigestible, and very similargummy bodies, mucilagin and bassorin. Sugar, are powerfullyactive volatile principle, and a fixed oil (probably allied toturpentine) are the only other invariable constituents of opiumbelonging to the great organic group of the hydro- carbons. I now come to a group by far the most importantof all. Almost without exception the vegetable poisons belong towhat are called the "nitrogenous alkaloids." Strychnia,brucia, ignatia, calabarin, woovarin, atropine, digitalin, andmany others, including all whose effect is most tremendous uponthe human system, are in this group. Not without insight did theearly discoverers call nitrogen azote, "the foe tolife." It so habitually exists in the things our body findsmost deadly that the tests for it are always the first whichoccur to a chemist in the presence of any new organic poison. Thenitrogenous alkaloids owe the first part of their name to thefact of containing this element; the second part to that of theirusually making neutral salts with acids, like an alkaline base.The general reader may sometimes have asked himself why thesealkaloids are diversely written-- as, e.g., sometimes"morphia," and sometimes "morphine." Thechemists who regard them as alkalies write them in the one way,those who consider them neutrals, in the other. Of thesenitrogenous alkaloids, even the nuts of the tree, which furnishesthe most powerful, swift poison of the world, contains butthree--the above-named strychnia, brucia, and ignatia--principlesshared in common with its pathological congener, the St. Ignatiusbean. Opium may be found to contain twelve of them; but as one ofthese (cotarnine) may be a product of distillation, and the other(pseudo-morphia) seems only an occasional constituent, I treatthem as ten in number--rationally to be arranged under threeheads. First, those whose action is merely acrid--sofar as known expending themselves upon the mucous coasts.(Pseudo-morphia when it occurs belongs to these.) So doporphyroxin; narceine; probably papaverine also; while meconin,whose acrid properties in contact with animal tissue are similarto that of meconic acid, forms the last of the group. The second head comprises but a singlealkaloid, variously called paramorphia or thebaine. (It mayinterest amateur chemists to know that its difference fromstrychnia consists only in having two less equivalents ofhydrogen and six of carbon--especially when they know how closelyits physical effects follow its atomic constitution.) A dose ofone grain has produced tetanic spasms. Its chief action appearsto be upon the spinal nerves, and there is reason to suppose it apoison of the same kind as nux vomica without the concentrationof that agent. How singular it seems to find a poison of thistotally distinct class--bad enough to set up the reputation ofany one drug by itself--in company with the remaining principleswhose effect we usually associate with opium and see clearest inthe ruin of its victim! The remainder, five in number, are the opiumalkaloids, which act generally upon the whole system, butparticularly, in their immediate phenomena, upon the brain. Imention them in the ascending order of their nervine power:narcotine; codeine; opianin; metamorphia, and morphia. The first of these the poppy shares in commonwith many other narcotic plants--tobacco the most conspicuousamong the number. In its anti- periodic effects on the humansystem it has been found similar to quinia, and it is anundoubted narcotic poison acting on the nerves of organic life,though, compared with its associates in the drug, comparativelyinnocent. The remaining four act very much like morphia,differing only in the size of the dose in which they proveefficient. Most perfectly fresh constitutions feel a grain ofmorphia powerfully; metamorphia is soporific in half-gain doses(American Journal of Pharmacy, September, 1861); opianin in itsphysical effects closely approximates morphia; codeia is aboutone-fifth as powerful; a new subject may not get sleep short ofsix grains; its main action is expended on the sympatheticsystem. It does not seem to congest the brain as morphia does;but its action on the biliary system is probably little lessdeadly than that of the more powerful narcotic. Looking at the marvelous complexity of opium wemight be led to the a priori supposition that its versatility ofaction on the human system must be equally marvelous. Miserably for the opium-eater, fortunately forthe young person who may be dissuaded from following in hisfootsteps, we are left in no doubt of this matter by theconclusions of experience. In practical action opium affects aslarge an area of nervous surface, attacks it with as muchintensity, and changes it in as many ways as its complexity wouldlead us to expect. I have pointed out the existence in opium of aconvulsive poison congeneric with brucia. The other chief activealkaloids, five in number, are those which specially possess thecumulative property. Poisons of the strychnia and hydro-cyanicacid classes (including this just mentioned opium alkaloid,thebaine), are swifter agents; but this perilous opium quintettesigns to every sense a lulling song from which it may not awakefor years, but wakes a slave. Every day that a man uses opiumthese cumulative alkaloids get a subtler hold on him. Even aphysician addicted to the practice has no conception how theirinfluence piles up. At length some terrible dawn rouses him out ofa bad sleep into a worse consciousness. Though the mostuntechnical man, he must already know the disorder which hastaken place in his moral nature and his will. For a knowledge ofhis physical condition he must resort to his medical man, andwhat, when the case is ten years old, must a practitioner tellthe patient in any average case? "Sir, the chances are entirely againstyou, and the possession of a powerfully enduring constitution, ifyou have it, forms a decided offset in your favor." He then makes a thorough examination of him byear, touch, conversation. If enough constitution responds to thecall, he advises an immediate entrance upon the hard road ofabnegation. If the practitioner finds the case hopeless hemust tell the patient so, in something like these words: "You have either suffered adisorganization of irreproducible membranes, or you havedeposited so much improper material in your tissue that your lifeis not consistent with the protracted pain of removing it. "One by one you have paralyzed all theexcretory functions of the body. Opium, aiming at all thosefunctions for their death, first attacked the kidneys, and withyour experimental doses you experienced a slight access ofdysuria. As you went on, the same action, progressively paralyticto organic life, involved the liver. Flatulence, distress at theepigastrium, irregularity of bowels, indicated a spasmodicperformance of the liver's work, which showed it to be under highnervous excitement. your mouth became dry through a cessation ofthe salivary discharge. Your lachrymal duct was parched, and youreye grew to have an arid look in addition to the dullnessproduced by opiate contraction of the pupil. All this time you continued to absorb an agentwhich directly acts for what by a paradox may be called fatalconservation of the tissues. Whether through its complexitycombined nitrogen, carbon, or both, the drug has interposeditself between your very personal substance and those oxidationsby which alone its life can be maintained. It has slowed thefires of your whole system. It has not only interposed but inpart it has substituted itself; so that along with much effetematter of the body stored away there always exists a certainundecomposed quantity of the agent which sustains this morbidconservation. **FN ----- ** (FN): I frequently use whathydropaths call "a pack" to relieve opium distress, andwith great benefit. After an hour and a half of perspiration, thepatient being taken out of his swaddlings, I have found in thewater which was used to wash out his sheet enough opium to haveintoxicated a fresh subject. This patient had not used opium fora fortnight. ----- "When this combination became established,you began losing your appetite because no substitution of freshmatter was required by your body for tissue wrongly conserved.The progressive derangement of your liver manifested itself inincreased sallowness of face and cornea; the organ was working onan inadequate vital supply because the organic nervous system wasbecoming paralyzed; the veins were not strained of that which isthe bowels' proper purgative and the blood's dire poison. You hadsealed up all but a single excretory passage--the pores of theskin. Perhaps when you had opium first given you you were toldthat its intent was the promotion of perspiration but did notknow the rationale. The only way in which opium promotesperspiration is by shutting up all the other excretory processesof the body, and throwing the entire labor of that function uponthe pores. (When the skin gives out the opium- eater is shut uplike an entirely choked chimney, and often dies in delirium ofblood-poisoning.) "For a while--the first six years,perhaps--your skin sustained the work which should have beenshared by the other organs--not in natural sweat, but violentperspiration, which showed the excess of its action. Then yourpalms became gradually hornier--your whole body yellower--at thesame time that your muscular system grew tremulous throughprogressively failing nervous supply. "About this time you may have had sometemporary gastric disturbance, accompanied with indescribabledistress, loathing at food, and nausea. This indicated that themucous lining of the stomach had been partially removed by thecorrosions of the drug, or that nervous power had suddenly cometo a standstill, which demanded an increase of stimulation. "Since that time you have been taking yourdaily dose only to preserve the status in quo. The condition bothof your nervous system and your stomach indicate that you mustalways take some anodyne to avoid torture, and your only anodyneis opium. "The rest of your life must be spent inkeeping comfortable, not in being happy.: Opium-eaters enjoy a strange immunity fromother disease. They are not liable to be attacked by miasma inmalarious countries; epidemics or contagions where they exist.They almost always survive to die of their opium itself. And anopium death is usually in one of these two manners: The opium-eater either dies in collapse throughnervous exhaustion (with the blood poisoning and deliriumabove-mentioned), sometimes after an overdose, but oftenerseeming to occur spontaneously; or in the midst of physical ormental agony, as great and irrelievable, as men suffer in hopefulabandonment of the drug, and with a colliquative diarrhea, bywhich--in a continual, fiery, acrid discharge--the systemrelieves itself during a final fortnight of the effete matterswhich have been accumulating for years. Either of these ends is terrible enough; let usdraw a curtain over their details. Opium is a corrosion and paralysis of all thenoblest forms of life. The man who voluntarily addicts himself toit would commit in cutting his throat a suicide only swifter andless ignoble. The habit is gaining fearful ground among ourprofessional men, the operatives in our mills, our weary sewingwomen, our fagged clerks, our disappointed wives, our formerliquor-drunkards, our very day-laborers, who a generation agotook gin; all our classes, from the highest to the lowest, areyearly increasing their consumption of the drug. The terribledemands, especially in this country, made on modern brains by ourfeverish competitive life, constitute hourly temptations to someform of the sweet, deadly sedative. Many a professional man of myacquaintance, who twenty years ago was content with histri-diurnal "whiskey," ten years ago, drop by drop,began taking stronger "laudanum cocktails," until hebecame what he is now--an habitual opium-eater. I have tried toshow what he will be. If this article shall deter any from animitation of his example, or excite an interest in thequestion--"What he shall do to be saved?"--I amcontent. Contents | Feedback | Search DRCNet Library | Schaffer Library | Historical ResearchWT01-B26-16IA087-000632-B028-201http://206.61.184.43:80/schaffer/history/szasz1.htm 206.61.184.43 19970122095853 text/html 7317HTTP/1.0 200 OKDate: Wednesday, 22-Jan-97 09:58:42 GMTServer: WebSitePro/1.1f (S/N wpo-0deb)Allow-ranges: bytesContent-type: text/htmlLast-modified: Saturday, 28-Dec-96 05:38:33 GMTContent-length: 7100 Are The Drug Laws Constitutional? Are The Drug Laws Constitutional? A Historical Perspective From _Our Right To Drugs_ by Thomas Szasz, PraegerPublishers, NY (1992): *The Pure Food and Drugs Act of 1906* Before 1907, all drugs could be sold and bought like anyother consumer good. The manufacturer did not even have todisclose the contents of his concoction. Hence the name patentmedicine, the adjective alluding to the fact that the compositionwas a trade secret, protected by a patented name. Although there is no evidence that the American consumer evercomplained about the free market in drugs, there is plenty ofevidence that his self appointed protectors complained bitterlyand loudly. The first landmark event in the federal regulation ofdrugs (and foods) was the Food and Drugs Act of 1906. What didCongress intend to achieve with this seemingly laudablelegislation? To protect people from the sale of"adulterated" or "misbranded" foods or drugs,that is, "assur[ing] the customer of the identity of thearticle purchased, not of its usefulness." I say Congress's aim in enacting this legislation wasseemingly laudable because, while it is desirable that peopleknow what drugs they buy, forcing manufacturers by law to listthe ingredients of their products is an unnecessary infringementon the free market -- the foot in the door ofpaternalistic-statist protectionism. If Great American Drugs,Inc., wants to market a mystery product, there is no reason whythe government should prevent it from doing so. And if I want tobuy such a pig in a poke, why should the government prevent mefrom making that choice? People who want to be informed about thedrugs they buy and use would abstain from purchasing mysteryproducts, and market forces would then create a supply oftruthfully labeled drugs. In short, there would be no need toprohibit the non-disclosure of the contents of medicinal (orother) products. It is enough to prohibit false disclosure and topunish it, as fraud, by both criminal and civil penalities. Asfor nondisclosure, it would be "punished" by theinvisible hand of the market. The truth is that behind Congress'sostensible aim of combating drug misbranding lay its growingantagonism to the habit of pharmacological self-pleasuring,manifested by the act's specifically mandating the listing on thelabel of what were then the main ingredients of Americans'favorite nostrums: alcohol, hypnotics, and sedatives. Therelevant lines of the Food and Drugs Act read as follows: That for purposes of this Act an article shall also be deemedmisbranded: ... if the package fails to bear a statement on thelabel of the quantity or proportion of any alcohol, morphine,opium, cocaine, heroin, alpha or beta eucaine, chloroform,cannabis, chloral hydrate, or acetanilide. It is implicit in this sentence that, back then, Congresstook for granted the legality of a free market in drugs,including cannabis, cocaine, heroin, and morphine. [...] *The Harrison Act (1914) and It's Aftermath* In 1914, Congress enacted another landmark piece of anti-druglegislation: the Harrison Narcotic Act. Originally passed as arecord-keeping law, it quickly became a prohibition statute. Inthe course of the next seven years, by a curious coincidence ofhistory -- if, indeed, it is a coincidence -- in Russia theSoviet Union replaced the czarist empire, while in the UnitedStates the free market in drugs was replaced by federal drugprohibition possessing unchallengeable authority. Excerpts fromtwo key Supreme Court decisions quickly tell the story. In 1915, in a test of the Harrision Act, the Court upheld itbut expressed doubts about its constitutionality: "While theOpium Registration Act of December 17, 1914, may have a moralend, as well as revenue, in view, this court, in view of thegrave doubt as to its constitutionality except as a revenuemeasure, construes it as such." Yet, only six years later the Court considered objection tofederal drug prohibition a taboo. In Whipple v. Martinson thejustices declared, "There can be no question of the authority of the Statein the exercise of its police power to regulate theadministration, sale, prescription, and use of dangerous andhabit-forming drugs.... The right to exercise this power is so manifest in theinterest of public health and welfare, that it is unnecessary toenter upon a discussion of it beyond saying that it is too firmlyestablished to be successfully called in question. In 1914, trading in and using drugs was a right. In 1915,limited federal drug controls were a constitutionallyquestionable tax revenue measure. By 1921, the federal governmenthad gained not only complete control over so-called dangerousdrugs, but also a quasi-papal immunity to legal challenge of itsauthority. Thus has the rejection of one of our most basicconstitutional rights become transformed into reverence for oneof our most baneful therapeutic-religious dogmas. Once ignited,the fire of "progressive" drug protectionism spread andsoon enveloped the whole contry, transforming the Harrison Actinto the legislative embodiment of the "moral principle thattaking narcotics for other than medicinal purposes was harmfuland should be prevented." That threw the monkey wrenchmedicinal purpose into the machinery of the trade in drugs; thisundefined and undefinable concept has haunted us ever since. In1920, drug prohibitionists won another major victory: Americawas, at last, alcohol-free -- if not de facto, then at least dejure. Since 1924, when Congress made it illegal to manufacture,possess, or sell heroin, America has been free from heroin aswell -- if not in practice, then at least in theory. [...] In retelling this tale, it is impossible to overemphasizethat, although initially the drug laws were intended to protectpeople from being "abused" by drugs others wanted tosell them, this aim was soon replaced by that of protecting themfrom "abusing" drugs they wanted to buy. The governmentthus succeeded in depriving us not only of our basic right toingest whatever we choose, but also of our right to grow,manufacture, sell, and buy agricultural products used by mansince antiquity. CliffSchaffer's Home Page WT01-B26-17IA087-000632-B028-225http://206.61.184.43:80/schaffer/history/1600BC.htm 206.61.184.43 19970122095902 text/html 3184HTTP/1.0 200 OKDate: Wednesday, 22-Jan-97 09:58:54 GMTServer: WebSitePro/1.1f (S/N wpo-0deb)Allow-ranges: bytesContent-type: text/htmlLast-modified: Saturday, 28-Dec-96 05:40:12 GMTContent-length: 2967 Evidence Found of Ancient Marijuana Use Contents | Feedback | Search DRCNet Library | Schaffer Library | Historical Research EVIDENCE FOUND OF ANCIENT MARIJUANA USE Albany (NY) Times Union, 20 May 1993 (attributed to Newsday) The first physical evidence that marijuana was used as amedicine in the ancient Mideast was reported Wednesday by Israeliscientists who found residue of the drug with the skeleton of agirl who apparently died in childbirth 1,600 years ago. The researchers said the marijuana probably was used by amid-wife trying to speed the birth, as well as ease the pain.Until now, the researchers wrote in a letter to the journalNature, "physical evidence of cannabis (marijuana) use inthe ancient Middle East has not yet been obtained." The seven researchers -- from Hebrew University, the IsraelAntiquities Authority and the National Police Headquartersforensic division -- said references to marijuana as a medicineare seen as far back as 1,600 B.C. in Egyptian, Assyrian, Greekand Roman writings. But physical evidence that the hemp weed,cannabis sativa, was used for that purpose has been missing. The researchers' examination of an undisturbed family tombnear Jerusalem dating to the fourth century AD indicated thegirl, about 14, died because her pelvis was too small to permitnormal birth. Contents | Feedback | Search DRCNet Library | Schaffer Library | Historical Research WT01-B26-18IA088-000636-B008-388http://206.61.184.43:80/schaffer/history/mrsin.htm 206.61.184.43 19970122095916 text/html 10634HTTP/1.0 200 OKDate: Wednesday, 22-Jan-97 09:59:04 GMTServer: WebSitePro/1.1f (S/N wpo-0deb)Allow-ranges: bytesContent-type: text/htmlLast-modified: Saturday, 28-Dec-96 05:38:53 GMTContent-length: 10416 From Mr Sin to Mr Big From Mr Sin to Mr Big Auth: Desmond Manderson Published: 1993 Publisher: Oxford University Press Australia ISBN: 0 19 553531 6 Background to the Book. (From back cover) From Mr Sin to Mr Big is a compelling legal and socialhistory of the origins and development of drug laws in Australia.It argues that the selective enactment of 'drug' laws has beendriven by fear, racism, powerful international pressures, and thevested interests of the medical profession, bureaucrats andpoliticians, rather than by genuine concerns about the welfare ofusers. Behind the emotion and contoversy that surround the use ofillegal drugs lie previously unexamined assumptions about how andwhy certain substances - such as opium, herion and cannabis -have been prohibited, while others - such as alcolhol and tobacco- have not. This book challenges these assumptions, while alsoexamining the power and efficacy of law as a means of achievingsocial change. Desmond Manderson traces the legislative developments, fromthe anti-opium laws directed against the Chinese in thenineteenth century, to the complex web of our present drug laws,and illustrates the gradual politicisation of the drugs debate.From Mr Sin to Mr Big argues that Australia's current drug lawsare a product of the past, and it is only by understanding thispast that we can begin a rational debate about reform in thefuture. [note] Desmond Manderson is a lawyer and historian who has writtenextensively on drug history and policy. After studying andteaching at the Australian National University in Canberra forseveral years, he is currently engaged in research at the Centrefor Medicine, Ethics, and Law at McGill University in Montreal, Canada. [accurate at 1993 : PH] [summary of the research programs] As part of his Honours thesis in History, Mandersonresearched for a small publication funded by the Research intoDrug Abuse Program (RIDAP) of the National Campaign Against DrugAbuse (NCADA). Following his Honours thesis, it was suggested that he workon a larger project into the history of drug laws in Australia,again supported by RIDAP, under the Commonwealth (Federal, forour world audience) Department of Community Services and Health. Interesting quotes from the book. (page 7) In nineteenth-century Australia, opium was the preserve ofneither the creative few nor the urban poor. It was freelyavailable and freely used. Furthermore, perhaps partly as aconsequence of the weakness of the medical profession, the linewhich is now seen to divide medical 'use' form non-medical'abuse' was not yet apparent. Many people who consumed opiumundoubtedly did so out of habit. Indeed, temperance activists whowould rather forfiet their lives than drink a nip of whiskey, butwho were addicted to opium, were the butt of many jokes. 'Ibelieve the teetotalers have too little pleasure in this world,whatever they may hope for in the next,' said Godfrey Carter, amember of the Victorian Legislative Assembly well known for hisopposition to the temperance movement, in 1898, "and when Ithink what little joy they have here at present is derived, to agreat extent, from the use of morphine, chlorodyne, painkiller,and a variety of other preparations of opium, why should weprevent them from going to their chemists and getting thesethings?" (page 19) As the "Bulletin", whose masthead proudlyproclaimed 'Australia for the White Man', stated in 1889: "The badness of the Chinaman, socially and morally, isthe outcome of his low wages ... If Chinamen will tomorrow refuseto work for less wages, man for man, than Britons, and willrefuse to work longer hours, the head and front of the objectionsto their presence will disappear." For the "Bulletin", the Chinese were'jaundice-coloured apostles of unlimited competition'. The proponents of a 'White Australia', however, slid withease from arguments of economic protectionism to visceral racism.The Chinese were painted as living squalidly and in filth, theirhabits depraved and their lives degraded. The absence of Chinesewomen was seen as a threat to the honor and chastity of innocentEuropean women and girls (and prostitution certainly flourishedin the Chinatowns of large communities). That the Chinese menworked on Sundays was portrayed as an indication of theinfiltration of paganism and devil-worshipping into god-fearingAustralian society. In the slandering of the Chinese, almostanything went, as this extract from a tract written by someonewho went by the ironic pseudonym 'Humanity' shows: "The Chinese amidst their evil surroundings, and theirfilthy and sinful abodes of sin and swinish devilry [will be]entered into by the servants of the Most High God! May thewayside scattering of the seed of holiness and truth take root inthe hotbed of all unholy and unclean vices! ... It would never bebelieved that our Saxon and Norman girls could have sunk so lowin crime as to consort with such a herd of GorillaDevils..." (page 23-24) Opium was seen as a pollutant, moral as well as physical; itwas tainted by the environment of its consumption and by itsconnections with the Chinese themselves. The potency of theseseparate aesthetic revulsions-against dirtiness, the Chinese, andthe smell of opium-was compounded by their mutual association, ascan be seen from the description of an opium den contained in the'Bulletin's" 1886 feature on 'The Chinese in Australia': "Down from the fan-tan den are stairs leading to lowerand dirtier abodes: rooms darker than and more greasy thananything on the ground floor: rooms where the legions ofaggressive stinks peculiar to Chinamen seems to linger ... Yetthe rooms are not naturally repulsive, nor would they be so whenoccupied by other tenants; but the Chinaman has defiled theirwalls with his filthy touch; he has vitiated what was once areasonably pure atmosphere with his presence, and he has pollutedthe premises with his disgusting habits; and so it is that noughtsave suggestions of evil, incentives of disgust and associationsof vice, now seems to move in the fetid atmosphere ... The veryair of the alley is impregnated with the heavy odour of thedrug." From being seen as a dirty habit in dirty people, opiumsmoking came to be seen as an immoral habit in hated people. Itwas a small step readily taken: from a symbol of depravity, opiumbecame a cause of it; from a sign of evil, it became an activeagent of it. (page 32) Sub-title: 'They all go to the Chinaman': Aboriginal OpiumLaws and the Chinese In fact, the first laws specifically toprohibit opium did not seem to deal with the Chinese use of it atall. The Queensland "Sale and Use of Poison Act 1891"penalised "any person who supplies, or permits to besupplied, any opium to any aboriginal native of Australia orhalf-caste of that race ... except for medicinal purposes..." (page 36) A man named Corbett, 'speaking for all other farmers',complained that 'they could not get the blacks to work when theywanted them, while the Chinese', who farmed half of thesurrounding land, could always get them, a fact which heaccounted for by saying that the Celestial paid their Aboriginalemployees in opium'. The solution seemed simple. As the localcarpenter argued, 'the blacks should be taken from the Chineseand compelled to work for any European who might require theirservices'. Opium was, as ever, a scapegoat. The local Whitefarmers, wanting cheap Black labour, could not understand whythey would rather work for the Chinese. The use of opium wasfastened upon as the only possible explanation for such aperverse choice. The more likely truth was that the Chinese treated theAboriginal with a modicum of respect. Roth reported the localpolice as saying that is the White population ceased starving andmistreating its Black employees, it could get as many workers asit wanted. But even the crudest kind of decency appears to havebeen beyond some of the locals. A man named Putt expressed hisgrievance with incredulity: "I have shot thirteen or fourteen niggers in thisDistrict and this is all the Government has done for me:-I can'tget a _____ nigger when I want one. They all go to theChinaman." (page 204-205) Senator Peter Baume, amongst others, has spoken with more andmore conviction as the years have passed. In one of his lastparliamentary speeches on the subject, before retiring to take upan appointment as Professor of Community Medicine at theUniversity of New South Wales, he said: "Our strategies seekto prevent the production of certain designated illegalsubstances, and fail to do so; they seek to prevent theimportation of substances, and fail to do so; they seek toprevent the distribution of substances, and fail to do so; theyseek to prevent the sale and use of substances, and fail to doso." (page 207) One thing is apparent. 'Drugs' is a subject which peopleapproach with many erroneous preconceptions, and a littleknowledge can change people's opinions profoundly. Both PeterBaume and Peter Cleeland, chairmen of influential parliamentarycommittees on the subject, have stressed to me how much theirthinking began to change when they first started to read and tolisten. CliffSchaffer's Home Page WT01-B26-19IA088-000636-B009-38http://206.61.184.43:80/schaffer/history/om/ommenu.htm 206.61.184.43 19970122095958 text/html 3264HTTP/1.0 200 OKDate: Wednesday, 22-Jan-97 09:59:50 GMTServer: WebSitePro/1.1f (S/N wpo-0deb)Allow-ranges: bytesContent-type: text/htmlLast-modified: Saturday, 28-Dec-96 05:40:33 GMTContent-length: 3047 The Opium Monopoly - Table of Contents Contents | Feedback | Search DRCNet Library | Schaffer Library | Historical Research THE OPIUM MONOPOLY BY ELLEN N. LA MOTTE AUTHOR OF " BACKWASH OF WAR...... PEKING DUST,CIVILIZATION," ETC. THE MACMILLAN COMPANY - 1920 " If this was our battle, if these were our ends, Which were our enemies, which were our friends?" Witter Bynner, in The Nation. CONTENTS INTRODUCTION I. GREAT BRITAIN'S OPIUM MONOPOLY II. THE INDIAN OPIUM MONOPOLY III. JAPAN AS AN Opium DISTRIBUTOR IV. SINGAPORE V. THE STRAITS SETTLEMENTS OPIUM COMMISSION VI. OPIUM IN SIAM VII. HONG KONG VIII. SARAWAK IX. SHANGHAI X. INDIA XI. TURKEY AND PERSIA XII MAURETIUS XIII. BRITISH NORTH BORNEO XIV. BRITISH GUIANA XV. HISTORY OF THE Opium TRADE IN CHINA.. XVI --CONCLUSION Contents | Feedback | Search DRCNet Library | Schaffer Library | Historical Research WT01-B26-20IA088-000636-B010-245http://206.61.184.43:80/schaffer/GOVPUBS/crimebil.htm 206.61.184.43 19970122100656 text/html 13567HTTP/1.0 200 OKDate: Wednesday, 22-Jan-97 10:06:42 GMTServer: WebSitePro/1.1f (S/N wpo-0deb)Allow-ranges: bytesContent-type: text/htmlLast-modified: Saturday, 28-Dec-96 06:16:29 GMTContent-length: 13349 Excerpt from the 1994 Crime Bill Contents | Feedback | Search DRCNet Library | Schaffer Library | The Drug Legalization Debate Excerpt from the 1994 Crime Bill Calling for the establishment of a commission to study thedrug problem. This clause was inserted into the Crime Bill as aresult of the Resolution for a Federal Commission on Drug Policy(Hoover Resolution). TlTLE XXVII PRESIDENTIAL SUMMIT ON VIOLENCE AND NATIONALCOMMISSION ON CRIME PREVENTION AND CONTROL 8EC. 27000L PRESIDENTIAL SUMMIT. Congress calls on the President to convene a national summiton violence in America prior to convening the Commissionestablished under this title. 8EC 270002. ESTABLISHMENT; COMMITTEES AND TASK FORCES (a) ESTABLISHMENT AND APPOINTMENT OF MEMBERS.--There isestablished a commission to be known as the "National Commission onCrime Control and Prevention". The Commission shall becomposed of 28 members appointed as follows: (1) 10 persons by the President, not more than 6 of whom shallbe of the same major political party. (2) 9 persons by the President pro tempore of the Senate, ofwhom shall be appointed on the recommendation of the MajorityLeader of the Senate and the chairman of the Committeeon theJudiciary of the Senate, and 4 of whom shall be appointed on therecommendation of the Minority Leader of the Senate and theranking minority member of the Committee on the Judiciary of theSenate. (3) 9 persons appointed by the Speaker of the House ofRepresentatives, in consultation with the chairman of theCommittee on the Judiciary of the House of Representatives, and 4of whom shall be appointed on the recommendation of the MinorityLeader of the House of Representatives, in consultation with theranking member of the Committee on the Judiciary. (b) COMMITTEES AND TASK FORCES.--The Commission shallestablish committees or task forces from among its members forthe examination of specific subject areas and the carrying out ofother functions or responsibilities of the Commission, includingcommittees or task forces for the examination of the subject areas of crime and violencegenerally, the causes of the demand for drugs, violence inschools, and violence against women, as descrIbed in subsections(b) through (e) of section 270004. (c) REPRESENTATION.~1) At least 1 member of the Commissionappointed by the President, at least 2 members of the Commissionappointed by the President pro tempore of the Senate, and atleast 2 members of the Commission appointed by the Speaker of theHouse of Representatives shall be persons well-qualified toparticipate in the Commission's examination of the subject areaof crime and violence generally, with education, training,expertise, or experzence in such areas as law enforcement, law,sociology, psychology, social work, and ethnography and urbanpoverty (including health care, housing, education, andemployment). (2) At least 1 member of the Commission appointed by thePresident, at least 2 members of the Commission appointed by thePresident pro tempore of the Senate, and at least 2 members ofthe Commission appointed by the Speaker of the House ofRepresentatives shall be persons well-qualified to participate inthe Commission's examination of the subject area of the causes ofthe demand for drugs, with education, training, expertise, orexperience in such areas as addiction, biomedicine, sociology,psychology, law, and ethnography and urban poverty (includinghealth care, housing, education, and employment). (3) At least 1 member of the Commission appointed by thePresident, at least 2 members of the Commission appointed by thePresident pro tempore of the Senate, and at least 2 members ofthe Commission appointed by the Speaker of the House ofRepresentatives shall be persons well-qualified to participate inthe Commtssion's examination of the subject area of violence inschools, with education, training, expertise, or experience insuch areas as law nforcement, education, school governance policyand teaching, law, sociology, psychology, and ethnography andurban poverty (including health care, housing, education, andemployment). (4) At least 1 member of the Commission appointed by thePresident, at least 2 members of the Commission appointed by thePresident pro tempore of the Senate, and at least 2 members ofthe Commission appointed by the Speaker of the House ofRepresentatives shall be persons well-qualified to participate inthe Commission's examination of the subject area of violenceagainst women, as surviuors of violence, or as persons witheducation, training, expertise, or experience in such areas aslaw enforcement, law, judicial administration, prosecution,defense, victim services or advocacy in sexual assault ordomestic violence cases (including medical services ancounseling), and protection of victims' rights. SEC. 270003. PURPOSES. The purposes of the Commission are as follows: (1) To develop a comprehensive proposal for preventing andcontrolling crime and violence in the United States, includingfor implementing any recommendations made by (2) To bring attention to successful models and programs crimeprevention and crime control. community for ideas for controlling and preventing criminaljustice to recommend improvements in the coordination of local,State, Federal, and international crime control and preventionefforts, including efforts relating to crime near internationalborders. (5) To make a comprehensive study of the economic and socialfactors leading to or contributing to crime and violence,including the causes of illicit drug use and other substanceabuse and to develop specific proposals for legislative andadministrative taibtlons to reduce crime and violence and thefactors that (6) To recommend means of utilizing criminal justice resourcesas effectively as possible, including targeting finitecorrectional facility space to the most serious and violentoffenders and considering increased use of intermediate sanctionsfor offenders who can be dealt with adequately by such means (?) To examine distinctive crime problems and the impact ofcrime on members of minority groups, Indians living on reservations, and other groups defined by race, ethnicity, religionage, disability, or other characteristics, and to recommendspecific responses to the distinctive crime problems of suchgroups (9) To examine the treatment of victims in Federal, State andlocal criminal justice systems, and to develop recommendaions toenhance and protect the rights of victims (10) To examine the ability of Federal, State, and localcriminal Justice systems to administer criminal law and criminalsanct~ons impartially without discrimination on the basis ofrace, et nicity, religion, gender, or other legally proscribedgrounds, and to make recommendations for correcting anydeficiencies in the impartial administration of justice on these (11) To examine the nature, scope, causes, and complexities ofvlolence in schools and to recommend a comprehensive ret at problem. C. a70004. RESPONSIBILITIES OF THE COMMISSION (a) IN GENERAL.--The responsibilities of the Commission shallbe such study and consultation as may be necessary or appropriateto carry out the purposes set forth in section 270003, includingthe specific measures described in subsections (b) through (e) inrelation to the subject areas addressed in those subsections. (b) CRIME AND VIOLENCE GENERALLY.--In addressing the subjectof crime and violence generally, the activities of the Commissionshall include the following (1) Reviewing the effectiveness of traditional criminaljustice approaches in preventing and controlling crime andviolence. (2) Examining the impact that changes in Federal and State lawhave had in controlling crime and violence. (3) Examining the impact of changes in Federal immigrationlaws and policies and increased development and growth alongUnited States international borders on crime and violence in theUnited States, particularly among the Nation's youth. (4) Examining the problem of youth gangs and providingrecommendations as to how to reduce youth involvement in violentcrime. (5) Examining the extent to which the use of dangerous weaponsin the commission of crime has contributed to violence and murderin the United States. (6) Convening field hearings in various regions of the countryto receive testimony from a cross section of criminal justiceprofessionals, business leaders, elected officials, medicaldoctors, and other persons who wish to participate. (7) Reviewing all segments of the Nation's criminal justicesystems, including the law enforcement, prosecution, defense,judicial, and corrections components in developing the crimecontrol and prevention proposal. (c) CAUSES OF THE DEMAND FOR DRUGS.--In addressing the subjectof the causes of the demand for drugs, the activities of theCommission shall include the following: (1) Examining the root causes of illicit drug use and abuse inthe United States, including by compiling existing researchregarding those root causes, and including consideration of thefollowing factors: (A) The characteristics of potential illicit drug users andabusers or drug traffickers, including age and social, economic,and educational backgrounds. (B) Environmental factors that contribute to illicit drug useand abuse, including the correlation between unemployment,poverty, and homelessness and drug experimentation and abuse. (C) The effects of substance use and abuse by a relative orfriend in contributing to the likelihood and desire of anindividual to experiment with illicit drugs. (D) Aspects of, and changes in cultural values, attitudes andtraditions that contribute to illicit drug use and abuse. (E) The physiological and psychological factors thatcontribute to the desire for illicit drugs. (2) Evaluating Federal, State, and local laws and policies onthe prevention of drug abuse, control of unlawful production,distribution and use of controlled substances, and the efficacyof sentencing policies with regard to those laws. (3) Analyzing the allocation of resources among interdictionof controlled substances entering the United States, enforcementof Federal laws relating to the unlawful production,distribution, and use of controlled substances, education withregard to and the prevention of the unlawful use of controlledsubstances, and treatment and rehabilitation of drug abusers. (4) Analyzing current treatment and rehabilitation methods andmaking recommendations for improvements. (5) Identifying any existing gaps in drug abuse policy thatresult from the lack of attention to the root causes of drugabuse. (6) Assessing the needs of government at all levels forresources and policies for reducing the overall desire ofindividuals to experiment with and abuse illicit drugs. Making recommendations regarding necessary improvements in policies for reducing the use of illicit drugs in the United States. Contents | Feedback | Search DRCNet Library | Schaffer Library | The Drug Legalization Debate WT01-B26-21IA031-000651-B014-17http://206.61.184.43:80/schaffer/GOVPUBS/drugcorr.htm 206.61.184.43 19970122120646 text/html 4662HTTP/1.0 200 OKDate: Wednesday, 22-Jan-97 12:06:37 GMTServer: WebSitePro/1.1f (S/N wpo-0deb)Allow-ranges: bytesContent-type: text/htmlLast-modified: Saturday, 28-Dec-96 06:14:21 GMTContent-length: 4445 Drug Corruption and the Federal Government CONGRESSIONAL REPORTS ON DRUG CORRUPTION AND THE FEDERALGOVERNMENT. CONTINUED INVESTIGATION OF SENIOR-LEVEL EMPLOYEE MISCONDUCTAND MISMANAGEMENT AT THE INTERNAL REVENUE SERVICE, Hearing beforethe Commerce, Consumer, and Monetary Affairs Subcommittee of theCommittee on Government Operations, House of Representatives, OneHundred Second Congress, First Session, July 24, 1991,GOV DOC # Y4.G 74/7:Em 7/16 House probe into why IRS investigator WilliamDuncan faced a career crisis for documenting the money-launderingthrough Arkansas in the 1980s. DEPARTMENTS OF COMMERCE, JUSTICE, AND STATE, THE JUDICIARY,AND RELATED AGENCIES APPROPRIATIONS FOR 1990. Hearings before aSubcommittee of the Committee on Appropriations, House ofRepresentatives, One Hundred First Congress, First Session.September 13, 1989. Washington : U.S. G.P.O. GOV DOC. # Y 4.Ap6/1:C 73/2/990/pt.9 Transcript of Congressman William V.Alexander (D-Arkansas) formally requesting U.S. Attorney GeneralRichard Thornburgh to investigate drug smuggling and gun runningat the Intermountain Regional Airport in Mena, Arkansas (whileBush Drug Czar William J. Bennett sits next to him). DRUGS, LAW ENFORCEMENT AND FOREIGN POLICY, Subcommittee onTerrorism, Narcotics and International Operations, Committee onForeign Relations, United States Senate, 1989, S. Prt. 100-165Chaired by Sen. John Kerry of Massachusetts, the subcommitteeheard abundant testimony by drug dealers and pilots about CIAconnections to cocaine smuggling. The report concluded that theUnited States allowed foreign policy objectives to interfere withthe War on Drugs. ENFORCEMENT OF NARCOTICS, FIREARMS, AND MONEY LAUNDERINGLAWS, Oversight Hearings before the Subcommittee on Crime of theCommittee on the Judiciary, House of Representatives, OneHundredth Congress, Second Session, July 28, September 23, 29,and October5, 1988, GOV DOC # Y 4.J 89/1:100/138 Investigatesconnections between cocaine smuggler Barry Seal and his role as a"confidential informant" for the Drug EnforcementAdministration, including the "sting" operation thatattempted to link the Sandinista Government of Nicaragua with thedrug trade. Testimony by several high-ranking DEA officials, aswell as information from the U.S. Justice Department in theappendixes, linked Lt. Col. Oliver North, the CentralIntelligence Agency, and Reagan's National Security Councildirectly to Seal while he was working out of the IntermountainRegional Airport in Mena, Arkansas as a "confidentialinformant" for the DEA. IRS SENIOR EMPLOYEE MISCONDUCT PROBLEMS, Hearings before theCommerce Consumer and Monetary Affairs Subcommittee of theCommittee on Government Operations, House of Representatives,July 25, 26 and 27, 1989, GOV DOC # Y 4.G 74/7:Em 7/11Congressional hearings discover that IRS employee problems aredue to employees investigating money-laundering of cocainethrough Arkansas. MISCONDUCT BY SENIOR MANAGERS IN THE INTERNAL REVENUESERVICE: TWENTIETH REPORT, by Committee on Government Operations,House of Representatives, October 4, 1990, GOV DOC # Y1.1/8:101-800. Report prepared for the Speaker of the House ofRepresentatives containing a section exploring the reasons whyIRS investigator William C. Duncan and others were blocked frominvestigating the money-laundering activities of theinternational narcotics smuggling organization operated by AdlerBerriman `Barry' Seal" in Mena, Arkansas from 1982 to 1986. SYRIA, PRESIDENT BUSH AND DRUGS, Subcommittee Staff Report,House Judiciary Committee's Subcommittee on Crime and CriminalJustice, October 28, 1992 Reports that Bekaa Valley herointraffickers have close ties to the Syrian government and Army,and that President Bush ignored this problem in his policytowards Syria. CliffSchaffer's Home Page WT01-B26-22IA086-000615-B002-73http://206.61.184.43:80/schaffer/GOVPUBS/psycviol.htm 206.61.184.43 19970122024551 text/html 43460HTTP/1.0 200 OKDate: Wednesday, 22-Jan-97 02:45:25 GMTServer: WebSitePro/1.1f (S/N wpo-0deb)Allow-ranges: bytesContent-type: text/htmlLast-modified: Saturday, 28-Dec-96 06:12:29 GMTContent-length: 43242 Psychoactive Substances and Violence Psychoactive Substances and Violence by Jeffrey A. Roth Series: Research in Brief, US Dept. of Justice Published: February 1994 19 pages Issues and Findings Discussed in the Research in Brief: The current status ofresearch on the links connecting violence to alcohol and illegalpsychoactive drugs, and evaluations of interventions to preventviolence related to these substances. Key issues: Correlations between violence and psychoactivesubstances; the social, economic, cultural, psycho-social,neurobehavioral, and other factors that explain the correlations;and prevention strategies for reducing the violence associatedwith these substances. Key findings: Research has uncovered strong correlations between violence and psycho-active substances, including alcohol and illegal drugs, but the underlying relationships differ by type of drug. The links between violence and psychoactive substances involve broad social and economic forces, the settings in which people obtain and consume the substances, and biological processes that underlie all human behavior. These factors interact in chains of events that may extend back from an intermediate triggering event such as an argument to long-term predisposing processes that begin in childhood. Of all psychoactive substances, alcohol is the only one whose consumption has been shown to commonly increase aggression. After large doses of amphetamines, cocaine, LSD, and PCP, certain individuals may experience violent outbursts, probably because of preexisting psychosis. Research is needed on the pharmacological effects of crack, which enters the brain more directly than cocaine used in other forms. Alcohol drinking and violence are linked through pharmacological effects on behavior, through expectations that heavy drinking and violence go together in certain settings, and through patterns of binge drinking and fighting that sometimes develop in adolescence. The most promising strategies for reducing alcohol-related violence are to reduce underage drinking through substance abuse preventive education, taxes, law enforcement, and peer pressure. Illegal drugs and violence are linked primarily through drug marketing: disputes among rival distributors, arguments and robberies involving buyers and sellers, property crimes committed to raise drug money and, more speculatively, social and economic interactions between the illegal markets and the surrounding communities. The most promising strategy for reducing violence related to illegal drugs appears to be reducing the demand that fuels violent illegal markets. Promising tactics include preventive education, pretrial monitoring of arrestees through urinalysis and, for convicted violent offenders, in-prison therapeutic communities integrated with postrelease treatment followup. In the future, medications may reduce violence by reducing cocaine craving and by blocking the aggression-promoting effects of opiate withdrawal and alcohol consumption. Target audience: State and local policymakers, courtadministrators, law enforcement and juvenile justicepractitioners, and drug treatment program staff. As noted by the Panel on the Understanding and Control ofViolent Behavior, the character of violence presents simultaneouschallenges to understanding and opportunities for prevention.First, violence is diverse. Acts as different as spontaneousdrive-by shootings and met-iculously planned serial killings, forexample, are both included in the legal and statistical categoryof murder. Second, the causes of violence are complex, involvinga very wide variety of factors. The panel found it useful toclassify these factors in terms of four levels of analysis atwhich they are usually studied: Broad social and economic forces (macrosocial). Encounters between people in particular settings (microsocial). Individual behavioral development from childhood through adulthood (psychosocial). Neurobehavioral and other biological processes that underlie all human behavior (neurobehavioral). Factors at these four levels operate and interact in chainsof events that may begin long before the violent event thatresults. Therefore, the panel's classification framework alsocategorized causal factors in terms of their temporal proximityto the violent event itself: from the immediate triggeringmechanism (for example, a response to an insult), back throughthe situation that led up to the triggering event, topredisposing factors that months or years earlier increased therisk of a future violent event. This diversity and complexity might at first glance seem todiscourage efforts to prevent violence. In fact, however, theycreate promising opportunities. Merely acknowledging thediversity breaks the overall "violence problem" intoseparate problems that may be preventable through interventionsby different public agencies. Recognizing the causal complexityexpands the list of options for preventing a particular violenceproblem by highlighting all the points at which chains of eventsleading to it may be breakable. Problem-solvinginitiatives--programs that involve design and evaluation ofpreventive interventions at various links in these chains ofevents, that revise these interventions in light of theevaluation findings, and that replicate the evaluations--have thepotential to simultaneously reduce violence and increase theunderstanding of its causes. Many chains of causal events for violence include links toalcohol or to illegal psychoactive drugs. The panel found theselinks worth exploring in depth for at least three reasons. First,statistics consistently demonstrate correlations between violentevents and involvement with alcohol and other psychoactive drugs.Second, the variety of potential causal links between violenceand different psychoactive substances--alcohol, opiates, cocainein smokable and powdered form, amphetamines, hallucinogens, andother illegal drugs--presents an especially rich example of thepanel's classification framework. Third, preliminary evidencefrom research and evaluations suggests that certain interventionsrelated to psychoactive substances should be considered indeveloping strategies for controlling violence. Correlations between violence and psychoactive substances Research supported by the National Institute of Justice andother organizations has repeatedly found strong correlationsbetween violence and psychoactive substances: For at least the last several decades, alcohol drinking--by the perpetrator of a crime, the victim, or both--has immediately preceded at least half of all violent events, including murders, in the samples studied by researchers. Chronic drinkers are more likely than other people to have histories of violent behavior. Criminals who use illegal drugs1 commit robberies and assaults more frequently than do nonuser criminals, and they commit them especially frequently during periods of heavy drug use. In a study of New York City murders in 1988, researchers classified more than half the homicides (53 percent) as drug-related: 39 percent in the course of drug distribution, 8 percent through pharmacological effects on the offender, 2 percent while the offender was obtaining money to buy drugs, and 4 percent through more than one of these links.2 Data from the National Institute of Justice Drug UseForecasting (DUF) program, which tests for drug use among bookedarrestees in 24 sites nationwide, showed the following patternsin 1989: Most males and females who were interviewed after arrest for a violent crime reported drinking alcohol within 72 hours before the crime for which they were arrested. About 60 percent of arrestees booked for violent crimes were confirmed by laboratory test to have used at least one illegal drug3 in the hours before arrest. Explaining the correlations While these statistical patterns strongly suggest thatpsychoactive substances play significant roles in acts ofviolence, they do not explain the nature of those relationships.In trying to sort out links between violence and psychoactivesubstances, the panel categorized potential links in terms of thefour levels noted above: o Social and economic forces (macrosocial): Processes that affect large social units such as nations orcommunities. Examples include cultural practices related toalcohol use and, in the United States, economic and socialprocesses surrounding the illegal markets in which psychoactivedrugs other than alcohol are sold. o Encounters between people (microsocial): Characteristics of encounters between people. Examplesinclude group drinking in settings where violence is expected andsocially acceptable; arguments that are begun or aggravatedbecause the participants are under the influence of drugs oralcohol; and disputes involving organizations, buyers, andsellers in illegal drug markets. o Psychosocial: Influences on individuals' behavior patterns, which begindeveloping in early childhood and continue to evolve throughoutadulthood. Examples include patterns of heavy drinking andaggression that develop during adolescence and psychoses thatpredispose a few individuals toward violent psychotic episodeswhile under the influence of certain drugs. o Neurobehavioral: Processes in the brain that underlie all human behavior andthat may be altered by pharmacological effects of alcohol andother drugs. Examples include effects of substance abuse duringpregnancy on fetal development, effects of chronic substanceabuse on brain functioning, and temporary neurological effects ofbeing "high" or "blue." These and other examples of links at all four levels betweenviolence and alcohol or other drugs are displayed in table 1.Much of the evidence for specific links is suggestive rather thanconclusive. One challenge in understanding and verifying thelinks is the complexity of interactions among factors atdifferent levels. It would be difficult at best to sort out suchinteractions. What makes the challenge even greater is that moststudies measure factors at only one or two levels at a time, sothat the full range of interactions is rarely observed in asingle study. In addition, it is difficult to study violentevents using methods that yield generalizable conclusions.Controlled experiments under laboratory conditions produce thestrongest confirmation of factors that influence behavior, butpractical and ethical constraints generally limit those methodsto studies of behaviors that are far milder than the potentiallylethal violence that occurs in homes and communities. At present,therefore, there are only fragments of scientific evidenceproviding partial support for the existence of many causal linksbetween psychoactive substances and violence. These findingsneither explain definitively how the links interact nor provide abasis for ranking them in order of importance in explainingvariation in violence related to alcohol or other drugs. Neurobehavioral explanations Research on humans and many animal species suggests there areseveral neurobehavioral links between violence and psychoactivesubstances: Expectant mothers' use of psychoactive substances during pregnancy adversely affects fetal development. The resultant damage causes learning and communication problems that, in turn, increase the risk of early grade school failure, a well-documented precursor of violent behavior. Alcohol is the only psychoactive drug that in many individuals tends to increase aggressive behavior temporarily while it is taking effect. However, factors at other levels--behavior patterns when people are not drinking, the setting in which people drink, and local drinking customs, for example--influence the strength of this relationship. Among alcohol abusers, those who also abuse other psychoactive substances, who are diagnosed with antisocial personality disorder, and whose parents have been diagnosed as alcohol abusers are at especially high risk of chronic violent behavior. Some researchers have suggested that a genetic process may contribute to this relatively rare pattern. Marijuana and opiates temporarily inhibit violent behavior, but withdrawal from opiate addiction tends to exaggerate both aggressive and defensive responses to provocations. Individual humans and animals deviate widely from these"average" behaviors. For example, theaggression-promoting effects of alcohol are strongest in animalshaving high blood levels of testosterone, the principal malehormone that distinguishes males from females; humans may or maynot exhibit the same pattern. A study of violent Finnish alcoholabusers suggests that the alcohol-violence link may be associatedwith abnormally low levels of blood sugar (that is, hypoglycemia)and of metabolites of the brain chemical serotonin. Another studysuggests that the alcohol-violence link is especially strong inpeople who exhibit certain abnormal brain wave patterns, both atrest and while responding to outside stresses. Common Assumptions Called Into Question On the other hand, several common assumptions aboutconnections between drugs and violence are called into questionby research findings: There is no evidence to support the claim that snorting or injecting cocaine stimulates violent behavior. However, research is urgently needed on the behavioral effects of smoking cocaine in crack form, which affects the brain more directly. Anecdotal reports notwithstanding, no research evidence supports the notion that becoming high on hallucinogens, amphetamines, or PCP stimulates violent behavior in any systematic manner. The anecdotes usually describe chronic users with histories of psychosis or antisocial behavior, which may or may not be related to their chronic use of drugs. Occasional anecdotes about " 'roid rages"--violent outbursts by men who use anabolic steroids to accelerate muscle growth--appear to describe isolated coincidences rather than any common, systematic effect. Psychosocial links Evidence from research on animals and humans indicates thatpatterns of substance abuse and aggressive behavior reinforceeach other. It cannot be said that one "causes" theother. For example, alcohol may trigger violent episodes inaggressive animals and people, but rarely in submissive ones. Patterns of aggressive behavior and substance abuse oftenbecome intertwined starting in childhood. Early childhoodaggression is a predictor of later heavy drinking, and thecombination is associated with an above-average risk of adultviolent behavior, especially among those who also abuse otherpsychoactive drugs. Research suggests at least four possible explanations for thelink between substance abuse and violent behavior in adolescents.First, adolescents may chronically use psychoactive substances tohelp them temporarily escape from such feelings as rage, guilt,worthlessness, or depression--emotions that often precedeaggressive behavior. Second, repeated family arguments overteenage substance abuse may eventually take on a violentcharacter. Next, underlying family problems or socially expectedresponses may lead some adolescent males to patterns of heavydrinking and fighting as ways to demonstrate their masculinity.Last, boys who regularly observe older males fighting whiledrinking may learn to expect that violent behavior accompaniesalcohol use. All of these processes may be at work, but theirroles, interactions, and importance as explanations have not yetbeen sorted out. Preexisting psychosis appears to account for occasionalviolent outbursts by people who are under the influence ofamphetamines or hallucinogens, especially PCP. While these drugsare well known to cause disorganized, bizarre behavior, theytrigger violence in very few people who are not also psychotic.In studies of laboratory mice and monkeys, bizarre behavior onthe part of animals under the influence of PCP fairly commonlyprovokes violent attacks by others in the group. Anecdotalinformation and newspaper accounts report similar attacks onhumans using alcohol, amphetamines, powdered cocaine, or LSD, butthis relationship has not been systematically studied in humans. Encounters between people In a variety of ways, alcohol and drugs modify encountersbetween people in ways that make these substances greater hazardsfor violence. In the case of alcohol, these hazards tend to berelated to use, while for illegal psychoactive drugs they tend tobe related to distribution and purchase. Alcohol use and sexual violence. Some therapists who treatviolent sex offenders have reported that their patients tend tohave both histories of alcohol abuse and high blood levels oftestosterone. Without comparisons to men who are not violent sexoffenders, these clinical observations cannot demonstrate thatalcohol abuse or high testosterone levels cause sexual violence.Studies of many animal species suggest a causal connection--thatalcohol reduces testosterone levels but has strongeraggression-promoting effects in individual high-testosteroneanimals. However, that relationship has not yet been tested inhumans. The frequent involvement of alcohol in acquaintance rapessuggests that social expectations may also be at work; that is,young men who expect to have sex after drinking may try tosatisfy their expectations, sometimes forcibly if they encounterresistance. Illegal drug markets. Illegal drug markets operate outsidethe world of contract law, courts and mediators for resolvingdisputes, and business customs that distinguish sociallyacceptable from unac- ceptable approaches to buying and selling.Illegal markets often develop substitute mechanisms that involvethe threat or actual use of violence. Examples include: Violence by drug distributors in the course of territorial disputes between rival organizations, threats of violence to make "staff" obey organizational rules, violent punishment of rulebreakers to keep the threats credible, battles with police, and protection of sellers or drugs on the street. Violence between buyer and seller during a drug transaction, caused, for example, by attempted robbery of one or the other, failure to hand over drugs or money, or "honest" misunderstandings of local rules of the game on the part of buyers and sellers. Violence involving people other than buyers and sellers who are found around drug markets--third parties such as innocent bystanders and people operating in related illegal markets for "protection," guns, or prostitution. As places where violence tends to occur for the reasonslisted above, illegal drug markets may also serve as"magnets." As such, they attract valuable drugs andcash, weapons, and people who are accustomed to violence. The mixof these ingredients creates hazardous conditions for robberiesand other forms of violence that may not be directly related todrugs. Obtaining drug purchase money. In some settings, the need formoney to buy drugs also increases the chance of a violentencounter. A taxi driver carrying a passenger late at night, forexample, is presumably at greater risk of being robbed if thepassenger wants to buy drugs but lacks the cash to do so. Whilerobbery is still a common way to obtain money to buy drugs, ithas been replaced by drug selling in some large cities. Using alcohol and drugs. If alcohol caused violence only bymaking individuals behave more aggressively, violence would beequally common in all places where drinking occurs. In fact,however, most drinking places are rarely scenes of violence. Afew acquire reputations as "animal houses" or"fighting bars," where people expect drinking andviolence to go hand in hand. Just what characteristics of a drinking place make it ahazard for violence are not precisely known, but there issupporting evidence for several possible explanations. People whodrink in fighting bars may behave violently in order to "fitin" or to advance socially. People who experience anger orfrustration may seek out such settings, because they believe thatdrinking in these types of establishments means social permissionto engage in violent behavior. One study of a group of young menwho were observed during an evening of drinking illustrates thisby suggesting that behavior patterns and situational influencesmay play off each other. As the evening progressed, the groupbegan both to behave more aggressively and to move on toestablishments where aggressive behavior was more sociallyacceptable. Connections between drinking and violence have beenidentified by researchers in many countries with predominantlyEuropean cultures. But they have not been found in many tribaland folk societies, even where binge drinking is common. Forreasons not yet known, expectations that violence followsdrinking have failed to develop in those cultures. Finally, it seems likely that substance abuse is indirectlyrelated to violence in ways that are difficult to identify andcount. Examples of indirect relationships include robberiescommitted to replace household money spent on drugs or alcohol,or spouse assaults arising from disputes over money or time spentaway from home drinking or taking drugs. Violence is related to the distribution, purchase, and use ofillegal drugs or alcohol in a wide variety of human interactions.Unfortunately, the difficulty of counting such interactions makesit also difficult to rank them in order of importance. Bettercounts would help in focusing violence prevention strategies onthe most common interactions in which drug- and alcohol-relatedviolence occurs. Social and economic forces If the patterns of behavior discussed above were the onlylinks between illegal drug distribution and violence, every citythat experienced a crack epidemic in the 1980's would also haveseen a substantial increase in homicide at the same time. Indeed,policymakers have occasionally claimed a "uniform, straightline relationship" between illegal drug use and murder.4 The reality is more complex. The murder rate increased 350percent in Washington, D.C., and by a smaller amount in New YorkCity as their crack epidemics unfolded. However, during the crackepidemics in Detroit and Los Angeles these cities experienceddecreases in the murder rate. This suggests that therelationships between illegal drug market activity and lethalviolence are intertwined with social and economic processes inthe surrounding community. What are these processes? Because causal patterns at thesocial level are especially difficult to establish, the answersare necessarily speculative. Fragments of evidence suggest thatsome or all of the following factors may influence therelationship between levels of violence and illegal drug marketactivity: Stability of drug market control: Situations that produce violent encounters--fights over territorial allocations or misunderstandings between buyers and sellers, for example--arose relatively infrequently in markets controlled by old, stable organizations that had developed operating rules decades ago and enforced them through a standing threat to punish violators violently. Where the spread of crack manufacturing technology encouraged new organizations to enter the markets, the resulting destabilization may temporarily have increased the frequency of violent encounters. Community access to legitimate economic opportunities: Where the rise of crack markets followed the exodus of legitimate economic opportunities from central cities, economic rewards shifted away from skills valued by legitimate employers to those valued by crack distribution organizations; these included the ability to threaten and use violence. Strength of informal violence controls: Where the exodus of legitimate economic opportunities from urban communities took with it many people committed to legal, nonviolent values, those people were no longer available for roles in preventing drug-related violence. They were not available, for example, as nonviolent role models for adolescents, as passers-by who might discourage drug buyers or intervene in emerging violent events, or as concerned individuals who might inform parents if their children began drifting toward involvement in drug markets. Social status and moral authority: During crack epidemics in some communities, successful young drug entrepreneurs either supplanted or intimidated neighborhood "old heads"--unofficial community leaders who upheld traditional values and had exercised moral authority in the neighborhood. Where this occurred, it tended to weaken cultural restraints against violence in all contexts, including drug markets. Because such relationships are difficult to verify, evidencesupporting their influence is only suggestive and fragmentary,and new research is needed to explore them more fully. Preventive interventions A number of intervention strategies for preventing violencerelated to psychoactive substances have been proposed: Police disruption of illegal drug markets. Selectively longer incarceration of violent drug-using criminals. Reducing teenagers' access to alcohol. Substance abuse prevention. Drug abuse treatment. Pharmacological therapies to reduce drug craving and aggressive tendencies associated with alcohol use and heroin addiction. Some of these strategies have been evaluated to test theireffectiveness in reducing violence. Only a few have demonstratedsuccess under any conditions; none have shown universaleffectiveness. Developing better interventions will requirecollaborative problem-solving initiatives that involverepresentatives of criminal justice agencies, providers ofsubstance abuse treatment and other social services, andevaluation researchers. These initiatives are needed to turnpromising ideas into workable programs, to evaluate the programs,and to refine them in light of the evaluation results. Thefindings of evaluations conducted thus far are summarized in thefollowing sections. Disrupting illegal drug markets. Policeattack illegal drug markets through a number of tactics:undercover investigations leading to dealers' arrests;cooperation with community antidrug efforts; and large-scale,high-visibility crackdowns. Evaluations of these tactics inBirmingham, Alabama; Lawrence and Lynn, Massachusetts; New YorkCity; Oakland, California; Philadelphia, Pennsylvania; andWashington, D.C., present a mixed picture. Perhaps the strongestsupportable statement is that their chance of success is improvedby intervening early in emerging markets, by creating a highlycommitted police force, and by generating community receptivityand cooperation in advance. NIJ's Drug Market Analysis (DMA)program is helping with the first prerequisite--early detectionof drug markets. Specific techniques for creating supportiveclimates in police departments and the surrounding communitiesare less well understood, although many approaches are now beingtested as part of community policing initiatives. Incarcerating violent drug-using criminals. Researchershave generally found that compared to other violent offenders,those who use drugs tend to have higher average frequencies ofviolent crimes such as robbery and assault. This finding raisesthe possibility that sentencing drug-involved offenders who areconvicted of these crimes to longer prison terms might reduceviolence. However, analyses suggest that this strategy of"selective incapacitation" would reduce violent crimelevels very little unless it were accompanied by massiveincreases in prison populations. A related strategy--monitoring pretrial releasees'drug use through urinalysis--showed rather surprisingeffects in a Washington, D.C., evaluation. Although positive drugtest results did not predict significantly higher pretrialrearrest rates, failure to show up for the test was a strongpredictor of subsequent new crimes leading to rearrest. Reducing teenagers' access to alcohol.Evidence is fairly clear that increases in tax rates and othermeasures that reduce the availability of alcohol to adolescents(social pressure and enforcement of underage drinking laws) inturn reduce drinking and certain associated problems such asdeath rates due to auto collisions. Therefore, these strategiesmay also reduce adolescents' disproportionate share of violence.That conjecture remains to be tested, however. Substance abuse prevention. By reducing thedemand that fuels violent, illegal drug markets, substance abuseprevention should, in theory, reduce violence levels. Manysubstance abuse prevention programs have been evaluated,including the Drug Abuse Resistance Education (DARE), whichbrings police officers into classrooms as instructors.Evaluations of prevention programs have generally found themeffective in delaying the onset of tobacco, alcohol, andmarijuana use. Evaluations have not generally found thateducation succeeds in preventing use of "harder" drugs,perhaps because use of those drugs was rare even in the controlgroups that did not receive preventive education. However, to theextent that minor drugs are "stepping stones" to theharder ones,5 the programs may have meaningful, yet delayed,effects for violence reduction. Prevention may have an especially importantrole to play for one category of adolescents--males whosebehavior meets diagnostic criteria for antisocial personalitydisorder and whose parents abuse alcohol. Research indicates thatthese two factors, coupled with both alcohol and drug abuse,create a high-risk profile for violent behavior in adulthood. Drug abuse treatment. Successful drugtreatment programs reduce criminal activity among adult clients.For drug abusers who are not in prison, stays of at least 3months in therapeutic communities reduce the tendency to commitcrime after discharge. Up to about 18 months, longer stays in thetherapeutic community produce greater reductions. For drug abusers in prison, treatment usually involves onlyindividual or group sessions a few times a week with nopostrelease followup. Evaluations of this approach have not foundit sufficient to reduce criminal behavior following release.However, a more intensive approach--combining inprisontherapeutic communities, planning for postrelease treatment, andpostrelease treatment in the community--reduces overall rearrestrates of inmates who complete the program. At least threeprograms have used this approach: Stay 'n Out (in a New Yorkprison), Cornerstone (in the Oregon State Hospital), and theCalifornia Civil Addict Program. In addition to these beneficial effects of drug treatment onoffenders' behavior, successful treatment may reduce aggregatelevels of violence related to drug markets by lowering the demandthat fuels the markets. Such an effect would, however, bedifficult to measure. Pharmacological interventions. Like otherforms of drug treatment, pharmacological therapies that reducedrug craving may also lower the demand that supports violent drugmarkets. For decades, methadone and related chemicals have beenused to reduce craving for heroin. There is no analogue tomethadone for treating addiction to cocaine in powdered orsmokable form. However, using animals as test subjects,researchers have identified the receptors for certain subtypes oftwo brain chemicals, dopamine and norepinephrine, as promisingsites to begin developing such medications. Animal research alsosuggests neurochemical starting points for developing medicationsthat reduce violence in other ways: by disrupting theaggression-promoting effects of alcohol and by preventingaggression during withdrawal from heroin addiction. Conclusion Too few of the links between violence and psychoactivesubstances have been established with enough certainty toadvocate a comprehensive national policy for preventing violencerelated to those substances. Instead, a program of testing andevaluating tactics for implementing a variety of promisingstrategies is called for. Among these strategies, criminaljustice agencies have particular roles in developing and testingtactics to disrupt illegal drug markets, in monitoring drug useof pretrial releasees, in establishing drug abuse treatment forconvicted criminals, and in creating effective substance abuseprevention programs. Fulfilling these roles will requirecooperation between the criminal justice system and drugtreatment, prevention, and education authorities. Eventually,efforts to prevent drug-related violence may be assisted bypharmacological therapies to reduce the aggression-promotingeffects of alcohol and the craving for other psychoactive drugs. Notes 1. Among studies of this relationship, many group all illegaldrugs together. Those that distinguish among drugs usually listcocaine, heroin, amphetamines, barbiturates, and hallucinogensother than marijuana. See, for example, Elliott, D.S., and D.Huizinga, The Relationship Between Delinquent Behavior and ADM[Alcohol, Drug, and Mental Health] Problems, National YouthSurvey Report No. 26. Boulder, Colorado: Behavioral ResearchInstitute, 1984. 2. Goldstein, P.J., H.H. Brownstein, P.J. Ryan, and P.A.Bellucci, "Crack and Homicide in New York City, 1988: AConceptually Based Event Analysis," Contemporary DrugProblems 16 (Winter 1989):651--687. 3. The DUF program uses urinalysis to confirm self-reports.The urine specimens are tested for cocaine, opiates, marijuana,PCP, methadone, benzodiazepine (Valium), methaqualone,propoxyphene (Darvon), barbiturates, and amphetamines. Samplesare collected at the time of arrest on a voluntary basis; anaverage of 80 percent of arrestees voluntarily cooperate. Testcriteria are set to detect use of most drugs in the preceding 24to 48 hours, but marijuana and PCP can be detected in the urineseveral weeks after use. 4. Isikoff, M., and K. Sawyer, "Thornburgh Says All DrugAbusers Fuel Nation's Crisis," Washington Post, August 17,1990. 5. Until recently, research on developmental pathwaysconsistently found these drugs to be "gateways" or"stepping stones" to cocaine use. Preliminary findings,presented after the Panel completed its report, suggest thatsince the New York City "crack epidemic" of the early1980's, crack-using youth in increasing numbers are skipping thegateway drugs and starting directly with crack. Author's Biography Dr. Jeffrey A. Roth served as study director for the Panel onthe Under-standing and Control of Violent Behavior. Currently heis research director in the Bethesda, Maryland, office of the Lawand Public Policy area of Abt Associates, Inc. Sidebar 1 Panel on the Understanding and Control of Violent Behavior Violence is universally recognized as a pervasive part ofcontemporary American society and of our Nation's past as well.Many of the attempts to understand the phenomenon have been madein response to specific situations, such as the lawlessness ofthe Prohibition era, the assassination of President John F.Kennedy, and the urban riots of the mid-1960's. Other attempts atunderstanding violence singled out particular causes foranalysis. In none of these studies, however, was the full body ofresearch on violence reviewed comprehensively, and none of themtook an interdisciplinary approach. The Panel on the Understanding and Control of ViolentBehavior was set up to meet the need for a more comprehensiveassessment of what is known about violent behavior. It wasestablished in response to a request made by three Federalagencies: the National Science Foundation (NSF), the NationalInstitute of Justice (NIJ), and the Centers for Disease Controland Prevention (CDC). NSF asked for a review of current knowledgeabout the causes of violent behavior and recommendations forfuture research. The other two agencies shared these goals, buttheir areas of interest reflected their particular missions. Asthe research arm of the U.S. Department of Justice, NIJ wanted tofind out about means to prevent and control violent crime. TheCDC wanted assistance in setting priorities for preventinginjuries and deaths caused by violence. Created in 1989, the panel reviewed research on"interpersonal violence"--events involving at most afew perpetrators and victims. This limitation excluded suicideand self-mutilation as well as large-scale collective and Stateviolence. The focus was on describing, understanding, andcontrolling violence in the United States. Research inbiomedical, psychological, and other social sciences wasreviewed. The work of the panel was intended both to help guidefuture research and evaluation projects aimed at prevention andcontrol and to suggest strategic directions for violence controlpolicy. The findings, conclusions, and recommendations of the panelwere published in Volume 1 of Understanding and PreventingViolence, published by the National Academy Press. Three volumesof background papers commissioned by the panel are forthcoming.The panel concluded that numerous, often interacting factors giverise to violent events. Although the underlying interactions arenot well understood, attention to the factors suggests manypromising preventive interventions. Testing and evaluating theseinterventions creates opportunities to prevent particular typesof violence while gaining better understanding of them. The panelmade recommendations in a number of areas, among them developmentof problem-solving initiatives to control and understandviolence; better statistical systems for measuring violence; anda program of research to identify underlying causes. ThisResearch in Brief is one of a series that summarizes the panel'sfindings. NIJ is committed to implementing the recommendations of thepanel. Its commitment has begun through support for the Programon Human Development and Criminal Behavior, a longitudinal,multicommunity research project that is exploring the factorsassociated with violence. In addition, the panel'srecommendations have helped shape the goals of NIJ research andevaluation activities and its long-range plans for research. Copies of Understanding and Preventing Violence are availablefrom the National Academy Press, 2101 Constitution Avenue N.W.,Washington, DC 20418 (800-624-6242). . CliffSchaffer's Home Page WT01-B26-23IA088-000636-B017-116http://206.61.184.43:80/schaffer/GOVPUBS/retri94.htm 206.61.184.43 19970122102406 text/html 403299HTTP/1.0 200 OKDate: Wednesday, 22-Jan-97 10:23:42 GMTServer: WebSitePro/1.1f (S/N wpo-0deb)Allow-ranges: bytesContent-type: text/htmlLast-modified: Saturday, 28-Dec-96 06:12:18 GMTContent-length: 403080 Past and Future Directions of the D.A.R.E. Program: CliffSchaffer's Home Page Past and Future Directions of the D.A.R.E. Program: An Evaluation Review Draft Final Report by Research Triangle Institute September 1994 Christopher L. Ringwalt Jody M. Greene Susan T. Ennett Ronaldo Iachan University of Kentucky Richard R. Clayton Carl G. Leukefeld Supported under Award # 91-DD-CX-K053 from the National Institute of Justice, Office of Justice Programs, U.S. Department of Justice. Points of view in this document are those of the authors and do not necessarily represent the official position of the U.S. Department of Justice. Past and Future Directions of the D.A.R.E. Program: An Evaluation Review Draft Final Report by Research Triangle Institute Christopher L. Ringwalt Jody M. Greene Susan T. Ennett Ronaldo Iachan University of Kentucky Richard R. Clayton Carl G. Leukefeld September 1994 TABLE OF CONTENTS Chapter Page Acknowledgments . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . ii List of Exhibits. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . vii SECTION I: INTRODUCTION AND OVERVIEW 1 INTRODUCTION. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 1-1 Purpose of the Study . . . . . . . . . . . . 1-1 Study Objectives . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 1-2 Description of the Study . . . . . . . . . . 1-2 Strengths and Limitations of the Study . . . 1-3 Overview of the Report . . . . . . . . . . . 1-4 2 OVERVIEW AND HISTORY OF SCHOOL-BASED DRUG PREVENTION PROGRAMS AND D.A.R.E.. . . . . . . . . . 2-1 History of School-Based Drug=20 Prevention Programs. . . . . . . . . . . . . 2-1 Drug Use Prevention Strategies . . . . . . . 2-2 History of D.A.R.E.. . . . . . . . . . . . . 2-4 D.A.R.E. Curricula. . . . . . . . . . . . . . 2-5 D.A.R.E. Officers and Training. . . . . . . .2-12 D.A.R.E. in the Context of Other School-Based Drug UsePrevention Programs . . . . . . . . . . . . .2-13 SECTION II: IMPLEMENTATION ASSESSMENT 3 NATIONAL AND REGIONAL OPERATIONS . . . . . . . . . . . 3-1 Summary . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 3-6 4 STATE-LEVEL OPERATIONS . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 4-1 Methodology . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 4-1 Instrument Design . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 4-1 Data Collection . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 4-2 Findings. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 4-3 Administration. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 4-3 Agencies Involved . . . . . . . . . . . . 4-3 Functions . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 4-5 Communication . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 4-6 Funding . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 4-7 State Training Centers. . . . . . . . . . . . . . 4-8 Implementation. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 4-8 Challenges and Problems . . . . . . . . . . . 4-8 Summary . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .4-10 Chapter Page 5 SCHOOL DISTRICT DRUG PREVENTION COORDINATOR SURVEY . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 5-1 Methodology . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 5-2 Sample Design . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 5-2 Sampling frame. . . . . . . . . . . . . . 5-2 First-Phase Sampling. . . . . . . . . . . 5-3 Second-Phase Sampling . . . . . . . . . . 5-4 Survey Estimation . . . . . . . . . . . . 5-4 Instrument Design . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 5-4 Data Collection . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 5-5 Findings. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 5-7 Administration of D.A.R.E.. . . . . . . . . . 5-7 Implementation. . . . . . . . . . . . . . 5-7 Administration. . . . . . . . . . . . . . 5-7 Participation of Teachers=20 and Community . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 5-8 Integration and Coordination. . . . . . .5-10 Problems. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .5-11 Future Use of D.A.R.E.. . . . . . . . . .5-12 National Prevalence Estimates of D.A.R.E. and Other AOD Programs . . . . . . .5-13 Prevalence. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .5-13 Grade Levels Targeted . . . . . . . . . .5-14 Substances Targeted . . . . . . . . . . .5-15 Type of Instructor. . . . . . . . . . . .5-15 Comparison of D.A.R.E. and Other AOD Programs. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .5-15 Funding . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .5-16 Satisfaction with Curricula . . . . . . .5-16 Support for Curricula . . . . . . . . . .5-18 Adaptations of Curricula. . . . . . . . .5-21 General Drug Policies . . . . . . . . . . . .5-22 Anti-Drug Policies. . . . . . . . . . . .5-22 Student Assistance Programs . . . . . . .5-22 Summary . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .5-24 6 SITE VISITS. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 6-1 Urban Schools . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 6-2 Urban School with D.A.R.E.. . . . . . . . . . 6-2 Administration. . . . . . . . . . . . . . 6-3 Implementation. . . . . . . . . . . . . . 6-3 Funding . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 6-4 Curriculum. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 6-4 Problems and Improvements . . . . . . . . 6-5 Classroom Observation . . . . . . . . . . 6-5 Chapter Page Urban School Without D.A.R.E. . . . . . . . . . . 6-6 Administration. . . . . . . . . . . . . . 6-6 Implementation. . . . . . . . . . . . . . 6-7 Funding . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 6-7 Curriculum. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 6-8 Problems and Improvements . . . . . . . . 6-8 Classroom Observation . . . . . . . . . . 6-8 Rural Schools . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 6-9 Rural School with D.A.R.E.. . . . . . . . . . 6-9 Administration. . . . . . . . . . . . . . 6-9 Implementation. . . . . . . . . . . . . . 6-9 Funding . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .6-10 Curriculum. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .6-10 Problems and Improvements . . . . . . . .6-10 Classroom Observation . . . . . . . . . .6-11 Rural School Without D.A.R.E. . . . . . . . .6-12 Administration. . . . . . . . . . . . . .6-12 Implementation. . . . . . . . . . . . . .6-12 Funding . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .6-12 Curriculum. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .6-12 Problems and Improvements . . . . . . . .6-13 Classroom Observation . . . . . . . . . .6-13 Summary . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .6-14 SECTION III: OUTCOME ASSESSMENT 7 D.A.R.E. OUTCOME ASSESSMENT. . . . . . . . . . . . . . 7-1 The D.A.R.E. Core Curriculum. . . . . . . . . . . 7-1 Meta-Analysis Background and Study Selection Criteria. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 7-2 Studies Selected. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 7-5 D.A.R.E. Effect Sizes . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 7-7 Comparison of D.A.R.E.'s Effectiveness=20 to Other Drug Use Prevention Programs=20 for Youth . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .7-11 Methodological Considerations . . . . . . . . . .7-17 Summary . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .7-19 SECTION IV: SUMMARY AND RECOMMENDATIONS 8 DISCUSSION AND RECOMMENDATIONS . . . . . . . . . . . . 8-1 Implementation Assessment . . . . . . . . . . . . 8-1 Outcome Assessment. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .8-12 Conclusion. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .8-21 REFERENCES . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . R-1 Appendices A Sampling for School District Drug Prevention Coordinators Survey B Individual Study Descriptions C Bibliography of Comparison Program Evaluations D Data Collection Materials for Implementation AssessmentLIST OF EXHIBITS Number Page 2.1 D.A.R.E.'s Original Core Curriculum. . . . . . . . . .2-7 2.2 D.A.R.E.'s Updated Core Curriculum . . . . . . . . . .2-8 2.3 D.A.R.E.'s Junior High School Curriculum . . . . . . .2-9 2.4 D.A.R.E.'s Senior High School Curriculum . . . . . ..2-10 2.5 D.A.R.E.'s Parent Curriculum . . . . . . . . . . . ..2-11 2.6 Curricular Strategies Used in D.A.R.E.'s=20 Core Curriculum. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .2-14 3.1 Jurisdictions of D.A.R.E.'s Regional=20 Training Centers . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 3-4 4.1 Percentage of State D.A.R.E. Programs Primarily =20 Managed by Various State and Local Agencies. . . . . . 4-3 4.2 Percentage of States with D.A.R.E. Policy Advisory Boards Having Representation of Various Agencies and Individuals on Such Boards. . . . 4-4 4.3 Percentage of States with D.A.R.E.=20 Educational Advisors Reporting to the=20 Employers of These Advisors. . . . . . . . . . . . . . 4-5 4.4 Percentage of State D.A.R.E. Coordinators=20 and Policy Advisory Boards Performing=20 Various Functions. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 4-5 4.5 Funding Received in 1991-1992 School Year=20 for State-Level D.A.R.E. Operations. . . . . . . . . . 4-7 4.6 Number of States Receiving Funds for State- Level Operations from Sources in 1991-1992 School Year. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 4-8 5.1 Final Sample Disposition . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .5-6 5.2 Use of D.A.R.E., by Grade. . . . . . . . . . . . . . .5-8 5.3 Agencies Administering the D.A.R.E. Program=20 at the Local Level . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 5-9 5.4 Agencies with Primary Responsibility for Coordination of D.A.R.E. Activities. . . . . . . . . . 5-9 5.5 Problem Areas That Are Barriers to=20 Implementing D.A.R.E. in All Schools . . . . . . . . .5-11 5.6 Percentage and Estimated Number of School Districts in the Nation Using Top Three Packaged Curricula During the 1991-1992 School Year, by Minority Status, SES,=20 and Urbanicity of the School District. . . . . . . . .5-14 5.7 Substances Targeted by, and Types of=20 Instructor of, the Three Most Frequently Mentioned Alcohol and Drug=20 Prevention Programs. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .5-15 5.8 Sources of Funding for D.A.R.E. and=20 Other Alcohol and Drug Prevention Programs=20 in the 1991-1992 School Year . . . . . . . . . . . . .5-17 5.9 Components of D.A.R.E. and Other Alcohol=20 and Drug Prevention Programs Rated as=20 Very Satisfactory. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .5-17 5.10 Components of D.A.R.E. and Other Alcohol=20 and Drug Prevention Programs Rated as=20 Very Satisfactory, by Minority Status=20 of School District . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .5-18 5.11 Components of D.A.R.E. and Other Alcohol=20 and Drug Prevention Programs Rated as=20 Very Satisfactory, by Urbanicity of=20 School District. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .5-19=20 Number Page 5.12 Individuals, Groups, and Agencies Very Supportive of D.A.R.E. and Other Alcohol and Drug Prevention=20 Programs . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .5-19 5.13 Individuals, Groups, and Agencies Very Supportive of D.A.R.E. and Other Alcohol=20 and Drug Prevention Programs, by=20 SES of School District . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .5-20 5.14 Individuals, Groups, and Agencies Very Supportive of D.A.R.E. and Other=20 Alcohol and Drug Prevention=20 Programs, by Size of School District . . . . . . . . .5-20 5.15 Adaptations of D.A.R.E. and Other Alcohol=20 and Drug Prevention Curricula to Meet=20 Specific Needs of District . . . . . . . . . . . . . .5-21 5.16 Individuals Trained to Participate in=20 Student Assistance Programs. . . . . . . . . . . . . .5-23 5.17 Effectiveness in Implementing Student Assistance Programs. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .5-23 7.1 D.A.R.E. Evaluation Studies (N=3D18) . . . . . . . . . .7-4 7.2 Sample and Methodological Characteristics=20 of the D.A.R.E. Evaluations (N =3D 8). . . . . . . . . . 7-6 7.3 Unweighted Effect Sizes at Immediate=20 Posttest Associated with Eight=20 Evaluations of D.A.R.E.. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 7-9 7.4 Magnitude of D.A.R.E.'s Weighted Mean=20 Effect Size (and 95% Confidence Interval),=20 by Outcome Measures at Immediate Posttest. . . . . . .7-10 7.5 Comparison Drug Use Prevention=20 Programs (N=3D25). . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .7-12 7.6 Weighted Mean Effect Size (and=20 95% Confidence Interval), by Outcome=20 for D.A.R.E. and Other Drug=20 Use Prevention Programs. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .7-14 7.7 Difference Between Mean Effect Sizes=20 (and 95% Confidence Interval),=20 by Outcome, for D.A.R.E. and=20 Other Drug Use Prevention Programs . . . . . . . . . .7-15 7.8 Weighted Mean Effect Size, by Drug, for D.A.R.E. and Other Drug Use=20 Prevention Programs. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .7-16 7.9 Difference Between Mean Effect Sizes=20 (and 95% Confidence Interval),=20 by Drug, for D.A.R.E. and Other=20 Drug Use Prevention Programs . . . . . . . . . . . . .7-16 CHAPTER 1 INTRODUCTION Drug Abuse Resistance Education (D.A.R.E.) is currently theNation's predominant school-based drug prevention program, andboth its prevalence and popularity continue to expand. TheD.A.R.E. program, designed to prevent students' use of tobacco,alcohol, and other drugs, uses trained, uniformed police officersin the classroom to teach a highly structured curriculum.Developed by the Los Angeles Police Department and the LosAngeles Unified School District (LAUSD) as a collaborativeventure, the primary or core D.A.R.E. curriculum is directedtoward pupils in the final grade of elementary school (usuallygrade 5 or 6). Additional curricula for students in kindergartenthrough fourth grade, junior high school, senior high school, andfor parents have been developed and implemented. Purpose of the Study D.A.R.E.'s popularity, as demonstrated by the extraordinarygrowth in its rate of dissemination and by abundant anecdotalreports of its success, is self-evident. In part because of itspreeminent position, policymakers, researchers, educators, andparents are asking a number of fundamental questions about theprogram: o How effective is D.A.R.E. in preventing drug use? o What are D.A.R.E.'s effects compared with those of otherschool-based drug prevention programs? o What are some of the basic features common to most D.A.R.E.programs? o Who usually manages the D.A.R.E. program? o How extensively is D.A.R.E. implemented nationwide? o How do other alcohol and drug prevention programs comparewith D.A.R.E. and D.A.R.E. with them? To address these and other questions, the National Instituteof Justice (NIJ) awarded the research team of the ResearchTriangle Institute (RTI) and the University of Kentucky's Centerfor Prevention Research (CPR) a grant to conduct an extensivereview of the D.A.R.E. program and to assess its place within thecontext of the broad spectrum of school-based drug preventionefforts. Study Objectives The research team proposed and carried out two distinct typesof assessments, the first pertaining to implementation and thesecond to outcomes or effectiveness. The primary objectives ofthe implementation assessment were to o assess the organizational structure and operation ofrepresentative D.A.R.E. programs nationwide; o review and assess factors that contribute to the effectiveimplementation of D.A.R.E. programs nationwide; and o assess how D.A.R.E. and other school-based drug preventionprograms are tailored to meet the needs of specific populations. The first two objectives for the implementation assessmentrelate exclusively to D.A.R.E. The third targets D.A.R.E. butalso includes other drug use prevention programs. The primary objectives of the outcome assessment were to o identify all outcome evaluations of D.A.R.E.'s corecurriculum conducted to date in the United States and Canada; o assess the methodological rigor of those evaluations; o examine the nature and extent of the effects of D.A.R.E.'score curriculum; and o compare the effectiveness of D.A.R.E.'s core curriculumwith that of other school-based drug use prevention programstargeting 5th- and 6th-grade pupils. Although the first three objectives of the outcome assessmentfocus exclusively on D.A.R.E., the fourth places D.A.R.E. in alarger context by comparing it with other drug preventionprograms. In this report, we synthesize the most important findingsfrom both of the assessments and present overall conclusions, andsome recommendations. Description of the Study To achieve the study's goals and objectives, the researchteam designed a set of research strategies that would yield datapertinent not only to a review and critique of D.A.R.E., but alsoto an assessment of how D.A.R.E. compares with other school-baseddrug prevention programs, and of future directions for theseprograms. For the implementation assessment, we collected original databy conducting o informal interviews and discussions with the coordinatorsand/or educational advisors of D.A.R.E.'s Regional TrainingCenters (RTCs); o a survey of State D.A.R.E. coordinators; and a survey of drug prevention coordinators in a representative, stratified sample of school districts that included districts with and without D.A.R.E. We also conducted site visits to two pairs of schools (one school in each pair had D.A.R.E. and the other did not). We discuss the methodologies used for each component of the implementation assessment in Section II of this report. For the outcome assessment, the research team conducted areview and assessment of the published and unpublishedevaluations of D.A.R.E.'s core curriculum conducted to date. Wecollected no primary data, but instead studied prior D.A.R.E.evaluations using meta- analytic techniques. The methodologies weused for the outcome assessment are presented in Section III ofthis report. At the conclusion of our data collection and analysisefforts, the research team joined Tom Colthurst of the Universityof California at San Diego Extension Program in March 1993 tohost a conference in San Diego, California, titled"Evaluating School-Linked Prevention Strategies Alcohol,Tobacco, and Other Drugs." Almost an entire day of this3-day conference for policymakers, researchers, and practitionerscentered on the preliminary results from this study. Thisconference provided an opportunity to disseminate early studyfindings from both the implementation and outcome assessments,and to incorporate participants' responses (including responsesfrom D.A.R.E. America as well as D.A.R.E. and other drugprevention researchers) to the findings in this final report. Strengths and Limitations of the Study We believe our approach to this study was fully responsive toNIJ's solicitation. Among the many strengths of this approach arethe following: o a multifaceted study methodology that collected informationfrom the national, regional, State, and school district levels ofD.A.R.E. and reviewed all short- term evaluations of the D.A.R.E.core curricula conducted to date; o a rigorous examination and synthesis of the results ofprevious evaluations of D.A.R.E.; and o incorporation into this final report of both formal andinformal feedback from researchers and practitioners attendingthe dissemination conference. However, we recognize that there are limitations to ourstudy, due primarily to limitations in the resources available tous. For example, our study budget would not allow us to surveylocal D.A.R.E. officers and classroom teachers, or monitor thedelivery of D.A.R.E. in the classroom. Additionally, somequestions raised in NIJ's solicitation, such as issues relatingto the effectiveness of the regional and State D.A.R.E. trainingcenters, could be answered only in part. A complete answer wouldhave required a many-layered study that examined trainingcenters' objectives, how these objectives are put into effectthrough training received both by trainers and by D.A.R.E.officers, and ultimately how the officers perform in theclassroom. This was clearly outside the scope of this study. Wealso were limited in assessing certain questions, such asvariability in effectiveness of the D.A.R.E. curriculum by thesociodemographic characteristics of the respondents because ofthe lack of research in this area (see Chapter 8 for furtherdetails). Given the level of resources available for this study, theresearch design required some compromises among the multipleobjectives invoked in NIJ's stated purposes, goals, objectives,and program strategies. However, the research team believes that the study representsan optimal mix of data collection methods and sources.Discussions with members of the D.A.R.E. America RTC AdvisoryBoard and other officials associated with the D.A.R.E. trainingcenters, when combined with information gathered from the surveyof State D.A.R.E. coordinators, provided answers to the questionsrelating specifically to the structure and operations of theD.A.R.E. program. The survey of school district drug preventioncoordinators yielded information about D.A.R.E. and itsrelationship to other school-based drug prevention programs. Thesite visits provided an illustrative, if unrepresentative,snapshot of D.A.R.E.'s implementation in two schools. A rigorousexamination of past D.A.R.E. evaluations provided information onthe effects of the program on students. Overview of the Report This report is organized into four sections and fourappendices. Section I contains the first two chapters, whichprovide an overview and history of school-based drug preventionprograms, with detailed information about the curricula andteachers of D.A.R.E. Section II has four chapters that present the methodologiesand results of each of the four components of the implementationassessment. In these four chapters, we present information aboutthe national/regional-level operations of D.A.R.E. (Chapter 3),State-level operations of D.A.R.E. (Chapter 4), and theimplementation of D.A.R.E. and other drug prevention programs atthe local level (Chapters 5 and 6). Section III (Chapter 7) presents the methodology and resultsof the outcome assessment. In Section IV (Chapter 8), wesynthesize and discuss findings from both the implementation andoutcome assessments, and present recommendations. Appendix A contains sampling information for the schooldistrict drug prevention coordinators survey. Appendix B contains descriptions of each study utilized inthe meta-analysis conducted for the outcome assessment. AppendixC presents a bibliography of comparison program evaluations, andAppendix D contains data collection materials for theimplementation assessment. CHAPTER 2 OVERVIEW AND HISTORY OF SCHOOL-BASED DRUG PREVENTION PROGRAMSAND D.A.R.E. History of School-Based Drug Prevention Programs School-basededucational programs are the most common approach to drugprevention aimed at young people. Prevention efforts are located in educational settings both because drug use typically begins during adolescence and because classrooms provide the best opportunity for reaching a large number of youth simultaneously.=20 Although rates of drug use among U.S. students generally have been declining over the past few years (University of Michigan, 1994), these rates are still higher than rates of all other Western industrialized nations. =20 The U.S. Congress reacted to concerns about youth drug use by enacting the Drug-Free Schools and Communities Act (DFSCA) of 1986. The DFSCA was designed to establish programs of drug abuse education and prevention throughout the Nation. A key part of the DFSCA is Subtitle B of Title IV, which provides Federal money to States, schools, and communities to initiate or expand drug prevention programs. Actions resulting from Subtitle B of Title IV quickly resulted in the single largest drug prevention activity offered by the Federal Government, reaching $498,565,000 in FY 1993.=20 Research conducted by RTI staff concerning the implementation of State and local programs of the DFSCA found that in the 1988-1989 school year all 50 States, the District of Columbia, and the Commonwealth of Puerto Rico have actively participated in programs funded by the DFSCA at the State and local levels. Of all the school districts in the Nation, 78% reported that they received DFSCA funding, either directly or through regional or county education organizations (Thorne, Holley, Wine, Hayward, & Ringwalt, 1991). The DFSCA funds appear to have had a positive effect on the school-based prevention programs of school districts. To be eligible for DFSCA funding, schools must implement a comprehensive drug prevention program.=20 More than half of the districts receiving DFSCA funding reported that since the advent of such support, they had been able to expand or increase numerous aspects of their programs, including=20 o number of grade levels with substance abuse curricula, o school-wide emphasis on substance abuse prevention,=20 o number of teachers and staff involved, and=20 o number of students involved. =20 A total of 25% of these districts had increased their curriculum development activities, and 48% had increased their degree of involvement with other groups in the community. The availability of DFSCA funds may be more limited in the future. Drug Use Prevention Strategies A variety of school-based intervention programs have been developed over the past three decades for preventing drug use among youth (Botvin, 1990; Flay, 1985; Hansen, 1992; Moskowitz, Malvin, Schaeffer, & Schaps, 1983; Tobler, 1986). The types of programs differ both in terms of what they teach as well as in how they are taught (Tobler, in press, 1994). Program content generally reflects assumptions about why young people use drugs. For example, activities to boost self- esteem reflect the belief that low self-esteem is a risk factor for drug use; strategies that teach youth how to refuse offers of drugs from friends assume that peer pressure leads to drug use. Similarly, teaching methods implemented in various strategies reflect beliefs about the most effective means for teaching young people not to use drugs. Programs that use didactic methods reflect a traditional expert model for learning; programs that emphasize group activities reflect the belief that participatory activities enhance understanding and learning more effectively. Although hundreds of individual school-based prevention programs have been developed, they generally fall into three broad categories:=20 (a) knowledge/information programs, (b) affective programs, and (c) social influences programs. A fourth category of prevention programs, alternative programs, includes those usually offered outside the school setting. Knowledge/information and affective education programs have sometimes been grouped together as more traditional approaches, while social influences programs represent newer approaches (Bruvold, 1993; Tobler, in press, 1994). These three types of programs tend to differ in content, in methods, and in their effectiveness. Even so, there is overlap among them. Knowledge/information programs were the earliest school-based prevention efforts to be developed. These strategies are based on the assumption that youth begin using drugs because they are not sufficiently knowledgeable about adverse consequences. Once youth have adequate and accurate knowledge about drugs, it is assumed that they will behave rationally and choose not to use drugs. It is also assumed that changes in knowledge about drugs will promote more negative attitudes toward drug use, which in turn will be a deterrent to using drugs. Knowledge programs typically present factual information about the legal, biological, and psychological effects of drug use. Some of these programs have adopted scare tactics to present the risks of drug use to youth in a dramatic fashion. The methods used by knowledge/information programs typically include didactic presentations, discussion, and audiovisual presentations. Affective programs were developed in the late 1970s and early 1980s and are based on the assumption that young people use drugs because of personal and social deficits. These programs emphasize increasing self- esteem, enhancing self-awareness, clarifying values, making responsible decisions, and improving interpersonal skills. Affective programs often do not mention drug use at all. By enriching personal and social development, it is assumed that youth will make responsible decisions about drug use. These programs typically are taught by the same types of methods as for knowledge/ information programs, but they also may include group activities. Social influences programs are the most recent approach to drug use among youth. These programs are based on the assumption that youth use drugs because they do not have the social competencies needed to resist social pressures to use drugs. Some programs focus specifically on teaching youth the skills needed for resisting drug use influences. Other programs emphasize developing more general social competencies, such as increasing decisionmaking, improving communication, and reducing anxiety, in addition to enhancing drug-specific social skills. They may also include activities to correct misperceptions about the prevalence and acceptability of drug use among peers, as well as activities that seek to establish conservative group norms about drug use. Social influences programs typically include active, participatory learning experiences, such as modeling, role-playing, and practicing behavioral skills. Social influence strategies also frequently and actively involve "peers leaders" as teachers, in role-playing, or to facilitate discussion. Despite the differences across program categories, there is actually much overlap among school-based prevention programs in their components. Affective programs share similarities with some social influences programs in their emphasis, for example, on developing personal competencies. Social influences programs frequently include information about drugs and adverse consequences. Some programs include elements of all three categories of programs and have been labeled comprehensive programs. Indeed, many school-based curricula, including D.A.R.E., combine strategies that reflect knowledge/information, affective, and social influences programs. Research on the effectiveness of school-based prevention programs suggests that all three program strategies are not equally successful in preventing adolescent drug use (Bangert-Drowns, 1988; Bruvold, 1993; Tobler, 1986, in press, 1994). Knowledge/information programs generally have not been effective in preventing drug use among youth. The evidence suggests that, although information-based programs may increase students' knowledge of drugs, they are unlikely to result in positive changes in either attitudes or behavior. In fact, some research indicates that these programs may lead to undesirable changes in attitudes (Bruvold & Rundall, 1988). Affective strategies also have not performed well in previous evaluations and meta-analyses (Botvin, 1990; Tobler, 1986). For example, Hansen, Johnson, Flay, Graham, and Sobel (1988) found that students who received an affective education program reported significantly more drug use than students in a comparison group and that these differences increased over time. In contrast, the results of evaluation of social influences programs have been generally more positive (Botvin, 1990; Bruvold, 1993, 1986; Bruvold & Rundall, 1988; Flay, 1985; Hansen, 1992; Moskowitz, 1989; Pentz et al., 1989; Tobler, 1986, in press, 1994). In comparison with knowledge/information and affective programs, social influences programs have been more effective at preventing adolescent drug use. History of D.A.R.E. D.A.R.E. is a school-based drug prevention program designed to prevent students' use of tobacco, alcohol, and other drugs. Most D.A.R.E. activities are directed toward pupils in the last grade of elementary school (grade 5 or 6), which is thought to be the age at which youth are most receptive to an anti-drug message, and before they begin experimenting with drugs (Bureau of Justice Assistance [BJA], 1991b). The original D.A.R.E. core curriculum, which was implemented in 1983, was developed by Dr. Ruth Rich, health education specialist from the LAUSD. Dr. Rich based the D.A.R.E. core curriculum on a review of other prevalent drug prevention programs, particularly Project SMART (Self-Management and Resistance Training), a prevention program designed by the Health Behavior Research Institute of the University of Southern California. =20 From its inception, D.A.R.E. was designed to be a continuing education program for kindergarten through high school. To that end, junior high and senior high curricula were developed in 1986 and 1988, respectively.=20 Additionally, D.A.R.E. designers created a parent curriculum to teach parents how to recognize and prevent drug use among youth and to provide them with information about the program. D.A.R.E. is distinctive among school-based drug prevention programs in that it uses trained, uniformed police officers in the classroom to teach a highly structured curriculum. D.A.R.E. officers enter the classroom not only because of a cooperative agreement between the local school district and law enforcement agency, but also because the community is willing to forgo or replace the time that D.A.R.E. officers lose to other police duties. During D.A.R.E.'s first year, 1983- 1984, 10 officers taught the curriculum to around 8,000 students in 50 Los Angeles elementary schools (BJA, 1991a). D.A.R.E. is now widely implemented throughout the Nation and parts of Europe and Asia. According to the BJA (1991b), some 6 million students in the United States received D.A.R.E. in the 1991-1992 school year, and D.A.R.E. is currently implemented in 8,000 cities across the Nation (Glenn Levant, personal communication).=20 Indeed, the D.A.R.E. workbooks are currently available in Japanese, Vietnamese, Spanish, and Braille. In addition, D.A.R.E. has been adopted by several governmental agencies that sponsor schools, including the Department of the Interior, the Bureau of Indian Affairs, the Capitol police, the National Park Service, and all overseas branches of the Department of Defense. D.A.R.E. combines an essentially local, grass-roots effort with a high degree of centralized program control asserted by coordinating mechanisms at the national, regional, and State levels. At the national level, D.A.R.E. America assumes the primary responsibility for implementing and managing D.A.R.E., assisted by five RTCs that constitute the D.A.R.E. America RTC Advisory Board.=20 A detailed examination of the roles of national, regional, and State D.A.R.E. organizations is presented in Section II, Chapter 3.=20 D.A.R.E. Curricula The primary purposes of all the D.A.R.E. curricula for students are to o teach students to recognize pressures to use drugs from peers and from the media, o teach students the skills to resist peer inducements to use drugs, o enhance students' self-esteem,=20 o teach positive alternatives to substance use, and o increase students' interpersonal, communication, and decision-making skills (BJA, 1991a). Each of the curricula is periodically updated; an updated version of the core curriculum is currently being pilot tested and will be implemented in September 1994. A brief summary of each of the five D.A.R.E. curricula follows. The D.A.R.E. core curriculum, which is taught in the 5th or 6th grade, comprises 17 hour-long weekly lessons. The D.A.R.E. officers have sole responsibility for teaching all of the lessons, although classroom teachers are encouraged to participate. Officers use a variety of teaching approaches, including the presentation of facts, group discussions, role-playing, and workbook exercises. =20 The core curriculum was updated in 1993 and will be fully implemented in 1994. The updated curriculum differs from the previous version in a variety of ways.=20 The new curriculum, which has been renamed "D.A.R.E. to Resist Drugs and Violence," o includes specific lessons concerning tobacco and inhalants, o emphasizes normative beliefs and protective factors, o adds violence prevention/conflict resolution strategies, o uses more participatory learning activities, and o employs a more collaborative partnership between the D.A.R.E. officer and the teacher in the classroom (Charles Dunn, personal communication, June 22, 1993). In both the old and new versions of the core curriculum, the lessons are cumulative, building upon concepts introduced in previous lessons. With the exception of lesson 14 in both versions, the lessons are implemented in sequence and without variation. The data collection for the implementation assessment and the evaluations studied in the outcome assessment occurred before the introduction of the new curriculum. We, therefore, believe it is important to provide information on both versions. Exhibit 2.1 presents a summary of the original version of the core curriculum upon which the outcome evaluation was based, and Exhibit 2.2 displays a summary of the updated curriculum.=20 In elementary schools that receive the D.A.R.E. core curriculum, officers may also visit students in kindergarten through 4th grade to teach brief introductory (15- to 20- minute) lessons. Topics in this curriculum include personal safety, the consequences of taking medicine and using drugs, saying "no" whenasked to engage in antisocial activities, and learning about feelings. The D.A.R.E. junior high school curriculum was originally developed to provide or reinforce information and skills that help students resist pressure to use drugs. Revisions were made in 1989 to include violence reduction, conflict resolution, and anger management. The 10 lessons are taught cooperatively by the officer and the classroom teacher.=20 The lessons and activities (summarized in Exhibit 2.3) are implemented over a 10-day period as part of a required course, such as health, science, or social studies. The senior high school curriculum also focuses on drug abuse and its effect on communities and young people (see Exhibit 2.4 for a summary of the lessons). The senior high school curriculum was designed to be taught over an 11-day period during health or another appropriate class. Responsibility for teaching the lessons is divided between the officer and the classroom teacher. Officers and teachers are trained together and are encouraged to be present during the entire 11-day period. Because of the difficulties educators have continually faced persuading parents to attend school educational functions, the D.A.R.E. parent curriculum was designed to be implemented where parents live and work. This curriculum consists of four or five 2-hour Exhibit 2.1 D.A.R.E.'sOriginal Core Curriculum Session Topic Descript= ion 1 First visit/personal safety Introduction of D.A.R.E. and law enforcement officer; safety practices; discussion of personal rights 2 Drug use and misuse Harmful effects from misuse of drugs 3 Consequences Consequences of using and choosing not to use alcohol, marijuana, and other drugs 4 Resisting pressures Sources of pressure; types of pressure to use drugs 5 Resistance techniques Refusal strategies for different types of peer pressure 6 Building self-esteem Identifying positive qualities in oneself; giving/ receiving compliments; importance of self-image 7 Assertiveness Personal rights/respon sibilities discussion; situations calling for assertiveness skills 8 Managing stress without =20 Identification of sources of stress; when stress drugs can be helpful or harmful; ways to manage stress; deep breathing exercise 9 Media influences Media influences on behavior; advertising techniques 10 Decisionmaking and risk Risk-taking behaviors; reasonable and taking harmful risks; consequences of various choices; influences on decisions 11 Drug use alternatives Reasons for using drugs; alternative activities 12 Role modeling Meet older student leaders/role models who do not use drugs 13 Forming support system Types of support groups; barriers to friendships; suggestions for overcoming these barriers 14 Ways to deal with gang Types of gang pressure; how gangs differ from pressures groups; consequences of gang activity (optional) 15 D.A.R.E. summary D.A.R.E. review 16 Taking a stand Taking appropriate stand when pressured to use drugs 17 D.A.R.E. culmination Award assembly; recognition of participants Exhibit 2.2 D.A.R.E.'s Updated Core Curriculum Lesson TopicDescription 1 Introducing D.A.R.E. Acquaints students with the D.A.R.E. officer; defines roles and responsibilit ies of students 2 Understanding the effects of Presents basic facts about mind-altering mind-altering drugs drugs and harmful effects from misuse 3 Consequences Presents consequences of using and choosing not to use alcohol and other drugs 4 Changing beliefs about drug use Teaches students to identify sources and kinds of pressure; compares students' estimates of drug use with estimates reported in national surveys 5 Resistance techniques: Ways to Presents refusal strategies for different say "NO" types of peer pressure 6 Building self-esteem Teaches students to recognize positive qualities in themselves 7 Assertiveness: A response style Teaches students to respond assertively in refusing offers to use drugs 8 Managing stress without drugs Identifies stressors in students' lives 9 Reducing violence Identifies nonviolent ways to deal with anger and disagreement 10 Media influences on drug use and Teaches students to recognize media influ- violence ence in presentations about tobacco, alcohol, other drugs, and violence 11 Making decisions about risky Teaches students decisionmaking skills behavior to evaluate risks in situations involving using drugs and using weapons 12 Say "YES" to positive alternatives Teaches students to identify and participate in positive alternative activities 13 Positive role modeling Teaches students to identify ways high school students avoid drug use 14 Resisting gang and group violence Identifies negative consequences of gang and group violence and ways to avoid becoming involved (optional) 15 Project D.A.R.E. summary Summarizes D.A.R.E.; asks students questions about drug use and violence 16 Taking a stand Puts student's commitment to be drug-free and to avoid violence in writing=20 17 D.A.R.E. culmination Reinforces the values and skills learned; recognizes individual achievement of all participants=20 Exhibit 2.3 D.A.R.E.'s Junior High School Curriculum Lesson TopicDescription 1 Drug use and abuse Helps students understand how drugs can change the way the mind and body function 2 Drugs, violence, and the law Informs students about laws and school behavior codes regarding possession of substances and acts of violence; helps students understand their role in following these expected standards of conduct 3 Consequences Explores how drug use affects every person living in a community 4 Assertive resistance Makes students aware of pressures that influence people to use drugs; teaches assertiveness as a way to resist these pressures 5 Forming positive friendships Helps students recognize ways individuals can reach out to form positive relation- ships=20 6 Resolving conflicts without Explores ways of dealing with anger and violence conflict without resorting to acts of violence 7 Destructive ecology: Tagging and Helps students understand how destruc- trashing tive acts of vandalism against personal or public property or living things affect everyone 8 Pressure from gangs and gang Makes students aware of kinds of pres- violence sures and violence they may encounter from gangs; helps them evaluate the consequences of choices available to them 9 Project D.A.R.E. review activities Provides an opportunity for students to review and strengthen what they learned in D.A.R.E. 10 D.A.R.E. to Be Helps students act in their own best interest Exhibit 2.4 D.A.R.E.'s Senior High School Curriculum Day TopicDescription 1 Pretest/Introduction Pretests students to measure knowledge and understanding of drug abuse and its effects on communities 2 Reducing the demand for drugs: Officer taught: Focuses on drug abuse and A shared responsibility its correlation with increased risk for problem behaviors that result in negative consequences 3 Day 2 follow-up Teacher taught: Focuses on the conse- quences of drug use for individuals, as well as the community 4 Communicating choices assertively Officer taught: Teaches skills to communi-cate choices assertively in situations involving substance abuse 5 Drug-related behaviors and the Officer taught: Focuses on the purpose of law laws and how drug-related behaviors can affect the balance between the need to maintain order and the right of an individual 6 Day 5 follow-up Teacher taught: Focuses on blood-alcohol levels; uses cooperative learning groups and case studies to demonstrate risks involved in drug abuse 7 Drugs, media, and violence Officer taught: Focuses on how drug abuse and the media can increase violent behavior 8,9 Managing anger and resolving Officer taught: Identifies positive ways conflict without drugs of expressing and managing anger without the use of drugs 10 Day 8, 9 follow-up Teacher taught: Focuses on the use of "I-message" statements 11 Evaluation/Posttest Posttest of students:=20 Evaluation of the program by students Exhibit 2.5 D.A.R.E.'s Parent Curriculum Lesson TopicDescription 1 Effective communication Helps parents understand that self- esteem, listening, and communication skills are critical in adult-child communication 2 Risk Factors (two options): Parents select Section A, B, or both (2A) Risk factors (yrs 0-8) Addresses the risk factors of children from birth to age 8; provides an awareness of safety measures that can be used in the home to reduce likelihood of dangerous exposure to drugs; introduces strategies parents can use to reduce the likelihood that young children will be at risk of drug abuse (2B) Risk factors (early adolescents) Introduces risk factors of substance use in early adolescents; introduces parents to basic drug identification and stages of adolescent chemical dependency 3 Youth pressure resistance skills Helps parents in awareness and under- standing of life skills, particularly in areas dealing with peer pressure and media influence; assists in strengthening the family network 4 Panel discussion Initiates discussion by members of the community from a variety of backgrounds on the scope of local substance abuse; provides an exchange of ideas on resources and referrals sessions generally held in the evenings (see Exhibit 2.5 for a summary of these lessons). Topics covered in this curriculum include developing better skills to interact with children, learning about peer pressures, and identifying signs and reducing risks of potential substance abuse. D.A.R.E. Officers and Training Law enforcement agencies exercise considerable discretion in identifying qualified, motivated police officers to be trained as D.A.R.E. officers. D.A.R.E. officers must be full-time, uniformed officers with at least 2 years of experience. When selecting candidate officers, local police departments are encouraged to consider the officer's ability to interact with children, ability to organize, and ability to handle the unexpected, as well as whether the officer would provide an exemplary role model and refrain from sexual, racial, stereotypical, or inappropriate remarks (BJA, 1991b). =20 Selected officers undergo an intensive, 2-week course of at least 80 hours of training. Officers are trained not only in the core curriculum, but also in public speaking, teaching skills, and classroom management. Their performance is directly critiqued by assigned mentors, who are experienced and specially trained D.A.R.E. officers. Outside speakers and consultants are also used to instruct the officers in areas requiring special expertise (e.g., a psychologist may present information on the stages of child development). The core curriculum training course includes opportunities to practice lessons both with peers and in an actual classroom setting. =20 Additional training is provided for officers teaching the junior and senior high school and parent curricula. Officers teaching these curricula are required to be certified as a D.A.R.E. officer and to have taught the core curriculum at least two semesters.=20 In-service training is provided to review what officers have previously learned in light of their actual classroom experiences and to acquaint them with changes to the curricula. The time that D.A.R.E. officers commit to the program varies considerably from one law enforcement jurisdiction to the next. For some officers, particularly those in large urban departments, teaching D.A.R.E. is a full-time occupation. In departments that serve rural communities, D.A.R.E. officers administer the program on a part-time basis, devoting the remainder of their time to other law enforcement tasks. =20 Once in the field, D.A.R.E. officer performance is monitored by mentors who observe classroom presentations and evaluate performance. Mentors may also use input from school administrators, classroom teachers, health education coordinators, and advisory committees to provide officers with feedback on their presentations. =20 D.A.R.E. in the Context of Other School-Based Drug Use Prevention Programs Considering that the D.A.R.E. curricula were based on several preexisting school-based drug prevention curricula (primarily Project SMART), it is not surprising that the curricula closely resemble other programs in content. Exhibit 2.6 show that D.A.R.E.'s core curriculum includes lessons that represent all three curricular strategies discussed earlier.=20 D.A.R.E. differs from most other school-based drug prevention programs in the structure by which it is organized and implemented. First, D.A.R.E. is implemented by law enforcement officers; most other programs are taught by teachers. Second, D.A.R.E. officer training lasts 2 weeks and is highly intensive; most drug prevention program training for teachers is of a shorter duration. Third, D.A.R.E. officers are strongly encouraged to deliver their lessons in sequence, departing only minimally (if at all) from their lesson plans; teachers are much more free to adapt curricula at will, emphasizing those areas they believe to be most salient or useful or integrating the drug prevention material into their general education curriculum.=20 Fourth, D.A.R.E. officer performance is often carefully monitored and evaluated; generally, the accountability mechanisms for teachers' implementation of their curricula are less structured. Fifth, the mission of D.A.R.E. officers in the school is exclusively drug prevention; to most teachers, drug prevention is often only part of a larger curriculum. Exhibit 2.6 Curricular Strategies Used in D.A.R.E.'s Core Curriculum Curricular Strategies Session Social Skills Topic Cognitive=20 Affective Skills 1 Introducing D.A.R.E. X 2 Understanding the effects of mind- X altering drugs 3 Consequences X 4 Changing beliefs about drug use XX 5 Resistance techniques: Ways to X say "NO" 6 Building self-esteem X 7 Assertiveness: A response style X 8 Managing stress without taking X drugs 9 Reducing violence X 10 Media influence on drug use X and violence 11 Making decisions about risky X behaviors 12 Saying "YES" to positive X alternatives 13 Positive role modeling X X 14 Resisting gang and group X violence 15 Project D.A.R.E. summary XXX 16 Taking a stand X 17 D.A.R.E. culmination X CHAPTER 3 NATIONAL AND REGIONAL OPERATIONS In any consideration of the organization of D.A.R.E. at the national and regional levels, it is important to remember that D.A.R.E. is very much a grass- roots program. In essence, it is a product of memoranda of understanding between community law enforcement and local public school districts across the Nation. The primary purposes of the D.A.R.E. hierarchy described in this chapter are to ensure the integrity of the D.A.R.E. curriculum and the fidelity with which it is delivered; to develop and uphold standards for the integrity, coordination, and quality of D.A.R.E. operations; and to provide support to D.A.R.E. at the community level. As we have said, in its degree of organization at the national and regional levels, D.A.R.E. differs greatly from other school-based drug use prevention programs, most of which limit their activities to delivering packaged curricula to school districts and offering some level of training to teachers. In contrast, the D.A.R.E. organization oversees all aspects of the prevention program, including the consistency with which it is implemented in the classroom. In this chapter, we discuss the functions of D.A.R.E. America, the preeminent D.A.R.E. organization, and its relationship with the o D.A.R.E. America RTC Advisory Board; o State Training Centers, State Charter Organizations; and State D.A.R.E. Coordinators; o Los Angeles United School District (LAUSD); and o D.A.R.E. America Scientific Advisory Board. We obtained much of the information for this chapter from an interview conducted in August 1994 with Glenn Levant, Executive Director of D.A.R.E. America. This information is supplemented by relevant D.A.R.E. documents. We also summarize a series of loosely structured interviews conducted in 1992 with representatives of the D.A.R.E. America RTC Advisory Board. D.A.R.E. at the national, regional, State, and local levels is promoted, monitored, and overseen by D.A.R.E. America, which is chartered as a nonprofit organization. As specified in its charter, D.A.R.E. America has responsibility for a variety of key func- tions, including o administering the D.A.R.E. program, o providing educational materials to communities implementing D.A.R.E., o overseeing D.A.R.E. officer training and ensuring its consistency, o improving the curriculum, and o providing support to D.A.R.E. both nationally and internationally. =20 In 1988, the BJA awarded four grants to establish the RTCs that constitute the D.A.R.E. America RTC Advisory Board, and a fifth RTC was established the following year. The RTCs are located in Arizona, California, Illinois, Virginia, and North Carolina, and the States associated with each are presented in Exhibit 3.1. The responsibilities of the RTCs include making recommendations to D.A.R.E. America concerning the accreditation of State-level training centers. In addition, the RTCs provide oversight to the local D.A.R.E. programs to ensure that the copyrighted curriculum is taught as specified. Educational specialists representing the five RTCs, together with staff of the LAUSD, are charged with curricular development, taking advice from the Scientific Advisory Board and other specialists. In Federal FY 1994, it is expected that the BJA grant, which in the past has flowed to the RTCs, will come directly to D.A.R.E. America to support the RTCs. D.A.R.E. is also organized at the State level. In more than one-third of the States, D.A.R.E. America has helped charter a nonprofit (501C3) organization, over which D.A.R.E. America has oversight, and which is designed to support the program in that State. The board of the chartered organization typically comprises the State's attorney general, the superintendent of education, and prominent business and education people.=20 The board of directors may also include a representative of the State's D.A.R.E. Officers' Association (described below) as well as, in some States, a D.A.R.E. coordinator whose prominence and position may vary considerably. It is expected that in time there will be D.A.R.E. charter organizations in the remaining States. In those States that currently lack a charter organization, there is typically some individual identified as the State D.A.R.E. coordinator who often is a State employee. This person's responsibilities include coordinating candidate selection and scheduling training for D.A.R.E. officers, obtaining State funds to support D.A.R.E. programs, providing local technical assistance, and overseeing policy development and implementation at the State level.=20 D.A.R.E. America meets with these individuals, and with the State charter organizations, on a quarterly basis. In addition to D.A.R.E. State charter organizations at the State level, a total of 42 States currently have developed State Training Centers (STCs), the purpose of which is to conduct training for prospective D.A.R.E. officers. These centers are differentially accredited; all conduct training for prospective D.A.R.E. officers in the core curriculum, while only some are accredited to teach the other curricula or to train D.A.R.E. mentors.=20 The STCs are supported both by the States and by D.A.R.E. America. The level of activity of these centers varies considerably given the size of the State and demand for D.A.R.E. officer training. At present, there are some 20,000 certified D.A.R.E. officers. D.A.R.E. America also owns and protects the copyright to the D.A.R.E. name, logo, and associated slogans. D.A.R.E.'s name is considered a valuable intellectual property. D.A.R.E. America approves all materials (e.g., bumper stickers) and celebrities used to promote the D.A.R.E. program. In addition, the organization screens sponsors for fund-raising events to exclude companies manufacturing alcohol or tobacco products. =20 Together with the LAUSD, D.A.R.E. America owns the copyright to the core curriculum. The superintendent of the LAUSD has been represented on the board of D.A.R.E. America since 1983. Through the RTCs, D.A.R.E. America monitors the implementation of D.A.R.E. in each community and may withdraw its permission to use D.A.R.E. if a local school district has improperly modified the curriculum. To fulfill its responsibility of improving the curriculum, D.A.R.E. America established in 1993 a Scientific Advisory Board, which is chaired by Dr. Herb Kleber of the Center on Addiction and Substance Abuse (CASA) at Columbia University. Dr. Kleber was formally the chief official for demand reduction in the Bush Administration's White House Office of National Drug Control Policy (ONDCP). The board includes prevention specialists from across the Nation. The National D.A.R.E. Officers' Association, which D.A.R.E. America helped to found in 1987, serves to improve communications among police officers within D.A.R.E. The association now has a State D.A.R.E. Officers' association in each of the 50 States. Each of the 18 other countries that have adopted the D.A.R.E. program also has an association of D.A.R.E. officers, although those association are not formally a part of the national association. However, all associations, both domestic and foreign, look to D.A.R.E. America for guidance in matters of policy. Finally, D.A.R.E. America provides considerable support to communities implementing D.A.R.E. in the form of the educational materials that support the curriculum.=20 In some cases, D.A.R.E. America offers communities direct financial support as well. We collected further information by means of informal interviews and discussions we conducted with the coordinators and/or educational advisors of each of the five RTCs in January 1992. The RTC coordinators/advisors discussed with us a number of their needs and recommendations for the D.A.R.E. program. Summaries of their discussions with us are presented below. An increasing need for in-service training. RTC coordinators/advisors indicated that a substantial number of officers have received D.A.R.E. training in the past decade. However, they stressed that the original training of many officers may now be several years old.=20 RTC coordinators/advisors indicated that although mechanisms for providing in-service training do exist, these mechanisms may not be sufficient. Furthermore, they suggested that because training of new officers already stretches available resources, the increasing need for in-service training for existing D.A.R.E. officers will strain D.A.R.E.'s budget further.=20 Exhibit 3.1 Jurisdictions of D.A.R.E.'s Regional Training Centers Southeast Midwest =20 Southwest East RTC RTC RTC RTC West RTC Connecticut Alabama Arkansas =20 Alaska California* Delaware Florida Illinois* =20 Arizona* Hawaii District of Columbia Georgia Indiana =20 Colorado Idaho Maine Louisiana Iowa =20 Kansas Montana Maryland Mississippi Kentucky =20 Nebraska Nevada Massachusetts North Carolina* Michigan New Mexico North Dakota New Hampshire South Carolina Minnesota =20 Oklahoma Oregon New Jersey Tennessee Missouri South Dakota Washington New York Ohio Texas =20 Wyoming Pennsylvania Wisconsin Utah Rhode Island Vermont Virginia* West Virginia *Indicates location of Regional Training Center. The increasing need to train State D.A.R.E. coordinators. RTC coordinators/ advisors indicated that most States now have State D.A.R.E. coordinators (see Chapter 4). However, they reported that many are relatively new in these positions or have received little formal information about how to conduct their jobs. They stated that coordinator training should include the responsibilities and roles of State D.A.R.E. coordinators, as well as how they can effectively interact both with their RTC and the schools in their States. RTC coordinators/advisors reported that plans are currently under way to establish procedures to accredit State D.A.R.E. coordinators. =20 The need to improve lines of communication and clarify lines of authority. RTC coordinators/advisors indicated that because of the lack of formal training and the lack of communication among State coordinators, many State D.A.R.E. coordinators have had to learn their jobs by trial and error. They stated that although a certain amount of communication occurs among State D.A.R.E. coordinators (especially among coordinators in neighboring States), increasing communication would greatly enhance efficiency by enabling coordinators to draw on the experiences of others instead of"reinventing the wheel."=20 RTC coordinators/advisors also indicated that State coordinators may need assistance with getting local programs to recognize developing lines of authority. For example, they stated that in the past, local programs worked directly with RTCs; they said that many local programs will need to be prompted to now work with the STC instead. The need for increased D.A.R.E. officer mentoring.=20 At present, RTC coordinators/ advisors reported that there is a well-developed system for monitoring D.A.R.E. officer performance in the classroom. They reported that D.A.R.E. mentors periodically monitor and evaluate officer performance by observing classes taught by the officer. They also indicated that teachers are given the opportunity to rate officer performance. They reported that D.A.R.E. officers are informed of any problem areas, told how to correct these problems, and later reevaluated to ensure that the problem has been corrected. However, to be truly useful, RTC coordinators reported that these mentors should have the time and resources necessary to work closely with D.A.R.E. officers to improve their performance. The need for increased collaboration between education and law enforcement. RTC coordinators/advisors indicated that because D.A.R.E. was created as a close partnership between the LAUSD and the Los Angeles Police Department, the program is dependent on a strong and continuing relationship between education and law enforcement at every level. At the State level, RTC coordinators/advisors see close collaboration between the department of education and the organization administering D.A.R.E. (typically related to law enforcement) as essential. They indicated that the institutional commitment of State Departments of Education to D.A.R.E. is essential, in part, to help resolve any community-level problems. Further, they indicated that as administrators of DFSCA funds, State Departments of Education have an increasing role to play in providing guidance concerning the various components of a school district's comprehensive K-12 curriculum (including D.A.R.E.) and how these components should be integrated to ensure a comprehensive approach. RTC coordinators indicated that ways in which State Departments of Education could play a role in assisting with the evaluation of D.A.R.E. officer performance should be examined. At the local level, RTC coordinators indicated that D.A.R.E. is initiated when a school district invites a police department to teach the program. They reported that the police department nominates a candidate for D.A.R.E. officer training, and the candidate must be acceptable to the school district administration. In the classroom, they stated, the role of the teacher is evolving from an observer and monitor of the officer's performance to an active partner in D.A.R.E. instruction.=20 The need to maintain limits to the D.A.R.E. "bureaucracy". RTC coordinators/ advisors stressed that pressures on D.A.R.E. to expand its operations are considerable. They indicated that as an institution, D.A.R.E. remains committed to maintaining high standards at the community level. They reported that as the role of the State coordinator continues to become more important in this regard, the need for the RTCs to provide technical assistance and to monitor State activities becomes even more crucial. RTC coordinators/advisors reported that because existing RTC resources are already strained by current demands, further growth at the national level seems inevitable.=20 They indicated that even if support for such growth exists, however, there is concern that a bureaucracy will develop that may weaken the "grass-roots" nature ofthe enterprise. Coordinators/advisors indicated that it will be a challenge to increase the size and capabilities of the D.A.R.E. bureaucracy to manage and control this burgeoning program with the need to keep the bureaucracy streamlined and responsive to the needs of the communities that D.A.R.E. serves. The need to locate permanent funding sources. RTC coordinators/advisors indicated that D.A.R.E. currently receives substantial support from DFSCA. However, they feel that Federal DFSCA funds appear to have reached a plateau in the past 3 years and are likely to be subjected to budget cuts in the future. RTC coordinators/advisors fear that D.A.R.E. could be reduced or even eliminated as a line item. Regardless, they reported that Federal funding may have been a mixed blessing, insofar as Federal support may displace local efforts to secure the resources necessary to implement the program.=20 Summary In this chapter, we focused on the national- and regional-level operations of D.A.R.E. We conducted unstructured interviews with the executive director of D.A.R.E. America and representatives from each of the RTCs. We also reviewed available documents. D.A.R.E. is a grass-roots program that operates through memoranda of understanding between community law enforcement agencies and local schools. D.A.R.E. America, a nonprofit organization, coordinates, promotes, monitors, and assumes ultimate responsibility for the D.A.R.E. program at all levels. The D.A.R.E. America RTC Advisory Board, which is composed of staff from the RTCs, serves in an advisory capacity to D.A.R.E. America. In addition to making recommendations to D.A.R.E. America, RTCs are responsible for oversight of the local D.A.R.E. programs and coordinating and conducting D.A.R.E. officer training. Organizations and individuals working to promote and coordinate the D.A.R.E. program at the State levelinclude State-chartered nonprofit organizations, State D.A.R.E. officers' associations, and State D.A.R.E. coordinators. Also at the State level are STCs that provide training to D.A.R.E. officers. Curriculum development and changes are the responsibility of educational specialists from each of the RTCs, together with staff from the LAUSD. A Scientific Advisory Board, composed of leading prevention specialists, assists in these endeavors. Our interviews with the RTC coordinators indicated the following key issues: a need for increased in- service training and mentoring, providing training to State D.A.R.E. coordinators, improving communication and collaboration between agencies, maintaining limits on the D.A.R.E. bureaucracy, and locating permanent funding sources. Findings from this chapter and resulting recommendations are discussed fully in Chapter 8. CHAPTER 4 STATE-LEVEL OPERATIONS In this chapter, we present the second component of the implementation assessment, a survey of those individuals who generally manage the State-level D.A.R.E. operations: the State D.A.R.E. coordinators. This component was conducted to fulfill NIJ's request for information concerning: o features common to most D.A.R.E. programs, o funding arrangements for D.A.R.E., o management of D.A.R.E. and supporting organizations, and o availability of the D.A.R.E. curricula. The primary objective of this component was, of course, to provide information concerning D.A.R.E.'s State-level operations. As a secondary objective, we collected preliminary information to facilitate sample selection for the school district drug prevention coordinators survey, the results of which we present in Chapter 5. This chapter covers both the methodology for and findings from the survey of State D.A.R.E. coordinators.=20 The findings section presents data concerning the administration, funding, implementation, challenges, and problems of State-level D.A.R.E. operations. Methodology Instrument Design We based the content of the State D.A.R.E. coordinators' survey on the research issues raised in NIJ's solicitation, discussions with NIJ personnel, a review of the literature on D.A.R.E.'s structure and operations, and an examination of prior studies of school-based drug education conducted at RTI.=20 Recognizing that State D.A.R.E. coordinators have considerable demands on their time, we designed the instrument to be as brief and straightforward as possible. To minimize ambiguity and burden, we used mostly close-ended items. A few open-ended questions were included to encourage respondents to provide detailed information. =20 The survey instrument was composed of two parts: a questionnaire and a list of school districts. The questionnaire contained items concerning administration, funding, and implementation of the State D.A.R.E. program. The list of school districts contained those districts we selected from that State for the first-phase sample of the school district drug prevention coordinators' survey (see Chapter 5). We asked State coordinators to indicate whether each district on their list used D.A.R.E., and we then used this information to draw the second-phase sample for the school district survey. We pretested the instrument on three State D.A.R.E. coordinators in early February 1992. We also shared the instrument with all five RTC coordinators and requested their feedback. We incorporated the responses of pretest participants, as well the comments of the RTC coordinators, the NIJ program manager, and other alcohol and drug prevention program experts into the final draft of the data collection instrument. A copy of the survey instrument and other data collection materials can be found in Appendix D. Data Collection In January 1992, the RTC coordinators provided us with lists of names and addresses of State D.A.R.E. coordinators. Based on this information, we identified 44 States with D.A.R.E. coordinators. We mailed each coordinator a package containing cover letters from the D.A.R.E. America RTC Advisory Board and RTI, a questionnaire, and a list of school districts in the coordinator's State. The cover letter from the RTC Advisory Board expressed support for the research effort and encouraged participation. The cover letter from RTI explained the study, provided assurances that all information would be kept strictly confidential, and requested copies of any pertinent State documents concerning the organization and/or administration of D.A.R.E. =20 We mailed the packages to the State D.A.R.E. coordinators on February 18, 1992. Two weeks after the initial mailout, we contacted nonresponders by telephone.=20 We made repeated attempts by mail and telephone to secure the return of completed materials or to collect the information by phone. The RTCs were again of great assistance to us in urging coordinators to return surveys. Of the 44 respondents identified by the RTC coordinators, 39 completed the instrument. For purposes of verification, one question in the survey asked respondents to confirm that the State had a D.A.R.E. coordinator. Although four States responded that they did not have such a position, we determined after some investigation that they did have a person who performs a coordinator's role. Respondents from all four of these States reported that administration of the State D.A.R.E. program was one of several roles they performed as supervisors or directors in law enforcement agencies.=20 We, therefore, did not delete these responses from our analysis. It should be noted, however, that because of skip patterns in the survey instrument, these four respondents did not complete survey items specifically directed to the State D.A.R.E. coordinator. =20 Findings Administration To address issues raised in the NIJ solicitation concerning management of the D.A.R.E. program, we asked a series of questions about the agencies involved in D.A.R.E.'s administration at the State level, the functions of each agency, and the relationships among them. Findings from these questions are presented below. Agencies Involved. We first asked respondents to report the agency with primary responsibility for managing the State D.A.R.E. program. As shown in Exhibit 4.1, the great majority of States indicated that a law enforcement or criminal justice agency was entrusted with this responsibility. =20 Exhibit 4.1 Percentage of State D.A.R.E. Programs Primarily Managed by Various State and Local Agencies Agency (N=3D39) % State Department of Public Safety 17.8 State Police 15.4 State Investigative Agency 7.7 State Highway Patrol 5.1 Other State Criminal Justice Agency 10.3 Governor's Office 7.7 State Attorney General's Office 10.3 State Department of Education/ Public Instruction 2.6 City/County Law Enforcement Agency 12.8 D.A.R.E. Agency 5.1 Board on Public Safety Training=20 and Standards 2.6 Association of Chiefs of Police 2.6 100.0 States are encouraged to establish statewide boards that will help ensure that the State D.A.R.E. program accommodates competing points of view, remains responsive to the needs of its constituency, and continues as a permanent component of State prevention activities (BJA, 1988). We asked coordinators if the State had a policy advisory board (PAB), and 15 States (38%) reported affirmatively. To explore PAB membership, we asked the 15 coordinators with PABs to indicate the agencies/individuals who held memberships on these boards and to indicate the representative who chaired it.=20 Exhibit 4.2 shows that 65% or more of the States with PABs listed State and local educational agencies, local law enforcement agencies, and State D.A.R.E. officer associations among their members. The leadership role of the PABs was primarily held by law enforcement representatives. The board was chaired by State law enforcement agencies in six States, by local law enforcement in three States, by local education agencies in two States, by the State Department of Education in one State, by another State agency in one State, and by an Association of Chiefs of Police in one State. =20 Exhibit 4.2 Percentage of States with D.A.R.E. Policy Advisory Boards Having Representation of Various Agencies and Individuals on Such Boards Agency/Individual (N=3D15) %1 State Law Enforcement Agency 60.0 Local Law Enforcement Agency 80.0 Representatives for Other Criminal Justice 13.3 Agencies State D.A.R.E. Officers' Association 73.3 Police Associations 20.0 State Department of Education/Public Instruction 86.7 Regional, County, or Local Education 66.7 Associations of Educators 26.7 University Representative 6.7 State Alcohol/Drug Abuse Agency 46.7 Governor's Office 26.7 State Legislature 20.0 State Judiciary 13.3 Other State Agency 33.3 Parents 26.7 Community-Based Organizations 26.7 Citizens-at-Large 13.3 Business Representatives 13.3 1Column percents will total more than 100.0% because multiple responses could be indicated by the same respondent. Yet another agency encouraged to become involved in D.A.R.E. is the State Department of Education. States are encouraged to retain an educational consultant to act as a liaison between the State Department of Education, local school administrators, and D.A.R.E. instructors (BJA, 1988). We, therefore, asked if the State had an educational consultant. Twenty-five (64%) of the 39 respondents reported having an educational advisor, and two States reported two advisors. Further, we inquired about the employers of these consultants and found that educational systems employed 17 of the 27 educational advisors and law enforcement agencies employed 4 (Exhibit 4.3). Exhibit 4.3 Percentage of States with D.A.R.E. Educational Advisors Reporting to the Employers of These Advisors Employer (N=3D25) %1 State Department of Education 20.0 Local School Systems 36.0 Boards of Education 12.0 College/University 4.0 State Highway Patrol 8.0 Other Law Enforcement Agencies 8.0 Other State Agencies 12.0 Private Consultants 8.0 1Column percents will total more than 100.0% because multiple responses could be indicated by the same respondent. Functions. Next, we sought to examine the responsibilities of both the State D.A.R.E. coordinators and the PABs by asking respondents to indicate the functions of each agency (Exhibit 4.4). The most fre- quently mentioned roles of State D.A.R.E. coordinators were D.A.R.E. advocacy and officer training within the State. The most frequently mentioned roles of PABs were formulating State policy, exploring funding sources, and advocating for D.A.R.E.=20 We also asked respondents to list functions performed by the State D.A.R.E. coordinators and the PABs that were not provided as close-ended response options.=20 Additional duties mentioned for State D.A.R.E. coordinators included=20 o acting as liaison to other D.A.R.E. agencies (three States), o distributing D.A.R.E. materials (three States), o making and managing grant applications (two States), o training D.A.R.E. officers for schools on military bases (one State), o recertifying officers (one State), o selecting officers (one State), and o serving as a clearinghouse for information (one State). Other duties performed by the PABs included long-term planning (two States) and the selection and supervision of the State D.A.R.E. coordinator (one State). Exhibit 4.4 Percentage of State D.A.R.E. Coordinators and Policy Advisory Boards Performing Various Functions State D.A.R.E. Policy Advisory Coordinator=20 Board Functions (N=3D35)=20 (N=3D15) Formulating State policy 82.9=20 86.7 Advocating D.A.R.E. 97.1=20 66.7 Exploring funding sources 80.0=20 73.3 Distributing funds 34.3=20 33.3 Training D.A.R.E. officers within the State 91.4=20 26.7 Training D.A.R.E. officers from other States 68.6=20 26.7 Follow-up in-service training 77.1=20 33.3 Direct student instruction 48.6=20 20.0 Implementation/development of local sites 80.0=20 26.7 On-site monitoring of D.A.R.E. officers activities 71.4=20 33.3 Program evaluation 77.1=20 53.3 Approving school districts' involvement with D.A.R.E. 45.7=20 60.0 Approving local law enforcements' involvement with D.A.R.E. 71.4=20 26.7 D.A.R.E. officer certification 82.9=20 60.0 D.A.R.E. officer decertification 68.6=20 53.3 Communication. As mentioned earlier, State D.A.R.E. programs are strongly encouraged to develop relationships with State Departments of Education.=20 Having an educational consultant, however, does not guarantee communication between the agencies. We, therefore, asked the State coordinators about how well they communicate with the Department of Education. Most of the State D.A.R.E. coordinators reported having a great deal (35%) or some (47%) communication with the State Department of Education. In six States, coordinators reported little communication, and only one reported none. Seven coordinators (20%) reported having a signed agreement between the State D.A.R.E. coordinator and the Department of Education. =20 We also asked coordinators about the level of communication between the PABs and the State Department of Education. Most of the coordinators reported that PABs had a great deal of communication with the Depart- ment of Education. Eight of the 15 States with PABs reported that their boards had a great deal of communication, three reported some communication, three reported little, and one reported none. =20 Only one State reported that both the State D.A.R.E. coordinator and the PAB had little communication with the Department of Education. Funding The NIJ solicitation also requested information on funding arrangements for D.A.R.E. To this end, we asked respondents to report the amount of funding received by the primary managing agency. Exhibit 4.5 presents ranges of funding received for D.A.R.E. at the State level. Four States reported that no funds were received for State-level D.A.R.E. operations, and two State coordinators were unable to provide this information. =20 The mean amount of funds received by the primary managing agency for operating D.A.R.E. at the State level in the 1991-1992 school year (excluding $0 values) was $273,657; funding ranged from $25,000 to $2,635,000. The total amount received by the responding States was $9,260,700. Exhibit 4.5 Funding Received in 1991-1992 School Year for State-Level D.A.R.E. Operations Funding Range (N=3D39) % $ 0 10.3 $ 25,000 - 49,000 12.8 $ 50,000 - 99,999 28.2 $100,000 - 299,999 25.6 $300,000 + 17.9 Data Unavailable 5.1 We asked the 33 respondents who reported the amount of funding for State-level operations to identify the sources of this funding (Exhibit 4.6). Four of the 33 respondents did not answer this question. We also asked coordinators to indicate the percentage of funds received from each source. Fifteen States indicated that all funds were received from one source (six from the BJA, four from State governors' grants, two from the State Department of Education, two from legislative funds, and one from other sources). Eight States reported that funding was received from two sources, and eight States reported receiving funding from three or more sources. =20 Additionally, we asked respondents to report other sources of funding not mentioned in the close-ended response options. Responses included State and local matching funds, special education trust funds, State penalty assessment funds, funds from the Exhibit 4.6 Numberof States Receiving Funds for State- Level Operations from Sources in 1991-1992 School Year Funding Source (N=3D31) % Bureau of Justice Assistance Grant 58.1 Grant from Governor's Office 29.0 State Department of Education 12.9 Legislative Funds 25.8 Grant from Other State Agency 29.0 Local Funds 9.7 Corporate Donations 9.7 Individual Donations 3.2 Civic or Community Groups 3.2 D.A.R.E. America 3.2* *As indicated by Question 2 of the State D.A.R.E. coordinator survey, this information refers to funding of State-level D.A.R.E. programs only. D.A.R.E. America has informed us that all State-level programs receive support from D.A.R.E. America (Glenn Levant, personal communi- cation, August 9, 1994). Office of Juvenile Justice and Delinquency Prevention (OJJDP), fund-raisers, and Federal forfeiture funds. State Training Centers As mentioned in Chapter 3, one goal of the RTCs has been to develop STCs in their geographic areas.=20 Increasingly, RTCs have adopted a "train thetrainer" model to prepare STCs in their jurisdiction to conduct their own D.A.R.E. officer training and certification procedures. We, therefore, asked coordinators whether their State had its own STC. About 87% (34 States) reported affirmatively. One of the five States without a training center reported that the State was in the process of establishing a training center. Implementation To obtain a general idea of the level of implementation of each of D.A.R.E.'s curricula, we asked respondents to indicate each curriculum used in the State during the 1991-1992 school year. All respondents reported that the core curriculum and the K-4 visitations were used in at least one school in the State.=20 Furthermore, 28 States (72%) implemented the junior high curriculum, 26 States (67%) implemented the senior high school curriculum, and 9 States (23%) implemented the parent curriculum in at least one school. Challenges and Problems To acquire an understanding of the challenges and problems facing D.A.R.E. and the State D.A.R.E. coordina- tor in the coming years, we asked two open-ended questions about these issues. We categorized the responses and counted the number of State coordinators indicating each category. (We advise caution in using these findings to make recommendations given the small number of coordinators mentioning each category.) =20 First, we asked respondents to identify the most significant issues they face in working with the State's Department of Education. The two most common responses were improving communication between agencies (mentioned by eight States) and acquiring a full-time educational advisor (mentioned by seven States). Most of the other responses were specific actions that coordinators wanted the State Department of Education to undertake, such as o assisting with program evaluation and monitoring D.A.R.E. officers (six States), o formally mandating the D.A.R.E. program (three States), o understanding the role of law enforcement in education (three States), o assisting with funding for D.A.R.E. (three States), o providing greater support for the D.A.R.E. program (two States), o assisting in training programs (one State), and o helping resolve problems between officers and teachers (one State). We then asked respondents to indicate the most significant issues facing the State D.A.R.E. coordinator. It should be noted that most of these issues could be mentioned by coordinators of other drug prevention programs, as well as coordinators of D.A.R.E.=20 Most of the responses centered on funding, communication, evaluation, and training. The responses, by category, were as follows:=20 Funding o maintaining or increasing funding (13 States) o locating funding sources (8 States) o locating funding specifically for training (6 States) Communication o increasing communication between D.A.R.E. agencies at the local, regional, and national levels (10 States) o improving relations with State Department of Education (4 States) o coping with the disorganization of the program (4 States) o improving public relations (3 States) o keeping up with constantly shifting policies of the D.A.R.E. America RTC Advisory Board (2 States) Evaluation o monitoring officers in the classroom (8 States) o evaluating the program (4 States) Training o improving training (3 States) o handling problem officers (2 States) o obtaining STC certification (1 State) Staffing o increasing staffing (6 States) o formally establishing a State D.A.R.E. coordinator position (2 States) o forming a PAB (2 States) Expansion o expanding D.A.R.E. to other grades or schools (7 States). Summary This chapter focused on a survey of the administrators of the State D.A.R.E. programs. Thirty- nine of the 44 States with State D.A.R.E. coordinators responded to the survey. =20 We found that most of the State D.A.R.E. programs are managed by law enforcement or criminal justice agencies and that most retain educational consultants.=20 About two-fifths of the States had PABs. Most of the coordinators reported high levels of communication between themselves and the State Department of Education.=20 They also reported high levels of communication between the PABs and the Department of Education. Most States received at least $50,000 in funding for training and administrative purposes, and most States had their own STC. Findings from this chapter and resulting recommendations are discussed fully in Chapter 8. CHAPTER 5 SCHOOL DISTRICT DRUG PREVENTION COORDINATOR SURVEY A survey of school district drug prevention coordinators was the main component of our implementation assessment. This component of the assessment was conducted to fulfill NIJ's request for information about the implementation of D.A.R.E. and other school-based drug prevention programs at the local level. NIJ specifically requested information on the following questions: o Who usually manages the D.A.R.E. program at the local level? o How involved in D.A.R.E. are classroom teachers, churches, and community groups? o How extensively are D.A.R.E. and other school-based alcohol and other drug (AOD) prevention programs implemented nationwide in terms of geography, target populations (such as ethnic groups, economic strata, and urbanicity), and grade levels? o How do other AOD programs compare with D.A.R.E. and D.A.R.E. with them? o What are local funding arrangements for D.A.R.E. and other AOD programs? How do these resources affect implementation? A careful reading of these questions reveals that NIJ had three primary objectives: (a) to secure information about the administration of D.A.R.E., (b) to develop estimates of the national prevalence of D.A.R.E. and other AOD programs, and (c) to make comparisons between D.A.R.E. and other AOD programs on a variety of issues. =20 RTI staff developed and conducted a comprehensive survey of school district drug prevention coordinators that addressed each of the above-mentioned objectives and questions. We selected drug prevention coordinators as respondents, as opposed to classroom teachers or police officers, because we believed that drug prevention coordinators were the school district staff members best able to provide us with a broad perspective on all drug prevention activities in the district, including both D.A.R.E. and other AOD prevention programs. This chapter presents the methodology and findings for this survey. We should note that for this chapter the results we display will be descriptive, as opposed to explanatory, in nature. That is, our purpose is to report what the school district drug prevention coordinators have told us, and not attempt to explain why they responded as they did. Although efforts to explain our respondents' answer are feasible, we believe they would ultimately prove unsatisfactory because our explanatory variables (e.g., the school districts' racial balance or percentage of youth in poverty) are very limited, and any differences we find may be misleading. The findings section first presents information we received from districts with D.A.R.E., followed by estimates of the numbers of districts with D.A.R.E. and other AOD programs, and comparisons of D.A.R.E. with other AOD programs. At the end of the findings section, we also provide some general information about drug policies in all the districts surveyed. Methodology Sample Design The sample design for the school district drug prevention coordinators' survey was a two-phased stratified random sample. The two-phases of the sample design was necessary to meet the multiple goals of this survey. The goal of the first-phase sample was to produce estimates by region, district size, socioeconomic status (SES) categories, ethnicity categories, and urbanicity. The goal of the second-phase sample was to enable comparisons between districts with and without D.A.R.E. A detailed discussion of each phase of the sample design is discussed below. Sampling frame. The first step in our sampling design was to obtain a list of public school districts nationwide. We obtained such a list from Quality Educational Data (QED) Inc., of Denver, Colorado. The QED file, which is updated every summer, lists all public school districts nationwide and contains a wealth of useful information for each school district. We used this file as our sampling frame. Information that we used from this file included the school district's o SES (defined as the percentage of children in the district below poverty level), o urbanicity (defined as urban, suburban, or rural), o ethnicity (defined as the percentage of children in the district who were black or Hispanic), and o district size (defined as the number of students enrolled in the district). =20 For each of the 14,715 districts on the QED file, we created five new variables that we later used for stratification and weighting purposes. First, we created a region variable that was based on the jurisdictions of D.A.R.E.'s five RTCs (see Chapter 3, Exhibit 3.1). Next, to keep the total number of stratum cells within reasonable bounds, we dichotomized urbanicity, SES, ethnicity, and district size. We first collapsed the urban and suburban categories on the QED file into one category. We computed percentiles for minority status, SES, and district size within each region-by-urbanicity group. We then used the median of each variable to define two categories (low/high) for each of the three variables. The number and percentage of school districts in the sampling frame in each of the strata are presented in Appendix A, Exhibit A.1. First-Phase Sampling. The goal of the first-phase of our sampling design was to ensure that we selected a nationally representative sample of school districts.=20 Additionally, we wanted to ensure that districts in each region, urbanicity category, SES category, minority status category, and district size category were adequately sampled. Therefore, our first-phase sample was a stratified random sample. =20 The first step in selecting our first-phase sample was to define each strata. We initially constructed 10 region-by-urbanicity strata by crossing the 5 regional strata with the 2 urbanicity strata. We then crossed each of these 10 strata with 2 SES categories (resulting in 20 strata). We then crossed each of those 20 strata by minority status (resulting in 40 strata). Finally, we crossed each of those 40 strata by district size (resulting in 80 strata). The number of school districts in the sampling frame in each of the 80 strata is presented in Appendix A, Exhibit A.2. The next step in our sampling design was to determine how districts from each strata would be selected for inclusion in the first-phase sample. We assayed two methods of allocating the sample to strata.=20 In the first method, we assigned equal sample sizes across strata (i.e., we sampled 15 districts from every stratum regardless of whether the stratum in the sampling frame contained 15 or 200 districts). This method would have ensured good precision across strata. In the second method, we assigned sample sizes proportional to the frame size within each stratum. For example, if 5% of the districts in the sampling frame were in a particular stratum, proportional sampling would have ensured that 5% of the first-phase sample would be allocated to that same stratum. Unlike equal allocation, proportional allocation yields approximately equal sampling weights, reduces variance, and thus provides better precision for overall survey estimates. =20 Because of its clear advantages, we chose proportional sampling. Thus, we randomly selected a proportional number of school districts within each of the 80 strata. The first-phase sample consisted of 1,500 school districts. Exhibits displaying the sample allocation to strata are provided in Appendix A, Exhibits A.3 and A.4. Second-Phase Sampling. The goal of the second- phase of our sampling design was to ensure that the second-phase sample included both D.A.R.E. and non- D.A.R.E. school districts. To make this determination, we asked State D.A.R.E. or DFSCA coordinators to classify the 1,500 school districts in the first-phase sample as either D.A.R.E. or non-D.A.R.E. districts (see Chapter 4). Because some State coordinators did not return this information or only partially completed the information, we created a third category of school districts with an unknown D.A.R.E. status. State coordinators reported that 43% of the sampled districts used D.A.R.E. and 40% did not; D.A.R.E. status was unknown for 17% of the districts. Exhibit A.5 in Appendix A displays the responses of the State coordinators on the D.A.R.E. status of the first-phase sample by region. The next step in selecting our second-phase sample was to determine the number of districts to be selected.=20 Calculations to determine the number of districts needed in the second-phase sample were based first on the type of analysis we planned to conduct and second on an anticipated 80% response rate. Because we calculated that 400 responding school districts were necessary to achieve sufficient statistical power and precision, we selected a second-phase sample of 500 school districts. Finally, we used the classifications provided by the State coordinators to select proportional numbers of school districts with D.A.R.E., without D.A.R.E., and with unknown D.A.R.E. status across the five regions.=20 Thus, we selected 215 school districts with D.A.R.E., 200 without D.A.R.E., and 85 with unknown D.A.R.E. status.=20 Exhibit A.6 in Appendix A displays the second-phase sample by region and D.A.R.E. status. Survey Estimation. All survey estimates were computed using software developed at RTI specifically for the analysis of surveys based on complex sample designs.=20 We computed analysis weights that took into account the two-phase stratified sample design. Weighted data provides a less biased estimate than unweighted data because the weighted data more accurately represents the true population. The weights varied across strata based on region, ethnic composition, urbanicity, SES, and size of the school district. Analysis weights were computed as the product of the first-phase sample weight and the second-phase sample weight. Sampling weights were also adjusted for nonresponse. We performed quality checks on the analysis weights to ensure that the sum of the analysis weights coincides with the number of districts in the frame. We also examined the variability of the analyses weights and their impact on survey variances. Instrument Design RTI staff determined the contents of the school district drug prevention coordinators' survey based on the research issues raised in NIJ's solicitation, discussions with NIJ personnel, a review of the literature, and examination of the studies of drug education programming previously conducted at RTI. We used close-ended items whenever possible to minimize ambiguity and burden. A few open-ended questions were included to encourage respondents to provide detailed information. =20 All drug prevention coordinators completed a set of core items that were designed to provide background information about the district and about the specific drug prevention curricula used. Additionally, coordinators in districts using D.A.R.E., alone or in combination with other drug prevention curricula, completed a set of items concerning the D.A.R.E. program only. Coordinators in districts using other AOD prevention programs, alone or in combination with D.A.R.E., completed a set of items concerning other AOD (i.e., non-D.A.R.E.) programs only. Therefore, school districts implementing D.A.R.E. and other AOD programs answered both sets of items. After submitting the data collection instrument to our NIJ program manager for comment and discussion, we formally pretested all data collection materials and procedures. Both regional and State DFSCA coordinators assisted in identifying pretest subjects. Seven school district drug prevention coordinators (two in New York, two in South Dakota, one in North Carolina, one in Rhode Island, and one in South Carolina) completed a pretest questionnaire in early April 1992. We used the responses of pretest participants, as well as the comments of our NIJ program manager and other AOD prevention program experts, to make final decisions on the data collection procedures and instruments. A copy of the survey instrument and other data collection materials for this component of the study can be found in Appendix D. Data Collection On May 1, 1992, we mailed a cover letter, questionnaire, and prepaid return envelope to school district drug prevention coordinators in each of the 500 selected school districts. The cover letter included a brief statement of study objectives, information on how the data would be used, and confidentiality assurances.=20 Approximately 2 weeks after the initial mailing, we sent postcards to coordinators who had not responded. The postcard asked if the initial packet had been received, reminded the coordinator of the importance of the study, and offered the RTI toll-free number in case assistance was needed. Upon request, we provided duplicate mailouts. Four packages were returned as undeliverable. Each of these was followed up by telephone inquiry to ascertain the correct address. We obtained correct addresses for three of the four returned packages and remailed the material. The remaining school district had recently merged with another school district. Because this merged district was already included in the sample, the duplicate was dropped. We began making follow-up telephone calls to nonresponders approximately 2 weeks after the reminder postcards were mailed. Follow-up phone calls were made by trained RTI telephone interviewers between June 2 and July 15, 1992. Interviewers encouraged coordinators to complete and return their instruments as soon as possible. Those coordinators who indicated to interviewers that they would not otherwise complete the instrument were asked to complete the survey over the telephone. The survey instrument was exactly the same for both telephone and mail administration. The final response rate was 85.6%, which considerably surpassed our expected response rate of 80%. The final sample disposition is presented in Exhibit 5.1. Exhibit 5.1 Final Sample Disposition N % Completed by phone 289 57.8 Completed by mail 139 27.8 Refused 8 1.6 No response 63 12.6 Duplicate 1 0.2 As indicated, we completed almost twice as many interviews by phone as by mail. We attribute this to several factors. First, phone surveys traditionally have higher response rates than mail surveys. Second, the questionnaires were not mailed until late in the school year; therefore, coordinators may have had end-of-the- year obligations that limited the amount of time they could spend on additional duties. Third, the part of the instrument that asked about each of the packaged drug prevention curricula was imposing; we believe that having the interviewers read these questions to the respondents may have made answering them less burdensome. Because the information gathered in this survey was not sensitive in nature, we believe that data obtained via both methods of administration are comparable. Returned questionnaires were delivered to a check-in station where they were logged in, coded, manually edited, keyed, and key verified. We implemented machine-editing procedures to verify and correct skip patterns and logical inconsistencies. We recontacted a few school district drug prevention coordinators to resolve problematic responses, such as incomplete or contradictory information. Findings Administration of D.A.R.E. The first objective of this survey was to obtain information about the administration of D.A.R.E. at the local level. This section presents findings concerning the implementation, administration, participation of teachers and the community in the D.A.R.E. program, integration and coordination of D.A.R.E. with other school-based drug prevention efforts, problems with D.A.R.E., and future plans for the use of D.A.R.E. Data from survey items asked only of the districts with D.A.R.E. are presented in this section. =20 Implementation. In the 1991-1992 school year, D.A.R.E. was implemented in 51.8%, or 222, of the school districts surveyed. Some 42% of all school districts surveyed used the core curriculum, 17% used K-4 lessons, 11% implemented the junior high school curriculum, 3% used the senior high school curriculum, and 3% used the parent curriculum. =20 Of the 222 school districts with D.A.R.E., the great majority (81%) implemented the core curriculum, around 33% used the K-4 visitations, 22% used the junior high school curriculum, 6% implemented the senior high school curriculum, and 5% used the parent curriculum. We further asked the respondents to indicate every grade in which the D.A.R.E. curricula were used. Exhibit 5.2 displays the percentage of school districts with D.A.R.E. implementing the program at each grade. Almost 70% of the districts with D.A.R.E. implemented the curriculum in 5th-grade classes, and almost 60% used it in 6th-grade classes. Thus, a substantial number of districts implemented the core curriculum in both grades, which probably reflects the different cutoff grades separating elementary from junior high or middle schools in that district. Administration. One objective of NIJ's solicitation was to ascertain what agencies usually manage D.A.R.E. and have responsibility for various aspects of the program at the local level. To address these issues, we first asked coordinators to report all agencies managing D.A.R.E. Around 81% of the districts with D.A.R.E. reported that a single agency administered the D.A.R.E. program, while 16.3% reported that two agencies and 2.3% reported that three or more agencies administered the program (Exhibit 5.3). Almost 34% of the school districts with D.A.R.E. reported that the county sheriff's department alone administered the program, and about 34% reported city/town police departments administered it.=20 We next asked coordinators to report whether law enforcement or education was responsible for various activities. Coordinators with D.A.R.E. most frequently reported that law enforcement agencies were responsible for selecting D.A.R.E. officers and determining classroom activities (Exhibit 5.4). They reported that responsibility for selecting schools to receive D.A.R.E., selecting classrooms to receive D.A.R.E., and assigning extracurricular D.A.R.E. activities were performed by education. Participation of Teachers and Community. NIJ's solicitation also requested an examination of the extent of involvement of classroom teachers. About 84% of the coordinators reported that classroom teachers were actively involved in the program. We also asked coordinators about classroom teachers' level of participation during D.A.R.E. lessons. About 21% reported a great deal of participation, 46% reported some participation, 28% reported little participation, and 5% reported no participation by the classroom teachers. =20 Exhibit 5.2 Use of D.A.R.E., by Grade Note: Based on responses of coordinators in school districts with D.A.R.E. (N=3D222). Exhibit 5.3 Agencies Administering the D.A.R.E. Program at the Local Level Agencies (N=3D222) % Single Agency: Sheriff Department 33.5 City/Town Police Department 33.5 State Police/Highway Patrol 11.3 County Police Department 1.3 Other 1.8 Combinations of Two Agencies: Sheriffs Department & City/ Town Police Department 8.6 Other Combinations of Two Agencies 7.7 Combinations of Three or More Agencies 2.3 Total 100.0 Exhibit 5.4 Agencies with Primary Responsibility for Coordination of D.A.R.E. Activities (%) =20 Extra- Officer School Classroom Classroom curricular Selection Selection Selection Activities Activities Law Enforcement 93.6 28.1 19.6=20 66.8 37.9 Education 6.4 71.9 80.4 =20 33.2 62.1 Total 100.0 100.0 100.0=20 100.0 100.0 To determine the extent to which teachers reinforce the D.A.R.E. lessons, we asked coordinators about D.A.R.E.-related activities performed by classroom teachers. Most of the school district drug prevention coordinators (89%) reported that teachers remain in the classroom during D.A.R.E. lessons. About 72% reported that classroom teachers integrate the D.A.R.E. message into other activities, 39% said that teachers collect D.A.R.E. homework, and 15% reported that teachers assign D.A.R.E. homework. The NIJ solicitation also requested that we examine the extent to which members of community groups (e.g., church or youth groups) participate in the D.A.R.E. program. Indeed, recent research suggests that linking school-based interventions with the larger community strengthens their effectiveness (Pentz et al., 1989; Perry & Tobler, 1992). Therefore, we asked the prevention coordinators to specify members of the community who were actively involved in D.A.R.E. About 51% of the coordinators said that parents were actively involved, 22% indicated that civic groups were so involved, 13% said that youth groups were so involved, and 5% said that church groups were so involved. Integration and Coordination. Another objective of this study was to examine the extent of D.A.R.E.'s integration and coordination with other school-based drug prevention efforts. To address this issue, we first asked coordinators to indicate the level at which D.A.R.E. was integrated with other AOD programs. About 63% of the prevention coordinators reported D.A.R.E. was very well integrated, 31% reported it was well integrated, and 7% reported it was poorly integrated. To determine whether D.A.R.E. was better integrated in some types of school districts than in others, we examined the differences in the percentages of coordinators reporting that D.A.R.E. was very well integrated by minority status, SES, urbanicity, and district size. No statistically significant differences were found.=20 D.A.R.E. was equally well integrated with other AOD programs across different types of school districts. One type of mechanism for coordinating the D.A.R.E. responsibilities of law enforcement with those of education agencies are written agreements that solidify commitment, define roles and duties, and establish sound working relationships. We asked coordinators about the existence of such agreements and found that approximately 44% of the coordinators reported that their district had a written agreement. We asked those coordinators with written agreements about the contents of these agreements. The following components of the agreements were mentioned by the accompanying number of coordinators: o the responsibilities of all parties (23 coordinators); o time (21 coordinators); o funding/fees (20 coordinators); o scheduling (15 coordinators); o curricula (10 coordinators); o schools to be offered in (9 coordinators); o grades used in (6 coordinators); o general use of D.A.R.E. (6 coordinators); o length of program (5 coordinators); o school policies (4 coordinators); o sequence of lessons (3 coordinators); o materials (3 coordinators);=20 o graduation program (3 coordinators); and o "don't know" (4 coordinators). Problems. We asked school district drug prevention coordinators to provide information concerning problems with implementing and coordinating D.A.R.E., and to suggest how the effectiveness of D.A.R.E. might be improved.=20 We asked coordinators to indicate whether there were any barriers to implementing D.A.R.E. and then to specify these barriers. Only 26% of the school district drug prevention coordinators with D.A.R.E. mentioned any barrier to implementing the program. Some 16% of the coordinators with D.A.R.E. mentioned inadequate funding as a barrier to implementation, 13% mentioned too few officers, and 11% mentioned scheduling difficulties (Figure 5.5). The two most frequently mentioned barriers were in areas over which the school system has little control (funding and number of officers). Exhibit 5.5 Problem Areas That Are Barriers to Implementing D.A.R.E. in All Schools Note: Based on responses of coordinators using D.A.R.E. (N=3D222). Next, in an open-ended question, we asked coordinators to elaborate on any problems with the coordination of D.A.R.E. The responses of those with problems were o lack of time (19 coordinators); o insufficient funding/staff (12 coordinators); o scheduling problems (9 coordinators); o officers not good teachers (5 coordinators); o difficulties getting program started (4 coordinators); o inadequate officer/teacher interaction (4 coordinators); o officer scheduling problems/absences (4 coordinators); o other officer problems (4 coordinators); and o lack of coordination between school and police (3 coordinators). Finally, we asked coordinators what, if any, changes they thought would make D.A.R.E. more effective in their district, and then to elaborate on these changes. About one-third of the coordinators mentioned that there was at least one change that they thought would make D.A.R.E. more effective. The following responses were the changes they mentioned: o expand to other grade levels (26 coordinators); o increase staff/officers (11 coordinators); o increase parental participation (7 coordinators); o increase funding (6 coordinators); o increase community involvement (6 coordinators); o increase teacher training and involvement (5 coordinators); o improve quality/dependability officers (4 coordinators); o increase integration with other curricula (4 coordinators); o increase time spent on D.A.R.E. (3 coordinators); o decrease time spent on D.A.R.E. (3 coordinators); =20 o increase publicity (2 coordinators); o adapt curriculum to grade level (2 coordinators); o change curricula (2 coordinators); o teach officers to be teachers (2 coordinators); o increase refresher training for officers (2 coordinators); o include D.A.R.E. as part of student assistance program (1 coordinator); o increase D.A.R.E.'s availability in rural/isolated areas (1 coordinator). Future Use of D.A.R.E. To examine whether the demand for D.A.R.E. is going to increase or diminish over the next few years, we asked coordinators about their future plans for D.A.R.E.=20 Some 43% of the coordinators with D.A.R.E. planned to expand use of D.A.R.E. in the next 5 years, and 55% planned to maintain the current level (only 2% planned to decrease use). Of the 208 school districts without D.A.R.E., 38% had not considered using D.A.R.E., 21% planned to implement D.A.R.E. in the future, 20% were undecided, 15% reported they definitely will not use D.A.R.E., and 6% had discontinued use of D.A.R.E. Further, to determine whether any particular type of school district was more likely to expand use of D.A.R.E. in the next 5 years, we examined the differences in the percentages of districts planning to increase their use of D.A.R.E. by minority status, SES, or urbanicity. No statistically significant differences were found. Plans for the expansion of D.A.R.E. were fairly equal across different types of school districts.=20 National Prevalence Estimates of D.A.R.E. and Other AOD Programs The second objective of this survey was to develop national estimates of the prevalence of D.A.R.E. and other AOD programs. To accomplish this objective, we asked coordinators to indicate all published drug prevention curricula used by the school district in the 1991-1992 school year. Based on previous research and discussions with school-based drug prevention curricula experts, we provided a list of 13 published curricula that we thought coordinators would mention most often.=20 In addition, we provided ample space for open-ended responses concerning other published curricula. We used this information in combination with the sample stratification variables to develop estimates by geographical area, ethnicity, SES, and urbanicity. We also asked respondents to complete a series of questions concerning grade levels and substances targeted, as well as type of teachers for each of these curricula.=20 Based on the number of school districts in our sample using the three most frequently mentioned curricula, we estimated the number of school districts nationwide using these curricula. These prevalence estimates and other findings concerning the three most frequently mentioned published drug prevention curricula used in the 1991-1992 school year are presented below. Prevalence. According to our estimates, the published curricula used most often by our respondents in the 1991-1992 school year were D.A.R.E., Quest, and Here's Looking at You. Exhibit 5.6 presents the estimated numbers and percentages of school districts nationwide using these three curricula overall and by the districts' region, urbanicity, SES, minority status, and district size. Urban/suburban school districts were significantly more likely than rural districts to use D.A.R.E. (p<.01) and Here's Looking Exhibit 5.6 Percentage and Estimated Number of School Districts in the Nation Using Top Three Packaged Curricula During the 1991-1992 School Year, by Minority Status, SES, and Urbanicity of the School District Here's Looking D.A.R.E. QuestAt You Characteristic1 % N % N % N Total2 Total 51.8 7619 26.7 3925 =20 24.5 3603 14719 Minority Status High 57.7 2384 25.0 1036 =20 19.1 790 4135 Low 49.1 5234 27.3 2889 =20 26.6 2813 10584 SES High 53.8 5904 28.0 3078 =20 26.7 2930 10973 Low 45.8 1715 22.6 847 =20 18.0 673 3746 Urbanicity Urban 60.5 3480 23.6 1358 =20 30.1 1730 5754 Rural 46.2 4139 28.6 2567 =20 20.9 1873 8965 District Size Small 45.7 3648 23.6 1886 =20 22.4 1792 7987 Large 59.0 3971 30.3 2039 =20 26.9 1811 6732 Region East 55.8 1760 24.2 762 =20 46.4 1462 3150 Southeast 56.8 553 29.1 283 =20 9.8 96 974 Midwest 59.9 2854 35.8 1705 =20 17.4 831 4762 Southwest 37.1 1257 12.4 420 =20 8.6 292 3384 West 48.8 1195 30.8 755 =20 37.7 922 2448 1Multiple curricula could be indicated by the same respondent. 2The sum of the weights provides an estimate of the total number of districts in the frame.=20 Similarly, the weight sum within a stratum estimates the stratum count. Due to sampling variability, stratum-level estimates will not coincide exactly with the corresponding stratum counts in Exhibit A.1 in Appendix A. at You (HLY) (p<.05). Large school districts were significantly more likely than small school districts to use D.A.R.E. (p<.01). =20 Grade Levels Targeted. To determine grade levels targeted by each of the three most frequently used curricula, we asked coordinators to indicate which curricula were used in the school district at each grade level. Grade levels targeted by coordinators with D.A.R.E. were presented in Exhibit 5.2. Around 46% of the school districts with Quest targeted the program to the elementary school level, 81% to the middle/junior high school level, and 12% to the senior high school level. Almost 89% of the school districts with HLY targeted the program to the elementary school level, 55% to the middle/junior high school level, and 35% to the senior high school level. Coordinators reported that all three curricula were more likely to target elementary or middle/junior high school levels. Substances Targeted. To determine whether the three most frequently mentioned curricula differed in substances targeted by the program, we asked the school district drug prevention coordinators to indicate which substances each of the prevention curricula targeted. We found no significant differences in substances targeted among D.A.R.E., Quest, and HLY (Exhibit 5.7). All three of the packages were comprehensive in targeting all substances.=20 Exhibit 5.7 Substances Targeted by, and Types of Instructor of, the Three Most Frequently Mentioned Alcohol and Drug Prevention Programs (%) Here's Looking at D.A.R.E. QuestYou (N=3D222) (N=3D116) (N=3D103) Substances Targeted: Tobacco 92.7 97.1 93.7 Alcohol 99.5 100.0 97.9 Marijuana 95.8 97.1 92.6 Cocaine/crack 92.7 91.3 88.4 Other drugs 92.7 89.4 86.3 Type of Instructor: Teachers 22.1 92.2 94.6 School counselors 8.3 38.5 34.4 School nurses 3.9 7.8 18.3 Police officer 98.0 4.3 3.2 Mental health agency 1.5 7.8 2.1 Volunteers 3.4 5.2 6.4 Note: Multiple responses are possible, so percentages do not add to 100%. Type of Instructor. We also asked coordinators to indicate who taught each of the prevention curricula. As expected, almost all school district drug prevention coordinators reported that police officers were responsible for teaching the D.A.R.E. curricula.=20 Classroom teachers were primarily responsible for teaching Quest and HLY (Exhibit 5.7). More than one- fifth of the coordinators reported that classroom teachers were also involved in teaching D.A.R.E. =20 Comparison of D.A.R.E. and Other AOD Programs The final objective of this study was to make comparisons between D.A.R.E. and other AOD programs on a variety of issues. Comparison data are presented in this section. Topics include funding, satisfaction with the curricula, support for the curricula, and adaptations to curricula. We asked respondents to report on other AOD curricula in general because it would have been too burdensome and time-consuming for them to answer each of the questions for every curricula in use during the 1991- 1992 school year. =20 We first asked school district drug prevention coordinators with D.A.R.E. (222 of the 429 respondents) to answer a set of survey items concerning their D.A.R.E. programs only. We asked all coordinators using other (non-D.A.R.E.) AOD programs (406 of the 429 respondents) to answer an identical set of items concerning their other AOD curricula only. The respondents using both D.A.R.E. and other AOD programs answered both sets of items. Information gathered from these matched sets of questions allowed a direct comparison of responses about the D.A.R.E. curricula with responses concerning other AOD curricula. Only 3% of the districts used only D.A.R.E.; 46% used only other AOD curricula; and 49% used both D.A.R.E. and other AOD curricula. Funding. The first comparisons we examined were comparisons of funding. We asked respondents to indicate all sources of funding for the districts' D.A.R.E. and other AOD programs (Exhibit 5.8). The most frequently mentioned sources of funding for D.A.R.E. were law enforcement agencies and DFSCA education funds. The most frequently mentioned sources of funding for other AOD programs were DFSCA education funds and school district funds. D.A.R.E. programs were more likely than other AOD programs to receive funding from city/county funds, corporate donations, and individual donations. Satisfaction with Curricula. Next, we compared satisfaction ratings for each of the curricula. We asked the school district drug prevention coordinators to rate five program components as very satisfactory, satisfactory, unsatisfactory or very unsatisfactory. The five components were curriculum, teaching, administrative requirements, student receptivity, and effects on students. None of the respondents with D.A.R.E. rated any of the five components as very unsatisfactory.=20 Approximately 1% of the respondents with other AOD programs rated teaching, administrative requirements, or effects on students as very unsatisfactory. D.A.R.E. was much more likely than other AOD programs to be viewed by the school district drug prevention coordinators as very satisfactory on each of the five components (Exhibit 5.9). Well over half of the coordinators with D.A.R.E. rated each of the components as very satisfactory. Between 23% and 35% of the coordinators with other AOD programs rated each of the components as very satisfactory. Students' receptivity was the component with the highest percentage of coordinators rating it as very satisfactory for both D.A.R.E. and other AOD programs. =20 Exhibit 5.8 Sources of Funding for D.A.R.E. and Other Alcohol and Drug Prevention Programs in the 1991-1992 School Year (%) D.A.R.E. Programs Other AOD Programs Source of Funding (N=3D222)(N=3D406) DFSCA Education Funds 47.565.2 DFSCA Governors' Funds 7.913.7 Other Federal Funds 4.810.5 State non-DFSCA Funds 6.413.3 City/County Funds 12.28.8 District Funds 25.153.4 Local Educational Area Funds 3.16.5 Law Enforcement Agencies 51.46.2 Community Agencies 16.619.0 Corporate Donations 15.35.3 Individual Donations 17.27.5 Exhibit 5.9 Components of D.A.R.E. and Other Alcohol and Drug Prevention Programs Rated as Very Satisfactory (%) D.A.R.E. Program =20 Other AOD Programs Component (N=3D222) (N=3D406) Curriculum 67.5 34.2 Teaching 69.7 29.8 Administrative Requirements 55.7 23.1 Receptivity of Students 76.5 34.6 Effects on Students 63.2 22.8 To determine whether school districts with particular characteristics were more likely to rate program components as very satisfactory than other districts, we examined ratings of each of the components by these characteristics. Among coordinators with D.A.R.E., those in high-percentage minority districts were significantly more likely than those in low- percentage minority districts to rate student receptivity as very satisfactory (p<.05) (Exhibit 5.10). Among coordinators with other AOD programs, those in urban districts were significantly more likely (p<.05) than those in rural districts to rate student receptivity and effects on students as very satisfactory (Exhibit 5.11).=20 There were no significant differences in components rated as very satisfactory between D.A.R.E. programs in low and high SES districts or between other AOD programs in low and high SES districts. Furthermore, there were no significant differences in components rated as very satisfactory between D.A.R.E. programs in small and large districts or between other AOD programs in small and large districts. Support for Curricula. We also asked the school district drug prevention coordinators to indicate how supportive they perceived the community, school personnel, students, parents, law enforcement, and civic groups to be of D.A.R.E. and other AOD programs.=20 Response options for these questions were very supportive, somewhat supportive, and not supportive.=20 None of the respondents with D.A.R.E. perceived students or law enforcement as unsupportive of the program (data not shown). The percentages of coordinators who perceived any of the listed individuals or agencies as unsupportive were very small for both D.A.R.E. and other AOD programs.=20 Exhibit 5.10 Components of D.A.R.E. and Other Alcohol and Drug Prevention Programs Rated as Very Satisfactory, by Minority Status of School District (%) D.A.R.E. Program Other AOD Program High LowHighLow Percentage Percentage=20 Percentage Percentage Minority MinorityMinority =20 Minority Component (N=3D69) (N=3D154)(N=3D109)=20 (N=3D297) Curriculum 74.0 64.435.7 33.7 =20 Teaching 70.7 69.227.8 30.6 =20 Administrative =20 Requirements 51.2 57.818.8 24.8 =20 Receptivity of Students 84.7 72.735.6 34.3 =20 Effects on Students 65.3 62.218.5 24.4 Exhibit 5.11 Components of D.A.R.E. and Other Alcohol and Drug Prevention Programs Rated as Very Satisfactory, by Urbanicity of School District (%) D.A.R.E. Program Other AOD Program Urban RuralUrban=20 Rural Component (N=3D99) (N=3D123)(N=3D156) = =20 (N=3D250) Curriculum 63.9 70.540.2 30.3 Teaching 69.1 70.235.8 25.9 Administrative Requirements 50.1 60.426.7 20.8 Receptivity of Students 78.6 74.742.2 29.7 Effects on Students 59.2 66.528.7 19.0 School district drug prevention coordinators reported that each type of agency and individual was much more likely to be very supportive of D.A.R.E. than of other AOD programs. Coordinators with D.A.R.E. were most likely to report law enforcement as being very supportive of the D.A.R.E. program, followed by students and school personnel (Exhibit 5.12). Coordinators with AOD programs other than D.A.R.E. were most likely to report law enforcement and school personnel as being very supportive of other AOD programs. =20 Exhibit 5.12 Individuals, Groups, and Agencies Very Supportive of D.A.R.E. and Other Alcohol and Drug Prevention Programs (%) D.A.R.E. Program Other AOD Programs (N=3D222) (N=3D406) Community 73.8 46.6 School Personnel 82.8 65.1 Students 89.6 50.7 Parents 78.7 45.8 Law Enforcement 92.2 66.8 Civic Groups 61.7 46.8 To determine whether school districts with particular characteristics were more likely to be very supportive of D.A.R.E. and other AOD programs, we examined support by each of these characteristics. Among coordinators with D.A.R.E., those in high SES districts were significantly more likely (p<.05) than those in low SES districts to perceive the community and parents as very supportive of D.A.R.E. (Exhibit 5.13). =20 Exhibit 5.13 Individuals, Groups, and Agencies Very Supportive of D.A.R.E. and Other Alcohol and Drug Prevention Programs, by SES of School District (%)=20 D.A.R.E. Program Other AOD Program High SES Low SESHigh SES =20 Low SES (N=3D173) (N=3D49)(N=3D305) =20 (N=3D101) Community 78.3 58.046.7 46.4 School Personnel 84.9 75.966.1 62.5 Students 91.4 83.651.9 47.1 Parents 83.4 62.946.8 42.7 Law Enforcement 92.8 90.267.3 65.2 Civic Groups 64.6 50.448.1 42.9 Among coordinators with D.A.R.E., those in large districts were significantly more likely (p<.05) than those in small districts to perceive civic groups as very supportive (Exhibit 5.14). Among coordinators with other AOD programs, those in large districts were significantly more likely than those in small districts to perceive law enforcement (p<.01) and civic groups (p<.001) as very supportive. Exhibit 5.14 Individuals, Groups, and Agencies Very Supportive of D.A.R.E. and Other Alcohol and Drug Prevention Programs, by Size of School District (%)=20 D.A.R.E. Program Other AOD Program Small LargeSmall Large (N=3D234) (N=3D195)(N=3D216)=20 (N=3D190) Community 65.7 78.540.7 49.4 School personnel 80.4 85.964.6 65.5 Students 87.9 92.251.2 49.5 Parents 73.9 83.246.1 44.7 Law enforcement 89.7 93.656.9 67.4 Civic groups 43.2 61.838.7 39.2 There were no significant differences in support between D.A.R.E. programs in low- and high-percentage minority districts or between other AOD programs in low- and high-percentage minority districts. Furthermore, there were no significant differences in support between D.A.R.E. programs in urban and rural districts or between other AOD programs in urban and rural districts. Adaptations of Curricula. Some drug prevention curricula, such as D.A.R.E., require instructors to strictly adhere to the curricula and established procedures. Other curricula allow instructors to adapt the curricula to meet their particular needs. However, little is known about how prevention curricula are actually adapted. We asked the school district drug prevention coordinators whether D.A.R.E. or other AOD programs were adapted in any way as a result of gang activity, drug availability, the racial/ethnic composition of the district, student or community poverty, urbanicity, or for some other reason. About 43% of the coordinators with D.A.R.E. reported adapting D.A.R.E. for at least one of these reasons, while about 54% of the coordinators with other AOD programs reported adapting for one of these reasons. Exhibit 5.15 presents the percentage adapting D.A.R.E. and other AOD curricula as a result of the above-mentioned issues. The most frequently mentioned reasons for adapting both D.A.R.E. and other AOD programs were drug availability and student/community poverty. Exhibit 5.15 Adaptations of D.A.R.E. and Other Alcohol and Drug Prevention Curricula to Meet Specific Needs of District (%)=20 D.A.R.E. Curricula Other AOD Curricula Adaptation for: (N=3D222)(N=3D406) Gang Activity 10.68.7 Drug Availability 23.433.2 Racial/Ethnic Composition 13.316.1 Student/Community Poverty 16.723.3 Inner-City Schools 1.32.2 Other 9.511.4 Respondents with D.A.R.E. were provided with additional space to explain ways in which the curricula were adapted. Adaptations mentioned by the coordinators included: o targeting particular drugs prevalent in the area; o making adaptations for the physically and mentally handicapped; o adding more information on violence prevention; o discussing drug abuse in the home environment; o teaching students to be more tolerant of others; o discussing local drug arrests; o involving high school students as role models; o communicating with families of youth to gain familial support and ensure attendance at graduation; o taking field trips; and o omitting lessons. General Drug Policies In this final section of Chapter 5, we present information from responses to questions that were designed to examine general drug policies in the school districts. All coordinators responded to these questions regardless of whether they used D.A.R.E. or any other drug prevention curricula. =20 Anti-Drug Policies. We first asked whether the school district had a written anti-drug policy. We found that 96% did have such a policy. Student Assistance Programs. One type of drug prevention program that many schools have adopted is the student assistance program (SAP). Modeled after employee assistance programs (EAPs) in businesses, SAPs conduct such activities as screening for alcohol and drug involvement, making referrals, and developing and coordinating early intervention plans for youth with problems that could lead to substance abuse. =20 Almost 55% of the school district drug prevention coordinators reported that their districts had SAPs in place during the 1991-1992 school year. Of the 237 districts with SAPs, 51% targeted these programs to the elementary school level, 78% focused on the middle/junior high school level, and 81% targeted the senior high school level. We asked the school district drug prevention coordinators using SAPs to indicate what types of individuals were trained to participate in these programs (Exhibit 5.16). Almost 89% of the coordinators mentioned that teachers had been trained, and nearly 75% mentioned that principals and guidance counselors had been trained to participate in SAPs. We also asked the coordinators using SAPs to indicate the types of individuals who actually implemented the programs and how effective they were (Exhibit 5.17). Coordinators most frequently mentioned that teachers, principals, guidance counselors, and students implemented SAPs. However, they perceived guidance counselors, D.A.R.E. officers, and district/school nurses as the most effective at implementing these programs. Coordinators most frequently mentioned that community professionals and community volunteers were not effective.=20 Exhibit 5.16 Individuals Trained to Participate in Student Assistance Programs Individual/Agency (N=3D237) % Teachers 88.6 Principals 74.9 Guidance Counselors 74.7 District/School Nurses 49.7 Community Professionals 42.5 Students 37.3 D.A.R.E. Officers* 36.6 Other School Staff 30.6 Community Volunteers 20.9 *Of the 237 school districts with SAPs, 138 also had D.A.R.E. Exhibit 5.17 Effectiveness in Implementing Student Assistance Programs (%) VerySomewhat Not Individual/Agency N Effective Effective Effective Teachers 236 39.057.6 3.4 Principals 234 46.249.4 4.4 Guidance Counselors 224 60.433.1 6.5 District/School Nurses 176 51.140.6 8.3 Community Professionals 195 37.745.0 17.3 Students 222 29.461.5 9.1 D.A.R.E. Officers 138 60.232.6 7.2 Other School Staff 183 27.063.5 9.5 Community Volunteers 156 17.653.8 28.6 Summary This chapter focused on the results of our nationally representative, random sample of 500 school districts. A total of 429 school district drug prevention coordinators responded to the survey. Data presented in this chapter were weighted to take into account the complex sample design. Over half of the school districts in the United States used D.A.R.E. in the 1991-1992 school year.=20 Additionally, demand for the program is going to increase over the next few years; two-fifths of those with the program planned to expand its use and one-fifth of these without the program plan to begin use. The two other most frequently used packaged curricula were Quest and Here's Looking at You, both used by about one-fourth of the districts. Only 3% of the districts used only D.A.R.E.; 46% used only other AOD curricula; and 49% used both D.A.R.E. and other AOD curricula. Most of the coordinators with D.A.R.E. reported receiving funding for the program from law enforcement and/or DFSCA funds. Most of the coordinators with other AOD programs reported receiving funding for these programs from DFSCA and/or district funds. D.A.R.E. was more likely than other AOD programs to be rated very satisfactory in terms of curriculum, teaching, administrative requirements, student receptivity, and effects on students. Furthermore, coordinators were more likely to indicate that the community, school personnel, students, parents, law enforcement, and civic groups were very supportive of D.A.R.E than of other AOD programs. Around two-fifths of the coordinators with D.A.R.E. and over one-half the coordinators with other AOD programs reported adapting the program to meet their needs. The most common reasons for adaptation for both D.A.R.E. and other AOD programs were drug availability and student/community poverty. Most of the D.A.R.E. programs were administered at the local level by a single law enforcement agency (i.e., sheriff's department or city/town police department). In most districts, coordinators reported that officer selection and classroom activities were the responsibility of the police, while school and classroom selection were the responsibility of education. Findings from this chapter and resulting recommendations are discussed fully in Chapter 8. CHAPTER 6 SITE VISITS The final component of the implementation assessment consisted of site visits to school districts.=20 We designed these visits to obtain a snapshot of the organization and operations of D.A.R.E. and other school- based drug prevention programs. The site visits also gave us an opportunity to speak with the officers, teachers, and students directly and to see the D.A.R.E. program in action.=20 For the site visits, we selected four schools in three school districts. Two of the school districts were adjacent to one another in a northern inner-city environment, with a large minority population and a substantial drug problem. The third school district was located in a rural area in the South; it also had a substantial minority population but less of a drug problem. The school in one urban school district had D.A.R.E., and the school in the other urban district did not have D.A.R.E. In the rural district, one school had D.A.R.E. and one did not. Because the school districts and schools were limited in number and purposively, rather than randomly, selected, the information gathered from these sites is not representative of schools in general. We present data gathered from this component of the assessment to illustrate and complement findings from other components of the implementation assessment. We recognize the need to exercise caution in interpreting site visit findings and encourage readers to use similar discretion. For the site visit interviews and observations, we developed site visit protocols that were based on issues raised in the previous components of the implementation assessment. The protocols were designed to elicit general, open-ended, and free-flowing discussions. We used protocols instead of structured surveys because we believed the structured format would inhibit the exploration of schools' individual characteristics.=20 Further, we expected respondents would provide us with a wealth of information that a structured format might have prevented. We often departed from the protocols to follow up any line of inquiry that appeared of potential interest. As a result, the reports from our sites are in some ways dissimilar. Copies of the protocols can be found in Appendix D. =20 Site visits were conducted by two teams. Each team included at least one senior investigator with considerable experience in conducting site visits. A two-person team conducted a 2-day site visit in the urban schools, and a four-person team conducted a 1-day site visit in the rural schools. Two or more site visitors jointly interviewed key individuals, and each interviewer took notes to reduce the chances of missing key information. When appropriate, we interviewed up to four individuals at the same time. Each team conducted interviews with a variety of individuals, including o the coordinator responsible for the development and implementation of drug prevention efforts in the school district; o individuals teaching drug prevention curricula to students (including D.A.R.E. officers at schools with D.A.R.E.), o their supervisors (if any), and o teachers in whose classes D.A.R.E. officers teach (at D.A.R.E. sites). When available, we also interviewed others involved in drug prevention program planning, delivery, or referral (e.g., representatives of community advisory or drug action groups). =20 In each of the two D.A.R.E. schools, the site visit team monitored a D.A.R.E. lesson and the officer's activities in the school outside the classroom. We also observed a drug prevention lesson in both of the schools without D.A.R.E. We note that both of the classroom observations in the non-D.A.R.E. schools were conducted in special education classes. The selection of classes to be monitored was based on what teacher was teaching drug prevention the day of our site visit and the discretion of the school district drug prevention coordinator. This chapter contains two sections. In the first, we discuss drug prevention programming in the urban schools; and in the second, we describe drug prevention programming in the rural schools. Within each section, we present information about the D.A.R.E. school, followed by information about the non-D.A.R.E. school. Urban Schools Urban School with D.A.R.E. The school we selected received D.A.R.E. after being on a waiting list for approximately 1 year; all 5th-grade classes and one 6th-grade class in the school received D.A.R.E. We interviewed three individuals involved in the D.A.R.E. program: o the police administrator in charge of the local D.A.R.E. program (an officer with many years of experience who had administered D.A.R.E. for 5 years); o a D.A.R.E. officer (involved with D.A.R.E. for 5 years and currently teaching 16 classes a week); =20 o the school district drug prevention coordinator.=20 The following summarizes our discussions with these respondents. =20 Administration. According to the police administrator, the D.A.R.E. program in this city follows the same procedures employed nationally. He stated that the local police, State police, and Board of Education work together to provide the D.A.R.E. program. He further indicated that this coordination has ensured the integrity of D.A.R.E.'s implementation, D.A.R.E.'s consistency with drug education required by the State, and smooth integration with other drug education initiatives. =20 Implementation. Initial steps in the implementation of the D.A.R.E. program, as reported by the police administrator, are as follows. The local police department conducts initial screening of candidate officers for the D.A.R.E. program. Potential D.A.R.E. officers are interviewed by the local police department, and then by the State police. Successfully screened candidates are sent for a 2-week training program offered by the State police. After completing the training, officers are assigned to particular schools or sets of schools by the local police department. The D.A.R.E. officer who was interviewed indicated that he is assigned a general target area and allowed to select the schools in that area in which he wishes to teach. He indicated that he and other officers are provided with a list of schools that have requested D.A.R.E. to guide their selections. He further reported that no more than 20% of the schools he selects can be private. According to the police administrator, a limited attempt is made to match officer and student characteristics. For example, he stated that in the Hispanic community, the local police department attempts to provide D.A.R.E. officers who can speak Spanish.=20 Beyond this, however, he indicated that little matching occurs. =20 The police administrator said that the D.A.R.E. program is monitored by both the State and local police departments. He reported that a staff member from the State police visits each D.A.R.E. instructor during the year to observe and assess teaching skills and students' receptiveness to the program, as well as to solicit feedback from classroom teachers. The administrator also stated that he monitors classroom activities as part of his supervisory responsibilities. According to the police administrator, school personnel are very supportive of the D.A.R.E. program, in part because the program is free to the school. The schools are, thus, able to use their drug prevention resources for additional drug prevention purposes. The police administrator indicated that some teachers get involved in the D.A.R.E. program because of personal interest, but that most do not. The D.A.R.E. officer reported that although State policy requires teachers to remain in the classroom during the lesson, they assist him only in disciplinary matters. The drug prevention coordinator indicated that although teachers do not participate in teaching the lessons, they have been very receptive both to the program and the officers.=20 The coordinator noted that teachers cannot be required to allow D.A.R.E. into their classrooms, and the fact that no teacher has refused D.A.R.E. indicates the degree of acceptance that the program enjoys. When asked about problems between regular teachers and D.A.R.E. officers, the police administrator reported that although there are some individuals who do not get along, it is not a system-wide problem. The D.A.R.E. officer stated that although principals are supportive of the program, he has yet to see one in his classes, and that no other school staff participate in the program. The police administrator indicated that parental involvement generally has taken the form of assistance from the PTA in co-sponsoring D.A.R.E. graduation ceremonies. However, he stated that the level of parental involvement varies substantially from one school to another. The D.A.R.E. officer reported that in his experience parents generally do not show an active interest in D.A.R.E. According to the police administrator, the investment of the community in the D.A.R.E. program is limited. He further indicated that D.A.R.E. officers have little time to seek community involvement: "The reality is that the D.A.R.E. instructor has a full day teaching classes; there isn't time to do anythingelse."=20 The D.A.R.E. officer also reported that community groups have little participation in the program. Funding. The police administrator reported that when the D.A.R.E. program began in this city, much of the funding came from the Federal Government (i.e., from BJA through a grant to the State police). He reported that support received from the State police is currently limited to training and materials. Salaries of officers and supervisors are paid by the local police department, and limited contributions are provided by the community.=20 According to the police administrator, there is real danger of D.A.R.E. becoming a victim of budget cuts because of the current budget crisis; he indicated that implementation has already been severely restricted because of lack of resources. Curriculum. We asked the police administrator whether the D.A.R.E. curriculum was adapted to meet the special needs of his area. He responded, "We teach D.A.R.E. D.A.R.E. is D.A.R.E. Once you decide to use a program that is administered throughout the country, then you do not tailor it." When asked about addressing the needs resulting from gang activity, he indicated that officers incorporate their own street experiences and information they received from the police academy into the D.A.R.E. gang lessons. He reported that local gangs and their behaviors are discussed. =20 The police administrator stated that local D.A.R.E. advocates believe that classroom activity should be supported by parental involvement. He, however, did not express interest in the parent curriculum at this time.=20 The reasons he gave were that the program is still experimental and has not been evaluated, the supply of officers is already inadequate to meet the demand, and the cost of the parent program would dramatically increase overall costs (i.e., because the parent curriculum is generally offered in the evening, officers would be paid time-and-a-half). The police administrator stated that "If more money was available, this (parent curriculum) would certainly be an option the local department would look into." Problems and Improvements. The police administrator stated, "One of our major problems is that we have so few officers and so many schools." He indicated that the department tries to "keep D.A.R.E. moving through the schools" and to cover as manystudents as possible. The administrator reported that although this rotation policy maximizes the number of schools reached within the department's limited resources, it also creates problems (i.e., just about the time the school becomes accustomed to D.A.R.E., the program is discontinued and moved to another school). The administrator reported that many school officials are angry about this policy. The police administrator also indicated the need for more evaluation. He stated, "Evaluation is the only way to find out what works and what doesn't. I don't think we're ever going to find that D.A.R.E. solves the drug problem in the United States, but that it is a first step. Evaluation must be written into everything. It has taken too long for evaluations to come about." He said that he would at least like to have information on how effective the program is in suburban, rural, and inner-city areas. He asked, "If we find the program is working in a certain area, that's great, but what can we do in the other areas to enrich the program and diversify it to meet those needs?" =20 The D.A.R.E. officer mentioned several problems areas. First, he indicated that although one of his schools is heavily Hispanic, it does not have D.A.R.E. books in Spanish. Second, he stated that the program was designed for the officer to stay in contact with the school and that in his current situation, he is in and out of the school with little chance for further contact with the students. Finally, he reported the need for greater recognition of graduates of the program.=20 "Something should be done to get the parents and principals more involved so that students feel they have really accomplished something that has meaning." The only problem mentioned by the drug prevention coordinator was the need for a bilingual officer. Classroom Observation. We observed a fifth-grade classroom of 25 students, composed of 6 Hispanics, 4 African Americans, and 15 Caucasians. Two of the students spoke limited English and needed translations of the D.A.R.E. lesson.=20 The D.A.R.E. instructor was a white male police officer in his forties who was dressed in regulation uniform. The officer presented himself to the class as a friend. The officer's teaching style was very straightforward and "streetwise," and he was bothgruff and engaging. He was very knowledgeable about the material and taught the whole lesson without notes. The interaction between officer and students was an easy, bantering one. The 40-minute lesson that we observed focused on the media and how advertisement can be used to persuade consumers and children to purchase and use different products. The lesson began with a short introductory lecture on the influences of advertising and the goals of the media. The officer then asked students questions about different products to show them how much they have learned from the media. The officer gave examples of different types of advertisements (e.g., "personal testimony," "bandwagon") and also used adsfrom magazines to illustrate his point. Most of the class period (30 minutes) was spent in interaction. =20 During the class, the students were rowdy but attentive. They called out answers to the officer's questions and felt free to make comments. The students treated the officer with genuine respect. The interest and interaction level in this particular lesson was high.=20 The classroom teacher was present during the lesson, leaving only once to go to the principal's office. The teacher sat at the back of the room grading papers; however, he had a D.A.R.E. book and followed the lesson as it progressed. Most of the teacher's input occurred in the beginning of the class before the lesson got started. The only other time the teacher spoke was to maintain discipline in the classroom, and then he only reprimanded talkers. Once the lesson was completed, the officer left immediately. There was no evidence of any outside contact with students. =20 Urban School Without D.A.R.E. We interviewed two individuals at the non-D.A.R.E. school, the drug prevention coordinator for that school district and the classroom teacher who taught the drug prevention lesson that we observed. The following summarizes the discussions with these individuals. Administration. The drug prevention coordinator reported that there is no specific drug prevention program in place. She indicated that drug prevention textbooks are used and, at times, individuals from outside the school make presentations at drug prevention assemblies. According to the coordinator, a teacher might incorporate a drug prevention lesson into a reading class or show a video. She stated, "We put together lots of little things that add up to something you might call a program, but we don't have a structured program." =20 Implementation. The coordinator indicated that each student at the school receives drug education information at least on a monthly basis. However, she reported that lower grades receive less and in a more loosely structured format. The teacher reported that he makes sure his students receive some drug prevention education every week. According to the coordinator, classroom teachers do not have specific times set aside for drug prevention, but rather fit it in when they can.=20 The seventh and eighth graders do use and follow a drug prevention textbook and have regular discussions. =20 The coordinator indicated that teachers' support for the drug prevention program depended on which teacher you were talking about. She indicated that all teachers think that drug prevention education is important, but that some are far more committed than others to incorporating drug prevention lessons into their curriculum. The classroom teacher stated that most of his fellow teachers support the school's drug prevention efforts, but that some teachers just did not know how to talk to students about issues like drugs and gangs. He stated, "Some either don't know what to say or justdon't care enough." =20 The coordinator reported that law enforcement personnel have been sporadically involved in the school's drug prevention activities and have attended local school council meetings and conducted in-service training with teachers about drug awareness. She noted that 2 years ago law enforcement officials came into the school to work with students targeted as high risk. She stated that "the success of that program depended upon whether or not the student accepted the officer." =20 When we asked the coordinator about the involvement of individuals from the community in the school's drug prevention efforts, she responded that no person from the community has been involved in implementing the school's drug prevention program. She indicated that most of the community has no idea about what the school is doing in terms of drug prevention education. She stated, "I don't think the community feels that it is their place to be involved." =20 Funding. According to the drug prevention coordinator, there were virtually no drug prevention activities until the school began receiving money specifically designated for drug prevention education (DFSCA) about 3 or 4 years ago. She reported that the school was currently in its third year of receiving DFSCA funds and that the amount of funding had steadily increased over those years. She noted, however, that this funding cannot be counted on from year to year, and it is difficult for the school to make long-term plans.=20 According to the coordinator, the lack of resources prevents consistency in the school's drug prevention program. =20 Curriculum. The drug prevention coordinator indicated that although all drugs are covered by their drug prevention efforts, alcohol is targeted. The coordinator and the classroom teacher both reported that alcohol is the most widely abused drug among children and adults in their community. The teacher indicated that he spends a great deal of time on this issue and that he spends more time teaching students about self-esteem and resisting peer pressure than teaching specifically about drugs. The classroom teacher stated it is a mistake to spend too much time educating students about the types of drugs and their effects unless a strong foundation of self-esteem has first been created. When we asked whether the school drug prevention program had been adapted to meet the needs of ethnic minorities, the coordinator indicated that stereotypes about who is on drugs and who is selling drugs are reflected in the materials she has purchased; that is, many of the pictures are of minorities. If anything, she felt that white suburbs would have to work more with adapting materials to fit their population. The classroom teacher indicated that he was aware of the cultural diversity in his school and addressed it on an individual basis with students and their parents. The teacher expressed frustration about the difficulty of teaching drug prevention when many of the students live in homes where the norm is to "drink heavily and abuse family members." =20 Problems and Improvements. The drug prevention coordinator said that in the future she would like to purchase a packaged curriculum=FEpossibly D.A.R.E. She indicated that she did not know very much about D.A.R.E., but would like information about how to get the program.=20 One negative factor she reported having heard about D.A.R.E. is that there is a long waiting list for the program. She stated, "When you first called and asked if we had D.A.R.E., I got excited and thought that someone was going to give us D.A.R.E.; I don't really know what D.A.R.E. is, but I assume that because it is in other schools, it is good."=20 The drug prevention coordinator also indicated that she would like to increase the amount and consistency of delivery of the drug prevention education program, and to bring greater structure to. The coordinator and the classroom teacher both reported that they want to have the drug prevention program administered by one person who would come in and take responsibility for the program. =20 Classroom Observation. We observed a special education class of 22 students. It was a remedial class comprising 14 Hispanics, 6 African Americans, and 2 Caucasians. There were 12 girls and 10 boys. =20 The teacher was a white man in his forties, dressed in a suit and tie. He encouraged the students and drew on their strengths. He often called on students who would not otherwise volunteer answers and helped them formulate answers. When an answer was not exactly correct, he encouraged the student to think further about the question asked. The teacher carefully and adequately answered students' questions. The topic of the observed lesson concerned the functioning of the lung and heart. This was a lesson designed to provide students with background information about the human body, before the impact of drugs on the body's major organs were discussed. The teacher followed the textbook closely. Because the students were slow learners, he altered the lesson slightly by asking the students to read sections aloud and then immediately asking questions about the section just covered. Most students appeared interested in the lesson. They followed along in the textbook and answered questions with sincerity. A few students consistently put their hands up to answer questions, but most were quiet. There were no discipline problems during the class. After class, we asked the teacher whether he ever used group discussions. He reported that this group of students was too remedial to use a discussion format. =20 Rural Schools Rural School with D.A.R.E. The D.A.R.E. program in the rural district employed four D.A.R.E. officers. We interviewed five individuals, including: o the police administrator in charge of the D.A.R.E. program, o a D.A.R.E. officer, o the school district drug prevention coordinator, o the school guidance counselor, and o the teacher in whose class the D.A.R.E. officer taught. The following summarizes our discussions with these respondents. Administration. The police administrator indicated that the D.A.R.E. program was administered by the city police department. He reported that this was the first semester that D.A.R.E. had been offered in this particular school. He stated that the agreement between the school and police department is informal. Implementation. The police administrator reported that the initial steps in implementing the D.A.R.E. program include selection of a D.A.R.E. officer by the local police department, approval of the officer by the State police, and training for the officer at a D.A.R.E. training course. The officer reported that there are no problems coordinating D.A.R.E. activities. He stated that there is "eagerness from all sides to make the programwork."=20 According to the officer, some classroom teachers participate in the lesson, but most do not. He further indicated that much of the time students are just as receptive without the teacher present. The D.A.R.E. officer indicated that parents are becoming more involved in the program. He stated that they are very interested and supportive of D.A.R.E., and that his attendance at nonclassroom school functions, such as Friday night dances, has greatly improved his relationships with parents. He reported that he hopes to receive training on the D.A.R.E. parent curriculum as soon as possible. According to the officer and the police administrator, there was little community involvement.=20 They attributed this to the program being new and hoped that there would be more community involvement in the coming semesters. However, the coordinator did report that D.A.R.E. is well received by the "educated" community. He indicated that churches in the community have not been particularly receptive and simply do not want to get involved. The coordinator and the guidance counselor saw the lack of involvement by churches as a loss to the program. According to the school counselor, students' attitudes toward police had changed considerably since the D.A.R.E. lessons began. She stated that "students now see the officer as a friend instead of someone to avoid." Funding. The police administrator reported that the police department funds the salary of the D.A.R.E. officer, while the school pays any costs for the curriculum (i.e., books, materials). The school district coordinator indicated that the school did not have the funds to purchase D.A.R.E. T-shirts and related paraphernalia. He further stated that the district is seeking a State grant for additional supplies. Curriculum. The guidance counselor reported that D.A.R.E. classes are a "wonderful way of teaching students to say no" and that the self-esteem modules are particularly valuable and effective. According to the district coordinator, D.A.R.E. complements all their other drug prevention programs, but that unfortunately there was little coordination between different curricula.=20 The D.A.R.E. officer reported that he does not target the curriculum to any particular substances and does not adapt the curriculum to specific ethnic needs.=20 He indicated that he does teach the gang lesson (as do most D.A.R.E. officers in the State), even though in this community there is little gang activity. Problems and Improvements. The guidance counselor indicated that she would like the school to provide D.A.R.E. in all classrooms in grades 5 through 7. The guidance counselor and the classroom teacher indicated the need for the school to offer D.A.R.E. or some other drug prevention education at earlier grade levels.=20 According to the counselor, "Trying to teach drug prevention education in high school is futile." The classroom teacher indicated that D.A.R.E. and other programs need to focus more on at-risk children.=20 She indicated that there are some 15- and 16-year-olds still in the 6th grade. She reported that these students usually have poor attendance records, are poorly motivated, and are frequently in trouble. She stated that current prevention programs, including D.A.R.E., are not adequately meeting the needs of these students.=20 The district coordinator indicated that one problem has been the lack of ongoing evaluations of D.A.R.E. Classroom Observation. We observed a fifth-grade class of 22 students, 12 boys and 10 girls. Twenty students were African American, and two students were Caucasian. The D.A.R.E. officer was a white man in his thirties who was dressed in regulation uniform. The officer presented himself as a "big brother,"someone whom the students could seek out if they needed guidance or assistance. The officer brought the D.A.R.E. mascot-- the D.A.R.E. bear--with him to class. The lesson that we observed focused on alternatives to drug use. The officer discussed how athletics could be used as an alternative to drug involvement. He used examples of well-known, drug-free athletes. The officer encouraged students to ask questions. He also used a "D.A.R.E. question box." In the previous week,students had been asked to write questions for the officer and place them in the box. During the lesson, he drew a question from the box and answered that question. For the remainder of the lesson, the officer took the students outside to play games to illustrate alternatives to drug use. He also involved the school's gym teacher in supervising the games. During the class, students were interested and inquisitive. They seemed to feel free to ask the officer questions. There were no disciplinary problems. The classroom teacher remained present during most of the lesson, sitting at the back of the room and grading papers. =20 The officer seemed to spend a great deal of time in the school. After the lesson was over, he talked to students in the hallway. Indeed, almost all students seemed to know him. When an emergency occurred (a student fell and broke his arm) and the principal was not present, the staff sought the officer's assistance. This was not the first such occurrence, and we learned that the school staff relied frequently upon the D.A.R.E. officer to act as a sort of assistant principal.=20 Clearly, he was viewed as an integral--and important-- part of the school staff. Rural School Without D.A.R.E. We interviewed four individuals at the non-D.A.R.E. school, including the school district drug prevention coordinator (who was the same for both rural schools), the supervisor of health services, and two members of a local advisory board for substance abuse. The following summarizes discussions with these individuals. Administration. Coordination of the drug prevention efforts in the observed non-D.A.R.E. school and other such schools in the community rests with the school district drug prevention coordinator. He indicated that there are a variety of programs currently available to schools but that implementation and coordination are sporadic. Implementation. According to the coordinator, parents in this school are becoming more aware of the drug problem and are beginning to ask what they can do to get involved. He stated that many parents are realizing that they cannot "send their kids to school to get fixed," and so are starting to take responsibility for their children's problems. He also indicated that school personnel are becoming more involved.=20 Funding. According to the district coordinator, the school receives most of its drug prevention funds from DFSCA. He also indicated funds were provided by the school board and a local university, as well as the Indian Education Act. These latter resources, however, could only be spent on programs delivered to Native American children. Curriculum. According to the coordinator, a variety of curricula are available to teachers at this school, but not all teachers use the same curriculum, and some do not provide drug prevention education at all.=20 The coordinator reported that Here's Looking at You 2000 is one package available to teachers in this school.=20 However, he indicated that only about half the teachers had been trained to teach this program. The advisory board members informed us of a community drug abuse treatment program currently in use in this and other area schools that follows the"12-step" model. This program offers intervention, education, and prevention to youth who have been suspended for substance use, as well as to their families. One board member stated that suspended youth must attend this program before returning to school. The coordinator indicated that the SAP is just now being implemented in this school. The health supervisor reported that the school also sponsors Red Ribbon week, a program sponsored by the National Federation of Parents that invites youth and community members to pledge their support for drug-free lives by displaying red ribbons. Problems and Improvements. All individuals interviewed indicated the need for greater coordination between the different types of drug prevention programs, as well as assessments of drug prevention efforts. The coordinator reported that he would like to have someone responsible for the delivery of drug prevention programs in the school and someone responsible for evaluation. He said that "a lot of people are working very hard, but have little idea of whether or not their efforts are successful." The coordinator indicated that time is also a major problem in the delivery of drug prevention education. He stated that preparing students for end of the year testing takes up most of the classroom teachers' time and allows them little time to teach drug prevention. Classroom Observation. We observed a 5th grade class of three girls and seven boys. This was a class for exceptional children that included students with emotional and behavioral problems. Five of the students were Caucasian, three were African-American, and two were Native American. The instructor was an African-American woman in her twenties. She used an approachable and upbeat teaching style. She was careful to include all of the students in the lesson. Because this was a class for exceptional children, the teacher tailored the drug lesson to the students.=20 The teacher drew her lesson from health textbooks used in regular classes. The lesson lasted approximately 1 hour.=20 The teacher indicated that the length of the class and how much time she spends on the drug lesson generally depends both on her assessment of how much of the lesson the students are absorbing and their interest level. She indicated that drug prevention lessons are usually taught two or three times a week. The observed lesson was about learning how to make healthy choices. Topics included why people smoke and use drugs, how magazine advertisements promote smoking and drinking, and the differences between drugs that are helpful and harmful. The teacher covered a wide range of concepts, including how self-esteem and peer pressure contribute to drug use, the importance of reading warning labels on medications, and techniques advertisements use to glamorize drug use. The class format was primarily question and answer, and the teacher encouraged each student to participate. The teacher used a variety of visual aids, including charts, examples of magazine ads, and a collection of common medications that can be inappropriately used. For the most part, the students were very attentive. Most were eager to be called on and to participate in the class. The teacher encouraged participation by all the students. Summary This chapter focused on site visits to four schools in three school districts. Two of the schools were located in one rural school district; one of these schools had D.A.R.E. and one did not. The other two schools were located in adjacent school districts in an urban area; again, one school had D.A.R.E. and one did not. In both of the schools with D.A.R.E., limited participation of teachers, parents, and the community were reported. Both schools also mentioned having inadequate resources for the program. Neither school reported adapting the curriculum for any reason. In both schools, the need for ongoing, long-term evaluations was stressed. Neither of the non-D.A.R.E. schools had a specific drug prevention program. Both reported that implementation and coordination was sporadic. Both schools reported wanting one person who would be responsible for administering the drug prevention program in the school. CHAPTER 7 D.A.R.E. OUTCOME ASSESSMENT Project D.A.R.E. is a drug use prevention program with curricula targeted at elementary, middle, and senior high school students. The original core curriculum used in elementary schools is the subject of this review (a revised core curriculum will be implemented in September 1994). The junior and senior high school curricula are not included in the review because they are more recent, not as prevalent, and generally have not been evaluated.=20 Future evaluation efforts should focus on these curricula, as well as on the cumulative effects of the comprehensive program. The purpose of the current review is to assess the short-term effectiveness of the original D.A.R.E. core curriculum by using meta-analytic techniques to synthesize the evaluation findings of several studies.=20 We searched for all D.A.R.E. evaluations, both published and unpublished, conducted over the past 10 years (i.e., since D.A.R.E. originated) and selected for further review those studies that met specified methodological criteria. To establish a comparable measure of effectiveness across studies, we calculated effect sizes for each study. In addition, to put D.A.R.E. in the context of other school-based drug use prevention programs, we compared the average magnitude of the effect sizes for D.A.R.E. with those of other programs that target youth of similar age. This chapter covers six topics. First, we briefly summarize the original D.A.R.E. core curriculum. Second, we provide some general background on meta-analysis and describe the methodological criteria used to select evaluations for the review. Third, we identify the eight studies that met the criteria and provide an overall description of these studies. Fourth, we examine the reported immediate effects of D.A.R.E., based on these studies. Fifth, we compare the D.A.R.E. effect sizes averaged across studies with the average effect sizes of other drug use prevention programs. Finally, we discuss several methodological considerations related to the evaluations included in our review that are important to interpretation of the results. Further discussion of the results is included in Chapter 8 of this report. The D.A.R.E. Core Curriculum The D.A.R.E. core curriculum is offered to pupils in the last year of elementary school, typically fifth or sixth grade. The 17 lessons in the core curriculum are usually offered once a week for 45 to 60 minutes. The lessons focus on teaching pupils the skills they need in order to recognize and resist social pressures to use drugs. In addition to information about drugs, lessons emphasize decisionmaking skills, building self-esteem, and choosing healthy alternatives to drug use. Officers use a variety of teaching methods, including lectures, group discussions, question-and-answer sessions, audiovisual materials, workbook exercises, and role- plays. Several aspects of the D.A.R.E. core curriculum suggest that it should be successful as a drug use prevention curriculum. First, the curriculum includes elements of prevention strategies generally thought to be effective, such as emphasis on peer resistance and social competence skills (Botvin, 1990; Hansen, 1992). Interac- tive programs have shown more promise than those using more traditional teaching methods (Tobler, 1986, in press, 1994), and at least some of D.A.R.E.'s teaching strategies encourage role-playing and interactions among pupils. Also, the core curriculum is offered to children at the age when they are believed to be most receptive to antidrug use messages, which is just before experimenta- tion with drugs begins (BJA, 1988; Oetting & Bauvais, 1990). In addition, the program targets cigarettes, alcohol, and marijuana--the "gateway drugs" thatchildren tend to experiment with first (Ellickson, Hays, & Bell, 1992; Kandel, 1975). Finally, the structured nature of the curriculum and extensive training of the officers helps ensure that the program is implemented as designed (BJA, 1988). Meta-Analysis Background and Study Selection Criteria Meta-analysis is a methodology for integrating the research findings of a body of studies (Bangert-Drowns, 1986; Cook et al., 1993). The purpose of meta-analysis is to discover whether some pattern of results is discernible in a set of studies pertaining to the same research question (Bangert-Drowns, 1986; Glass, McGaw, & Smith, 1981; Rosenthal, 1991). Meta-analysis differs from a traditional narrative review of studies by providing statistical techniques for summarizing the research findings from the studies. By quantifying outcomes across studies and making them comparable with each other, meta-analysis provides an objective rather than subjective basis for drawing conclusions about patterns of study results. Three basic steps are commonly followed in conducting meta-analyses (Bangert-Drowns, 1986). First, all relevant studies are collected, and some studies are selected for inclusion according to a set of a priori defined methodological criteria. Second, effect sizes are calculated for each study. Effect sizes represent the statistical outcomes of each study transformed to a common metric. This transformation allows comparisons across different scales of different outcome measures.=20 Third, effect sizes for the set of studies are averaged.=20 In addition, explanations for variability in effect sizes across studies usually are tested. We followed these three steps in conducting our assessment of the D.A.R.E. core curriculum; we did not, however, examine possible causes of differences in outcomes across the D.A.R.E. studies (e.g., differences in D.A.R.E. outcomes by the racial/ethnic composition of the study samples). The relatively small number of D.A.R.E. studies precluded this type of analysis. In selecting studies, our review focused on student-based, quantitative evaluations of D.A.R.E. that measured program effects on drug use behavior and/or other outcomes targeted by the D.A.R.E. core curriculum, such as attitudes about drug use. Evaluations that reported only subjective assessments or satisfaction ratings are outside the scope of this review. We also did not consider the results of parent, teacher, administrator, or D.A.R.E. officer surveys, which sometimes were conducted as part of the total evaluation effort. (For information about the opinions of school district drug prevention coordinators concerning D.A.R.E., see Chapter 5.) It should be noted that there are many possible D.A.R.E. outcomes of importance other than the ones we examined in this meta-analysis, such as improved school and police relations and greater trust in law enforcement among youth. We attempted to locate all the quantitative evaluations of the original D.A.R.E. core curriculum conducted to date through a survey of D.A.R.E.'s five RTCs, telephone interviews with individuals known to be involved with D.A.R.E., and computerized searches of the published and unpublished literature using several data bases. The computerized data bases included ERIC, PsychINFO, and Dissertation Abstracts Online.=20 Through the combined sources, we identified 18 quantitative D.A.R.E. evaluations conducted in 12 States and one Canadian province. The location and primary reference for each evaluation are shown in Exhibit 7.1.=20 Several of the evaluations were reported in multiple reports or papers; we generally used the final, most complete report or the published paper for our review. From the 18 studies, we selected studies to include in our meta-analysis that met the following criteria:=20 (a) use of a control or comparison group; (b) pretest- posttest design or posttest only with random assignment; and (c) use of reliably operationalized quantitative outcome measures. Quasi-experimental studies were excluded if they did not control for preexisting differences on measured outcomes with either change scores or covariance adjusted means (Tobler, in press, 1994). In addition, to ensure the comparability of results, we used only results based on immediate posttest. There were an insufficient number of long-term evaluation studies to adequately assess the longer-term effects of the core curriculum. We selected these criteria because they help to ensure confidence in the study results by removing a number of alternative explanations, other than true D.A.R.E. impact, that could account for outcomes observed. For example, the first criterion, a comparison group made up of schools and/or subjects that did not receive the curriculum, makes it possible to determine whether changes in the D.A.R.E. youth are unique to them or are shared by other youth. If youth receiving and not receiving D.A.R.E. change on some outcome of interest, then the cause is due to some other factor, such as maturation, rather than to D.A.R.E. Pretest measures (the second criterion) are neededExhibit 7.1 D.A.R.E.Evaluation Studi= es (N=3D18) Location References British Columbia* (BC) Walker, 1990 California-A Becker, Agopian, & Yeh, 1992 California-B DeJong, 1987 California-C Evaluation and Training Institute, 1990 Colorado Dukes & Matthews, 1991 Hawaii* (HI) Manos, Kameoka, & Tanji, 1986 Illinois-A Kethineni, Leamy, & Guyon, 1991 Illinois-B Earle, Garner, & Phillips, 1987 Illinois-C* (IL) Ennett et al., 1994; Ringwalt, Curtin, & Rosenbaum, 1990; Rosenbaum et al., 1991, 1992 Indiana Aniskiewicz & Wysong, 1987,=20 1990 Kentucky-A* (KY-A) Clayton et al., 1991a, 1991b Kentucky-B* (KY-B) Faine & Bohlander, 1988, 1989 Minnesota* (MN) McCormick & McCormick, 1992 North Carolina* (NC) Ringwalt, Ennett, & Holt, 1991 Pennsylvania Anonymous, 1987 South Carolina* (SC) Harmon, 1993 Tennessee Faine & Bohlander, 1989 Virginia McDonald, Towberman, & Hague, 1990, 1991 *Study selected for further review (with State abbreviation). for testing the assumption that the D.A.R.E. and comparison groups are equivalent at the outset. In the absence of random assignment, this assumption must be tested. In addition, pretest measures provide a benchmark for evaluating changes in outcome measures after program implementation. Reliably operationalized measures of the outcomes of interest (the third criterion) are important for ensuring that the constructs intended to be measured are the ones actually measured.=20 For example, for assessing outcomes related to knowledge, attitudes, and skills, we considered multiple item scales to be more reliable than single-item measures. We also examined a number of other methodological features, such as the correspondence between the unit of assignment and unit of analysis, whether a panel design was used, whether schools in the intervention and comparison conditions were matched, and whether attrition rates were reported and examined. Although these factors were considered in assessing the overall methodological rigor of the studies, no evaluations were eliminated on the basis of these criteria. Studies Selected Eight of the original 18 evaluation studies met the criteria for inclusion in the review. One additional study met the methodological criteria but did not administer the first posttest until 1 year after D.A.R.E. implementation and so could not be included in the analysis of immediate effects (Nyre & Rose, 1987; Nyre, Rose, & Bolus, 1987). The eight evaluations are indicated by an asterisk (*) in Exhibit 7.1.=20 Characteristics of the studies are summarized in Exhibit 7.2. A more complete description of each study is provided in Appendix B. Each of the evaluations represented a State or local (e.g., city, school district) effort using either the entire population of schools in a locale or a convenience sample. The number of student subjects in all studies was large; each study included at least 10 schools and approximately 500 to 2000 students in the combined D.A.R.E. and control groups. Demographic information about each sample, including gender, race/ethnicity, SES, and metropolitan status, was not consistently given across studies. Based on the information available, the samples were about equally divided between girls and boys; included white, black/African American, Hispanic, and Asian-American youth, with whites usually in the majority; and represented urban, suburban, and rural areas.=20 Information was generally not given on the SES of the sample. Assignment of D.A.R.E. to intervention and control groups was by school for all eight studies. In one study, D.A.R.E. was also assigned by classroom in certain schools (Manos et al., 1986). Because the control group classrooms in that study were potentially contaminated by their close proximity to D.A.R.E. classrooms, these control classrooms were eliminated; only control schools with no D.A.R.E. classes were included. Two of the studies used a true experimental design in which schools were randomly assigned to D.A.R.E. or control conditions; a third study used random assignment for two-thirds of the schools. The remaining five evaluations used a nonequivalent control group quasi-experimental design.=20 For these, assignment was based on some other criterion; if the criterion was stated, usually it was the administrative convenience of either the school district or law enforcement agency.=20 A fundamental consideration in reviewing the studies was the equivalence of the D.A.R.E. and control groups before the intervention. Because there were relatively few sampling units across studies (ranging from 11 to 63 schools, with under 40 schools in all except one study), it is unlikely that equivalence between groups was obtained without prior matching or blocking of schools, even with randomization. Only half the studies matched comparison schools on selected demographic characteristics. The majority of studies (75%), however, assessed the equivalency of the comparison groups at pretest and made adjustments for pretest differences on demographic characteristics. All studies adjusted for pretest differences on outcome measures. Exhibit 7.2 Sample and Methodological Characteristics of theD.A.R.E. Evaluations (N =3D 8) School Subject Research = Unit of PretestScale Study N N Design Matching =20 Analysis Equivalency1=20 Reliabilities Attrition British Columbia 11 D=3D287 Quasi, Yes = =20 Individual Yes Non.a. C=3D176 x-sectional Hawaii 26 D=3D1574 Quasi, No = =20 Individual NoNo No C=3D435 panel Illinois-C 36 D=3D715 Exp./quasi, Yes = School-=20 Yes YesYes2 C=3D608 panel = based Kentucky-A 31 D=3D1438 Exp., No = =20 Individual Yes YesYes2 C=3D487 panel Kentucky-B 16 D=3D451 Quasi, Yes = =20 Individual Yes YesNo C=3D332 panel Minnesota 63 D=3D453 Quasi, No = =20 Individual Yes YesYes3 C=3D490 panel North Carolina 20 D=3D685 Exp., No = School-=20 Yes YesYes2 C=3D585 panel = based South Carolina 11 D=3D295 Quasi, Yes = =20 Individual Yes YesYes3 C=3D307, panel 1Pretest equivalency on demographic variables assessed andcontrolled if necessary. 2Attrition rates reported and differential attrition acrossexperimental conditions analyzed. 3Attrition rates reported only. All but one of the studiesused a pan= el design that matched subjects from pretest to posttest using a unique identification code. Outcome measures used in the studies were based on responses to self-administered questionnaires. Seven of the eight studies used measures that were standardized scales or derived from existing measures; six studies reported scale reliabilities (usually Cronbach's alpha) that were generally high. Validity information, however, was rarely reported, and none of the studies used either a biochemical indicator or "bogus pipeline"technique to validate self-reports of drug use. Informing youth that their self-reports of drug use will be verified by a biological specimen (e.g., saliva) or a purported lie detector (i.e., bogus pipeline) is believed to enhance the validity of their responses (Bauman & Dent, 1982). As is unfortunately typical of school-based evaluation studies, most (75%) of the D.A.R.E. evaluations did not use a data analysis strategy appropriate to the unit of assignment. Because schools, not students, were assigned to D.A.R.E. and control conditions, it would have been appropriate to analyze the data by schools with subjects' data aggregated within each school or to use an analysis strategy that accounts for clustered data (Moskowitz, 1993; Murray & Hannan, 1990). Six of the studies ignored schools altogether and analyzed individual subjects' data, thereby violating the statistical assumption of independence of observations.=20 The result of ignoring schools as the unit of analysis is a positive bias toward finding statistically significant program effects (Murray & Hannan, 1990). Five of the studies reported attrition rates, which generally were small. None of the three studies that analyzed attrition rates found that attrition differed significantly across experimental and control conditions.=20 In addition, subjects absent from the posttest were not more likely to be drug users or at risk for drug use.=20 Although attrition usually is greater among drug users (Biglan & Ary, 1985), given the young age of the sample, when dropping out of school is unlikely and drug use prevalence is low, these results are not surprising. D.A.R.E. Effect Sizes To assess the impact of the original D.A.R.E. core curriculum on youth drug use, as well as on other outcomes targeted by the curriculum, we calculated effect sizes. An effect size (ES) is defined as the difference between the mean for the intervention group (MeanI) and the mean for the control group (MeanC), standardized by dividing by the pooled standard deviation (SD): [ES =3D (MeanI - MeanC)/ SD] (Hedges & Olkin, 1985; Perry & Tobler, 1992; Rosenthal, 1991). If means and standard deviations are not available, effect sizes can be calculated using formulae developed to convert other test statistics (such as, t or F), as well as percentages, to effect sizes (Perry & Tobler, 1992). Effect sizes are expressed as standard deviation units and may be positive or negative. A positive effect size indicates an effect in the desired direction as a result of the intervention. An effect size of 1, for example, indicates that the intervention group performed one standard deviation unit better than the control group on some outcome of interest. Although there are no clear conventions for defining "small,""medium," and "large" effect sizes in the context of drug use prevention programs, review of several meta-analyses of adolescent drug use prevention programs (Bangert-Drowns, 1988; Bruvold, 1993; Bruvold & Rundall, 1988; Tobler, 1986, in press, 1992 ) suggests that effect sizes below .15 reflect a small effect; effect sizes between .15 and .30 indicate a modest effect; and effect sizes above .30 reflect stronger program effects. For each of the eight D.A.R.E. studies, we calculated effect sizes to quantify the magnitude of D.A.R.E.'s effectiveness with respect to six outcomes that reflect the aims of the D.A.R.E. curriculum. The six outcomes were knowledge about drugs, attitudes about drug use, social skills, self-esteem, attitude toward police, and self-reported drug use. We calculated effect sizes using the procedure appropriate for the summary statistics reported. In all cases, we used statistics reflecting covariance-adjusted means, with pretest values as covariates, rather than unadjusted means so that any differences between the comparison groups prior to the intervention would not be reflected in the effect sizes (Tobler, in press, 1994). Where possible, we used statistics that also were adjusted for sample demographic characteristics (six of eight studies). Some studies did not include all six outcomes of interest, and some outcomes were measured by more than one indicator. When multiple indicators were used, such as two measures of social skills, we calculated separate effect sizes and then averaged them. This procedure yielded one effect size per study for each type of measured outcome. In the one study that reported only that a measured outcome was not statistically significant and did not provide any further statistics, we assigned a value of zero to that effect size. To calculate effect sizes for reported drug use, we considered only alcohol, tobacco, and marijuana use; we averaged effect sizes across these substances. In a supplementary analysis, we also considered use of these substances separately. Use of other drugs, such as cocaine, was measured by some studies, but the prevalence of use was too small to produce meaningful effects. The unweighted effect sizes at immediate posttest for each outcome for each study are shown in Exhibit 7.3.=20 Several of the effect sizes are .30 or higher, although most are less than .20. The largest effect sizes are for knowledge (that was only measured by three of the eight studies) and social skills. The effect sizes for self- esteem, attitudes about drug use, and attitude toward police tend to be smaller. The smallest effect sizes are for drug use, with none being greater than .11. The higher effect sizes for knowledge compared with drug use is consistent with other studies and supports the conclusion that knowledge is easier to change than behavior (Bangert-Drowns, 1988; Bruvold & Rundall, 1988; Tobler, 1986). Exhibit 7.3 Unweighted Effect Sizes at Immediate Posttest Associated with Eight Evaluations of D.A.R.E. Attitudes =20 Attitude About Social Self- Toward Drug Study Knowledge Drugs Skills =20 Esteem Police Use1 BC 0.68 0.00 -- -- -- 0.02 -- 0.07 0.34 -- -- -- -- 0.03 0.15 0.15=20 0.12 0.0A -- 0.11 0.10 0.07 -- 0.0B 0.58 0.19 0.30 0.14=20 0.27 -- 0.19 0.06 0.08 -0.03=20 0.05 -- -- 0.19 0.17 0.00 -- 0.11 -- 0.23 0.19 0.06=20 0.08 0.10 1Limited to alcohol, tobacco, and marijuana. In addition to calculating one effect size for each outcome for each study, we calculated the weighted mean effect size and 95% confidence interval for each type of outcome across the eight studies. The weighted mean provides a summary measure across the eight studies that is useful for indicating D.A.R.E.'s general effectiveness with respect to each outcome. The weighted mean provides a less biased estimate than the simple unweighted mean because estimates from larger samples are given more weight. It is computed by weighting each effect size by the inverse of its variance, which is a reflection of the sample size (Hedges & Olkin, 1985). The effect size estimates from larger studies are generally more precise than those from smaller studies (Hedges & Olkin, 1985). The 95% confidence interval provides an upper and lower bound for the estimate; in 95% of samples drawn, the estimate would fall within these bounds. To calculate the 95% confidence interval, 1.96 multiplied by the square root of one divided by the sum of the study weights is added to or subtracted from the mean (Hedges & Olkin, 1985). The weighted mean effect size at immediate posttest and 95% confidence interval (CI) for each outcome are depicted in Exhibit 7.4. The largest weighted mean effect size is for knowledge about drugs (0.42), followed by social skills (0.19), attitude toward police (0.13), attitudes about drug use (0.11), self-esteem (0.06), and drug use (0.06). The weighted mean effect sizes for knowledge, social skills, attitude toward police, attitudes about drug use, and self-esteem are statistically significant. The statistical significance of these D.A.R.E. effect sizes, however, should be interpreted cautiously because the significance may be positively influenced by the failure of most studies to account for data Exhibit 7.4 Magnitude of D.A.R.E.'s WeightedMean Effect Size (and 95% Confidence Interval), by Outcome Measures at Imme- diate Posttest clustered by school. The confidence interval for the weighted mean effect size for drug use overlaps with zero, meaning than it is not significantly different from zero. Because averaging alcohol, tobacco, and marijuana use for the drug use effect size could obscure substantial differences among substances, we calculated D.A.R.E.'s weighted mean effect sizes separately for alcohol, tobacco, and marijuana use. None of the individual effect sizes for any of the three substances from any study is larger than 0.15. The mean immediate effect size for alcohol use is 0.06 (95% CI: .00, .12); for tobacco use, 0.08 (95% CI: .02, .14); and for marijuana use, =FE0.01 (95% CI: =FE.09, .07). Only the mean for tobacco use is statistically significant. =20 The range of effect sizes, both individually by study and averaged across studies, suggests that D.A.R.E. has been more effective at immediate posttest in influencing some outcomes than others. The core curriculum has been most effective in increasing knowledge about drug use and in enhancing social skills.=20 Although some studies reported fairly large effect sizes for attitudes about drugs and attitude toward police, overall the studies show less D.A.R.E. success in influencing these factors and self-esteem. Based on these eight studies, the core curriculum has been least effective at immediate posttest at influencing drug use outcomes: alcohol, tobacco, and marijuana use. The small effect sizes for drug use and attitudes about drugs and police reflect, at least in part, the low levels of drug use by this age group and their already negative attitudes about drugs and positive attitude toward police. Comparison of D.A.R.E.'s Effectiveness to Other Drug Use Prevention Programs for Youth To see how D.A.R.E. compares with other school- based drug use prevention programs, we compared the weighted mean D.A.R.E. effect sizes with weighted mean effect sizes computed for similar programs. For comparison, we used the effect sizes reported in Tobler's recent meta-analysis of school-based drug use prevention programs (Tobler, in press, 1994). To allow the most appropriate comparisons with D.A.R.E. effect sizes, we obtained Tobler's results for only those programs, excluding D.A.R.E., aimed at fifth and sixth graders.=20 Although pupils in the comparison programs were in the fifth and sixth grade, some sixth graders were in middle school, whereas all D.A.R.E. sixth graders were in elementary school. Like the D.A.R.E. studies, the interventions analyzed by Tobler were implemented in geographically diverse areas. Also similar to the D.A.R.E. studies, demographic information was not reported across all studies. The available data suggest that the studies in Tobler's review represented both white and minority populations and included urban, suburban, and rural areas with urban areas predominating.=20 These programs are a subset of 25 from the 114 programs included in Tobler's meta-analysis. The studies from Tobler's meta-analysis are referenced in Exhibit 7.5 and listed in Appendix C. We selected Tobler's meta-analysis for comparison because it is more similar to our review than other meta- analyses of drug use prevention programs (Bangert-Drowns, 1988; Bruvold, 1993; Bruvold & Rundall, 1988; Tobler, 1986). Tobler's meta-analysis and ours used similar processes and criteria to identify and select program evaluations for examination and included both published and unpublished studies. Like the D.A.R.E. criteria, Tobler selected student-based quantitative evaluations that included a control or comparison group and used a pretest-posttest sign or posttest only with random assignment. In addition, Tobler reported separate weighted mean effect sizes for four categories of outcome measures that are comparable to four of our outcome measurements: knowledge, attitudes toward drugs, social skills, and drug use. The meta-analyses differed, however, in that Tobler excluded studies that did not measure drug use and that included results from later posttests. In addition, some of Tobler's programs focused on a single drug rather than on multiple drugs as in D.A.R.E. The collective impact of these Exhibit 7.5Comparison Dru= g Use Prevention Programs (N=3D25) Noninteractive Programs Study Location References 1, 2 Ontario Allison, Silver, & Dignam, in press 3 Pennsylvania Dubois et al., 1989 4 Pacific Northwest Gilchrist et al., 1987 5 California Johnson et al., 1987 6 California Moskowitz et al., 1984; Schaeffer et al., 1981 7 Michigan; Sarvela, 1984; Sarvela & McClendon, 1987 Wisconsin 8 California Schaps et al., 1984 9 Not stated Schinke, Gilchrist, & Snow, 1985 Interactive Programs Study Location References 10, 11 Michigan Dielman et al., 1986; Dielman et al., 1987; Dielman=20 et al., 1989; Shope, Dielman, & Leech, 1988 12 Ontario Flay et al., 1989; Flay et al., 1983; Flay et al., 1985 13 New England Gersick, Grady, & Snow, 1988 14-16 California Johnson et al., 1987 17 Massachusetts McAlister, 1983 18, 19 Washington Schinke et al., 1988 20 Not stated Schinke & Blythe, 1981 21 Washington Schinke & Gilchrist, 1983 22 Not stated Schinke et al., 1986 23 Not stated Schinke, Gilchrist, & Snow, 1985 24, 25 Not stated Schinke et al., 1985 Note: Some programs were published in multiple publica- tions. Some publications reported on more than one type of program. See Appendix C for a listing of these references. differences should be minimal, however. Overall, the D.A.R.E. and Tobler studies are highly comparable in terms of program focus, study methodology, and target audience. In assessing the magnitude of the effect sizes reported for the Tobler studies, it should be noted that the studies typically did not correct for the correlation among students in the same school. As explained for the D.A.R.E. studies, this may produce inflated effect sizes.=20 Because neither the D.A.R.E. nor Tobler studies generally made adjustments for this interdependence of observations, the net effect on the comparison of effect sizes should be minimal. The evaluation studies included in Tobler's meta- analysis are classified into two broad categories based on typical combinations of program content and program process (process describes the teaching approach, or how the content is delivered): noninteractive (N=3D9) and interactive programs (N=3D16). =20 Noninteractive programs emphasize intrapersonal factors and use more traditional teaching approaches.=20 Activities typically are designed to increase knowledge about drugs, boost self-esteem, promote self-awareness, increase problem-solving skills, and promote values clarifications. These activities, in turn, are expected to encourage youth to make a personal decision to abstain from using drugs. Program content is usually introduced by the teacher in a didactic manner, and participatory activities often involve teacher-led discussions. Interactive programs emphasize interpersonal factors and use a participatory teaching approach.=20 Activities are designed to counter peer pressure to use drugs through developing drug refusal skills, promoting general social competencies, and correcting beliefs about the prevalence of drug use among peers. Program process emphasizes the interaction and exchange of ideas among peers, and it encourages active participation of all students in the classroom, particularly in small groups. Consistent with other meta-analyses showing that programs emphasizing social skills tend to be the most effective at achieving their outcomes (Bangert-Drowns, 1988; Bruvold, 1993; Bruvold & Rundall, 1988; Tobler, 1986), Tobler's interactive programs produced larger effect sizes in all four outcome measures than noninteractive programs. Because D.A.R.E. has features of both noninteractive and interactive programs, we compared D.A.R.E. with both categories of programs.=20 The weighted mean effect sizes and 95% confidence intervals by outcome for the D.A.R.E. studies and the two types of comparison programs are shown in Exhibit 7.6.=20 To test whether the mean effect sizes differed significantly between D.A.R.E. and the noninteractive programs and between D.A.R.E. and the interactive programs, we also calculated the 95% confidence interval around the difference between the means. If the confidence interval spans zero, this indicates that the difference between the two effect size means is not statistically significant. Conversely, if the confidence interval does not include zero, then the means are determined to be significantly different; that is, the D.A.R.E. mean is significantly greater or less than the mean for the comparison programs. The difference between the weighted mean effect sizes for D.A.R.E. and both noninteractive and interactive programs and 95% confidence intervals are shown in Exhibit 7.7. In addition, Exhibit 7.7 indicates whether the difference favors D.A.R.E. or the comparison programs. Exhibit 7.6 Weighted Mean Effect Size (and 95% Confidence Interval), by Outcome for D.A.R.E. and Other Drug Use Prevention Programs Exhibit 7.7 Difference Between Mean Effect Sizes (and 95% Confidence Interval), by Outcome, for D.A.R.E. and Other Drug Use Prevention Programs __ __ =20 Favors __ __ Favors Outcome |ESD-ESNI| 95% C.I. D.A.R.E. =20 |ESD-ESI| 95% C.I. D.A.R.E. Knowledge 0.26 .10-.42* Yes =20 0.11 .00-.22 No Attitudes 0.05 -.04-.14 Yes 0.22 .10-.34* No Social Skills 0.11 -.09-.31 Yes 0.57 .46-.68* No Drug use1 0.02 -.11-.07 No 0.12 .05-.19* No __ __ Note: ESD =3D weighted mean effect size for D.A.R.E.; ESNI =3D weighted mean effect size for __ noninteractive programs; ESI =3D weighted mean effect size for interactive programs; || indicates absolute value. Confidence intervals that include zero are not statistically significant; * =3D statistically significant. 1Includes alcohol, tobacco, and marijuana. For knowledge about drugs, the mean immediate effect size achieved by D.A.R.E. (0.42) is substantially and statistically significantly higher than the mean effect size for noninteractive programs (0.16). The D.A.R.E. effect size is lower than that of interactive programs (0.53), but the difference is not significant. For attitudes about drugs, the mean immediate effect size achieved by D.A.R.E. (0.11) is larger than the mean achieved by noninteractive programs (0.06); the difference is not statistically significant. The D.A.R.E. effect size is significantly less than the mean for interactive programs (0.33). The same pattern is observed for skills. The mean D.A.R.E. immediate effect size (0.19) is larger than for noninteractive programs (0.08) but smaller than for interactive programs (0.76). The difference in means between D.A.R.E. and the noninteractive programs is not statistically significant, whereas the D.A.R.E. mean is significantly less than for interactive programs. For drug use (alcohol, tobacco, and marijuana averaged together), the mean immediate effect sizes achieved by D.A.R.E. (0.06) and noninteractive programs (0.08) are not significantly different. The D.A.R.E. mean is significantly smaller than the mean for interactive programs (0.18). Exhibit 7.8 shows a comparison of effect sizes and 95% confidence intervals separately for alcohol, tobacco, and marijuana use.=20 Confidence intervals around the difference between the mean effect sizes are shown in Exhibit 7.9. The D.A.R.E. mean effect sizes for alcohol and marijuana are significantly smaller than the effect sizes for noninteractive programs, while the mean effect size for tobacco isExhibit 7.8 Weighted Mean Effect Size, by Drug, for D.A.R.E. and Other Drug Use Prevention Programs Exhibit 7.9 Difference Between Mean Effect Sizes (and 95% Confidence Interval), by Drug, for D.A.R.E. and Other Drug Use=20 Prevention Programs __ __ Favors =20 __ __ Favors Drug |ESD-ESNI| 95% C.I. D.A.R.E. =20 |ESD-ESI| 95% C.I. D.A.R.E. Alcohol 0.14 .05-.24* No 0.13 .05-.21* No Tobacco 0.11 .02-.20* Yes 0.10 .03-.18* No Marijuana 0.16 .04-.29* No 0.12 .01-.23* No __ __ Note: ESD =3D weighted mean effect size for D.A.R.E.; ESNI =3D weighted mean effect size for __ noninteractive programs; ESI =3D weighted mean effect size for interactive programs; || indicates absolute value. Confidence intervals that include zero are not statistically significant; * =3D statistically significant. significantly larger. The D.A.R.E. effect sizes for all three substances are significantly smaller than the comparable effect sizes for interactive programs. A comparison of D.A.R.E. effect sizes with effect sizes of noninteractive and interactive drug use prevention programs for fifth and sixth graders reviewed by Tobler suggests that D.A.R.E. has been more effective in influencing knowledge, attitudes, and skills outcomes than noninteractive programs, although only the knowledge difference is statistically significant. D.A.R.E. has been less effective, however, than interactive programs across all outcome measures, most prominently for social skills and drug use. The only difference in effect size means between D.A.R.E. and interactive programs that was not statistically significant was for knowledge. For drug use, the average effect size for interactive programs was three times greater than the average D.A.R.E. effect size; for social skills, four times greater than D.A.R.E.; and for attitudes, three times greater. These findings suggest that greater effectiveness is possible with school-based drug use prevention programs for fifth- and sixth-grade pupils than is achieved by the original D.A.R.E. core curriculum. Methodological Considerations Several methodological considerations relating to the evaluations included in our review and to the approach we used in conducting our review bear on the interpretation of the results. Fundamental considerations are whether the D.A.R.E. evaluations selected for review are methodologically strong and are sufficient in number. As is appropriate for meta-analysis, we used stated and objective criteria to select D.A.R.E. evaluations for review. Because the evaluations we selected had a comparison group, administered both pretests and posttests, used quantifiable outcome measures, and made statistical adjustments for pretest differences on outcome measures, we can be reasonably confident in their findings. Eight evaluations were included in the review; this is not a large number compared with the vast number of sites where D.A.R.E. has been implemented. It far exceeds, however, the number of evaluations of any other widely available drug use prevention program. Most prevention programs developed and evaluated by researchers have been much less widely implemented, and have received less scrutiny, than D.A.R.E. More important, however, when considering the adequacy of the number of studies, are the uniformity of D.A.R.E.'s curriculum content and method of delivery across implementation sites, and the consistent results found across geographically heterogeneous studies. This uniformity and consistency suggest that a sufficient number of evaluations were identified for assessment of the original core curriculum's immediate effects. Even so, we would have preferred a full set of eight effect sizes for each outcome. The immediate effect sizes for the D.A.R.E. studies may have been attenuated compared with the comparison drug use prevention programs because the control groups were not pure "no treatment" groups. As documentedby Tobler (1986, in press, 1994), effect sizes are lower when the control group receives some sort of drug education. Information generally was lacking from the D.A.R.E. evaluations on alternative interventions received by the control groups, but it is likely that most control groups received some drug education because the studies occurred after the passage of the 1986 DFSCA.=20 However, approximately half (54%) of the comparison programs used for Tobler's study also were conducted between 1986 and 1990, suggesting that they also may suffer from the same effect. Nevertheless, the lower effect sizes of the D.A.R.E. programs compared with the interactive programs in Tobler's study could be due in part to the likelihood that the control groups for the D.A.R.E. studies received a stronger intervention than did the control groups in the studies reviewed by Tobler. Most of the drug use prevention programs evaluated by Tobler are smaller-scale university research-based evaluation studies, while D.A.R.E. is a widely available curriculum. In both cases, however, the interventions were implemented by service providers and the evaluations were conducted by researchers. Even so, the intensity of efforts devoted to interventions conducted for evaluation research may be greater, the implementation conditions more optimal, and the possibility for scrutiny and control greater than would be the case for a program that is widely disseminated. Some diminished effectiveness may be inevitable once programs are implemented under real-world conditions. This could be an important factor in explaining some of the differences in effect sizes between D.A.R.E. and the comparison programs. Differences in the studies selected for our D.A.R.E. review and selected by Tobler could also contribute to the relative differences in effect sizes between these programs. The differences include the exclusion of studies by Tobler that did not evaluate drug use behavior and the inclusion of outcomes from later posttests. In addition, some sixth graders in the programs reviewed by Tobler were in middle rather than elementary school, and some programs focused on a single drug, such as tobacco, rather than multiple drugs as is the case with D.A.R.E. It is possible that these differences could decrease, increase, or not change the relative differences in effect sizes. For example, differences might have been less if programs focused on a single substance were not included in Tobler's meta- analysis. It is possible that single substance programs have greater impact on use of that substance than generic drug education programs, although study of this possibility is limited and findings are mixed (Tobler, 1994). On the other hand, differences might have been greater had Tobler excluded results from posttests beyond immediate follow-up because curriculum effects tend to decay rather than increase with time (Ellickson, Bell, & McGuigan, 1993; Murray, Pirie, Luepker, & Pallonen, 1989). The limited number of programs precluded assessment of these possibilities, as well as whether program effects differ, and in what direction, for sixth graders in elementary versus middle school. Finally, it is possible that our results might have differed if there had been sufficient numbers of D.A.R.E. evaluations and studies in Tobler's analysis to analyze effect sizes while controlling the effects of other factors. In addition to the differences between the D.A.R.E. and Tobler studies described above, it is possible that other factors may have varied across the intervention programs and associated evaluation studies that contributed to the observed differences in effect sizes. For example, substantial variation in characteristics of the students (e.g., in race/ethnicity), features of the interventions (e.g., variations in program intensity), and features of the research design (e.g., experimental versus quasi- experimental design) could have contributed to the differences in program effects. In other words, some of the differences in effect sizes observed between the D.A.R.E. studies and Tobler's studies could have been due to other factors than the type of program.=20 Unfortunately, these possibilities could not be tested because of the small number of studies. Further testing is warranted when larger samples of D.A.R.E. and comparison studies are available. Summary From a pool of 18 quantitative D.A.R.E. evaluation studies identified by this review, eight met specified methodological criteria and were selected for further review. Each of these eight evaluations had a control group, administered both pretests and posttests, used quantifiable outcome measures, and made statistical adjustments for pretest differences on outcome measures.=20 Effect sizes for these studies at immediate posttest, both individually by study and averaged across studies, showed that the original D.A.R.E. core curriculum had strong and statistically significant effects on knowledge about drugs. The curriculum also had a positive and significant impact on social skills. The core curriculum had smaller, although statistically significant, effects on attitudes about drug use, attitude toward the police, and self-esteem. The curriculum had limited immediate effects on use of alcohol, tobacco, and marijuana.=20 Although the effect on tobacco use was small, it was statistically significant. Weighted mean effect sizes were used to compare D.A.R.E. with other school-based drug use prevention programs targeted at same-age youth. The original D.A.R.E. core curriculum compared favorably with noninteractive drug use prevention programs, which emphasize intrapersonal factors and use more traditional teaching methods. The original core curriculum compared less favorably, however, with interactive drug use prevention programs. Interactive drug use prevention programs, which emphasize interpersonal skills and an interactive teaching style, have been shown to be the most successful drug use prevention programs (Tobler, in press, 1994). Several methodological considerations should be noted in interpreting the results of this review. These include the number of methodologically rigorous D.A.R.E. studies in our review; the purity of the control groups in the D.A.R.E. evaluations compared with those in the comparison programs; and the relative impacts of commercial programs such as D.A.R.E. and smaller scale research-based interventions; and the small number of D.A.R.E. and comparison studies available for assessing other potential explanations for differences in program effectiveness. The findings of the D.A.R.E. outcome assessment are discussed fully in Chapter 8. CHAPTER 8 DISCUSSION AND RECOMMENDATIONS In preceding chapters, we presented data acquired from our implementation and outcome assessments of D.A.R.E. Information about D.A.R.E.'s operations, prevalence, and effectiveness was collected from a variety of sources. Given the complex nature of the D.A.R.E. organization, it is not surprising that the findings are voluminous. Nor is it surprising that although some findings attest to the strengths and robustness of D.A.R.E., others indicate limitations.=20 This final chapter presents a discussion of these findings. In the course of this discussion, we highlight the key findings and, where appropriate, make recommendations for programmatic changes and additional research. =20 This chapter is organized into three sections.=20 Highlights from the implementation assessment are presented in the first section, followed by key findings from the outcome assessment. To facilitate a review of the study's many and sometimes disparate findings, our discussion is organized by some of the questions that guided these study components. In the final section, we attempt to synthesize the most important findings and present overall conclusions derived from the study. Implementation Assessment As discussed in Chapter 1, we conducted an implementation assessment of D.A.R.E. that had two primary objectives. These were, first, to conduct an assessment of the organizational structure and operation of representative D.A.R.E. programs nationwide to learn what factors contribute to the effective implementation of D.A.R.E. programs nationwide and, second, to determine how D.A.R.E. is tailored to meet the needs of specific populations. To address these issues, we collected data from sources at all levels of the multi-layered D.A.R.E. institution. We presented information concerning operations at the national and regional level of D.A.R.E. in Chapter 3, State-level operations in Chapter 4, and local-level operations in Chapters 5 and 6. We obtained information from interviews with Glenn Levant of D.A.R.E. America and with coordinators and/or educational advisors from each of the five Regional Training Centers (RTCs), a review of available BJA documents, a survey of the State D.A.R.E. coordinators, a survey of a nationally representative sample of school district drug prevention coordinators, and site visits to four purposively selected schools (two with D.A.R.E. and two without). How extensively is D.A.R.E. implemented nationwide, and how does D.A.R.E.'s prevalence compare with that of other curricula? One of the most important findings of this study was the extraordinary prevalence of D.A.R.E. In the 1991-1992 school year, 44 of the 50 States had State coordinators fortheir D.A.R.E. programs. Based on our sampleof school districts, we estimate that over half the districts in the country implemented at least one of the D.A.R.E. curricula in one or more of their schools. In comparison, the two other most prevalent prevention programs, Quest and Here's Looking at You (HLY), were used in at least one school in about 27% and 24% of the districts, respectively. Another important finding is that the demand for D.A.R.E. over the next 5 years is going to increase substantially. Over 40% of the districts with D.A.R.E. planned to expand its use. Of those districts without D.A.R.E., 21% expressed the intention to institute it, and 20% reported that they were as yet undecided about using D.A.R.E. Slightly over half of all school districts implemented D.A.R.E.'s core curriculum, which is targeted at 5th- and 6th-grade pupils; around 17% implemented the K-4 curriculum, 11% the junior high school curriculum, and 3% the senior high curriculum. Around 12% of the school districts used Quest at the elementary level, 22% at the middle/junior high school level, and 3% at the senior high school level. Around 22% of the school districts used HLY at the elementary level, 14% at the middle/junior high school level, and 9% at the senior high level. =20 Does the extent of D.A.R.E. implementation vary by demographic characteristics of school districts, such as geographic region, urbanicity, SES, and minority status? How does D.A.R.E. compare with other curricula in this regard? The Midwest region had the highest percentage of districts using D.A.R.E. (59.9%) , followed by the Southeast (56.8%), East (55.8%), West (48.8%), and Southwest (37.1%). Use of Quest was highest in the Midwest region (35.8%) and use of HLY was highest in the East (46.4%). Use of all three prevention programs was lowest in the Southwest region. The lower rates of program use in the Southwest can probably be largely attributed to its rural nature, and thus the greater difficulties in fielding D.A.R.E. officers to geographically dispersed schools. There were no statistically significant differences in the use of D.A.R.E., Quest, or HLY by either the minority status or SES of the school districts.=20 Urban/suburban school districts were, however, significantly more likely to use D.A.R.E. and HLY than rural districts. Further, large districts were significantly more likely than small districts to use D.A.R.E. We suspect that these findings may be attributed to the relatively greater resources available to urban and large law enforcement agencies. In the case of D.A.R.E., these agencies may be at greater liberty to free up their officers' time to teach D.A.R.E. It is difficult to determine what adjustments might make D.A.R.E. more accessible to rural and small school districts. We believe that ways of improving access to D.A.R.E. in rural and small districts should be examined.=20 For example, methods for distributing DFSCA funds to favor rural and small school districts instead of distribution solely on a per capita basis could be explored. =20 How well integrated is D.A.R.E. with other drug use prevention programs offered in schools? Neither D.A.R.E. nor any other drug prevention program can or should stand alone in a school district; instead, such programs should be integrated into a comprehensive curriculum that is developmentally appropriate and implemented at every grade level.=20 Indeed, all school districts receiving DFSCA funds must implement a comprehensive K-12 drug prevention program.=20 Even were a school district to implement all four of D.A.R.E.'s student curricula, additional drug prevention programming would still be required in the grades to which D.A.R.E. was not directed. Our survey showed that only 2% of the school districts used only D.A.R.E. and no other drug prevention program. Almost two-thirds of the school district coordinators with D.A.R.E. reported that the program was "very well" integrated with other prevention programs. How does D.A.R.E. compare with other alcohol and other drug (AOD) programs in terms of support and satisfaction for the programs? The school district drug prevention coordinators indicated that support for D.A.R.E. is very strong not only among students and school staff=FEwhose support the coordinators rated as very high=FEbut also among parents and the community. These ratings were also markedly higher than those for other AOD programs.=20 The responses of the coordinators also indicated the high regard in which the D.A.R.E. curricula are held.=20 Two-thirds of the school district coordinators with D.A.R.E. rated the curricula, as well as how it is taught, as "very satisfactory"; over three-quartersgave the same rating to how students receive it. This endorsement is all the more vivid when contrasted with coordinators' ratings of other AOD prevention programs; only one-third of coordinators with other AOD programs rated these programs as highly. =20 A close examination of these findings reveals that coordinators in districts with a high percentage of minority students were more likely to rate students' receptivity to D.A.R.E. as very high than those in districts serving predominantly white students. This finding is not confounded by the district's urbanicity or SES because comparisons between coordinators from these pairs of districts (i.e., by high and low SES and by rural and urban/surburban) were not statistically significant. =20 Of even greater importance are the satisfaction ratings that the prevention coordinators gave to D.A.R.E.'s effects on students. Almost two-thirds of the coordinators with D.A.R.E. indicated that they were very satisfied with D.A.R.E.'s effects; less than one-quarter of those with other AOD programs reported that they were very satisfied with the effects of these AOD programs.=20 Are D.A.R.E. and other drug prevention programs adapted to a community's particular needs? D.A.R.E. is distinguished by the integrity and consistency with which its curricula are administered.=20 During their training, D.A.R.E. officers are instructed not to deviate in any substantive fashion from the curriculum. The D.A.R.E. core curriculum allows only one modification--a gang activity lesson that can be added in schools where gangs are perceived to be a problem. Over two-fifths of the coordinators with D.A.R.E. and over half of the coordinators with other AOD programs reported that the curriculum had been adapted at least to some degree, however modest. The most frequently mentioned reason for adaptation of both D.A.R.E. and other AOD programs was drug availability at their schools. Coordinators with D.A.R.E. provided some hints as to the types of topics introduced, which included discussing specific locally prevalent drugs, drug abuse at home, and local drug arrests. During the site visit to the urban school district, we learned that some police officers incorporate their own street experiences into their lessons. The second and third most frequently mentioned reasons for adaptation for D.A.R.E. and other AOD programs were student/community poverty and racial/ethnic composition. Although we recognize that some tailoring of D.A.R.E. to the needs of a particular audience may be appropriate, we encourage fidelity to the curricula and careful monitoring of officer presentation. We strongly suggest that current procedures of notifying the D.A.R.E. America RTC Advisory Board curriculum committee of limitations in the curricula and of substantive modifications of the curricula originating from that agency be continued. Allowing officers to modify the program at will would quickly result in disintegration of the curriculum and the program. To what extent are classroom teachers and other community members or agencies involved in D.A.R.E.? The original core curriculum, which was in use when the survey was conducted, encouraged classroom teachers to remain in the classroom and to communicate D.A.R.E.'s objectives to students. However, teachers played little active part in the actual instruction. Teachers and D.A.R.E. officers together teach the junior and senior high curricula; at the senior high level, they are even trained together. According to the drug prevention coordinators, teachers in almost 90% of the districts remained in the classroom during D.A.R.E. lessons, and in 84% teachers were reported as "actively involved"in D.A.R.E. The revised core curriculum encourages classroom teachers to take a more active role. D.A.R.E. officers already are expected to meet for an hour or so with the classroom teachers in a brief, structured orientation and discussion. To the extent that time and resources permit, we encourage the co-training of teachers and officers at every curricular level because we believe that such training would enhance effective communication and coordination between the two.=20 =20 One of D.A.R.E.'s strengths is the active involvement of individuals in D.A.R.E., both within and outside of the school. Half of the prevention coordinators reported that school staff, other than classroom teachers, were actively involved in D.A.R.E., and almost one-quarter reported that civic groups were actively involved. This level of involvement surely makes a major contribution to the high level of enthusiasm that D.A.R.E. generates. We note that only a relatively few coordinators reported that "youthgroups" were involved in D.A.R.E. We recommend increasing the involvement of both youth and church groups as a way to reinforce D.A.R.E.'s message and to help establish anti-drug use norms throughout the school and community.=20 About half of the coordinators reported that parents were actively involved in D.A.R.E. Our site visits, however, suggested that parents tend to be rather detached. D.A.R.E.'s efforts to reach out to parents through the parent curriculum are commendable and, we hope, will prove successful. Many such efforts in the past have proved futile because the parents who are most in need of educational intervention are also the most difficult to reach and most resistant to attending meetings. One additional method to involve parents more directly in D.A.R.E. is to assign specific parent-child homework exercises that, at the very least, will open vital lines of communication between parent and child concerning drug use. A second method that could supplement the D.A.R.E. parent curriculum would be to develop a freestanding, 1-hour video. This video could be used to provide an introduction to D.A.R.E. and a synopsis of the D.A.R.E. curriculum, as to well as provide information about how to effectively reinforce D.A.R.E.'s message. It might, for instance, include advice about how to talk to youth about drugs and stress the importance of serving as a model for a drug-free life. We, thus, recommend that D.A.R.E. consider and weigh the relative merits of a variety of strategies designed to reach parents who may not respond to the D.A.R.E. parent curriculum. What role, if any, do D.A.R.E. officers have in treatment referral for students who already have substance abuse problems? An additional role that D.A.R.E. officers can undertake is to serve as members of student assistance program (SAP) teams. Of the school districts that had both SAPs and D.A.R.E., 37% had D.A.R.E. officers who had been trained to participate in the district's SAP. Most of the coordinators rated D.A.R.E. officers as highly as they did guidance counselors (and much higher than teachers) in effectiveness in implementing SAPs. We recommend that D.A.R.E. officers become familiar with SAPs in their schools and, when feasible, become involved in these programs. We also recommend that the D.A.R.E. America RTC Advisory Board establish procedures for officers to follow when their work with SAPs comes in conflict with their duties as a police officer, so that the confidentiality of youth and their parents who have drug problems may be maintained. How is D.A.R.E. managed at the national, regional, and State level, and what are the major responsibilities of the governing bodies? At the national level, all D.A.R.E. operations are overseen by D.A.R.E. America, a nonprofit organization that bears ultimate responsibility for promoting, monitoring, and overseeing the program. In this capacity, D.A.R.E. America is assisted by a number of regional and State organizations. These include five RTCs that constitute the D.A.R.E. America RTC Advisory Board and make recommendations to D.A.R.E. America concerning the accreditation of State-level training centers and monitor the fidelity with which the D.A.R.E. curriculum is taught at the local level. Educational specialists representing the RTCs, together with staff from the Los Angeles United School District (LAUSD) and assisted by a Scientific Advisory Committee, also make recommendations to D.A.R.E. America concerning modifications to the various D.A.R.E. curricula. State-level D.A.R.E. entities include chartered nonprofit D.A.R.E. organizations designed to support the program in that State; such organizations currently exist in over one-third of the States, and it is expected that they will be chartered in all 50. In those States that currently lack such an organization, there is typically a State employee designated as a D.A.R.E. coordinator. In addition, 42 States currently have developed State Training Centers (STCs), the purpose of which is to conduct training for prospective D.A.R.E. officers. Updating and improving curricular materials and teaching strategies is a difficult task. We commend D.A.R.E. America for convening a Scientific Advisory Committee, and for choosing Dr. Kleber as committee chair. It is our understanding that the committee's charge is an expansive one and includes reviewing current and ongoing D.A.R.E. evaluations, and integrating relevant findings from other evaluations of school-based drug prevention programs. We recognize the constraints that D.A.R.E. faces in updating the curricula, given the considerable costs required to retrain D.A.R.E. officers appropriately. Hence, it is probably not feasible to make substantive changes to the curricula more frequently than once every 5 years, at a minimum. Another source of expertise that should be tapped as input for curricular changes is the U.S. Department of Education. Various D.A.R.E. materials encourage the establishment of strong ties between D.A.R.E. and education at both the State and local levels. At the national level, an educational consultant from each of the five RTCs make suggestions concerning the curricula.=20 However, it is our understanding that this group lacks representation from a national-level education agency.=20 We thus recommend thatthe D.A.R.E. America request anappropriate member of= the U.S. Department of Education to serve as an ex officio member, who should represent the department's extensive drug prevention program. Such an individual would be able to provide D.A.R.E. America with guidance as to how effectively to integrate D.A.R.E. into the Department of Education's comprehensive, K-12 drug prevention strategy.=20 Furthermore, the inclusion of a U.S. Department of Education staff member seems particularly appropriate as long as D.A.R.E. continues to be mentioned as a specific line item on the DFSCA budget. =20 State coordinators informed us that over one-third of the States had policy advisory boards (PABs), a proportion that may have increased in the 2 years since our survey. Because PABs can be instrumental in developing and maintaining communications and positive relationships among the various agencies involved in D.A.R.E., we recommend that all States establish such boards. The great majority of the PABs comprise representatives of both State and local law enforcement and education. Other key individuals from the community who have a stake in the success of D.A.R.E. or who could provide different and valuable perspectives on D.A.R.E. were less well represented. These include parents, members of community-based organizations, citizens-at- large, members of associations of educators, and business representatives. The latter could be particularly helpful in securing resources for D.A.R.E. We thus recommend that State-level PABs systematically examine their representation and seek ways to reach out to new and potentially useful constituencies by expanding their membership. Because of the unique partnership between D.A.R.E. and education, it is critical that State-level D.A.R.E. operations have strong ties to education at the State level. Around one-third of the State D.A.R.E. coordinators reported a great deal of communication with the State Department of Education, and another 50% reported having at least some communication. We also note that one State D.A.R.E. coordinator was affiliated with a State Department of Education, and that three PABs were chaired by staff members from State or local education departments. The need to improve communication with their State's education departments was mentioned by several State D.A.R.E. coordinators. One way to improve communication between D.A.R.E. and education is for State D.A.R.E. programs to retain educational consultants to act as liaisons. Two-thirds of the State coordinators reported employing such a consultant, and almost all of the States without educational consultants considered acquiring a full-time educational consultant to be priority. We recommend that all State D.A.R.E. programs secure educational consultants. In a few States, the State D.A.R.E. programs employed their own educational consultants. In most States, however, educational consultants were employed by education departments. We believe the liaison between law enforcement and education will be most effective if the consultants are based in the State Departments of Education. Ideally, to ensure a maximum level of coordination both with the State Departments of Education as a whole and with their drug-free schools program in particular, these consultants should be members of the departments' alcohol and drug prevention offices.=20 Certainly, regardless of whether the education consultants are employed by education or directly by the State D.A.R.E. program, they should seek all appropriate means to establish meaningful affiliations with State- level educational agencies. By the same token, education agencies should be apprised of=FEand take seriously=FEtheir responsibility to include D.A.R.E. representatives in planning statewide drug prevention activities. To be truly effective, education and law enforcement need to work together in a partnership at the national and State levels as well as at the local level. Educational consultants' roles may vary, but besides providing a "bridge" between the two organizations, the consultants should help ensure that D.A.R.E.'s multiple curricula fit into a comprehensive, developmentally appropriate drug prevention program.=20 Several coordinators mentioned that consultants could assist with program evaluation and with monitoring officer performance in the classroom. It may be appropriate to consider expanding the roles of educational consultants further, perhaps to provide assistance in these areas. =20 How is D.A.R.E. managed at the local level? At the local level, the majority of the D.A.R.E. programs were managed by a single law enforcement agency, primarily the sheriff's or city/town police department.=20 Officer selection and classroom activities was most frequently mentioned as the responsibility of the police department, selection of D.A.R.E. classrooms was the responsibility of the school administration and staff, and responsibility for selection of D.A.R.E. schools was shared by the police department, school administration and staff, and the school superintendent.=20 In a number of places throughout this report, we have mentioned that D.A.R.E. is a collaborative venture between a local school district and a law enforcement agency, and we have emphasized the importance of developing a positive relationship between the two from the outset. One way to foster this relationship at the local level is with written agreements that clearly state the roles and responsibilities of each. Less than half of the drug prevention coordinators mentioned that their districts had such an agreement. We recognize that some of the coordinators responding to our survey may simply not have known that a written agreement existed, particularly if they were new in their position and the agreement had been written before they were employed. We recommend that the law enforcement agencies without such agreements secure them. Furthermore, we recommend that the agreements be reviewed with school administration/ staff at least every other year. This biennial review would ensure that all parties are aware of their responsibilities and could also serve as forums to discuss issues relating to D.A.R.E.'s implementation and to develop additional ways in which the D.A.R.E. officer can serve the schools. They could also provide opportunities for the school district to recognize the officer's contribution. Another way to engender a positive collaboration between law enforcement and education is by developing close liaisons between the D.A.R.E. officer and classroom teacher. Such liaisons have obvious benefits, including providing a role model for new officers, sharing the burden of difficult classes or difficult students, and increasing the likelihood that the teacher will reinforce the D.A.R.E. message in other areas of instruction. We learned from the drug prevention coordinators' survey that classroom teachers in almost three-quarters of the school districts with D.A.R.E. now integrate the D.A.R.E. message into their other activities in the classroom, so that the program has a strong foundation in this area on which to build. We thus recommend that D.A.R.E. officers spend more time consulting with classroom teachers, both formally at the beginning of the semester and informally as the semester progresses. Topics for conversation should include both the content of the D.A.R.E. curriculum and how teachers can effectively articulate an anti-drug message. What funding mechanisms are at the national/regional, State, and local levels? At the national/regional level, funding is received primarily from BJA. The RTC coordinators mentioned the need to find permanent funding sources that will supplement Federal support and make D.A.R.E. less vulnerable to the vicissitudes of such funding. One solution to this issue is to establish or strengthen reliance on State or local support, particularly the latter. =20 The majority of State D.A.R.E. programs receive funding from BJA grants; around one-fourth of the States received funding from governors' grants, grants from other State agencies, and legislative funds. Four States reported that they received no funding for their State- level operations, and around one-third mentioned that maintaining and increasing their funding or locating new funding sources were among the most significant issues facing them. If they are to discharge multiple responsibilities for developing and managing their D.A.R.E. programs successfully, the States must have sufficient support. We recommend that the D.A.R.E. America RTC Advisory Board explore further the various sources of support used by the State programs, and how these have been obtained, and then provide technical assistance to those States that currently operate with either no funding or whose funding is precariously low.=20 D.A.R.E. America could perhaps play a role in assisting the development and maintenance of the STCs by providing modest grant programs to assist States. =20 At the local level, the cost of assigning a police officer to deliver D.A.R.E. is assumed by the local city or county law enforcement agency, and thus, ultimately, by the community. Only a small minority of prevention coordinators (one in six) indicated that program costs were a barrier to implementation. D.A.R.E. America assumes the costs of program curriculum materials. The coordinators also informed us that primary support for D.A.R.E. came from law enforcement, but that DFSCA funds also played a major role in supporting D.A.R.E., as did (to a lesser extent) school district funds. We note that non-D.A.R.E. drug prevention programs appear much more dependent on DFSCA funds than does D.A.R.E. Given projected cuts in the DFSCA budget, which we understand may amount to as much as 25% in the near future, D.A.R.E.'s relative lack of reliance on DFSCA funds will prove beneficial. We also note that D.A.R.E. is relatively less dependent on local funds than are non- D.A.R.E. programs, which also decreases D.A.R.E.'s vulnerability to cuts as competing demands increase ever tighter budgets. How adequately does D.A.R.E. training meet the needs of an expanding and changing program? As noted earlier, the core curriculum has recently been revised, and the new version is currently being implemented. Because of D.A.R.E.'s magnitude, curricular changes are far-reaching and, thus, expensive and time- consuming to implement. Therefore, modifications to any of the D.A.R.E. curricula must necessarily be weighed against the substantial costs associated with updating and distributing material, as well as retraining D.A.R.E. officers. Nevertheless, modifications to the curricula will need to be made periodically if D.A.R.E. is to remain on the "cutting edge" of drug prevention programming.=20 To reduce the burden on D.A.R.E. of keeping officers up-to-date with modifications to the curriculum, the RTCs should explore novel means to provide officers with curriculum and teaching updates and to provide formal in-service training on a periodic basis. One in- service training method that should be considered is the use of the Law Enforcement Television Network (LETN).=20 Because a substantial and growing number of police and sheriffs' departments are linked to this network, it could be an effective and cost-efficient means of providing high-quality in-service programming to D.A.R.E. officers around the country. Ideally, such a system should be interactive to allow for discussions between officers and trainers. Another less costly and more accessible method that could be explored is the use of videotaped programs to explain and demonstrate changes to curricula and teaching methods. Still another alternative is to use an on-line computer billboard to distribute the latest D.A.R.E. information. This method could be made available at very low cost to all police departments with computers and modems. We learned from the January 1992 D.A.R.E. America RTC Advisory Board minutes that such a system was being developed by D.A.R.E. America and indeed may now be in place. In-service training should clearly not be restricted to teaching D.A.R.E. officers how to implement modifications to existing curricula. Such training could also serve to increase the competence of newly minted officers over their first semester. Regardless of how powerful and effective the initial 80-hour introduction to D.A.R.E. is, D.A.R.E. officers are bound to forget some of what they have been taught when, 3 months later, they are teaching one of the final D.A.R.E. lessons for the first time. One potentially useful device would be to develop and distribute taped versions of an expert D.A.R.E. officer delivering the curriculum to real classrooms, which new officers could be encouraged to review immediately prior to the first time they teach the lesson. Such tapes could serve several purposes: to reinforce the content of what should be taught, to model how the lesson should be taught, and to teach classroom management techniques. Each videotape might highlight dealing with a special problem (e.g., how to generate a discussion when students tend to be silent; how to draw out a shy or largely silent child; and how to respond when a child discloses drug use by a peer, friend, or family member). Each of these tapes should be relatively short (or they will not be viewed) but could be followed by a summary of the key points the officer should keep in mind in teaching the next lesson. The tapes would also help ensure that a primary goal of D.A.R.E. be reached-- that lessons be taught uniformly. Another training issue confronting the RTCs is the development and maintenance of STCs. As D.A.R.E. continues to grow=FEand our study has demonstrated that demand for D.A.R.E. shows no signs of abatement=FEthe RTCs will become increasingly challenged to meet the training and monitoring needs of their constituent States. The development and maintenance of STCs is critical because the RTCs cannot assume the multiple burdens of training, mentoring, and monitoring D.A.R.E. officers, as well as assisting local law enforcement in developing and maintaining effective ties with school districts. RTC coordinators indicated that training and monitoring officers already strain the capacities of the RTCs. We recommend that sufficient funding be appropriated to establish and/or maintain an STC in every State. =20 D.A.R.E. officers are not the only D.A.R.E. staff in need of ongoing training and technical assistance; several RTC coordinators indicated that many of the State D.A.R.E. coordinators have a similar need. RTC coordinators also indicated that State coordinators need support in developing lines of communication and authority with local-level law enforcement agencies and school districts, many of which have been operating with a fair degree of autonomy or have been used to dealing directly with the RTCs. It might be helpful if the RTCs brought together their constituent State coordinators at least yearly to discover and discuss common needs and concerns and provide technical assistance to the coordinators as a group as appropriate. However, the need will still exist for resources to support individual consultation between the RTCs and their respective State coordinators. As we mentioned earlier, the demand for D.A.R.E. in school districts that currently lack the program is likely to be exacerbated by the lack of available D.A.R.E. officers. Fully 60% of the school districts indicated that they want either to begin or increase their use of D.A.R.E. Some of the RTC staff indicated training may not be able to keep up with the demand for D.A.R.E. Almost 15% of the drug prevention coordinators identified lack of sufficient officers as a barrier to implementing D.A.R.E. This problem was illustrated in the urban D.A.R.E. school district we visited, where lack of available officers led to dissatisfaction on the part of school officials as officers were moved from one school to another to accommodate demand. Clearly, those communities in which D.A.R.E. is a high priority but which lack sufficient D.A.R.E. instructors should provide greater support to their law enforcement agencies to recruit and train additional officers. Further, the surprisingly high prevalence of the relatively new junior and high school D.A.R.E. curricula suggests that each community should examine the extent of the perceived need for each D.A.R.E. curriculum and develop a long-range plan to identify and fund additional officers as necessary. Any substantive curricular changes affecting what, and especially how, D.A.R.E. officers teach, should be accompanied by a determined effort to ensure that these changes are fully reflected in officer behavior in the classroom. The RTC coordinators clearly stressed the need for increasing officer monitoring in the field as well. Monitoring officers, however, is only part of the task. Adequate resources should also be made available to allow mentors to work closely with officers whose performance needs improvement. Outcome Assessment The D.A.R.E. outcome assessment, described in Chapter 7, had four primary objectives. These were (a) to identify prior studies of D.A.R.E.'s effectiveness as a drug use prevention program, (b) to assess the quality and adequacy of the methodologies of these studies, (c) to summarize D.A.R.E.'s effectiveness based on this research, and (d) to compare D.A.R.E.'s effectiveness with that of other school-based drug use prevention programs. We focused our assessment on the original D.A.R.E. core curriculum, which is the heart of the D.A.R.E. program. We did not include the junior high school, senior high school, and other D.A.R.E. curricula in the outcome assessment because they are more recent, not as prevalent, and generally have yet to be evaluated.=20 Future evaluation efforts should focus on these curricula, as well as on the revised core curriculum implemented in September 1994. Questions that guided the outcome assessment are discussed in this section. What were the scope, reliability, and technical quality of the D.A.R.E. assessments? A number of States and smaller localities have been actively involved in assessing the D.A.R.E. core curriculum since 1983, when the program was initiated in Los Angeles. By using multiple sources to identify studies, we obtained reports of 18 outcome studies in twelve States and one Canadian province. These studies collected data from students concerning D.A.R.E.'s effectiveness in influencing outcomes the curriculum seeks to change. We defined a set of methodological criteria to use in assessing the quality and adequacy of the study methodologies. The criteria, based on review of the evaluation methodology literature, were (a) that the study compared students who received D.A.R.E. to students in a control or comparison group who did not receive D.A.R.E.; (b) that outcomes of interest, such as drug use, were measured both before D.A.R.E. was implemented and after the program ended; (c) that measures of the outcomes were constructed so as to ensure reasonable certainty that they were measured accurately; and (d) that in the absence of random assignment, the analysis strategy adjusted for any initial differences on outcome variables between D.A.R.E. and comparison students. Half of the 18 studies met these methodological criteria; however, one study was not considered further because the children were tested 1 year later rather than immediately after the program. That 50% of the studies were of this technical quality suggests that a high level of effort has been invested in carefully evaluating D.A.R.E. Because these studies avoid many of the problems that commonly undermine evaluation studies, reasonable confidence can be placed in their findings.=20 Some of the studies exceeded our criteria, for example, by randomly assigning D.A.R.E. to schools, by analyzing attrition effects, by statistically adjusting differences in students' background characteristics, or by using an analysis strategy appropriate to the research design. We recommend that these features be incorporated into future studies. In assessing the findings of the eight methodologically rigorous D.A.R.E. studies, it should be noted that the studies are not a national sample of representatively selected sites. It is reassuring, however, that the findings tended to be consistent across studies, indicating that the conclusions they suggest about the effectiveness of the D.A.R.E. core curriculum are reliable. What gaps in the D.A.R.E. assessments merit attention? Our review of studies suggested several methodological issues that should be addressed directly and critically by future studies. These include the complete and careful reporting of the research design and results, contamination of the comparison group, the appropriateness of the analysis strategy, and the control and analysis of attrition. Although most of the studies we reviewed documented the research procedures and methods, some did not provide sufficient detail. Thorough documentation is needed for assessing and interpreting the results; information was most often lacking in the description of the study sample. In addition to the exact sample sizes of the D.A.R.E. and comparison groups, sociodemographic information such as whether recipients live in urban, suburban, or rural areas, their racial/ethnic composition, and their SES, should all be reported. This information is needed for assessing the degree to which study results may be generalized. It also can be used to test whether D.A.R.E.'s effectiveness varies by characteristics of the sample. For example, is D.A.R.E. equally effective among inner-city, suburban, and rural students and among white, African American, and Hispanic students? Almost none of the studies we reviewed made these sorts of assessments. Sociodemographic information also is relevant when making comparisons between studies (as we did between D.A.R.E. and other school-based drug use prevention programs) in order to assess the similarity of the recipients of programs being compared. An issue related to the completeness of reporting is the need for reports of research to be accessible to all those interested in D.A.R.E., including sponsors, educators, parents, police officers, other researchers, and concerned citizens. Most of the studies we identified were not reported in the published literature, and therefore are not easily accessible. It is vitally important that reports be made quickly and widely available. As we have suggested earlier, we recommend that a library of D.A.R.E. evaluation reports and associated summaries of key findings be maintained by the D.A.R.E. America RTC Advisory Board. The extensive communication channels between local, state, and national D.A.R.E. entities should facilitate the prompt identification and dissemination of evaluation studies. One of the most important methodological issues raised by our review is the potential contamination of the control group by exposure to D.A.R.E. or to other drug use prevention programs. Although none of the comparison groups in the methodologically rigorous D.A.R.E. studies was exposed to D.A.R.E. between pretest and immediate posttest, contamination was an issue for some studies conducting longer-term evaluations. This contributed to our inability to evaluate D.A.R.E.'s effectiveness beyond immediate posttest. Ironically, contamination is particularly problematic for D.A.R.E. evaluations because of the rapid dissemination of the program and because of the various curricula now prevalent for students at different grade levels. It is increasingly possible, for example, for a control group not receiving the D.A.R.E. core curriculum to receive the junior high school curriculum, effectively reducing its utility as a control group. A larger, but more subtle comparison group problem is that the prevalence of school-based drug use prevention programs in general makes it virtually impossible to find a true "no treatment" controlgroup.=20 Hence, when comparing D.A.R.E. to another drug education program, effectiveness is determined on a comparative rather than an absolute basis. For example, a finding of little difference in effectiveness may indicate that both programs are effective rather than that D.A.R.E. is of limited effectiveness or both programs are ineffective.=20 None of the studies we reviewed indicated whether the control group received any drug use prevention programming, much less provided information about it.=20 Future studies should describe any prevention interventions being delivered to the comparison group and discuss the implications for the results. An increasingly recognized methodological concern in the evaluation of school-based interventions is the importance of following an analysis strategy that is appropriate to the study design (Moskowitz, 1993; Murray & Hannan, 1990). Only two of the methodologically rigorous studies addressed this issue in the statistical analyses. When D.A.R.E. is assigned by schools, which is usually the case, or by classrooms rather than by individuals, the analysis strategy must take into account the correlations among students in the same school or classroom. This requires performing analyses at the aggregate level (e.g., through comparison of school or classroom means) or by statistically correcting for within-school or within-classroom correlations. Analyses that do not account for the correlations among subjects tend to underestimate the variability in outcomes across schools and therefore overstate the statistical significance of treatment effects (i.e., the difference between the D.A.R.E. and control schools). Because statistical significance is often used as an indicator of effectiveness, this can artificially inflate the effects and thus unfairly bias interpretation of the results. Related to this issue is the need for sufficiently large samples to provide adequate statistical power for detecting significant differences between D.A.R.E. and comparison groups. Most of the D.A.R.E. studies reviewed had large numbers of students. However, because the sample of interest, as described above, usually revolves around schools as opposed to students, it is important that sample size determinations in future studies be based on analysis of the number of schools needed in treatment and control conditions. The final methodological issue raised by our review of studies concerns the careful control and analysis of study attrition. Attrition can affect both the external and internal validity of the study. Attrition rates were usually reported in the D.A.R.E. studies selected for review. However, data on demographic and pretest differences in drug use and other predictor measures between those who remained in and those who dropped out of the study were less frequently reported. Attrition analyses can reveal whether subjects who were lost to follow-up disproportionately represent drug users or those at risk of drug use. When this is the case, it compromises the external validity of the study by limiting the population to which the study results may be generalized. When differential attrition occurs by experimental condition, for example, such that a larger proportion of drug users is lost from the intervention than the control group, the internal validity of the study is undermined. That is, the extent to which either positive or negative outcomes can be attributed to the intervention is limited. We recommend that all future D.A.R.E. evaluations not only meet, but also exceed each of the methodological criteria used for our review by addressing these methodological issues. Specifically, in addition to meeting the criteria used for this review, we recommend that studies report sample demographics, draw a sample with sufficient statistical power to detect differences in outcomes, use an analysis strategy appropriate to the way D.A.R.E. is assigned, minimize attrition, and analyze differential attrition across treatment groups. In addition, we strongly recommend the use of an experimental research design, in which schools are randomly assigned to either D.A.R.E. or control conditions. It is probably insufficient to assign classrooms at random within schools, because the activities of D.A.R.E. officers outside the classroom may affect (or "contaminate") other classes. Althoughthere frequently are difficulties inherent in using an experimental design, results from experimental studies always will be subject to fewer questions about validity than those of quasi-experimental studies. A small set of the D.A.R.E. evaluations studies we reviewed used an experimental study design and incorporated other methodological features into the design. This level of rigor is needed if future D.A.R.E. evaluation research is to contribute further to knowledge about D.A.R.E.'s effectiveness. What overall assessment of D.A.R.E. do the study findings suggest? As described in Chapter 7, we used meta-analytic techniques to synthesize and assess the findings of eight methodologically rigorous studies of the original D.A.R.E. core curriculum. Our approach required calculating individual study effect sizes for drug use and other outcomes targeted by the core curriculum and then averaging effect sizes across studies. Effect sizes facilitate comparing and summarizing results across studies because they transform the results of the studies, which may have been derived from a wide variety of statistical tests, to a common metric. Hence, in terms of statistical output, the results of one study are comparable with those of another study. Furthermore, effect sizes are a more useful indicator of effectiveness than comparing whether results are statistically significant from one study to another. This is because statistical significance can be influenced by such factors as sample size and analysis strategy, making comparisons problematic. The magnitude of the effect sizes, when considered both within each study and averaged across studies, indicated that D.A.R.E. was most effective at immediate posttest in increasing knowledge about drug use and in enhancing social skills. The average effect sizes reported for these outcomes were statistically significant and larger than for other outcomes. It is consistent with other meta-analyses for the largest effect sizes to be associated with knowledge change, supporting the general observation that knowledge is more amenable to change than attitudes or behavior. Averaged across studies, D.A.R.E. also had statistically significant effects on attitudes about drugs, attitude toward the police, and self-esteem. The effect sizes were smaller, however, than for knowledge and social skills, indicating fewer meaningful changes in these areas. The smallest immediate effect sizes were for drug use (alcohol, tobacco, and marijuana separately and averaged together), and except for tobacco use, none was statistically significant. In interpreting the small magnitude of D.A.R.E.'s effectiveness with respect to drug use behavior, it is important to note that the immediate effect sizes may reflect, at least in part, the relatively low frequency of drug use by the elementary school pupils targeted by the original core curriculum.=20 The effect sizes probably also reflect the short time interval from pretest to immediate posttest for behavior change to occur. D.A.R.E. was more effective at influencing factors believed to mediate drug use. It is most noteworthy that D.A.R.E. had positive effects on social skills because it is widely believed that children with greater social competencies are more able to resist social pressures to use drugs. Long-term impact of D.A.R.E., therefore, may result from D.A.R.E.'s immediate impact on social skills. As described earlier, few longer-term longitudinal studies have been conducted, and some have been compromised by contamination of the control group. However, based on two experimental studies for which reliable information 1 and 2 years after implementation is available, there is no evidence that D.A.R.E.'s effects are activated when subjects are older (Clayton et al., 1991b; Ennett et al., 1994). Most long-term evaluations of drug use prevention programs have shown that curriculum effects decay rather than appear or increase with time (Ellickson et al., 1993; Murray et al., 1989). Future D.A.R.E. evaluation studies should continue to assess drug use, attitudes about drug use, social skills, and attitude toward police. Drug use indicators should include tobacco (cigarettes and smokeless tobacco), alcohol (particularly beer, wine, and wine coolers), and marijuana. In addition, use of inhalants and any other drugs that are locally prevalent should be monitored. It is also important to continue to measure outcomes targeted by the D.A.R.E. curriculum, such as social skills, that are believed to indirectly influence drug use. This requires linking outcome measures to specific objectives addressed by the various lessons of the curriculum. These data are needed for measuring a variety of potentially important program effects other than drug use behavior, and for testing assumptions about the means by which the D.A.R.E. curriculum influences drug use.=20 For maximal usefulness, we further recommend that effect sizes be routinely reported with the study results to facilitate comparison both to the results of this meta-analysis and those of future studies. As demonstrated by this meta-analysis, effect sizes can be readily calculated from a variety of statistical tests, so this should not place an undue burden on researchers. When the results of future D.A.R.E. evaluation studies become available, they should be carefully studied and compared with the results of the studies reviewed here. As we recommended earlier, the D.A.R.E. America RTC Advisory Board could coordinate periodic reviews of the evaluations. It is likely that ongoing review of evaluation results will suggest areas where the curriculum might need modification. How well does D.A.R.E. address drug involvement by youth in general? The effect sizes discussed above indicate the extent to which the original D.A.R.E. core curriculum influenced drug use by youth and other outcomes at immediate posttest. To put the D.A.R.E. results in context, we compared D.A.R.E.'s effectiveness with that of other school-based drug use prevention programs to determine whether D.A.R.E. had greater, smaller, or similar effects. Hence, we compared the average D.A.R.E. effect sizes for drug use, knowledge, attitudes, and skills to average effect sizes calculated for other methodologically strong school-based drug use prevention programs. We restricted the comparison programs to those for upper elementary school pupils to make the comparisons most meaningful. We compared D.A.R.E. to two broad categories of prevention programs, namely "interactive" and "noninteractive" programs (Tobler, in press,1994).=20 These two program categories cover most types of current school-based prevention efforts described in Chapter 2.=20 Interactive programs generally are the same as the social competence programs described in that chapter. These programs represent the most recent advances in drug use prevention strategies, and emphasize social competencies and interactive teaching methods. Noninteractive programs generally include knowledge and affective programs, also described in Chapter 2. These programs represent earlier approaches to drug education that emphasize changing knowledge and attitudes about drug use through more traditional learning styles. Interestingly, D.A.R.E. shares similarities with both noninteractive and interactive programs. The original core curriculum was developed when prevention efforts were in transition between noninteractive programs (knowledge and affective education programs) and the emergence of interactive programs (these emphasizing social influence). Average D.A.R.E. immediate effect sizes were greater, except for drug use, than the comparable average effect sizes for noninteractive programs. The D.A.R.E. effect sizes were smaller, however, than the effect sizes for interactive programs. For drug use, the average effect size for interactive programs was three times greater than the average D.A.R.E. effect size; for social skills, four times greater than for D.A.R.E.; and for attitudes, three times greater. Interactive programs have been shown to be the most promising drug use prevention programs; noninteractive programs generally have been shown to be less effective (Botvin, 1990; Bruvold, 1993; Bruvold & Rundall, 1988; Tobler, 1986, in press, 1994). Because D.A.R.E. shares features of both interactive and noninteractive programs, it is perhaps not surprising that the effect sizes we reported should fall somewhere between. In Chapter 7, we described several methodological reasons that could help account for the differences in effect sizes between the D.A.R.E. studies and the interactive comparison programs. These included the possibility that the control groups in the D.A.R.E. studies were exposed to some sort of alternative drug education programs, whereas the control groups for the various interactive studies were not. Another possibil- ity is that because the interactive programs were primarily university research-based evaluation studies, the evaluations--and programs themselves--may have been more stringently implemented and more closely monitored.=20 Under these conditions, greater effectiveness might be expected than in real-world conditions, such as those surrounding D.A.R.E. Other possibilities include factors that may have varied across the intervention programs and associated evaluation studies that contributed to the observed differences in effect sizes. For example, substantial variation in characteristics of the studients (e.g., in race/ethnicity), features of the interventions (e.g., variations in program intensity), and features of the research design (e.g., experimental versus quasi- experimental design) could have contributed to differences in program effects. Such possibilities could not be tested because of the small number of studies.=20 Further testing is warranted when larger samples of D.A.R.E. and comparison studies are available. It is also important to consider substantive reasons that could account for the differences. Possible explanations include the content of the original core curriculum, the use of law enforcement officers as instructors, and the more didactic approach of the instruction. Consideration of each of these explanations suggests areas for future research and possibly for programmatic change. As we have indicated, D.A.R.E.'s curriculum content has similarities with both noninteractive and interactive programs, although it has more of an intrapersonal focus than most interactive programs and, conversely, more of a skills focus than most noninteractive programs. Perhaps greater emphasis in the D.A.R.E. core curriculum on social influences, and less emphasis on affective factors, might result in effect sizes nearer to those reported from interactive programs. However, it is difficult to speculate on the effect of altering the D.A.R.E. curriculum by adding or subtracting particular lessons. Most evaluations of school-based prevention programs have assessed the effectiveness of overall programs rather than of the various program components or combinations of components. Future research in this area might suggest particular curriculum changes. D.A.R.E. instruction offers another possible area of explanation for D.A.R.E.'s relatively poorer performance compared with interactive programs. Although instruction by police officers is the sine qua non of the D.A.R.E. curriculum, their effectiveness may be less than other possible program providers. For example, despite the extensive D.A.R.E. training received by law enforcement officers, they may not be as well equipped to lead the curriculum as classroom teachers are. No studies have been reported in which the D.A.R.E. curriculum was offered by anyone other than a police officer; examination of the results from such a study might suggest whether police officers are as effective as other possible instructors. Regardless of the leader, however, the generally more traditional teaching style used by D.A.R.E. has not been shown to be as effective as an interactive teaching mode (Tobler, 1986, in press, 1994). Traditional didactic approaches that involve teachers delivering information, with little response from students, are increasingly recognized as undesirable. More effective are strategies that engage students in a dialogue with the teacher; more effective still are cooperative or participatory learning approaches in which the teacher serves as a facilitator or catalyst to generate discussions and other interactions among students.=20 Although some D.A.R.E. activities encourage pupil interaction, the original core curriculum relies heavily on the officer as expert and makes frequent use of lectures and question-answer sessions between the officer and pupils. In fact, it is in teaching style, not curriculum content, that D.A.R.E. differs most from the interactive programs examined by Tobler. In the revised D.A.R.E. core curriculum, there is greater emphasis on such cooperative learning experiences. We recommend that the D.A.R.E. training programs urge officers to employ more interactive methods and provide specific guidance on how they can do so. What are the intended and unintended consequences of D.A.R.E.'s approach to drug abuse prevention? None of the studies we reviewed examined consequences of the D.A.R.E. program, either intended or unintended, other than those related directly to the curriculum. However, a number of consequences can be envisioned. These include effects related to other behaviors than drug use (e.g., effects on violent and delinquent behavior). More likely, perhaps, may be consequences related to the relationship that develops between the D.A.R.E. officers and students, which may in turn have positive consequences for police and community relations in general. Research indicates that the effects on police officers through their exposure to students and the problems they face may also be substantial and beneficial (D.A.R.E. Southeast Regional Training Center, 1992). It is possible, in fact, that some of D.A.R.E.'s most important effects are related to the relations between students and police officers. The studies we reviewed provided little insight into these areas. This suggests the importance of research to explore other consequences related to D.A.R.E.'s approach to drug use prevention. Conclusion As might be expected of an institution as large as D.A.R.E., our implementation and outcome assessments present an array of findings and raise a number of issues deserving of consideration by the D.A.R.E. organization and all those concerned with this program. Perhaps most prominently, the findings show a program that has been extremely successful at placing drug education in our Nation's schools. Indeed, D.A.R.E. is now implemented in the majority of school districts in the country and is expected to grow substantially in coming years. At the same time, however, as our findings confirm D.A.R.E.'s prevalence and popularity, they also suggest that the original D.A.R.E. core curriculum has not been as successful in accomplishing its mission to prevent drug use among fifth and sixth graders as have interactive programs. Review of the rigorous evaluations of the original core curriculum, the heart of D.A.R.E., showed that D.A.R.E. had only limited immediate effects on students' drug use. Although the curriculum was more successful in influencing other outcomes, such as social skills, more work is needed to make D.A.R.E. more effective as a drug use prevention program. Given D.A.R.E.'s strengths, the task of increasing the effectiveness of the core curriculum is feasible.=20 D.A.R.E. has achieved its accomplishments to date through building a complex and solid organizational structure that reaches from local to national levels, by forging close partnerships between education and law enforcement, and by winning substantial community support for the program. In no other program of this magnitude have school districts welcomed into the classroom outsiders who lack traditional educational credentials to replace teachers as instructors of a major curriculum. These resources, as well as the dedication of the D.A.R.E. officers in the classroom, should enable D.A.R.E. to move forward more effectively to meet the challenges of drug use prevention. In this final section of our assessment, we briefly recapitulate our major findings and recommendations. =20 D.A.R.E. 's prevalence. D.A.R.E. is now implemented in over half the school districts in the country and is expected to grow substantially in the coming years. Because it is least prevalent in small and rural school districts, we believe that ways for these school districts to increase access to D.A.R.E. should be examined. =20 D.A.R.E. 's organization. D.A.R.E. is at once both hierarchical and community-based. Although it is carefully controlled, monitored, and overseen at the national, regional, and State levels, it is also very much a grass-roots movement, dependent on local initiatives to form partnerships and secure support. At the State level and above, we suggest that sufficient resources be made available to support this burgeoning organization to ensure adequate authority, communication, technical assistance, and oversight. At the local level, we believe that alternative sources of support should be explored so that D.A.R.E. can be freed as much as possible from dependence on public funds. =20 =20 D.A.R.E. 's partnership with education. Law enforcement's relationship with education is the cornerstone of D.A.R.E. We believe that at all levels a variety of mechanisms could be instituted to strengthen this critical partnership. This includes improving methods for co-teaching D.A.R.E. at the local level, as well as increasing where possible the already multifaceted involvement of D.A.R.E. officers in school life. We also suggest ensuring adequate representation on advisory boards by staff of departments of education at the State and national levels. =20 Popular support for D.A.R.E. Anecdotal evidence of grass-roots support for D.A.R.E. is abundant and is fully confirmed in our study. School-based drug prevention coordinators tended to rate school staff's attitudes toward D.A.R.E. as well as those of students, the parents, and the community as very supportive. The D.A.R.E. curriculum and students' receptivity to the program, and perhaps most important, D.A.R.E.'s effects on students were rated as very satisfactory. This persuasive evidence suggests that whatever modifications and enhancements may be made to the D.A.R.E. curriculum and how the program is taught, D.A.R.E.'s organization and structure at the local level is sound and should be preserved. =20 The original D.A.R.E. core curricula. Drug prevention coordinators' endorsements of D.A.R.E.'s positive effects on students are generally not supported by the results of the methodologically sound short-term evaluations of the original D.A.R.E. core curriculum we summarized. As indicated earlier, D.A.R.E. demonstrated somewhat greater effects than those of didactic school-based drug prevention methods that are based on affective approaches, but considerably fewer effects than those of interactive methods that use social influence approaches. Because D.A.R.E. already incorporates many interactive features, we believe that appropriate modifications can be made both to the core curriculum and to the way D.A.R.E. is taught that are well within the context of the institution as a whole. These modifications should be made periodically (perhaps every 2 years), as refinements are suggested by evaluations of drug prevention programs in general, and of D.A.R.E.inparticular. We comm= end D.A.R.E. for convening a Scientific Advisory Committee that comprises drug prevention specialists who will review relevant drug prevention research findings and make recommendations concerning improvements to the curricula.=20 In conclusion, D.A.R.E. represents an institution that is unique in the area of drug use prevention: a partnership between law enforcement and education that has the substantial support of children, parents, and the community at large. Not unexpectedly, along with this highly visible profile come high expectations. Our report demonstrates D.A.R.E.'s success in meeting many of these expectations, as well as challenges that lie ahead.=20 Key to the continued growth of D.A.R.E. will be careful monitoring of the effectiveness of the various curricula, coupled with the willingness to make and assess modifications that could enhance effectiveness. D.A.R.E. has already demonstrated its responsiveness to change by the introduction of new curricula, revisions to the core curriculum, and expanded roles for D.A.R.E. officers.=20 Equally important to D.A.R.E.'s viability will be its continued coordination of the roles and responsibilities of the many D.A.R.E. players. In both of these efforts, we recommend that D.A.R.E. seek to strengthen its partnerships with individuals and institutions outside its bounds. The advice, support, and perspectives of those who are not part of the D.A.R.E. structure but who are equally committed to drug use prevention will enhance the vitality and integrity of the program. We believe these efforts will result in a program that maintains its unique identity and place in drug education, while meeting more effectively the challenge of reducing drug use among youth. APPENDIX A SAMPLING FOR SCHOOL DISTRICT DRUG PREVENTION COORDINATORS SURVEY Exhibit A.1 Number of School Districts in Sampling Frame, by Region, Urbanicity, SES, Minority Status, and District Size Stratification Variables N% Minority Status High 4,02327.3 Low 10,692 72.7 14,715100.0 SES High 10,79473.4 Low 3,921 26.6 14,715100.0 Urbanicity Urban/suburban 5,22635.5 Rural 9,489 64.5 14,715100.0 District size Small 7,34749.9 Large 7,368 50.1 14,715100.0 Region East 3,15221.4 Southeast 9636.5 Midwest 4,75932.4 Southwest 3,41923.2 West 2,422 16.5 14,715100.0 Exhibit A.2 Number of School Districts in Each Stratum forthe Samplin= g Frame = =20 Region East Southeast = =20 MidwestSouthwest West Minor- ity District Urban/ Urban/ = =20 Urban/ Urban/=20 Urban/ SES Status Size Suburban Rural Suburban Rural = =20 Suburban Rural Suburban Rural Suburban Rural High High Small 90 95 6 20 = 117=20 154 14 105 27 80 Large 119 248 10 33 = 172=20 422 50 279 56 246 Low Small 509 438 63 229 = 479=20 858 276 817 281 419 Large 473 333 73 277 = 464=20 781 240 742 292 407 Low High Small 75 22 21 92 = 63=20 94 4298=20 60 39 Large 157 90 21 45 = 160=20 169 92 191 77 72 Low Small 152 194 15 35 = 191=20 422 56 298 70 231 Large 78 79 2 21 = 55=20 158 11 108 17 48 Exhibit A.3 First-Phase Sample Allocation by Region, Urbanicity, SES, Minority Status, and District Size Stratification Variables N% Minority Status High 41027.3 Low 1,090 72.7 1,500100.0 SES High 1,10173.4 Low 399 26.6 1,500100.0 Urbanicity Urban/suburban 53435.6 Rural 966 64.4 1,500100.0 District Size Small 75050.0 Large 750 50.0 1,500100.0 Region East 32121.4 Southeast 1006.7 Midwest 48532.3 Southwest 34623.1 West 248 16.5 1,500100.0 Exhibit A.4 First-Phase Sample Allocation, by Each Stratum = =20 Region East Southeast = =20 MidwestSouthwest West Minor- ity District Urban/ Urban/ = =20 Urban/ Urban/=20 Urban/ SES Status Size Suburban Rural Suburban Rural = =20 Suburban Rural Suburban Rural Suburban Rural High High Small 9 10 2 2 = 12=20 16 211=20 3 8 Large 12 25 2 3 = 18=20 43 528=20 6 25 Low Small 52 45 6 23 = 49=20 87 2783=20 29 43 Large 48 34 7 28 = 47=20 80 2476=20 30 41 Low High Small 8 2 2 9 = =20 6 10 410=20 6 4 Large 16 9 2 5 = 16=20 17 819=20 8 7 Low Small 15 20 2 4 = 19=20 43 630=20 7 24 Large 8 8 1 2 = =20 6 16 211=20 2 5 Exhibit A.5 First-Phase Sample, by Region and D.A.R.E. Status1 East Southeast Midwest Southwest=20 West Total N % N % N % N %N% N % D.A.R.E. 180 56.0 46 51.7 182 37.5 124 35.3=20 114 44.9646 43.0 No 138 43.0 43 48.3 174 35.9 144 41.0=20 95 37.4594 40.0 D.A.R.E. Unknown 3 1.0 0 0.0 129 26.6 83 23.7=20 45 17.7260 17.0 D.A.R.E. Status Total 321 100.0 89 100.0 485 100.0 351 100.0=20 254 100.01500 100.0 1Based on data provided by State D.A.R.E. coordinators. Exhibit A.6 Second-Phase Sample Allocation, by Region and D.A.R.E. Status1 East Southeast Midwest Southwest=20 West Total N % N % N % N %N% N % D.A.R.E. 60 56.0 15 50.0 61 37.7 41 35.3=20 38 44.7215 43.0 No D.A.R.E. 46 43.0 15 50.0 59 36.4 48 41.4=20 32 37.6200 40.0 Unknow 1 1.0 0 0.0 42 25.9 27 23.8=20 15 17.7 85 17.0 D.A.R.E. Status Total 107 100.0 30 100.0 162 100.0 116 100.0=20 85 100.0500 100.0 1Based on data provided by State D.A.R.E. coordinators. Appendix B Individual Study Descriptions Brief descriptions of the eight methodologically rigorousstudies selected for the meta-analysis are given below in alphabetical order by the location of the study. The research design, sample size and characteristics, and results for drug use knowledge, attitudes about drug use, social skills, self-esteem, attitude toward police, and drug use behavior are reported. Additional information and greater detail about the study methodologies and results are available in the reports or papers issued by each study. 1.British Columbia The British Columbia evaluation of D.A.R.E. (Walker, 1990)used a quasi-experimental design in which seven schools were assigned to receive D.A.R.E. and four schools with similar demographic characteristics were selected for the comparison condition. The study administered an anonymous pretest and immediate posttest; assessed pretest equivalence on some demographic variables and all outcome variables; and controlled for pretest values on outcome variables by analyzing change scores at the aggregate level. The sample included 463 fifth-, sixth-, and seventh-grade pupils. No information was given on the ethnic composition of the sample. The results showed that D.A.R.E. had a statisticallysignificant effect on subjects' knowledge about drugs. D.A.R.E. did not have a statistically significant effect on attitudes about drug use or on drug use behavior (use of tobacco, beer, pop, marijuana, acid, valium, wine, aspirin, uppers, downers, heroin, crack, liquor, candy, glue, and PCP). 2. Hawaii The Hawaii evaluation of D.A.R.E. (Manos, Kameoka, &Tanji, 1986) used a quasi-experimental research design in which 23 schools were assigned to either D.A.R.E. or comparison conditions. In three other schools, some classrooms were assigned to D.A.R.E. and other classrooms to the comparison condition; data from these comparison classrooms were not included in our analysis. The study administered a pretest and immediate posttest; matched subjects from pretest to posttest; used some measures that were standardized scales or derived from existing measures; and controlled for pretest values on outcome variables. The sample included 2,009 fifth-grade pupils (not including the pupils in comparison classrooms in the D.A.R.E. schools). No information was given on the ethnic composition of the sample. Attrition was not analyzed but was approximately 6%. The results showed that D.A.R.E. had a statisticallysignificant effect in the desired direction on one social skills indicator (choices in a risk situation). D.A.R.E. did not have statistically significant effects on another social skills indicator (assertiveness) or on subjects' attitudes about drug use. 3. Illinois-C The Illinois-C evaluation of D.A.R.E. (Ennett, Rosenbaum, Flewelling, Bieler, Ringwalt, & Bailey, 1994) used both an experimental and quasi-experimental design: 12 pairs of schools serving urban and suburban areas were randomly assigned to D.A.R.E. and control conditions, while 6 pairs serving rural areas were assigned using a nonrandom procedure. The study matched schools on metropolitan status, ethnic composition, number of students with English proficiency, and percentage of pupils from low- income families; administered a pretest and three posttests (immediately, 1 year, and 2 years after implementation); matched subjects from pretest to posttest; used measures that were standardized scales or derived from existing measures; controlled for pretest values on outcome variables and initial nonequivalence between the comparison groups; adjusted for school effects with a nested cohort strategy; and assessed attrition. The sample included 1,323 subjects who were fifth and sixth graders at pretest; 54% were white, 22% were African American, 9% Hispanic, and 15% were American Indian, Asian American, or "other." The attritionrate over the three posttests was 26% and did not differ across experimental conditions. The results showed that D.A.R.E. had statisticallysignificant effects in the desired direction on subjects' self- esteem, attitude toward police, and increased use of cigarettes at immediate posttest. D.A.R.E. did not have statistically significant effects on subjects' attitudes about drugs (general attitude toward drugs, attitude toward use of specific drugs, perceived benefits of cigarette use and alcohol use; perceived costs of cigarette use and alcohol use; perceived media influence on smoking and beer drinking); social skills (assertiveness and peer refusal skills); or on other drug use behavior (initiation of alcohol, cigarettes, or heavy drinking; increased use of alcohol or heavy drinking; or quitting alcohol). 4. Kentucky-A The Kentucky-A evaluation of D.A.R.E. (Clayton, Cattarello,Day, & Walden, 1991a; Clayton, Cattarello, & Walden,1991b) used an experimental design employing random assignment of 31 schools to either D.A.R.E. or control conditions.=20 The study administered a pretest and three posttests (immediately, 1 year, and 2 years after implementation); matched subjects from pretest to posttest; used measures that were standardized scales or derived from existing measures; controlled for pretest values on outcome variables and initial nonequivalence between the comparison groups; and assessed attrition. The sample included 1,925 subjects who were sixth graders at pretest; 76% were white and 21% were African American.=20 The attrition rate over the three posttests was approximately 21% and did not differ across experimental conditions. The results showed that, at immediate posttest, D.A.R.E. had statistically significant effects in the desired direction on some indicators of subjects' attitudes about drugs (general attitudes about drugs and negative attitudes about alcohol, cigarettes, and marijuana).=20 D.A.R.E. did not have statistically significant effects at immediate posttest on other indicators of subjects' attitudes about drug use (positive attitudes about alcohol, cigarettes, and marijuana), social skills, self- esteem, or drug use behavior (use of alcohol, cigarettes, and marijuana). 5. Kentucky-B The Kentucky-B evaluation of D.A.R.E. (Faine & Bohlander1988, 1989) used a quasi-experimental research design in which 16 schools, stratified by school type (rural, inner-city, suburban, and parochial), were randomly selected among schools assigned to receive D.A.R.E. immediately or at a later semester (a delayed intervention comparison group).=20 The study administered a pretest and two posttests (immediately and one year after implementation); matched subjects from pretest to posttest; used measures that were standardized scales or derived from existing measures; and controlled for pretest values on outcome variables and type of school. The sample in the first year included 783 fifth-grade pupils; sample demographic characteristics were not given. Attrition information was not given. By year 2, all the comparison groups had received the D.A.R.E. program. The immediate posttest results showed that D.A.R.E. had statistically significant effects in the desired direction on subjects' knowledge about drugs, attitudes about drug use, social skills, self-esteem, and attitude toward police. 6. Minnesota The Minnesota evaluation of D.A.R.E. (McCormick &McCormick, 1992) used a quasi-experimental research design in which D.A.R.E. was implemented by semester in 63 schools; random samples of D.A.R.E. participants and pupils who would receive D.A.R.E. in the next semester (a delayed intervention comparison group) were drawn. The study administered a pretest and immediate posttest; matched subjects from pretest to posttest; used measures that were standardized scales or derived from existing measures; assessed pretest equivalence on selected demographic variables; and controlled for pretest values on outcome variables. The sample included 943 fifth graders; 62% of the D.A.R.E. group participants were white; 18% Asian Americans, 12% African American, and 7% Native American or Hispanic (demographic information on the comparison group was not given). The attrition rate was 9%. The results showed that D.A.R.E. had a statisticallysignificant effect in the desired direction on subjects' knowledge about drugs. D.A.R.E. did not have statistically significant effects on subjects' attitudes about drug use, social skills, self-esteem, or attitude toward police. 7. North Carolina The North Carolina evaluation of D.A.R.E. (Ringwalt, Ennett,& Holt, 1991) used an experimental research design employing random assignment of 20 schools to either D.A.R.E. or control conditions. The study administered a pretest and immediate posttest; matched subjects from pretest to posttest; used measures that were standardized scales or derived from existing measures; controlled for pretest values on outcome variables and initial nonequivalence between the comparison groups; adjusted for school effects; and assessed attrition. The sample included 1,270 fifth- and sixth-grade students; 50% were African American, 40% were white, and 10% were American Indian, Asian American, or Hispanic. The attrition rate was 9% and did not differ across experimental conditions. The results showed that D.A.R.E. had statisticallysignificant effects in the desired direction on subjects' attitudes about drugs (general attitude toward drugs, attitude toward use of specific drugs, perceived peer attitude toward drug use, perceived costs of using alcohol and cigarettes, and perceptions of the media portrayal of beer drinking and cigarette smoking) and social skills (assertiveness). D.A.R.E. did not have statistically significant effects on subjects' drug use behavior (alcohol, cigarettes, or inhalant use). 8. South Carolina The South Carolina evaluation of D.A.R.E. (Harmon, 1993) useda quasi-experimental research design in which five schools were assigned to receive D.A.R.E. and six schools matched on demographic characteristics were selected for the comparison condition. The study administered a pretest and immediate posttest; matched subjects from pretest to posttest; used measures that were standardized scales or derived from existing measures; controlled for pretest values on outcome variables and initial nonequivalence between the comparison groups; and assessed attrition.=20 The sample included 602 fifth-grade pupils. The attrition rate was 13.5% in the D.A.R.E. group and 16.3% in the comparison groups. The results showed that D.A.R.E. had statisticallysignificant effects in the desired direction on subjects' attitudes about drugs, social skills (assertiveness), and initiation of alcohol use in the past year. D.A.R.E. did not have statistically significant effects on subjects' self-esteem, attitude toward police, or other drug use behavior indicators (previous year tobacco and marijuana use, and previous month cigarette, alcohol, and marijuana use). Appendix C Bibliography of Comparison Program Evaluations Allison, K., Silver, G., & Dignam, C. (in press).=20 Effects on students of teacher training in use of a drug education curriculum. Journal of Drug Education. Dielman, T., Shope, J., Butchart, A., & Campanelli, P.=20 (1986). Prevention of adolescent alcohol misuse:=20 An elementary school program. Journal of Pediatric Psychology, 11, 259-281. Dielman, T., Shope, J., Campanelli, P., & Butchart, A.=20 (1987). Elementary school-based prevention of adolescent alcohol misuse. Pediatrician:=20 International Journal of Child and Adolescent Health, 14, 70-76. Dielman, T., Shope, J., Leech, S., & Butchart, A.=20 (1989). Differential effectiveness of an elementary school-based alcohol misuse prevention program. Journal of School Health, 59, 255-262. Dubois, R., Hostelter, M., Tosti-Vasey, J., & Swisher.J.=20 (1989). Program report and evaluation: 1988-1989 school year. Unpublished report. Philadelphia, PA: Corporate Alliance for Drug Education. =20 Flay, B., Koepke, D., Thomson, S., Santi, S., Best, J., & Brown, S. (1989). Six-year follow-up of the first Waterloo school smoking prevention trial. American Journal of Public Health, 79, 1371-1376. Flay, B., Ryan, K., Best, J., Brown, K., Kersell, M., d'Avernas, J., & Zanna, M. (1983). Cigarette smoking: Why young people do it and ways of preventing it. In P. McGrath & P. Firestone (Eds.), Pediatric and adolescent behavioral medicine (pp. 132-183). New York: Springer- Verlag. Flay, B., Ryan, K., Best, J., Brown, K., Kersell, M., d'Avernas, J., & Zanna, M. (1985). Are social psychological smoking prevention programs effective? The Waterloo study. Journal of Behavioral Medicine, 8, 37-59. Gersick, K., Grady, K., & Snow, D. (1988). Social- cognitive development with sixth graders and its initial impact on substance use. Journal of Drug Education, 18, 55-70. Gilchrist, L., Schinke, S., Trimble, J., & Cvetkovich,G.=20 (1987). Skills enhancement to prevent substance abuse among American Indian adolescents.=20 International Journal of the Addictions, 22, 869- 879. Johnson, C., Graham, J., Hansen, W., Flay, B., McGuigan, K., & Gee, M. (1987). Project Smart after three years: An assessment of sixth-grade and multiple- grade implementations. Unpublished report.=20 Pasadena, CA: University of Southern California- Institute for Prevention Research. McAlister, A. (1983, May). Approaches to primary prevention. Presented at the National Academy of Science/National Research Council Conference on Alcohol and Public Policy, Washington DC. =20 Moskowitz, J., Malvin, J., Schaeffer, G., & Schaps, E.=20 (1984). Evaluation of an affective development teacher training program. Journal of Primary Prevention, 4, 150-162. Sarvela, P. (1984). Early adolescent substance use in rural northern Michigan and northeastern Wisconsin.=20 Dissertation Abstracts International, 46(01), 2000A. (University Microfilms No. 8422327). Sarvela, P., & McClendon, E. (1987). An impact evaluation of a rural youth drug education program.=20 Journal of Drug Education, 17, 213-231. Schaeffer, G., Moskowitz, J., Malvin, J., & Schaps, E.=20 (1981). The effects of a classroom management teacher training program on first-grade students:=20 One year follow-up. Unpublished report. Napa, CA:=20 The Napa Project Pacific Institute for Research.=20 Schaps, E., Moskowitz, J., Condon, J., & Malvin, J.=20 (1984). A process and outcome evaluation of an affective teacher training primary prevention program. Journal of Alcohol and Drug Education, 29, 35-64. Schinke, S., Bebel, M., Orlandi, M., & Botvin, G.=20 (1988). Prevention strategies for vulnerable pupils: School social work practices to prevent substance abuse. Urban Education, 22, 510-519. Schinke, S.P., & Blythe, B.J. (1981). Cognitive- behavioral prevention of children's smoking. Child Behavior Therapy, 3, 25-42. Schinke, S., & Gilchrist, L. (1983). Primary prevention of tobacco smoking. Journal of School Health, 53, 416-419. Schinke, S., Gilchrist, L., Schilling, R., Snow, W., & Bobo, J. (1986). Skills methods to prevent smoking. Health Education Quarterly, 13, 23-27. Schinke, S., Gilchrist, L., & Snow, W. (1985). Skills interventions to prevent cigarette smoking among adolescents. American Journal of Public Health, 75, 665-667. Schinke, S., Gilchrist, L., Snow, W., & Schilling, R.=20 (1985). Skills-building methods to prevent smoking by adolescents. Journal of Adolescent Health Care, 6, 439-444. Shope, J., Dielman, T., & Leech, S. (1988, November).=20 An elementary school-based alcohol misuse preven- tion program: Two year follow-up evaluation.=20 Presented at the American Public Health Association Annual Meeting, Boston, MA.REFERENCES Aniskiewicz, R.E., & Wysong, E.E. (1987). Project D.A.R.E. evaluation report: Kokomo schools, spring, 1987. Unpublished report. Kokomo, IA:=20 Indiana University. Aniskiewicz, R., & Wysong, E. (1990). Evaluating D.A.R.E.: Drug education and the multiple meanings of success. Policy Studies Review, 9, 727-747. Anonymous. (1987). Project D.A.R.E. evaluation, spring, 1987. Unpublished paper. Pittsburgh, PA. Bangert-Drowns, R.L. (1986). Review of developments in meta-analytic method. Psychological Bulletin, 99, 388-399. Bangert-Drowns, R.L. (1988). The effects of school- based substance abuse education: A meta-analysis.=20 Journal of Drug Education, 18, 243-264. Bauman, K.E., & Dent, C.W. (1982). Influence of an objective measure on the self-reports of behavior.=20 Journal of Applied Psychology, 67, 623-628. Becker, H.R., Agopian, M.W., & Yeh, S. (1992). Impact evaluation of Drug Abuse Resistance Education (D.A.R.E.). Journal of Drug Education, 22, 283- 291. Biglan, A., & Ary, D.V. (1985). Methodological issues in research on smoking prevention. In: C.S. Bell & R. Battjes (Eds.), Prevention research:=20 Deterring drug abuse among children and adolescents (pp. 170-195). Rockville, MD: National Institute on Drug Abuse. Botvin, G.J. (1990). Substance abuse prevention:=20 Theory, practice, and effectiveness. In M. Tonry & J.Q. Wilson (Eds.), Drugs and crime (pp. 461-519).=20 Chicago: The University of Chicago Press. Bruvold, W.H. (1993). A meta-analysis of adolescent smoking prevention programs. American Journal of Public Health, 83, 872-880. Bruvold, W.H., & Rundall, T.G. (1988). A meta-analysis and theoretical review of school based tobacco and alcohol intervention programs. Psychological Health, 2, 53-78. Bureau of Justice Assistance. (1988). Implementing Project D.A.R.E.: Drug Abuse Resistance Education.=20 Washington, DC: Author. Bureau of Justice Assistance. (1991a). An introduction to D.A.R.E.: Drug Abuse Resistance Education (BJA Program Brief, NCJ 129862). Washington, DC:=20 Author. Bureau of Justice Assistance. (1991b). Drug Abuse Resistance Education (D.A.R.E.) training center policies and procedures.=20 Washington, DC: Author. Clayton, R.R., Cattarello, A., Day, L.E., & Walden,K.P.=20 (1991a). Persuasive communication and drug prevention: An evaluation of the D.A.R.E. program.=20 In L. Donoher, H. Sypher, & W. Bukoski (Eds.), Persuasive communication and drug abuse prevention (pp. 295-313). Hillsdale, NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum Associates. Clayton, R.R., Cattarello, A., & Walden, P. (1991b).=20 Sensation seeking as a potential mediating variable for school-based prevention intervention: A two- year follow-up of D.A.R.E. Health Communication, 3, 229-239. Cook, D.J., Guyatt, G.H., Ryan, G., Clifton, J., Willas, A., Mcllroy, W., & Oxman, A.D. (1993). Should unpublished data be included in meta-analyses?=20 Journal of the American Medical Association, 269, 2749-2753. D.A.R.E. Southeast Regional Training Center. (1992). An Investigation of DARE Officer and DARE Mentor Behavioral Change: Final report. Raleigh, NC:=20 Author. DeJong, W. (1987). A short-term evaluation of Project D.A.R.E. (Drug Abuse Resistance Education):=20 Preliminary indicators of effectiveness. Journal of Drug Education, 17, 279-294. Dukes, R., & Matthews, S. (1991). Evaluation of the Colorado Springs citywide D.A.R.E. program:=20 Interim report. Unpublished report. Colorado Springs, CO: University of Colorado, Center for Social Science Research. =20 Earle, R.B., Garner, J., & Phillips, N. (1987).=20 Evaluation of the Illinois state police pilot D.A.R.E. program. Unpublished report.=20 Springfield, IL: A.H. Training and Development Systems, Inc. Ellickson, P.L., Bell, R.M., & McGuigan, K. (1993).=20 Preventing adolescent drug use: long-term results of a junior high school program. American Journal of Public Health, 83, 856-861. Ellickson, P.L., Hays, R.D., & Bell, R.M. (1992).=20 Stepping through the drug use sequence: Longitudi- nal scalogram analysis of initiation and regular use. Journal of Abnormal Psychology, 101, 441-451. Ennett, S.T., Rosenbaum, D.P., Flewelling, R.L., Bieler, G.S., Ringwalt, C.R., & Bailey, S.L. (1994).=20 Long-term evaluation of Drug Abuse Resistance Education. Addictive Behaviors, 19, 113-125. Evaluation and Training Institute. (1990). D.A.R.E. evaluation report for 1985-1989. Unpublished report. Los Angeles, CA: Author. Faine, J.R., & Bohlander, E. (1988). Drug Abuse Resistance Education: An assessment of the 1987-88 Kentucky state police D.A.R.E. program.=20 Unpublished report. Bowling Green, KY: Western Kentucky University, Social Research Laboratory. Faine, J.R., & Bohlander, E. (1989). D.A.R.E. in Kentucky schools 1988-89. Unpublished report.=20 Bowling Green, KY: Western Kentucky University, Social Research Laboratory. Flay, B.R. (1985). Psychosocial approaches to smoking prevention: A review of findings. Health Psychology, 4, 449-488. Glass, G., McGaw, B., & Smith, M. (1981). Meta-analysis in social research. Beverly Hills, CA: Sage Publications. Hansen, W.B. (1992). School-based substance abuse prevention: A review of the state of the art in curriculum, 1980-1990. Health Education Research, 7, 403-430. Hansen, W.B., Johnson, C., Flay, B., Graham, J., & Sobel, J. (1988). Affective and Social Influences approaches to the prevention of multiple substance use among seventh grade students: Results from project Smart. Preventive Medicine, 17, 135-144. Harmon, M.A. (1993). Reducing the risk of drug involvement among early adolescents. An evaluation of Drug Abuse Resistance Education (D.A.R.E.).=20 Evaluation Review, 17, 221-239. Hedges, L.V., & Olkin, I. (1985). Statistical methods for meta-analysis. New York: Academic Press. =20 Kandel, D. (1975). Stages in adolescent involvement in drug use. Science, 190, 912-914. Kethineni, S., Leamy, D.A., & Guyon, L. (1991).=20 Evaluation of the Drug Abuse Resistance Education program in Illinois: Preliminary report.=20 Unpublished report. Normal, IL: Illinois State University, Department of Criminal Justice Sciences. =20 Manos, M.J., Kameoka, K.Y., & Tanji, J.H. (1986).=20 Evaluation of Honolulu police department's Drug Abuse Resistance Education program. Unpublished report. Honolulu, HI: University of Hawaii-Manoa, School of Social Work, Youth Development and Research Center. McCormick, F.C., & McCormick, E.R. (1992). An evaluation of the third year drug abuse resistance education (D.A.R.E.) program in Saint Paul.=20 Unpublished report. Saint Paul, MN: Educational Operations Concepts, Inc. =20 McDonald, R.M., Towberman, D.B., & Hague, J.L. (1990).=20 Volume II: 1989 impact assessment of Drug Abuse Resistance Education in the Commonwealth of Virginia. Unpublished report. Richmond, VA:=20 Virginia Commonwealth University, Institute for Research in Justice and Risk Administration. =20 McDonald, R.M., Towberman, D.B., & Hague, J.L. (1991).=20 Volume III: 1990 Assessment of Drug Abuse Resistance Education in the Commonwealth of Virginia. Unpublished report. Richmond, VA:=20 Virginia Commonwealth University, Institute for Research in Justice and Risk Administration. Moskowitz, J. (1989). The primary prevention of alcohol problems: A critical review of the research literature. Journal of Studies on Alcohol, 50, 54-88. Moskowitz, J.M. (1993). Why reports of outcome evaluations are often biased or uninterpretable.=20 Evaluation and Program Planning, 16, 1-9. Moskowitz, J., Malvin, J., Schaeffer, G., & Schaps, E.=20 (1983). Evaluation of a junior high school primary prevention program. Addictive Behaviors, 8, 393- 401. Murray, D.M., & Hannan, P.J. (1990). Planning for the appropriate analysis in school-based drug use prevention studies. (1990). Journal of Consulting and Clinical Psychology, 58, 458-468. Murray, D.M., Pirie, P., Luepker, R.V., & Pallonen, U. (1989). Five- and six-year follow-up results from four seventh-grade smoking prevention strategies.=20 Journal of Behavioral Medicine, 12, 207-218. Nyre, G.F., & Rose, C. (1987). Drug Abuse Resistance Education (D.A.R.E.) longitudinal evaluation annual report, January 1987. Unpublished report. Los Angeles, CA: Evaluation and Training Institute. =20 Nyre, G.F., Rose, C., & Bolus, R.E. (1987). Drug Abuse Resistance Education (D.A.R.E.) longitudinal evaluation annual report, August, 1987.=20 Unpublished report. Los Angeles, CA: Evaluation and Training Institute. =20 Oetting, E.R., & Bauvais, F. (1990). Adolescent drug use: Findings of national and local surveys.=20 Journal of Consulting and Clinical Psychology, 58, 385-394. Pentz, M.A., & Trebow, E. (1988). Implementation issues in drug abuse prevention research: In C. Leukefeld, & W. Bukoski (Eds.), Drug prevention intervention research methodological issues.=20 Rockville, MD: National Institute on Drug Abuse. Perry, P.D., & Tobler, N.S. (1992). Manual for effect size calculation: Formula used in the meta- analysis of adolescent drug prevention programs (Appendix 3, Meta-Analysis of Adolescent Drug Prevention Programs: Final Report). Rockville, MD: National Institute on Drug Abuse. Ringwalt, C., Curtin, T.R., & Rosenbaum, D.P. (1990). A first-year evaluation of D.A.R.E. in Illinois.=20 Unpublished report. Research Triangle Park, NC:=20 Research Triangle Institute. Ringwalt, C., Ennett, S.T., & Holt, K.D. (1991). An outcome evaluation of project D.A.R.E. (Drug Abuse Resistance Education). Health Education Research:=20 Theory and Practice, 6, 327-337. Rosenbaum, D.P., Ringwalt, C., Curtin, R.T., Wilkinson, D., Davis, B., & Taranowski. (1991). Second year evaluation of D.A.R.E. in Illinois. Unpublished report. Chicago, IL: University of Illinois, Center for Research in Law and Justice. Rosenbaum, D.P., Flewelling, R.L., Bailey, S.L., Faggiani, D., & Ringwalt, C. (1992). Third year evaluation of D.A.R.E. in Illinois. Unpublished report. Chicago, IL: University of Illinois, Center for Research in Law and Justice. Rosenthal, R. (1991). Meta-analytic procedures for social research. Applied Social Research Methods Series. Vol 6). Newbury Park, CA: Sage Publications. Rundall, T.G. & Bruvold, W.H. (1988). Meta-analysis of school-based smoking and alsochol use prevention programs. Health Education Quarterly, 15, 317-334.=20 =20 Thorne, J.M., Holley, J.A., Wine, J., Hayward, B.J., & Ringwalt, C.L. (1991). A study of the Drug-Free Schools and Communities Act: Report on State and local programs (U.S. Department of Education Contract LC88028001). Research Triangle Park, NC:=20 Research Triangle Institute. Tobler, N.S. (1986). Meta-analysis of 143 adolescent drug prevention programs: Quantitative outcome results of program participants compared to a control or comparison group. Journal of Drug Issues, 16, 537-567. Tobler, N.S. (1994). Meta-analysis of adolescent drug prevention programs. Unpublished Ph.D. dissertation, State University of New York at Albany. Tobler, N.S. (in press). Meta-analytic issues for prevention intervention research. In L. Seitz & L. Collins (Eds.), Advances in data analysis for prevention intervention research. Rockville, MD:=20 National Institute on Drug Abuse. University of Michigan. (1994, January 31). Drug use rises among American teen-agers, as fewer see dangers and as peer norms begin to change.=20 Cigarette smoking among teens also begins to increase [press release on Monitoring the Future Study]. Ann Arbor, MI: University of Michigan, News and Information Service. Walker, S. (1990). The Victoria police department Drug Abuse Resistance Education programme (D.A.R.E.) programme evaluation report #2 (1990). Unpublished report. Victoria, BC: The Ministry of the Solicitor-General, Federal Government of Canada. ************************************************************ William T. Browning Internet/Bulletin Board Coordinator National Criminal Justice Reference Service (NCJRS) 1600 Research Boulevard Rockville, MD 20850 (301) 251-5507 FAX (301) 251-5212 wbrownin@ncjrs.aspensys.com ************************************************************ CliffSchaffer's Home Page WT01-B26-24IA031-000651-B014-37http://206.61.184.43:80/schaffer/GOVPUBS/pidcms.htm 206.61.184.43 19970122120654 text/html 43345HTTP/1.0 200 OKDate: Wednesday, 22-Jan-97 12:06:47 GMTServer: WebSitePro/1.1f (S/N wpo-0deb)Allow-ranges: bytesContent-type: text/htmlLast-modified: Saturday, 28-Dec-96 06:13:06 GMTContent-length: 43127 PREVENTING ILLEGAL DIVERSION OF CHEMICALS: U.S. DEPARTMENT OF JUSTICE OFFICE OF JUSTICE PROGRAMS NATIONAL INSTITUTE OF JUSTICE NATIONAL INSTITUTE OF JUSTICE RESEARCH IN BRIEF NOVEMBER 1993 PREVENTING ILLEGAL DIVERSION OF CHEMICALS: A MODEL STATUTE BY SHERRY GREEN Letter from Michael J. Russell, Acting Director, NationalInstitute of Justice: Chemicals diverted from legitimate commerce are used in theproduction of illicit drugs such as cocaine, heroin, methamphetamine, PCP,and LSD. Controlling illegal diversion and use of such chemicals isessential to limiting illicit drug production. Recent efforts to addressthis problem are based on the belief that illicit drug production can betraced from the records of chemical manufacturers and dealers of rawmaterials in the same way that laundered money can be traced through financialrecords. The principal U.S. statute to control chemical diversion isthe Chemical Diversion and Trafficking Act of 1988, which establishedrecord keeping requirements and enforcement activities, initially for 20chemicals. The Act has already proven effective in limiting theinternational illicit diversion of the identified chemicals and controlling somedomestic manufacturing. However, illicit drug production in the UnitedStates has been rising at an alarming rate, with illegal domesticlaboratories now capable of producing enough stimulants, depressants, hallucinogens, andnarcotics to satisfy demand for these substances. Adequate record-keeping ensures that there are paper trailson chemicals sent to illegal laboratories that make drugs. Thirty-two States,however, do not require record-keeping of transactions involving chemicalsidentified as necessary for producing illegal drugs. Criminals camouflagediversion of chemicals by moving shipments through States withoutrecord-keeping requirements. To focus attention on the need for all State law enforcementagencies to supplement Federal controls over chemical traffic and itsdiversion into illicit drug manufacturing, the National Institute of Justicesponsored a project to create a Model State Chemical Control Act. TheModel Act seeks to balance and accommodate the interests of law enforcement andlegitimate commerce. This Research in Brief explains how the Model Actcan be used to help halt the growth of illegal domestic drug manufacturingby stopping the diversion of chemicals from legitimate to illegitimatepurposes. [End letter] Law enforcement agencies around the world are using a varietyof methods to attack the illegal and deadly "industry" of illicitdrugs. Enforcement officials seize contraband substances, break up distributionnetworks, disrupt money-laundering operations, and destroy crops. Acritical part of this multifaceted attack on drug trafficking is the controlof specific chemicals that are necessary to produce illegal drugs. The United States is one of the world's leading producers anddistributors of the chemicals that are used to make controlled substances.Each year our Nation exports more than 50,000 metric tons of chemicals toLatin America, many of which find their way into the clandestinelaboratories of cocaine- and heroin-producing countries. In fact, seizures of illegallabs in Colombia and other Latin American countries often uncover chemicalcontainers with US. company logos. Until 1989 much of the cocaine entering ourcountry was produced using chemicals originating in the United States. Although there has been a decline in the export of chemicalsfor manufacturing illegal drugs, there has been an increase inthe chemicals' distribution at home. Illegal domestic laboratories are nowcapable of producing enough illicit drugs to satisfy U.S. consumers'demand. In 1991 the National Institute of Justice (NIJ) supported aproject to help the States develop a legislative response to the problem ofdistribution of chemicals and their manufacture into illegal drugs. Toprepare the Model State Chemical Control Act of 1992 (the Model), the AmericanProsecutors Research Institute (APRI), the research arm of the NationalDistrict Attorneys Association, brought together investigators andprosecutors from Arizona, California, Oklahoma, Texas, and Washington State.In addition, APRI solicited comments from the Department of Justice and theDrug Enforcement Administration (DEA) on the lessons they had learned at theFederal level and sought to understand the concerns of the chemical andpharmaceutical industries. This Research in Brief describes how chemicals are used tomake illicit drugs, discusses existing Federal and State legislation tocurtail the diversion of chemicals for illicit drug production, andreviews the Model statute. DOMESTIC ILLICIT DRUG PRODUCTION --Essential and precursor chemicals: All major illicit drugsexcept marijuana are either extracted or synthesized in a process requiringchemicals that are categorized as either "essential" or"precursor." Essential chemicals are used to extract drugs, such as cocaine, from plants. Althoughthese chemicals do not become part of the drug's molecular structure, theyare crucial to the manufacturing process. Precursor chemicals are used tosynthesize drugs (such as PCP), which are not naturally derived. These chemicals dobecome part of the drug's molecular structure. --Clandestine Labs: Highly sophisticated laboratoryoperations are sometimes necessary to manufacture drugs. For example, producingmarketable quantities of cocaine requires large-scale operations to handle theenormous amounts of coca leaves and solvents required. On the other hand, illegaldrug production is often a simple process, without need of complextechnology, sophisticated education, or training. Many synthetic drugs such asmethamphetamine and PCP can be produced in someone's home with readily availablelaboratory equipment. In fact, with equipment and precursor chemicalsworth $200, a criminal can in 18 hours produce a batch of methamphetaminewith a street value of $98,000.(ref. 1) In the 1980's States faced an outbreak of clandestinelaboratories because chemicals were readily available on the open market or wereeasily diverted from legitimate commerce. In 1986 the Oklahoma Bureau ofNarcotics (OBN) seized 28 labs, an almost 100 percent increase over the 16labs seized in 1985. Another 100 percent increase in seizures occurred in1988 when OBN seized 62 laboratories, compared to the 30 labs seized theprevious year. From 1985 to 1987, Texas narcotics officers seized more thantwice the number of labs as OBN. Clandestine laboratories range from small crude operations insheds, bathtubs, mobile homes, boats, and motel rooms to highlysophisticated operations with professional quality laboratory glassware andequipment. More than 80 percent of the clandestine labs in the UnitedStates produce methamphetamines.(ref. 2) With a knowledge of chemistryequivalent to that learned in high school, illicit lab operators are believed toproduce 25 tons of methamphetamines annually with a street value of $3billion. Less than 1 percent of that amount is spent on the chemicals needed forproduction.(ref. 3) CHEMICAL DIVERSION AND TRAFFICKING ACT In 1988 Congress enacted the Chemical Diversion andTrafficking Act (CDTA), Subtitle A of the Anti-Drug Abuse Amendments of 1988(codified as amendments to the Federal Controlled Substances Act). CDTA establishedrecord-keeping and reporting requirements and authorized enforcementactivities for domestic and international transactions in designated precursor andessential chemicals. Originally CDTA regulated machines for making thedrugs into tablets or capsules, 12 precursor chemicals, and 8 essentialchemicals. Now, 27 precursor and 7 essential chemicals are on the CDTA list.Chemicals may be added or deleted under standard Federal rule makingprocedures. CDTA applies to any individual or legal entity thatmanufactures, distributes domestically, imports, or exports any of the listedchemicals. The Act makes the unauthorized trade in these listed chemicals equivalentto trafficking in illegal drugs. Each chemical has been assigned a threshold amount, by volumeor weight, or a threshold number of monthly transactions. Once the thresholdhas been reached or exceeded, regulated individuals and entities must complywith Federal record-keeping, reporting, and identification requirements.However, threshold quantities do not apply to machinery; distributionof a single tableting or encapsulating machine triggers CDTA provisions. Among the provisions are requirements that purchasers supplyproof of identity in all regulated transactions. The type ofidentification required depends on whether the customer is new, is an individual orestablished business, is paying in cash, or is exporting the chemical toanother country. Records of regulated domestic transactions involving aprecursor chemical or a tableting or encapsulating machine must be kept for 4years. For an essential chemical, the record must be kept 2 years. Recordsmust be readily retrievable either at the business where the transactionoccurred or some other central location. Each record must contain specificinformation about the transaction and is subject to inspection and photocopyingby the Drug Enforcement Administration. CDTA requires that regulated individuals and entities reportsome circumstances both orally and in writing to DEA. Theseinclude uncommon methods of payment, loss or disappearance of a chemical, andsuspicion that a chemical has been diverted for illegal purposes. As withrecords, reports must contain the date of the transaction, quantity of thechemical purchased, name and address of each party, method of transfer, and otherdescriptive details. On the basis of the reports or a lapse inrecord-keeping, DEA has the authority to stop chemical shipments. Receipt of therequired advance notice of shipments can trigger DEA suspension when anillicit transfer is suspected. --The effect of Federal control: Shortly after implementationof CDTA, DEA noted a downward trend in domestic illegal lab activity asmeasured by the number of lab seizures. Of the 1,000 projected DEA labseizures for 1989, 807 materialized. A sharper decline occurred the following yearwhen DEA seized 521 laboratories. This decline was the first time seizureshad dropped significantly since 1981. CDTA has also been successful in controlling exports ofessential chemicals to Latin America. But as the pathways to foreign buyers havenarrowed, some U.S. exporters have turned their attention to the domesticmarket. Opportunities for diversion exist all along the domesticcommercial chain. Although CDTA's strict requirements help safeguard the legaltransfer of chemicals above the threshold levels, illicit operators arerestructuring their businesses to avoid Federal regulations. They arefocusing their efforts on States that do not have effective mechanisms forcontrolling chemicals. --Closing the door: The Office of National Drug ControlPolicy has estimated that the world supply of cocaine in 1990 was 1,000 metrictons, or about 2.2 million pounds. To produce this amount of cocaine, millionsof pounds of essential chemicals were required for processing. But many ofthese chemicals such as hydrochloric acid also have hundreds of legitimateuses, and for this reason, they are common substances in international trade. Criminals obtain these substances from manufacturers throughtheft, bribery of employees, or even legal purchase, especially in areasthat lack chemical control laws or do not enforce them. Poor plant security canincrease theft, and some retail purchasers are actually "frontcompanies" set up by producers to disguise the illicit drug trade. In addition, the vast international network of freightforwarders, brokers, and agents provides access to chemicals through multiplesales transactions, similar to money-laundering operations. In ports and freetrade zones, criminals can obtain the desired chemicals by repacking orre-labeling materials. CDTA has greatly decreased U.S. exports of essentialchemicals to Latin America. This Federal statute has added to costs borne bycriminals, and the new regulation and record-keeping requirements of the Actmake it increasingly likely that illicit operators are restructuringtheir businesses to avoid Federal regulations. They are focusing their effortson States that do not have effective mechanisms for controlling chemicals. THE NEED FOR EFFECTIVE STATE CONTROLS State regulatory and enforcement efforts are needed tosupplement Federal controls over the movement of chemicals into illegalchannels. If State officials can follow the trail of precursor and essentialchemicals from the chemical manufacturer to the illicit drug producer, thenproducers can be identified and apprehended before they manufacture illegaldrugs. Controlling these chemicals, therefore, is a potent strategy that canhelp identify drug criminals and interfere with their operations. Effective regulation of chemical transactions could dry upthe sources that supply illegal labs. However, clandestine drug production isa nomadic business. When chemicals become difficult to obtain in onelocale, illegal lab operators simply move their operations to a locationwhere acquisition of chemicals is less complicated. Differences in the extent ofcontrol exercised by the States currently make that a fairly easy process. Moreconsistent State laws could curtail movement of illegal labs from Stateto State. EXISTING VARIATIONS IN STATE CONTROLS To date 18 States have sought to control the existence ofclandestine labs by enacting their own detailed chemical tracking requirements.Some jurisdictions have incorporated these requirements into theircontrolled substances acts already on the books, while others haveadopted new, distinct statutes. --Number of chemicals: Colorado controls the largest numberof chemicals (35) while Montana regulates 9. The differences reflect eachState's experience or policy regarding diversion, abuse, and the potential illicituse of a chemical. Nearly all of the States that have controls excludeprescription or over-the-counter drugs, or both, from chemical requirements,with special exemptions for ephedrine, pseudoephedrine,norpseudoephedrine, and phenylpropanolamine. --Registration: All 18 States require a license or permit tolawfully manufacture or transfer a regulated chemical. Only a fewregulate the purchase or possession of chemicals. Registration renewalgenerally happens annually and involves a reasonable fee; the definition ofreasonable varies from a maximum of $25 in Arkansas to a minimum of $250 in NewMexico. Grounds for denial, suspension, or revocation include fraud; drug lawviolations and convictions; and denial, suspension, or revocation of Federalregistrations. --Record-keeping: Differences also occur in the requirementsfor record-keeping. For example, several jurisdictions mandatethat chemical transfer records be kept for 2 years after the transactiondate, but Minnesota requires that records be kept for 5 years. Texasrequires that records of sales of laboratory apparatus also be kept. Hawaiiand Missouri maintain the confidentiality of information obtained throughrecords. Pennsylvania penalizes wrongful use of the information. --Reporting: Required reporting of intrastate transfers andout-of-State purchases also varies among States. In several States theregulatory agency must be given 21 days advance notice of any chemicaldelivery. Some States provide a monthly reporting alternative for individuals andentities with a history of lawful use, a regular relationship with arecipient, or both. While California and Montana require notice of receipt ofchemicals within 3 days after delivery, Oregon allows 10 days. Ten Statesrequire that special reports be submitted within 3 days after discovery of a theftor loss of chemicals, and eight require reports within 3 days for adiscrepancy in quantities shipped and received. Iowa and Washington extendthese deadlines to 7 days. --Exemptions: Medical professionals, agents, and licensedentities such as common carriers are traditionally exempt from licensing orreporting obligations. Some States expand the exemptions to includecollege chemistry students, government employees, or researchers. --Purchaser identification: Most jurisdictions mandate thatindividual purchasers identify themselves with a photograph, proof ofstreet or residential mailing address, and signature. Somejurisdictions ask for the purchaser's birth date, driver's license or otherState-issued identification number, year in which the purchaser's vehicle wasmanufactured, and vehicle license tag number. Most business recipients must furnish anauthorization letter listing an identification number, an address, a phonenumber, and a description of the chemical's intended use. --Responsibility: Finally, there is no consensus among theStates on which government agency should be given regulatory responsibility.The 18 States assign this duty to a wide variety of health, pharmaceutical,commerce, and enforcement agencies. ILLEGITIMATE USES FOR LEGITIMATE PRODUCTS Many people recognize ephedrine as an ingredient in sinusmedications. However, consumers are often unaware that ephedrine is alsothe primary precursor used to illegally produce methamphetamine (meth).In 1990, 53 percent of the clandestine meth labs seized by the DrugEnforcement Administration used the ephedrine reduction method to producethe drug.(ref. 4) State officials report that illicit meth laboratories in theWest and Southwest began using ephedrine after phenylacetic acid cameunder State regulation. In northern California 85 percent of the seizedmeth labs used single-ingredient ephedrine tablets. In Oregon officialsdiscovered that over-the-counter ephedrine tablets sold in the Portland areahad become a source of ephedrine for northwest meth lab operators.(ref. 5) For this reason, ephedrine has been included in the list ofchemicals targeted for regulation under the Model State ChemicalControl Act. MODEL STATE CHEMICAL CONTROL ACT In developing the Model State Chemical Control Act of 1992,the drafters sought to close loopholes in existing Federal and Statelegislation and to foster greater consistency among State regulations. Unlikemost criminal laws, the Model is a preventive measure. Its goal is to stopdrug offenses before they occur by preventing precursor and essentialchemicals from being diverted to illegal channels. It seeks to protect theinterests of legitimate commerce without limiting the ability of law enforcement tostop illicit chemical transactions. Monitoring every transaction involving a regulated chemical.The Model creates a monitoring system that tracks 35 chemicals fromsource to use. It covers a comprehensive range of chemicals controlled byStates and the Federal Government. The Model's reporting and record-keeping requirements applyto every transaction involving a regulated chemical, not just thoseexceeding a legal threshold. Under Federal law, manufacturers and distributorsdo not have to report or keep records on individuals or businesses who buychemicals in amounts below the legal threshold. Individuals can circumventthe law by making multiple purchases of small quantities, therebyaccumulating large amounts of chemicals for clandestine production.Unfortunately, Federal officials have no way of obtaining information about suchtransactions. The Model permits State and local officials to address this typeof diversion activity, which would otherwise escape detection until afterillegal use of the chemicals. The list of regulated chemicals can be modified by rule inresponse to changes in diversion or use. Under the Model, State officialsmay regulate a chemical on an emergency basis while awaiting completion ofnormal rule-making procedures. Emergency regulation is sometimes necessary to preventimminent hazards to public health and safety. Some chemicals are flammable ortoxic and their use must be controlled as soon as possible to prevent explosions,environmental damage, or illness. Registering manufacturers and distributors. Responsibilityfor the control of regulated chemicals rests primarily with manufacturers anddistributors. Therefore, the Model requires that they annually furnish lawenforcement with detailed information about the sources, location, and amountof chemicals available for sale. The purpose of annual registration isthreefold: --To convey to manufacturers and distributors anunderstanding of the critical role they play in eliminating illegal chemicaltransfers. --To help government officials determine if the chemicalsfound at clandestine lab sites have been supplied by a legal or"underground" source. --To help government officials more accurately assess theextent of illegal diversion. The drafters anticipate that the number of annualregistrations to be processed will be manageable. For example, in Californiaofficials currently register only 40 to 45 companies per year. Requiring permits to possess a regulated chemical. Permitsidentify which persons intend to use specific quantities of chemicals for aspecific purpose. With certain exceptions, every applicant for a permit mustprovide detailed personal information, including a criminal history andnotarized fingerprint card. Based on this information, government officialsascertain the fitness of a potential chemical recipient and ensure that theintended use is lawful. The permit provision is modeled after Oklahoma's chemicalcontrol statute, which extends the law beyond the traditional"receiving" category of purchasers to individuals who want to "possess" aregulated chemical. By requiring that they obtain a permit each time they seek topossess a regulated chemical, the Model eliminates a significantloophole in many existing statutes. For example, some illegal"cookers" manufacture controlled substances using chemicals produced in their own clandestinelaboratories. They are not subject to existing regulation and liabilityprovisions, which apply solely to purchasers, because they do not buy thechemical from an outside source. Under the Model statute, "cookers"would be subject to the law because although they do not "receive" thechemicals, they nonetheless "possess" them. The Model's permit process protects legitimate commerce intwo ways. First, it exempts the owners and officers of publicly heldcorporations (those with 35 shareholders or more) from the disclosure requirements ofpermit applications. These corporations are often fairly sizablebusinesses or are headquartered out-of-State. Their shareholders and officerslack the personal access necessary to illegally use or transfer regulatedchemicals. The Model assumes that there is no need for detailed backgroundinformation or fingerprint cards for such persons. Second, the Model includes a reporting alternative forpossessors who demonstrate a history of regular, legitimate use. The risk ofthese possessors diverting chemicals for unlawful purposes is lessthan with other possessors. Therefore, they may submit retrospective monthlyreports of actual chemical use in lieu of obtaining permits. The Modelprevents unnecessary duplication by accepting copies of Federalreports containing information about threshold amounts of regulated chemicals. --Exempting individuals from regulation: The Model exemptscommon carriers pharmacists, physicians, and other authorized practitionersfrom the statute's requirements. Manufacturers can obtain a specialexemption to continue marketing bona fide drug products such as over-thecounter sinus and asthma medications. A special exemption is granted upon afinding by State officials that a product is manufactured and distributed in amanner that prevents its diversion. In making the finding, Stateofficials consider the product's packaging, advertising, and actual or potential fordiversion.(ref. 6) --Safeguarding possession of regulated chemicals: The Modelcontains a number of safeguards to prevent unauthorized or unscrupulous personsfrom gaining access to regulated chemicals. It specifies that thefollowing persons are ineligible to apply for a registration or permit: Convicted drug offenders. Persons who have had a prior registration or permit Minors Because juveniles are subject to milder penalties thanadults, they frequently have been recruited to become participants incriminal activity. Therefore, making minors ineligible should preclude drugbalers from using juveniles to acquire chemicals for illegal purposes. The Model also provides for denial, suspension, or revocationof a registration or permit. Violation of the statutory rules,falsification of a document, and similar acts are grounds for denial ofauthorized access to regulated chemicals. Spotting discrepancies in the flow of chemicals. The Modelestablishes four information-gathering mechanisms to help State officials spotpossible diversion activities. First, the Model requires manufacturers, distributors, andpossessors to report any suspicious transaction or circumstance. cashpayments, discrepancies between quantities shipped and received, andtheft or loss of chemicals are all examples of suspicious circumstances. Second, the Model requires manufacturers, distributors,brokers, and traders to provide monthly reports detailing every transactioninvolving a regulated chemical. The reports allow officials to identify the truepurchaser of chemicals and ascertain whether the actual chemical use isconsistent with the stated intended use. Third, the Model requires purchasers to submit informationabout themselves, their permit or other authorization, and their vehicles priorto receiving or distributing a regulated chemical. This provision, whichincorporates California's purchaser identification requirements, alsofacilitates determination of the ultimate purchaser and the chemical'suse. Fourth, manufacturers and distributors are required to takeinventory annually and to keep all transaction records readilyaccessible for 4 years. --Providing for enforcement: The Model vests State officialswith the authority to identify and respond to situations ofnoncompliance. It authorizes limited warrantless inspections during regularbusiness hours and allows State officials to routinely inspect inventories,storage facilities, records, papers, files, and equipment.(ref. 9) It also grantsState officials the power to subpoena witnesses and require documentproduction. The Model provides for stiff fines and terms of imprisonment fornoncompliance. To eliminate the economic incentive for this type of criminalactivity, the Model applies a State's drug forfeiture procedures to moneyand property used in violation of the chemical diversion statute. --Recovering expenses: As with any proactive regulatoryscheme, the Model requires a continuing investment of time and money. Toprevent financial strain on scarce State resources, a system of nonrefundableapplication fees is recommended to help offset the cost of administering theprogram. In addition, the Model imposes a special civil assessment onviolators of the statute to be used for cleanup of illegal laboratory sites.Seizure of clandestine laboratories often reveals significant amounts ofhazardous or toxic waste and other byproducts that have been found. UnderFederal law, law enforcement agencies become liable for various cleanup andtransporting operations, damage to natural resources, and subsequenthealth risks that remain after the lab is dismantled.(ref. 10) Last year Oklahoma spent approximately $6,000 to clean upillegal labs, and for several years California has spent more than $1 million ayear for similar tasks. However, these expenses were only for removingbulk contamination. In the future site restoration throughhazardous waste removal may require even larger sums of money. The civil assessmentwill prevent violators from escaping financial liability for theenvironmental damage they cause and help States address the issue of long-termhazardous waste or residual contamination. APPLYING THE MODEL The chemical control legislation in California, Oklahoma,Texas, and Washington served as guides for creating the Model. Oklahomaand Texas officials have already noted the positive effect of theirlegislation on the struggle to eliminate illegal drug production. The OklahomaBureau of Narcotics and Texas Department of Public Safety indicate thattheir States' precursor laws significantly reduced the availability ofchemicals throughout Oklahoma and Texas. The reduction in supply has led to adecrease in clandestine laboratory activity in both States. The TexasDepartment of Public Safety reports that the availability of illicitamphetamine and methamphetamine in Texas decreased about 50 percent duringthe 3-year period since passage of its statute." Despite the success of these States' efforts, the lack ofadequate chemical controls in many states provides illegal drug manufacturerswith opportunities to expand their production of controlledsubstances. The toll in health, welfare, enforcement, and safety costs as well ashuman suffering is incalculable. The Model is designed to help Statepolicymakers and criminal justice professionals develop legislation that willseverely curtail domestic illegal drug production while protecting legitimatecommercial interests. COPING WITH CHEMICAL HAZARDS Seizures of clandestine labs pose special problems for lawenforcement officers because many of the chemicals used in drugmanufacturing are dangerous. For example, acids and solvents are corrosive andflammable, and some are highly explosive. About one-fifth of clandestine labseizures result from reports of fires caused by chemical processes.(ref. 7) In addition, many precursor and essential chemicals arecorrosive and can cause lung and eye damage, even upon exposure to vaporsemanating from the lab. Furthermore, according to a study in California,one-tenth of seized labs were booby-trapped with explosives or with disfiguringand poisonous chemical devices.(ref. 8) For these reasons, law enforcement experts recommend thatpolice officers in all areas of the criminal justice system be given specialtraining in handling these substances. They note that rural policeagencies are just as likely to encounter clandestine labs as urban police. Highwaypatrols and other agencies in jurisdictions with large railroad and othertransportation hubs are likely to find such substances en route to aclandestine location. NOTES 1. Impact of Clandestine Drug Laboratories on Small Business,1988: Hearing Before the Subcommittee on Regulation and BusinessOpportunities of the House of Representatives Committee on Small Business, 100thCongress, 2d Session, 1988 (Statement of David Frohnmayer, Attorney General of theState of Oregon). 2. Drug Enforcement Administration. Guidelines for theCleanup of Clandestine Drug Laboratories. Washington, D.C.: U.S. Department ofJustice, Drug Enforcement Administration, 1990. 3. Laszlo, A.T. "Clandestine Drug Laboratories:Confronting a Growing National Crisis." National Sheriff, 41 (1989): 9-14. 4. American Prosecutors Research Institute, Highlights of theModel State Chemical Control Act. Alexandria, Virginia: AmericanProsecutors Research Institute, 1991: 6-7. 5. American Prosecutors Research Institute, Highlights, pp.6-7. 6. This provision is based on draft CDTA amendmentsnegotiated between DEA and chemical and drug manufacturers. 7. National Institute of Justice. Controlling Chemicals Usedto Make Illegal Drugs: The Chemical Action Task Force and the DomesticChemical Action Group. Research in Brief. Washington, D.C.: U.S. Department ofJustice, January 1993: 3. 8. Laszlo, "Clandestine Drug Laboratories," 9-14. 9. This provision complies with New York v. Burger, 107 S.Ct. 2636 (1987). 10. These requirements result from provisions of theComprehensive Environmental Response, Compensation, and Liability Act [42U.S.C. 9601-9657 (1982), amended by 42 U.S.C. 9601-9675 (1988)] and theResource Conservation and Recovery Act [42 U.S.C. 6901-6992 (1988)]. Also, theSuperfund Amendments and Reauthorization Act [Public Law 99-499] makes owners ofcontaminated property responsible for decontamination before it is sold.Thus, if a property is confiscated by a local jurisdiction, seizedthrough asset forfeiture laws, and subsequently sold, the jurisdiction maystill be responsible for cleanup. 11. Jolley, Inspector Jerrell, and Inspector Kenneth Hailey.Chemical Precursor Legislation: Texas Reduces the General Availabilityof Illicit Amphetamine and Methamphetamine. Unpublished report, March1991. REFERENCES American Prosecutors Research Institute. State Drug Laws forthe '90s. Alexandria, Virginia: American Prosecutors ResearchInstitute, 1991. Duncan, John. Clandestine Labs on Decline. Oklahoma Bureau ofNarcotics Enforcement. Unpublished report, 1991-1992. Duncan, John. Surviving Clandestine Labs. Oklahoma Bureau ofNarcotics Enforcement. Unpublished report, 1991-1992. Drug Enforcement Administration. Report summarizing Stateprecursor control laws. Washington, D.C.: U.S. Department of Justice, DrugEnforcement Administration. Unpublished, 1991-1992. General Accounting Office. Briefing report on the DrugEnforcement Administration's implementation of the Chemical Diversion andTrafficking Act of 1988. B-243007, April 1991. Findings and conclusions of the research reported here arethose of the author and do not necessarily reflect the official positionor policies of the U.S. Department of Justice. The National Institute of Justice is a component of theOffice of Justice Programs, which also includes the Bureau of JusticeAssistance, Bureau of Justice Statistics, Office of Juvenile Justice andDelinquency Prevention, and the Office for Victims of Crime. Sherry Green was a senior attorney at the AmericanProsecutors Research Institute in Alexandria, Virginia, when she worked on thisproject to develop the Model (supported by NIJ grant #91-IJ-CX-K002). Shecurrently serves as executive Director of the President's Commission on ModelState Drug Laws, which is reviewing the Model for possible inclusion in itsreport to the States on recommended model laws. Drafters of the Model in addition to Ms. Green were SteveBrookman, Oklahoma State Bureau of Investigation, Mark Faull, Crime Strike,Phoenix, Arizona; William Holman, San Diego District Attorney's Office; JohnDuncan Oklahoma Bureau of Narcotics Enforcement; Katina Kypridakes,California Bureau of Narcotics Enforcement; Harry Matz, U.S. Department ofJustice; Michael Scott, Texas Department of Public Safety; Richard Wintory, OklahomaCounty District Attorney's Office; and Ken Ronald, Drug EnforcementAdministration. Katina Kypridakes and Mark Faull assisted with the development ofthis Research in Brief. Readers who wish to learn more about how States can addressthe chemical diversion issue may request a special information packagethat includes a copy of the Model and accompanying commentary; sample Statestatutes, regulations, and forms; and a chart of State chemical controlrequirements. Interested persons should write the American ProsecutorsResearch Institute, National Drug Prosecution Center, 99 Canal Center Plaza,Suite 510, Alexandria, VA 22314, or call 703- 549-6790. NCJ 142974 [NOTE: The published report from which this information wasinput contains accompanying charts and tables.] CliffSchaffer's Home Page WT01-B26-25IA031-000651-B014-66http://206.61.184.43:80/schaffer/GOVPUBS/dcourt1.htm 206.61.184.43 19970122120711 text/html 85467HTTP/1.0 200 OKDate: Wednesday, 22-Jan-97 12:06:55 GMTServer: WebSitePro/1.1f (S/N wpo-0deb)Allow-ranges: bytesContent-type: text/htmlLast-modified: Saturday, 28-Dec-96 06:15:19 GMTContent-length: 85249 Drug Courts: Information on a New Approach to AddressDrug-Relat Drug Courts: Information on a New Approach to Address Drug-Related Crime (Briefing Report, 05/22/95, GAO/GGD-95-159BR). GAO provided information on drug courts, a new approach usedto monitor defendants' drug use, treatment, and behavior. GAO found that: (1) in exchange for reduced charges, drugusing defendants can be diverted to drug courts where judgesmonitor their progress through frequent status hearings; (2) drug courtprograms vary in length, participant eligibility, funding, and otherpractices; (3) as of March 1995, there were at least 37 drug courts operatingnationwide; (4) 33 drug courts have accepted over 20,000 defendants; (5)most drug courts do not accept violent offenders; (6) drug courts havenot been operating long enough to determine their overalleffectiveness; and (7) although the 1994 Crime Act authorized $1 billion to supportdrug court programs from fiscal year (FY) 1995 through FY 2000, Congresshas proposed repealing the drug court grant program. --------------------------- Indexing Terms----------------------------- REPORTNUM: GGD-95-159BR TITLE: Drug Courts: Information on a New Approach to Address Drug-Related Crime DATE: 05/22/95 SUBJECT: Crimes or offenses Courts (law) Drug treatment Federal grants Defendants Drug abuse Law enforcement Recidivism Offender rehabilitation IDENTIFIER: Dade County (FL) DOJ Corrections Options Program Federal Drug Court Grant Program ************************************************************************** * This file contains an ASCII representation of the text of aGAO * * report. Delineations within the text indicating chaptertitles, * * headings, and bullets are preserved. Major divisions andsubdivisions * * of the text, such as Chapters, Sections, and Appendixes,are * * identified by double and single lines. The numbers on theright end * * of these lines indicate the position of each of thesubsections in the * * document outline. These numbers do NOT correspond with thepage * * numbers of the printed product. * * * * No attempt has been made to display graphic images,although figure * * captions are reproduced. Tables are included, but may notresemble * * those in the printed version. * * * * A printed copy of this report may be obtained from the GAODocument * * Distribution Facility by calling (202) 512-6000, by faxingyour * * request to (301) 258-4066, or by writing to P.O. Box 6015,* * Gaithersburg, MD 20884-6015. We are unable to acceptelectronic orders * * for printed documents at this time. * ************************************************************************** Cover ================================================================COVER Briefing Report to the Committee on the Judiciary, U.S.Senate, and the Committee on the Judiciary, House of Representatives May 1995 DRUG COURTS - INFORMATION ON A NEW APPROACH TO ADDRESS DRUG-RELATED CRIME GAO/GGD-95-159BR Drug Courts Abbreviations ===============================================================ABBREV BJA - Bureau of Justice Assistance CSAT - Center for Substance Abuse Treatment DOJ - Department of Justice NIJ - National Institute of Justice OJP - Office of Justice Programs Letter ===============================================================LETTER B-260301 May 22, 1995 The Honorable Orrin G. Hatch Chairman The Honorable Joseph R. Biden, Jr. Ranking Minority Member Committee on the Judiciary United States Senate The Honorable Henry J. Hyde Chairman The Honorable John Conyers, Jr. Ranking Minority Member Committee on the Judiciary House of Representatives This briefing report provides information on drug courts,\1 anew approach used by state and local governments to addressdrug-related crime. These courts monitor the treatment and behavior ofdrug-using defendants. Title V of the Violent Crime Control and Law Enforcement Actof 1994 (the 1994 Crime Act) authorizes the award of federal grantsfor drug courts. The act requires that we assess the effectiveness andimpact of these grants and report to Congress by January 1, 1997. Toassist Congress in its deliberations on whether to fund drug courts,we developed this preliminary report. Specifically, we gathered information on drug courts in existence prior to the awardingof grants under the 1994 Crime Act, assessed evaluations ofthese courts, and reviewed the Department of Justice's (DOJ) responsibilities and plans for implementing the federal drugcourt grant program. During April and on May 11, 1995, we briefed the Committeeson the results of our work. -------------------- \1 Throughout this briefing report, we use the terms drugcourts and drug court programs interchangeably. RESULTS ------------------------------------------------------------Letter :1 In response to the deluge of drug cases since the late 1980sand the cycle of recidivism (rearrest rates) common to drugoffenders, some state and local jurisdictions created drug courts, themajority of which have been operating since 1993. The main purpose ofdrug courts is to use the authority of the court to reduce crimeby changing defendants' drug-using behavior. In exchange for the possibility of dismissed charges or reduced sentences,defendants are diverted to drug courts. Judges preside over drug courtproceedings, monitor the progress of defendants through frequent statushearings, and prescribe sanctions and rewards as appropriate incollaboration with prosecutors, defense attorneys, treatment providers, andothers. Although there are basic elements common to many drug courtprograms, they vary in terms of participant eligibility, length of theprogram, penalties and rewards, and other practices. The courts aresupported by a variety of local, state, federal, and private funds and participant fees, according to the Drug Court ResourceCenter.\2 As of March 1995, there were at least 37 drug courtsoperating nationwide, most of which had been fully operational for atleast 9 months. Thirty-three drug courts responding to ourquestionnaire reported having accepted over 20,000 defendants, of whom athird had completed their programs. According to the Project Directorof the Drug Court Resource Center, none of the drug courts acceptdefendants currently charged with a violent offense, and most do notaccept defendants with prior violent convictions. However, at leastone drug court accepts defendants regardless of prior offenses.(See sect. I for more general information on drug courts.) We assessed six evaluations of five drug courts completed asof March 1995. Although some evaluation results indicated that drugcourts may have some beneficial effects, limitations in theirdesigns and methodologies, as well as the relative newness of drugcourts, precluded firm conclusions about the overall impact of these programs. The evaluations showed mixed results in recidivismand other defendant outcomes. For example, two evaluations showedless recidivism by drug court defendants. However, three other evaluations showed no significant differences in recidivism. Additionally, two evaluations of the same drug court showed contrasting recidivism results. (See sect. II and app. IIIfor more information on the evaluations we assessed.) The 1994 Crime Act authorized the Attorney General to awardand administer discretionary grants for drug court programs. Akey requirement of the act is that violent offenders areprohibited as drug court participants. The act authorized $1 billion fromfiscal years 1995 through 2000 to support drug court programs. Forfiscal year 1995, $29 million was appropriated. However, Congresshas proposed fiscal year 1995 budget cuts in a pending rescissionbill. In addition, the House has passed legislation repealing thedrug court grant program authorized in the 1994 Crime Act. DOJ expects to award grants beginning in the summer of 1995.The 1994 Crime Act also authorizes the Attorney General toprovide for a national evaluation of drug courts supported by federalgrants. DOJ expects to complete the evaluation to assess the impact and effectiveness of drug court grants in about 2 years. (Seesect. III for more information.) -------------------- \2 The Bureau of Justice Assistance funds the Drug CourtResource Center. The Resource Center began operating October 1, 1994,under the direction of The American University in partnership withthe National Center for State Courts and the National Consortiumof Treatment Alternatives to Street Crime Programs. The ResourceCenter assists state and local justice system officials in planning, implementing, managing, and evaluating drug courts. It alsoacts as a clearinghouse and provides technical assistance and otherservices to jurisdictions interested in developing or expanding drugcourts. OBJECTIVES, SCOPE, AND METHODOLOGY ------------------------------------------------------------Letter :2 In preparation for our 1997 mandated study, we initiated a preliminary review of drug court programs. Our objectiveswere to determine the number, location, and key elements of drug courts; the results and validity of evaluations of drug courts; and DOJ's responsibilities and plans for implementing statutory requirements for the federal drug court grant program. The Drug Court Resource Center, which is based at TheAmerican University, Washington, D.C., provided us with generalinformation on drug courts. To obtain more current information, we sent a questionnaire to 37 drug courts. We received responses from33 drug courts as of March 31, 1995. We did not verify the accuracyof the data provided to us by the Drug Court Resource Center anddrug courts. In addition, we attended a January 1995 nationaltraining conference for drug court professionals in Las Vegas, NV, andvisited drug courts in Las Vegas and Washington, D.C. To determine the results and assess the validity ofevaluations of drug courts, we obtained 11 drug court evaluations completedas of March 1, 1995, from the Drug Court Resource Center. These evaluations were done by a variety of sources, includingindependent researchers, county officials, and court representatives. We reviewed them and assessed the evaluative methodology usedand the validity of reported findings. We did not analyze thereported results of three of them because they reported outcome datafor drug court defendants without any reference to comparison orcontrol groups. We were unable to assess the validity of one becauseit did not include a description of the methodology used. Two dealtwith one drug court and were assessed as one evaluation becauseone was a follow-up to the other and contained the same methodology and findings. To determine DOJ's responsibilities and plans forimplementing the federal grant program, we met with representatives of theOffice of Justice Programs, DOJ. We held discussions and revieweddocuments regarding their responsibilities and plans for implementingthe federally supported drug court program. We also obtained drugcourt funding information from the Department of Health and HumanServices' Center for Substance Abuse Treatment. Our review was done from January 1995 to April 1995 inaccordance with generally accepted government auditing standards. AGENCY COMMENTS ------------------------------------------------------------Letter :3 In April 1995, we provided a draft of this report for commentto the Attorney General and the Project Director of the Drug CourtResource Center. On April 21, 1995, we discussed the report with the ProjectDirector of the Drug Court Resource Center. On May 5, 1995, we alsodiscussed the report with the Deputy Assistant Attorney General andother officials from DOJ's Office of Justice Programs. Theseofficials generally agreed with the information presented in the reportand provided comments that we incorporated as appropriate. DOJ officials said the report was positive, informative, andwill be helpful to drug court professionals. They explained thatthere is no universal model for drug courts, and as a result, each drugcourt operates differently due to local needs and conditions.Similarly, the Project Director of the Drug Court Resource Center saidthat the information presented in the report was comprehensive,accurate, and objective. ----------------------------------------------------------Letter :3.1 We are sending copies of this briefing report to otherinterested congressional committees and Members and the AttorneyGeneral. Copies will also be made available to others upon request. The major contributors to this briefing report are listed inappendix IV. If you have any questions about this report, please callme on (202) 512-8777. Norman J. Rabkin Director, Administration of Justice Issues Briefing Section I DRUG COURTS ==============================================================Letter TYPES OF DRUG COURTS ------------------------------------------------------------Letter :4 (See figure in printed edition.) In the late 1980s, state and local criminal courts wereinundated with drug cases. One response to this challenge was thecreation of drug courts, a relatively recent grassroots movement to dealwith drug-related crime and drug-using defendants. According to DOJ, two main types of drug courts have evolved,those that (1) expedite the processing of drug cases and (2) use court-monitored drug treatment to attempt to achieve changesin defendants' drug-using behavior. In addition, some drugcourts combine these two types. The 1994 Crime Act authorizes grants for those drug courtsthat have programs offering court supervised drug treatment. The actdoes not authorize grants for courts designed solely to expedite the processing of drug cases. This briefing report providesinformation on drug treatment courts. Courts offering court-monitored drug treatment are referredto as "drug treatment courts" or simply "drugcourts." Although there is no standard definition applicable to drug treatment courts, theNational Association of Drug Court Professionals\3 defines them asfollows: "A Drug Court is a special court given theresponsibility to handle cases involving less serious drug using-offendersthrough a supervision and treatment program. These programs include frequent drug testing, judicial and probation supervision,drug counseling, treatment, educational opportunities, and the useof sanctions and incentives." One of the first drug courts to employ drug treatment as anintegral part of the processing of drug felonies is located in DadeCounty (Miami), FL, and began operations in June 1989. This courtbecame a model for other jurisdictions that implemented drug courts. Although drug courts share certain common elements such as court-monitored treatment, the courts are uniquely designedto meet local needs and can vary considerably in the way theyoperate. Organizationally, drug courts generally are distinct parts oftrial courts. -------------------- \3 This is the principal organization of professionalsinvolved in the development of treatment-oriented drug courts. Itsmembers include judges, prosecutors, defense attorneys, treatmentservice providers, educators, researchers, and community leaders. DRUG COURT APPROACHES ------------------------------------------------------------Letter :5 (See figure in printed edition.) DRUG COURT APPROACHES ----------------------------------------------------------Letter :5.1 According to a report provided by the Drug Court ResourceCenter, drug courts have generally taken two approaches to processingcases: (1) deferred prosecution and (2) postadjudication. In thedeferred prosecution approach, shortly after being charged, defendantswaive their right to a speedy trial and enter a treatment program. Defendants who fail to complete the treatment program havetheir charges adjudicated. Defendants who complete the treatmentprogram are not prosecuted further or have their charges dismissed.This approach is intended to capitalize on the trauma of arrestand offers defendants the opportunity to obtain treatment and avoid the possibility of a felony conviction. In the postadjudication approach, defendants are tried andconvicted, but their sentences are deferred or pronounced andincarceration is suspended until they complete or withdraw from the treatmentprogram. This approach provides an incentive for the defendant torehabilitate because progress toward rehabilitation is factored into the sentencing determination. Appendix I presents examples of how cases are processed underthe two drug court approaches. PARTICIPANT ELIGIBILITY CRITERIA ------------------------------------------------------------Letter :6 (See figure in printed edition.) PARTICIPANT ELIGIBILITY CRITERIA ----------------------------------------------------------Letter :6.1 According to the Drug Court Resource Center, drug courtsgenerally accept defendants with substance abuse problems who arecurrently charged with drug possession and/or other nonviolent offensessuch as property crimes. Some drug courts accept defendants who haveprior convictions, and others do not. The Project Director of the Drug Court Resource Center alsopointed out that drug courts do not accept defendants currentlycharged with a violent offense. The Project Director further commentedthat most drug courts do not accept defendants with prior violentoffenses. However, at least one drug court accepts defendantsregardless of prior offenses possibly including defendants with priorconvictions for violent crimes. Under the 1994 Crime Act, federal grantscannot be awarded to any drug court that allows either current orpast violent offenders to participate in its program. DRUG COURT PLAYERS ------------------------------------------------------------Letter :7 (See figure in printed edition.) DRUG COURT PLAYERS ----------------------------------------------------------Letter :7.1 According to a DOJ-funded report on the first national drugcourt conference,\4 judicial leadership is the foundation on whichthe overall drug court approach is most often built. Ajurisdiction's trial court provides the leadership, authority, andmanagement capacity to enable the drug court to operate. The drug courtis headed by a judge whose role is generally expanded beyondnormal court duties to include active involvement in monitoring thestatus of defendants in the treatment program. The judge's dutiesmay include conducting hearings, reviewing treatment progressreports, issuing bench warrants, and deciding who may enter theprogram and who should be terminated considering recommendations ofprosecutors, public defenders, and treatment providers. The judiciary alone, however, cannot successfully implementand operate a drug court, according to the conference report.Rather, a drug court requires a special collaborative effort amongjudges, prosecutors, defense attorneys, and related criminal justiceagencies along with treatment providers and other social services and community organizations. This collaborative effort is basedon local needs and the targeted population being served and may differ considerably among drug courts. Specifically, drug courts create new and different roles for prosecutors and defense attorneys. In most drug courts theseplayers are not adversaries in the traditional sense but rather areto work in concert with the court for the sole purpose of helpingdefendants become drug free. This nonadversarial role is significantbecause the court does not arbitrate in the usual fashion and has the opportunity to address addiction-related issues. Further,drug courts place the defendant in the unique role of being heldpublicly accountable for his or her actions. -------------------- \4 Justice and Treatment Innovation: The Drug Court Movement,A Working Paper of the First National Drug Court Conference,December 1993, John S. Goldkamp, October 1994. COMMON ELEMENTS OF DRUG COURT PROGRAMS ------------------------------------------------------------Letter :8 (See figure in printed edition.) COMMON ELEMENTS OF DRUG COURT PROGRAMS ----------------------------------------------------------Letter :8.1 According to the Drug Court Resource Center, in most drugcourts, treatment is designed to usually last at least 1 year and is administered on an outpatient basis with limited inpatienttreatment as needed to address special detoxification or relapsesituations.\5 These courts operate with the philosophy that because drugaddiction is a disease relapses can occur, and that the court mustrespond with progressive sanctions and/or enhance treatment rather than immediately terminate a participant. The central element of all drug court programs is attendanceat the regularly scheduled status hearings at which the drug courtjudge monitors the progress of participants. Monitoring is based on treatment provider reports on urine test results that detectdrug use, attendance at counseling, etc. The judge reinforcesprogress and addresses noncompliance with program requirements. Theprimary objective of the status hearing is to keep the defendant in treatment. -------------------- \5 These programs recognize that some individuals willrequire a longer period to complete the program. PROGRAM REQUIREMENTS ------------------------------------------------------------Letter :9 (See figure in printed edition.) PROGRAM REQUIREMENTS ----------------------------------------------------------Letter :9.1 Overall, according to the Drug Court Resource Center,treatment program requirements are more demanding than the applicablesanction received through traditional adjudication. Most drug courtprograms require that defendants attend status hearings, participatein counseling sessions, and submit to urine tests with the goalof becoming drug free. Some programs focus on special classes of defendants such as women. Many programs also provide support services such as public health services; assistance withhousing, food, and child care; vocational training; and job placement. TREATMENT PHASES -----------------------------------------------------------Letter :10 (See figure in printed edition.) TREATMENT PHASES ---------------------------------------------------------Letter :10.1 Treatment services are generally divided into three phases:(1) detoxification, (2) stabilization, and (3) aftercare. First,the defendant's physical dependence on drugs is eliminatedthrough detoxification. Acupuncture is sometimes used as an adjunctto treatment in the detoxification phase. According to theProject Director of the Drug Court Resource Center, 9 of 20 drugcourts responding to the Center's 1994 survey indicated that theyused acupuncture. Second, the defendant's psychological cravingfor the drugs is treated during stabilization. Frequent group and/or individual counseling sessions are employed during thisphase. And third, aftercare focuses on helping the defendant obtaineducation or job training, find a job, and remain drug free. PROGRAM SANCTIONS -----------------------------------------------------------Letter :11 (See figure in printed edition.) PROGRAM SANCTIONS ---------------------------------------------------------Letter :11.1 Sanctions for failing to abide by program rules can include(1) verbal admonition from the judge; (2) demotion to an earlierstage of the program; (3) incarceration for several days or weeks,increasing with the number and severity of the violations; and (4) morefrequent status hearings, treatment sessions, or urine tests. Manyprograms also use graduated sanctions, increasing the severity of thesanction with subsequent violations of program rules. DOJ also pointed out that most drug courts use sanctions notto simply punish inappropriate behavior but to augment thetreatment process. For example, many drug courts will place a defendantin residential treatment if he or she is unable to achievesatisfactory progress in an outpatient setting. In addition, many drugcourts incarcerate defendants for the purpose of detoxificationrather than detain them for inappropriate behavior. REASONS FOR TERMINATING DEFENDANTS FROM THE PROGRAM -----------------------------------------------------------Letter :12 (See figure in printed edition.) REASONS FOR TERMINATING DEFENDANTS FROM THE PROGRAM ---------------------------------------------------------Letter :12.1 Drug courts use various criteria for ending a defendant's participation in the program before completion. These mayinclude a new felony offense; multiple failures to comply with program requirements, such as not attending status hearings ortreatment sessions; and a pattern of positive urine tests. According toDOJ, many drug courts do not terminate defendants for a new drug possession offense. Before terminating a defendant for continuing to use drugs,drug courts will use an array of treatment services and available sanctions. There are no uniform standards for the number offailed urine tests and failures to attend treatment sessions thatresult in a participant being terminated that apply to all programs.Each drug court sets its own standards. Relapses are expected and theextent to which noncompliance results in terminations varies fromprogram to program. Generally, the drug court judge makes the decision toterminate, but the prosecutor or treatment provider can recommend thetermination. Once a defendant is terminated, he or she will be referredfor adjudication or sentencing. PROGRAM GRADUATION REQUIREMENTS -----------------------------------------------------------Letter :13 (See figure in printed edition.) PROGRAM GRADUATION REQUIREMENTS ---------------------------------------------------------Letter :13.1 Drug courts typically require defendants to complete atreatment program in order to graduate. Some impose other conditions defendants must meet after treatment. These could includeremaining drug free and not being arrested for a specified period oftime, paying restitution, being employed full-time, or performingcommunity service. For example, the Seattle, WA, drug court requires that adefendant complete all phases of the program to graduate. However, the Beaumont, TX, drug court requires that, in addition tocompleting the treatment program, the defendant maintain sobriety for aspecified time and participate in education and vocational trainingand/or be working full-time. EFFECTS OF PROGRAM GRADUATION ON CASE OUTCOME -----------------------------------------------------------Letter :14 (See figure in printed edition.) EFFECTS OF PROGRAM GRADUATION ON CASE OUTCOME ---------------------------------------------------------Letter :14.1 In many jurisdictions, completion of the drug court programleads to a dismissal of charges or cessation of prosecution. Inothers, the guilty plea can be stricken, the defendant can be sentencedto probation in lieu of incarceration, or the defendant'sprobation can be shortened. DOJ pointed out that some drug courts will seal all caserecords, including arrests, when defendants complete the program. Thesealing of records is particularly significant when attempting tomeasure the impact of drug court programs at a later date. NUMBER OF DRUG COURTS STARTED, 1989-1994 -----------------------------------------------------------Letter :15 (See figure in printed edition.) Note: One drug court was started in March 1995. (See figure in printed edition.) Source: GAO and Drug Court Resource Center data. (See figure in printed edition.) NUMBER OF DRUG COURTS STARTED, 1989-1994 ---------------------------------------------------------Letter :15.1 According to the Drug Court Resource Center, as of March1995, there were at least 37 drug courts operating across the country.\6Of these drug courts, 29 had been fully operational for at least 9months, and 8 others had been operating for a lesser period. The number of drug courts steadily increased from 1991 to1994, with substantial increases since 1993. As of March 1995, 24jurisdictions were developing drug courts. Another eight jurisdictions had exhibited interest in starting drug courts by initiatingfeasibility studies. Appendix II lists the number of drug courts in operation andbeing developed. -------------------- \6 Because of the absence of any official requirement toreport their existence to a central organization, additional drug courtsmay exist. DRUG COURT LOCATIONS AS OF MARCH 1995 -----------------------------------------------------------Letter :16 (See figure in printed edition.) Source: Drug Court Resource Center data. (See figure in printed edition.) DRUG COURT LOCATIONS AS OF MARCH 1995 ---------------------------------------------------------Letter :16.1 According to the Drug Court Resource Center, the 37 drugcourts in operation as of March 1995 are located in 15 states and theDistrict of Columbia. The largest number of drug courts are located in Florida, with 10, followed by California, with 6. There aretwo drug courts in each of six states, and there is one drug court ineach of the remaining eight states and the District of Columbia. The specific location of each drug court is shown in appendix II. DRUG COURT PARTICIPANTS' STATUS AS OF MARCH 1995 -----------------------------------------------------------Letter :17 (See figure in printed edition.) N = 20,421 (See figure in printed edition.) Note 1: Based on responses from 33 drug courts. (See figure in printed edition.) Note 2: Percentages do not add to 100 percent due to rounding. (See figure in printed edition.) Source: GAO questionnaires. (See figure in printed edition.) DRUG COURT PARTICIPANTS' STATUS AS OF MARCH 1995 ---------------------------------------------------------Letter :17.1 Data obtained from 33 of 37 drug courts responding to our questionnaire showed that since inception of the first drugcourt in 1989, 20,421 persons have participated in drug courts. Ofthese, 7,235 participants have graduated, and 7,595 are currently inthe programs. The remaining participants did not complete theprograms. Generally, when participants do not complete drug courtprograms it is because they were terminated, voluntarily withdrew, ordied. Based on the data received, these totaled 5,591.\7 The number of participants currently in each of these drugcourt programs varied widely, ranging from a low of 1 participantin Santa Ana, CA, a new drug court,\8 to a high of 1,200 participantsin Miami, FL, one of the oldest drug courts. The median numberof participants in these drug court programs is 105. It should be noted that many of the drug courts have beenoperating for less than a year and would not yet have graduates. Asshown, more than one-third of the total participants are currentlyenrolled in drug court programs. -------------------- \7 We calculated the number (5,591) of participants notcompleting the programs by subtracting the number (7,235) of graduatesand the number (7,595) of participants currently in the programs fromthe total number (20,421) of participants in the programs sincetheir inception. \8 At the time of our review, Orange County, CA, had filedfor bankruptcy and curtailed resources for its drug court. FUNDING SOURCES -----------------------------------------------------------Letter :18 (See figure in printed edition.) According to the Drug Court Resource Center Project Director,drug courts generally piece together funding from a variety ofsources. Information reported to the Drug Court Resource Center by 15drug courts showed that these sources included local taxes andsurcharges, state alcohol and drug agency funds, private foundationmonies, participant fees, and federal grants. Some drug courts have developed innovative fundingapproaches. For example, a drug court judge from Orange County, CA, told usthat when the county filed for bankruptcy, it cut back servicesnecessary for the drug court operation. The judge said that he was forminga nonprofit corporation to try to provide funding for the drugcourt outside of the bankruptcy proceedings. Until the 1994 Crime Act, there was no federal grant program specifically designed for drug courts. However, some drugcourts have received federal grants and technical assistance fromthe Department of Health and Human Services' Center for SubstanceAbuse Treatment (CSAT) and DOJ's Bureau of Justice Assistance(BJA). According to CSAT, it has provided or plans to provide anestimated $15 million in assistance to some drug courts. Of the $15million, about $6 million is for a drug court demonstration projectfor the District of Columbia Superior Court. BJA could not provide us with complete information on DOJgrants used in support of drug courts. According to a BJA official,"drug courts" was not a specific grant category that granteescould designate for funding. However, this official commented thatBJA is aware that DOJ grant funds provided under other grantcategories such as "corrections options" have been used in supportof drug courts, and that three drug courts had received $2.5 million from the Corrections Options program.\9 -------------------- \9 The Corrections Options program assists states withdesign, development, and implementation of innovative alternatives to traditional modes of incarceration. PARTICIPANT FEES -----------------------------------------------------------Letter :19 (See figure in printed edition.) PARTICIPANT FEES ---------------------------------------------------------Letter :19.1 We obtained data (based on our questionnaire and informationprovided by the Drug Court Resource Center) from 34 drug courts onfees charged to participants in drug court programs. Twenty-threeof the 34 drug courts reported that they charged fees, and 11reported that they did not. Insufficient data on fee amounts actuallycollected precluded us from determining the extent to which drug courtsrelied on participant fees as a funding source. Of the 23 drug courts charging participant fees, the amountscharged for the total cost of treatment ranged from $20 to $2,500.One drug court reported charging fees on a sliding scale from $60 to$300 for treatment based on a defendant's ability to pay, whileanother reported charging on a sliding scale from $500 to $2,500. Atleast nine courts responded that they charged fees ranging from$200 to $350. Several drug courts reported applying participant fees tocounseling and treatment costs, drug testing costs, and other programexpenses. In addition, DOJ commented that many treatment providersbelieve participant fees are a useful therapeutic tool and should becharged regardless of the extent to which fees are needed to coverprogram costs. COST SAVINGS -----------------------------------------------------------Letter :20 (See figure in printed edition.) COST SAVINGS ---------------------------------------------------------Letter :20.1 Drug courts have reported information to the Drug CourtResource Center on savings that they believe their programs haveachieved in the costs of court and other criminal justice systemoperations. One of the larger categories of savings reported by drugcourts was jail costs avoided, i.e., the estimated costs ofincarcerating a typical drug court defendant that would be expected to incurif he/she were not participating in a drug court program. Onecourt estimated savings of $5,400 per drug court participant, andanother estimated savings of $2,566 to $5,185. Another drug court claimed a savings of $2 million over a3-year period resulting from drug court participants spending fewerdays in custody and the consequent ability of the county to rentunused jail cells to other law enforcement agencies. Still another drugcourt estimated it had saved about $875,500 in jail costs for itsprogram but did not specify the time frame. The National Association of Drug Court Professionals notedthat drug court programs are much less costly than the incarceration of drug-using offenders. The Association reported thatincarceration of drug-using offenders ranges from $20,000 to $50,000 annually,and the cost to build a prison cell is $80,000 to $90,000. It alsosaid that drug courts cost less than $1,500 annually for each offender. Some drug courts identified savings such as reduced caseloadsof other trial judges not in the drug court program. Inaddition, some drug courts claimed savings in court-appointed attorney fees,reduced probation office caseloads, and costs of prosecution,arrests, and police overtime. We did not verify this information, and further analysis ofall drug court costs is essential to fully understanding the benefitsof these programs. Briefing Section II EVALUATIONS OF DRUG COURTS ==============================================================Letter DO DRUG COURTS MAKE A DIFFERENCE? -----------------------------------------------------------Letter :21 (See figure in printed edition.) In evaluating the effectiveness of drug courts, the basicquestion is: Do drug courts make a difference? Specifically, dodefendants who successfully complete drug court programs exhibit reduced recidivism, decreased drug use, and other socially beneficialeffects as a result of participating in drug court programs whencompared to their counterparts, i.e., control groups who were not exposedto the same drug court treatment? Based on evaluations we reviewed, drug courts generally mayhave some beneficial effects. However, because of the nature of thestudy designs and the short periods of time elapsed betweentreatment and measurement of outcomes (drug courts are relatively new),firm conclusions cannot be drawn about the effects of drug courts. It is both difficult and costly to conduct programevaluations that can measure program effects. Although the strongest designinvolves assembling and randomly assigning defendants to controlgroups (comparing drug courts versus traditional courts, forexample), such studies raise serious logistical and ethical issues.Additionally, according to the Project Director of the Drug Court ResourceCenter, control groups cannot be used properly unless a drug court is originally designed to define such groups. An alternative approach is to design studies allowing theresearcher to create comparable groups from existing programs, throughthe use of various analytical techniques. However, even such studiesare often made more difficult by the fact that existing programschange over time, resulting in individuals at the end of the studyperiod being exposed to different treatments than those at thebeginning. Also, different locations of the same program may have verydifferent implementation needs, making it more difficult to comparesuch programs. GAO ASSESSED DRUG COURT EVALUATIONS -----------------------------------------------------------Letter :22 (See figure in printed edition.) We assessed six evaluations that compared performanceoutcomes for drug court defendants to the experiences of other defendants,i.e., previous divertees or unsuccessful drug court defendants or defendants who had never been in a drug court. In order todetermine whether a drug court has an impact on its participants, anevaluation should compare outcomes of drug court defendants to those ofother groups of similar defendants who are not in drug courts. The six evaluations covered five drug courts and variedconsiderably in terms of the study designs, types of outcomes measured,and scope of analyses performed on the available information. Ourassessment indicates that the evaluations differed particularly in termsof the validity of the designs, which determine the extent to whichthe reader is able to draw conclusions from any findings. Of thesix studies: two studies had fairly strong designs; of these, one providedsome evidence of an effect of the drug court program, and theother study's results were too preliminary to draw any conclusions; two studies had designs with more serious problems; of these,one suggested possible effects of the program, and the other was inconclusive; and two studies had design weaknesses that prevented anyconclusions about the effects of the program. The major outcome measure used, in five of the sixevaluations, was recidivism (rearrest rates). To a lesser degree,recidivism-related measures were also used, such as length of time beforerearrest and days spent in custody for felony offenses. We focused onthese measures in this report because they provided the strongestevidence for the long-term effect of the drug court programs, eventhough other measures were used in these studies. EVALUATION OUTCOMES -----------------------------------------------------------Letter :23 (See figure in printed edition.) Two of the six evaluations were well-designed. However, theresults in terms of recidivism outcomes were mixed. One of theevaluations showed that drug court defendants had significantly lowerrearrest rates than defendants not in drug court, and that they spentfewer days in custody for felony offenses (app. III, evaluation 1).This evaluation also showed that drug court defendants had a lowerrate of failures-to-appear for required court hearings than did other defendants. However, the other evaluation, with preliminary information only, showed no significant difference so far inrearrest rates between drug court defendants and defendants who werenot in the drug court (app. III, evaluation 2). Although these evaluations have strong study designs and one indicates some beneficial effects on defendants resultingfrom the drug court programs, the evidence does not permit firmconclusions about the effects of the drug courts studied. Additionally,for one of the evaluations, insufficient time had elapsed to providefirmer evidence of program effect. Of the next two evaluations, both of the same drug court, one provided some suggestive evidence of program effect. Itshowed lower recidivism by drug court defendants and longer time beforerearrest (app. III, evaluation 3). The other generally showed nodifference in recidivism rates (app. III, evaluation 4). Design problemsmade it difficult to attribute these findings to the programs.There are too many potential differences between the drug courtparticipants and the groups to which they were compared to develop strong conclusions. The final two evaluations did not provide reliable evidence concerning the effects of the programs. One showed nosubstantial difference in recidivism between drug court defendants anddefendants who left the drug court (app. III, evaluation 5). The other evaluation measured defendants' drug abstinence andfailure-to-appear rates and showed positive results for drug court defendantsas compared to defendants terminated from the drug court (app.III, evaluation 6). Because the study design did not control for anumber of factors, such as motivation and susceptibility totreatment, these evaluations do not permit conclusions to be drawn about theeffects of the programs. Appendix III contains further information on each of these evaluations. Briefing Section III FEDERAL DRUG COURT GRANT PROGRAM ==============================================================Letter THE 1994 CRIME ACT -----------------------------------------------------------Letter :24 (See figure in printed edition.) THE 1994 CRIME ACT ---------------------------------------------------------Letter :24.1 Beginning in fiscal year 1995, DOJ may provide jurisdictionswith drug court grants. Title V of the Violent Crime Control andLaw Enforcement Act of 1994 (Public Law 103-322) authorizes theAttorney General to award discretionary drug court grants to states,units of local government, Indian tribal governments, and state andlocal courts. Grants may be awarded to drug court programs when ajudge continuously supervises the progress of nonviolent offenderswith substance abuse problems. The act requires the Attorney General to issue regulations toensure that jurisdictions receiving drug court grants to supporttheir programs do not allow violent offenders to participate. Itdefines a violent offender as a person who is charged with or convictedof an offense involving a firearm, dangerous weapon, death, seriousbodily injury, or force; or who has one or more prior convictionsfor a violent felony crime. Drug court programs must also integrate a number of judicial sanctions and treatment services. Specifically, the actrequires programs to include (1) mandatory periodic testing for theuse of addictive substances; (2) substance abuse treatment; (3)diversion, probation, or other supervised releases with the possibilityof prosecution, confinement, or incarceration when participantsdo not comply with program requirements or fail to show satisfactory progress; and (4) program and aftercare services, such asrelapse prevention, health care, education, vocational training, job placement, housing placement, and child care. FEDERAL FUNDING FOR DRUG COURTS -----------------------------------------------------------Letter :25 (See figure in printed edition.) FEDERAL FUNDING FOR DRUG COURTS ---------------------------------------------------------Letter :25.1 The 1994 Crime Act authorized a total of $1 billion forfiscal years 1995 through 2000 to support drug court programs. Althoughthe act authorized $100 million for fiscal year 1995, DOJ's fiscalyear 1995 Appropriations Act (Public Law 103-317) included only $29million for the drug court program. However, Congress has proposed fiscalyear 1995 budget cuts for the drug court program. On March 16,1995, the House passed H.R. 1158, the Emergency SupplementalAppropriations Act of 1995, which rescinds $27.75 million for the drug court program. During its consideration of H.R. 1158, the Senatereduced the rescission to $17.1 million. On April 6, 1995, the Senatepassed its version of the bill and requested a conference with theHouse. The House and Senate conferees began May 3, 1995, to try toreconcile the separate provisions of the bill. The President's fiscal year 1996 budget requests $150 millionfor drug court grants. However, H.R. 667 (The Violent Crime Incarceration Act of 1995) passed by the House ofRepresentatives on February 10, 1995, would amend Title V of the 1994 Crime Actand in doing so would repeal the 1994 Crime Act's drug courtdiscretionary grant provisions. On February 22, 1995, H.R. 667 was referredto the Senate Committee on the Judiciary. DOJ'S RESPONSIBILITIES FOR DRUG COURTS -----------------------------------------------------------Letter :26 (See figure in printed edition.) DOJ recognizes that no single model exists for an effectivedrug court. Consequently, DOJ plans to maintain flexibility inawarding grants to programs that use a variety of approaches tocoordinate drug treatment and persuade offenders to abstain from drugswith the goal of becoming drug free. In addition, given the greatdiversity in the structure and operation of state and local courts andcriminal justice systems, DOJ plans to allow jurisdictions to tailorlocal initiatives to best suit their needs and local conditions. DOJ's Office of Justice Programs (OJP) has overallresponsibility for the new federal drug court program, including policy setting.To carry out this responsibility, OJP has hired an actingdirector and policy analyst to staff its Drug Court Program Office. Inaddition, BJA, an office of OJP, recently established a Drug CourtProgram Office to manage and monitor drug court program grants,according to an OJP official. BJA has hired four people to staff thisoffice. Since November 1994, OJP and BJA staffs have worked togetherto develop program guidelines and application materials.\10 Currently, these staffs are considering the most appropriateand effective ways of providing technical assistance to federally supported drug courts, operating drug courts, and relatedfederal projects to be funded with other fiscal year 1995 resources.The level and source of funding to support this technicalassistance is also under review. OJP's National Institute of Justice (NIJ) is responsible forfunding a national evaluation of drug court program impacts. Thisevaluation will assess whether federally supported drug court programshave helped their participants to break the cycle of substanceabuse and crime. It will also assess the cost-effectiveness of theseprograms. NIJ is also responsible for ensuring that drug court programsuse part of their grants to conduct process evaluations. Theseare aimed at determining, among other things, if the drug court isachieving its objectives, if it was implemented as originally intended,and whether major changes are appropriate. They will also examinehow drug courts affect the rest of the court system and otherelements of the criminal justice system. -------------------- \10 In March 1995, DOJ published Drug Court Grant ProgramGuidelines and Application Information. FISCAL YEAR 1995 DRUG COURT GRANT PROGRAM -----------------------------------------------------------Letter :27 (See figure in printed edition.) FISCAL YEAR 1995 DRUG COURT GRANT PROGRAM ---------------------------------------------------------Letter :27.1 If Congress does not rescind the fiscal year 1995appropriation, DOJ plans to award grants for planning, implementing, andimproving or enhancing drug court programs. Eligible applicants may applyonly for one type of grant. Assuming no rescission is enacted, ofthe $29 million appropriated for fiscal year 1995, DOJ plans to awardup to 100 planning grants for not more than $35,000 each tojurisdictions interested in establishing drug courts, 10 implementation grants for not more than $1 million each to jurisdictions that have identified their target populationsand case processing procedures, 3 additional implementation grants for not more than $2million to larger jurisdictions with populations exceeding 1 million,and 20 improvement and enhancement grants for not more than $1million to jurisdictions that have already established drug courts. Federal grants for each drug court program will be 75 percentof program costs. The grantees will be required to provide cashto fund the remaining 25 percent. Applications are due by May 23, 1995. Then, OJP and BJAstaffs will focus on screening and processing qualified applications for potential grant awards, pending final congressional action onthe fiscal year 1995 budget rescission. If the current deadlinefor filing drug court applications does not change, the firstgrants are expected to be awarded in the summer of 1995. EVALUATION REQUIREMENTS FOR FEDERALLY FUNDED DRUG COURTS -----------------------------------------------------------Letter :28 (See figure in printed edition.) Evaluating effectiveness is a critical element of the federaldrug court program. The 1994 Crime Act authorizes the AttorneyGeneral to carry out or make arrangements for evaluations of programsthat receive discretionary program grants. The act also mandatesus to study and assess the effectiveness and impact of thesediscretionary grants and report to the Congress by January 1, 1997. OJP program guidelines require recipients of drug courtgrants to cooperate with a national evaluation team. The evaluationwill be aimed at measuring program impact primarily through the useof the following criteria: reduction in recidivism rates of program participants, maintenance of acceptable treatment completion rates, decreased participant drug use, and maintenance of a cost-effective program. NIJ is responsible for overseeing the national evaluation.The evaluation will focus on treatment and its impact and isexpected to take at least 2 years to complete. At the time of our review,NIJ was developing the solicitation for proposals to conduct the evaluation. Program guidelines also require each drug court grantrecipient to conduct process evaluations of their programs. For these evaluations, grantees are expected to collect descriptiveinformation on the role of drug court players, potential eligiblepopulation, and participant program characteristics. Grantees will also beasked to collect information on program procedures used to identifyand screen eligible offenders, accept and assess offenders, respond torelapses, manage and monitor cases, and discharge and referparticipants. FLOWCHART OF TWO DRUG COURT APPROACHES ===========================================================Appendix I (See figure in printed edition.) \a Judges may reward progress and impose sanctions fornoncompliance with program requirements. Source: Drug Court Resource Center and GAO analysis of selected drug court program descriptions. (See figure in printed edition.) NUMBER AND LOCATION OF DRUG COURTS IN OPERATION AND BEING DEVELOPED AS OF MARCH 1995 ==========================================================Appendix II In About to Location operation start Planned ------------------------ ---------- ---------- ---------- Alabama Mobile 1 Arizona Phoenix 1 Arkansas Little Rock 1 California Bakersfield 1 East Bay Corridor 1 El Monte 1\a Los Angeles 1 Oakland 1 Riverside 1 Sacramento 1 Santa Ana 1\a San Bernardino 1\a 1 San Francisco 1 Connecticut Hartford 1 Colorado Denver 1 Delaware Wilmington 1 District of Columbia Washington 1 Florida Bartow 1\a Crestview 1 Ft. Lauderdale 1 Gainesville 1 Jacksonville 1\a Key West 1 Miami 1 Orlando 1 Panama City 1 Pensacola 1 1 Tallahassee 1 Tampa 1 Georgia Atlanta 1 Hawaii Honolulu 1 Illinois Chicago 1 Indiana Gary 1 Kansas Wichita 1 Kentucky Louisville 1 Maryland Baltimore 2\a Massachusetts Dorchester 1 Michigan Kalamazoo 1 St. Joseph 1 Missouri Kansas City 1 Nevada Las Vegas 1 Reno 1\a New Mexico Las Cruces 1 New York Rochester 1\b Ohio Akron 1 Cincinnati 1 Cleveland 1 Sandusky 1 Oregon Eugene 1 Portland 1 South Carolina Columbia 1 Texas Austin 1 Beaumont 1 Fort Worth 1 Utah Salt Lake City 1 Washington Seattle 1 Tacoma 1\a Spokane 1 ============================================================ Total 37 5 19 ------------------------------------------------------------ \a Drug courts in operation less than 9 months. Includes oneof the two Baltimore drug courts. \b In commenting on a draft of this report, the ProjectDirector of the Drug Court Resource Center told us that a drug court inRochester began operating on a pilot basis in early 1995. Source: Drug Court Resource Center data. OUTCOMES REPORTED IN AND GAO'S ASSESSMENT OF EVALUATIONS OF FIVE DRUG COURTS =========================================================Appendix III EVALUATION 1: F.I.R.S.T. OAKLAND -------------------------------------------------------Appendix III:1 TREATMENT GROUP --------------------------------------------------- AppendixIII:1.0.1 Drug use defendants granted admission to a diversion program. Admission requirements changed during the course of thestudy. STUDY DESIGN --------------------------------------------------- AppendixIII:1.0.2 Comparison of 110 defendants in a program with a similargroup of 110 defendants in a different program a year earlier. TIME OF STUDY --------------------------------------------------- AppendixIII:1.0.3 Drug court participants referred in January and February of1991; earlier group referred in January 1990 through March of 1990.The report contained a 3-year follow-up study. KEY MEASURES --------------------------------------------------- AppendixIII:1.0.4 (1)Felony rearrests: Drug court defendants had a loweraverage rate of felony rearrests per defendants (0.75) than had previousdivertees (1.33). (2)Days in custody for felony offenses: Drug courtdefendants, on average, spent fewer days in custody per defendant (44) thanhad previous divertees (78). (3)Bench warrants: Drug court defendants, on average, hadfewer bench warrants issued for failures to appear at courthearings (0.67) than had previous divertees (1.1). ASSESSMENT --------------------------------------------------- AppendixIII:1.0.5 There were some questions concerning the comparability of thetwo groups, as well as the eligibility requirements for the twoprograms. (The report stated that eligibility requirements were relaxedfor the drug court program participants in order to obtain a broadergroup for comparative purposes.) In spite of these concerns, theevaluation suggested some fairly strong evidence of program successafter 3 years. EVALUATION 2: MARICOPA COUNTY -------------------------------------------------------Appendix III:2 TREATMENT GROUP --------------------------------------------------- AppendixIII:2.0.1 Offenders sentenced to probation for first-time drugpossession convictions. STUDY DESIGN --------------------------------------------------- AppendixIII:2.0.2 Random assignment to four groups: (1)No drug testing, frequent visits (n=approximately 154). (2)Monthly random drug testing, occasional visits(n=approximately 154). (3)Biweekly scheduled drug testing, limited visits(n=approximately 154). (4)Drug court, with testing and treatment supervised by aprobation officer (n=177). TIME OF STUDY --------------------------------------------------- AppendixIII:2.0.3 Participants in program between March 1992 and April 1993.Current data reported only preliminary findings after 6 months. KEY MEASURES --------------------------------------------------- AppendixIII:2.0.4 (1)Rearrest rates: No statistically significant differences(16.95 percent for the drug court group vs. 15.37 percent forothers). (2)Rates of technical probation violations: Drug court grouphad lower rates than those of others (7.9 percent vs. 11.9percent). ASSESSMENT --------------------------------------------------- AppendixIII:2.0.5 Although the evaluation design was quite strong, the resultswere preliminary; insufficient time had elapsed to provide a firm indication of program effect. Future comparisons may becomplicated by the fact that the drug court sample had lower rates ofreported history of prior marijuana use. Otherwise, the control groups (groups 1-3) were quite similar to the drug court group(group 4). EVALUATION 3: DADE COUNTY (GOLDKAMP AND WEILAND) -------------------------------------------------------Appendix III:3 TREATMENT GROUP --------------------------------------------------- AppendixIII:3.0.1 Persons arrested for 2nd and 3rd degree drug-relatedfelonies. STUDY DESIGN --------------------------------------------------- AppendixIII:3.0.2 Five key groups:\11 (1)Persons admitted to drug court program (n=326). (2)Sample of felony drug defendants in same period noteligible because of more serious drug-related offenses (n=199). (3)Sample of nondrug felony defendants in same period(n=185). (4)Sample of felony drug defendants in period several yearsearlier (n=302). (5)Sample of felony nondrug defendants in period severalyears earlier (n=536). In addition, the evaluation compared persons completing thedrug court program with those failing to complete. -------------------- \11 An additional sample of offenders could not reliably beused as a control group because they were exposed to the drug courtprogram. TIME OF STUDY --------------------------------------------------- AppendixIII:3.0.3 Participants in groups 1-3 had charges filed in August 1990and September 1990. Charges for groups 4-5 were filed in thesummer of 1987. Data report results after 18 month follow-up. KEY MEASURES --------------------------------------------------- AppendixIII:3.0.4 (1)Rearrest rates: Drug court defendants were rearrested at a statistically significant lower rate (33 percent, vs. 40percent to 53 percent for other groups). (2)Time before rearrest: Drug court defendants hadstatistically significant longer time before rearrest (median of 235 days,vs. 52 to 115 days for other groups). (3)Rearrests and treatment completion: Rearrest rates were associated with failure to complete the treatment program. ASSESSMENT --------------------------------------------------- AppendixIII:3.0.5 The results suggested an effect of the program. However, thestudy design was unable to make the comparison with offenders inthe same situation with similarly serious drug offenses; therefore,the results must be interpreted cautiously. In particular, thedrug court sample had fewer prior arrests than had the othercomparison groups, and the key group of felony drug defendants used for comparative purposes were not eligible for the drug courtprogram because of the seriousness of their charges or prior records. The comparisons between those completing and failing tocomplete the program must also be viewed with caution, due to possible motivational and other differences between the groups. In commenting on a draft of this report, DOJ officials notedthat this study had a strong design with carefully drawncomparison groups. We agree that the study's design was generallystrong. However, as we state in this report, there were somepotentially important differences in prior arrest rates between thegroups, and the study was not able to compare similarly situated drugdefendants in a roughly similar time period. Therefore, as we noted, the study's results should be interpreted cautiously. EVALUATION 4: DADE COUNTY (SMITH, DAVIS AND GORETSKY) -------------------------------------------------------Appendix III:4 TREATMENT GROUP --------------------------------------------------- AppendixIII:4.0.1 Defendants with no prior convictions charged with a drugpossession offense, admitting to a drug problem for which they wantedtreatment. STUDY DESIGN --------------------------------------------------- AppendixIII:4.0.2 Comparison of 318 defendants assigned to the drug court witha sample of 99 narcotics cases in early 1988. In addition, a group ofdrug court defendants who were accepted into the drug courtprogram were compared on rearrest rates. TIME OF STUDY --------------------------------------------------- AppendixIII:4.0.3 Participants were assigned to the drug court in January 1990through March 1990. The comparison group was charged between January1988 and March 1988. KEY MEASURES --------------------------------------------------- AppendixIII:4.0.4 (1)Rearrest rates: There was no statistically significantdifference in the rate of felony rearrests after 1 year between thoseassigned to drug court (32 percent) and the comparison group ofdefendants charged 2 years earlier (33 percent). Those defendantsaccepted by the drug court did have lower rates of rearrest (15 percent),but the authors noted that these individuals constituted "ahighly select group . . . least disposed to commit new crimes." Therearrest results in this evaluation differed from those in the other evaluation of Dade County (evaluation 3). (2)Sentencing dispositions: There were statisticallysignificant differences in dispositions between those assigned to drugcourt and the comparison group of earlier defendants. Those assigned todrug court were more likely not to face further prosecution andless likely to serve probation or short jail terms. ASSESSMENT --------------------------------------------------- AppendixIII:4.0.5 There were concerns about the comparability of theparticipants in the various groups. In particular, the finding of lowerrearrest rates for program participants should be viewed cautiously inlight of the selectivity of admission to the program. As a result,there were strong reservations about the results reported. DOJ officials, in commenting on a draft of this report,indicated that this study had several flaws. They pointed out that thestudy was done when this drug court was less than 10 months old.They further noted that information on successful drug courtparticipants was not available for evaluation because the participants'records were sealed. We concur with these comments. EVALUATION 5: BROWARD COUNTY (TERRY) -------------------------------------------------------Appendix III:5 TREATMENT GROUP --------------------------------------------------- AppendixIII:5.0.1 First-time offenders arrested for possession or purchase ofcocaine. STUDY DESIGN --------------------------------------------------- AppendixIII:5.0.2 Comparison of 392 defendants completing or remaining in thedrug court program with 241 defendants not completing the drugcourt program. TIME OF STUDY --------------------------------------------------- AppendixIII:5.0.3 Participants entered the program from July 1991 through June1992. Study results were reported for October 1993. KEY MEASURES --------------------------------------------------- AppendixIII:5.0.4 Rearrests: Persons remaining in the program committedfelonies at a slightly lower rate than did those leaving the program (7.7percent vs. 12.0 percent). (Cases dismissed were not included inthese comparisons.) No differences occurred in comparing theproportions having committed misdemeanors (4.1 percent for personsremaining in the program vs. 5.0 percent for those leaving the program). ASSESSMENT --------------------------------------------------- AppendixIII:5.0.5 There was no adequate comparison group in this study fromwhich to draw any conclusions about the effect of the program. EVALUATION 6: MULTNOMAH COUNTY -------------------------------------------------------Appendix III:6 TREATMENT GROUP --------------------------------------------------- AppendixIII:6.0.1 Defendants arrested for possession of any illegal substancefor personal use. STUDY DESIGN --------------------------------------------------- AppendixIII:6.0.2 Comparison of 105 defendants graduating from the drug courtprogram with 78 defendants who terminated unsuccessfully. TIME OF STUDY --------------------------------------------------- AppendixIII:6.0.3 Participants entered the program on or before August 1, 1992,and graduated or terminated unsuccessfully on or before April 1,1994. KEY MEASURES --------------------------------------------------- AppendixIII:6.0.4 Graduates had lower rates of bench warrants for failure toappear, went slightly longer before the first bench warrant wasissued, and had a lower percentage of positive urine tests than those who terminated unsuccessfully. However, the report did notindicate whether these figures referred to prior histories orfollow-up information after program completion. ASSESSMENT --------------------------------------------------- AppendixIII:6.0.5 There was no adequate comparison group in this study fromwhich to draw any conclusions about the effect of the program. MAJOR CONTRIBUTORS TO THIS BRIEFING REPORT ==========================================================Appendix IV GENERAL GOVERNMENT DIVISION, WASHINGTON, D.C. Weldon McPhail, Assistant Director, Administration of Justice Issues Samuel A. Caldrone, Senior Evaluator Deborah A. Knorr, Senior Evaluator Patricia J. Scanlon, Staff Evaluator Barry J. Seltser, Assistant Director, Design, Methodology and Technical Assistance Group Douglas M. Sloane, Assistant Director David P. Alexander, Senior Social Science Analyst Arthur J. Kendall, Senior Mathematical Statistician Katherine M. Wheeler, Publishing Advisor Pamela V. Williams, Communications Analyst BOSTON/NEW YORK FIELD OFFICE Brenda R. James Towe, Evaluator-in-Charge Rudolf F. Plessing, Core Group Manager Michael Savino, Senior Evaluator OFFICE OF THE GENERAL COUNSEL, WASHINGTON, D.C. Ann H. Finley, Senior Attorney CliffSchaffer's Home Page WT01-B26-26IA031-000651-B014-114http://206.61.184.43:80/schaffer/GOVPUBS/cjstcha.htm 206.61.184.43 19970122120750 text/html 87759HTTP/1.0 200 OKDate: Wednesday, 22-Jan-97 12:07:33 GMTServer: WebSitePro/1.1f (S/N wpo-0deb)Allow-ranges: bytesContent-type: text/htmlLast-modified: Saturday, 28-Dec-96 06:16:10 GMTContent-length: 87541 A Criminal Justice System Strategy for TreatingCocaine-Heroin A A Criminal Justice System Strategy for Treating Cocaine-HeroinAbusing Offenders in Custody National Institute of Justice James K. Stewart, Director. Contents Introduction Research findings The problem The criminal justiceresponse The efficacy ofcriminal sanctions Some dimensions of effective drugabuse treatment Conclusion Policy recommendations The identification of drug-involvedoffenders Jail-based intervention In-prison treatment Community treatment programs Organization and staffing issues Conclusion Appendix A-"Stay 'NOut": A model for prison-based drug treatment Program overview "Stay 'N Out" components Glossary Reference notes Introduction Despite the demonstrated relationships between drug abuse andcrime, criminal justice agencies too seldom focus on reducingdrug abuse as a means of reducing the criminal activities ofdrug-involved offenders. Yet evidence from the researchliterature continues to accumulate, indicating that some drugtreatment programs have been successful in reducing recidivism.Following an overview of pertinent research findings, this paperoutlines the elements of an effective strategy for treatingcocaine and heroin abusing offenders. The interventions proposed in this paper grow out of the drugabuse research literature, the authors' urban-based research, andtheir clinical expcriencc with drug abuse treatment incorrections. In addition, the suggested interventions emerge fromyears of correctional outcome research which has assessed whatworks, with whom, and under what circumstances. Although thispaper will focus on heroin and cocaine involved offenders, somerecommendations may apply to offenders who use other illicitdrugs. Research findings The problem Recent research provides amplc evidence that offenderpopulations are composed of large numbers of drug abusers-andthat drug-involved offenders commit substantial number-, ofundetected crimes. Very recent cocaine and heroin abusers constitute amajority of the arrestees and inmates in jails and prisons in NewYork City and some other jurisdictions. National surveys of jail and prison populations, smallerself-report studies, and urine testing results indicate thatincreasing proportions of offenders are users of drugs and thatcocaine use is increasing the most rapidly. More thanthree-quarters of the nation's inmates and almost all inmates inNew York City report illicit drug use.' Similarly, sclf-rcportstudies among prison and jail inmates in California, Michigan,and Texas reveal that approximately half are heroin users andmany are daily heroin users.' Recent urinalysis-based studies ofarrestees in Washington, D.C. reveal that well over half testpositive for at least one illicit drug and a quarter testpositive for two or more illicit drugs, In a recent Manhattanstudy the level of co caine use had doubled .;ince 1984.Eighty-three percent of arrestees in September and October 1986tested positive for cocaine, compared with 42 percent in 1984;the increase in cocaine was found at all age levels and for alloffenses. Comparable increases have also been reported inWashington, DC. Frequent users of heroin and cocaine in the generalpopulation exhibit a multiproblem lifestyle that mayinclude a pattern of persistent criminal behavior. Drug addiction is a chronic relapsing condition that is partof a complex multiproblem lifestyle which is highly resistant torehabilitation. Several studies show that daily or near dailyheroin users-many of whom also use other illicit substancesdaily-are not in treatment, and do not seek treatment. Many alsoconsume alcohol heavily. They average over 200 non-drug crimcsand hundreds of drug distribution offenses annually, yet areunlikely to be arrested more than once a year, and then spendless than a month in incarceration, The majority commit manycrimes for which they are not arrested or incarcerated, butbecause of sheer volume of activity, they still have many morearrests and incarceration periods than non-drug offenders. Overhalf their generally modest income comes from drug distributionactivities. They usually spend most of that income on drugs.Daily heroin abusers also generally do not have a residence normake their own meals, but rather stay and eat with a relative orfriend. They do not receive or seek public assistance. They haveno legal employment during a typical week nor do they seek any.Thus, they are typically an economic burden on the poorestmembers of their low-income communities. Many aspects of theirlifestyle also put them at high risk for violence and many othersocial and health problems such as AIDS, alcoholism, and TB.Therefore, whatever treatment programming is applied to thispopulation, it must contend with all or most of these problems ifit is to achieve long-term changes in this lifestyle.' Data about chronic cocaine users' crime rates are not as welldeveloped. Recent evidence from street and treatment settinginterviews with crack users indicate that about 60 percent admitpaying for their cocaine with money derived from illicitsources-ranging from drug dealing and prostitution to theft androbbery. The persons using cocaine, however, generally come frommore varied socioeconomic backgrounds than heroin users, theirlifestyles vary accordingly, and many do not ever get arrested.Nevertheless, the lifestyles of cocaine abusers who do becomeinvolved with the criminal justice system appear to be verysimilar to those of heroin abusers, as cocaine users often alsouse heroin. The criminal justiceresponse While much remains to be learned about the precise nature ofthe links betnveen doing drugs and doing crime, the two behaviorsare clearly associated. Yet criminal justice agencies have fewstrategies for routinely detecting and intervening in the druguse of arrested heroin and cocaine abusers. The justice systemfocuses almost exclusively on its criminal processing functionsof arrest, adjudication, probation, incarceration, and parole.Even these interventions often represent a limited intrusion onthe criminal activities of the drug abusing offender. Criminal justice agencies, with rare exceptions, do notseek or use information about the drug use of persons who arearrested or convicted of crimes. Littlc cffort is made to identify drug abusers, to recordinformation about their drug use, to provide treatment (otherthan dctoxification) while in jail or prison, to refer them totreatment programs in the community, or to use such informationin plea bargaining or case dispositions (where legallyappropriate). Only a few jurisdictions maintain anyinformation about the drug use of arrestees or convictedoffenders, and there is a strong likelihood that the druginformation in their records is both incomplete and inaccuratebecause it is most often based on self-report and notsubstantiated through urinalysis. Thus, information that couldhelp inform criminal justice processing is not generallyavailable.' To the extent that criminal sanctions are applied, theirability to interrupt the life style of the vast majority ofcocainc-heroin abusers is minimal. Nationally, only a low percentage (less than 10 percent) ofall felony arrests lead to a felony conviction resulting inincarceration. Over half of all felony arrests (60 percent inManhattan) lead to conviction, but there is much variation byjurisdiction. Typically, offenders plead guilty to lesser chargesand are sentenced to time served, a fine, community service,probation, or a few months in jail. Consequently, the vastmajority of offenders, mainly those arrested on less severefelony and misdemeanor charges, are at liberty within threemonths after arrest. In addition, many felony offenders (asignificant portion of whom are involved with drugs) are atliberty on bail or on personal recognizance while awaiting trial.Active heroin-cocaine users have higher failure-to-appear ratesand much higher rates of rearrest while out on bail thanoffenders not involved with drugs.9 The efficacy ofcriminal sanctions Little evidence is available that criminal justice sanctionsalone are as effective as drug treatment in reducing the drug useand criminality of cocaineheroin abusers at liberty. The centralvalue of the criminal process may lie in the leverage that can beexerted to bring hardcore drug abusers into treatment. Existing evidence does not show that criminal justicesanctions (fine, probation, or parole, or length of time served)reduce criminality or drug use more effectively than drugtreatment among cocaine-heroin abusers. It is not known whether or to what extent jail or prison timealone suppresses post-incarceration criminality or cocaine-heroinabuse among drug involved offenderq- The limited evidenceavailable suggests that two-thirds or more of arrestedheroin abusers return to heroin-cocaine use and their diversecriminal patterns within three months after release fromdetention. In contrast, several studies of drug treatmentoutcomes with criminal justice clients (mainly probationers) showsubstantial post-treatment reductions in both drug use andcriminality.10 Outpatient clients in methadone treatment reportless than half as much criminal activity as heroin abusers not intreatment. Compared with their pretreatment criminality,methadone clients report 50 to 80 percent less crime duringtreatment." Even among those who continue criminal activityduring treatment, methadone clients report reduced involvement inserious crimes such as robbery, burglary, or dealing of heroin orcocaine; they report mainly low-level property crimes, con games,and sale of marijuana or pills." Residential drug programs have sizable proportions(frequently over half) of clients who are on probation or paroleor under related legal pressure, and whose criminality isnear zero while in the residential program. This nearzerocriminality of cocaine-heroin abusers while in residentialprograms is documented for therapeutic communities in severalcities. A study of treatment facilities in New York found thatabout a third of residential clients were criminal justicereferrals and had extensive criminal histories. These clientstended to stay longer and have as good or better outcomes thanclients with similar pretreatment criminal and drug abusehistories who were not referred by the criminal justice system.13 The coercive power, surveillance potential, and timeoffcmd through criminal justice sanctions, open significantopportunities for effectively treating cocaine-heroin abusers. Although criminal justice sanctions alone may have uncertainvalue in reducing the criminality of drug involved offenders,those sanctions can serve a powerful role by facilitatingeffective drug treatment. There are a variety of pressures thatbring hardcore drug abusers into treatment: parents, employers,loved one, and friends may all apply psychological and socialpressures. The most powerful pressure, however, may be the threatof legal sanction -- the threat of arrest and conviction, andmost importantly, the threat of incarceration. The leveragecreated by this threat, and by the sanction itself, permitstreatment to be considered as a viable option by serious abusers.Moreover, by reducing early program termination, it allows thetreatment and aftercare to continue for the length of thepermissable custody. Cocaine-heroin abusers typically wish to avoid the"hassles" associated with changing their lives. Whenthe alternative is lengthy incarceration, cocaine-heroin abusersmay be more willing to be referred to drug treatment. If,however, the alternative is a short sentence, detainees and jailinmates may prefer the incarceration rather than diversion tolong-term drug abuse treatment. Unfortunately, relatively few offenders voluntarily seektreatment. Many offenders are referred by the criminal justicesystem to drug treatment as the result of negotiated pleabargains in which the offender agrees to enter treatment insteadof receiving a substantial sentece. For many years TASC(Treatment Alternatives to Street Crime) has operated in selectedjurisdictions to recruit clients and negotiate with court stafffor release of offenders to drug programs. TASC clients are morelikely to select treatment because the alternative is consideredmore onerous. Few cocaine-heroin abusers in custody volunteer for drugtreatment unless the treatment program is seen as an attractivealternative. Prison inmates seek out in-house treatment programsbecause they often provide better living conditions, a saferenvironment, parole release considerations, and an opportunity topossibly change one's lifestyle. In-prison programs that offersuch conditions are substantially better able to recruitparticipants than those which do not. Although these offendersmay not be completely sincere at admission, there is anopportunity for the program to engage them in an effectivetreatment experience. In short, the threat of substantialsanctions (for arrestees) or the promise of better in-prisonconditions (for those in custody) can operate as extremely usefulincentives for treatment. Nevertheless, it must be understoodthat a significant portion of offenders who have long chronicheroin or cocaine abuse patterns will not want treatment underany circumstances. Some dimensions of effective drugabuse treatment. As the preceding section has demonstrated, the criminality ofheroin abusers is substantially reduced while they are receivingsome form of treatment. The experiences of effective programssuggest that whatever treatment method is used must have a soundtheoretical and empirical basis for its implementation.Additionally, the treatment method must emerge from a powerfulsocial restoration tradition (discussed further below) that iscapable of teaching offenders to interact with others in lessdeviant, more socially acceptable ways. Such an approach must becredible to participants and not be perceived to be coercive andauthoritarian. The approach must have the capability to convinceoffenders that the demanding path to a socially acceptablelifestyle is worthwhile despite their deprived backgrounds, theirexperience with quick criminal profits, and their recognitionthat there is a low probability they will be caught for theircrimes. Despite the often cited conclusion that "nothingworks", evidence from the research literature continues toaccumulate that some programs have been successful in reducingrecidivism." The majority of successful programs have been based on asocial learning theory of criminal behavior." According tothis theory, criminal behavior is learned through a process ofsocial interaction with others. Thus, pro-social behaviors mustbe learned to replace deviant behavior. Effective approachesinclude: therapeutic communities, self-help groups, familytherapy, contingency contracting, role playing and modeling,vocational and social skills training, training in interpersonalcognitive problem-solving skills, and other programs involvingongoing peer monitoring of participants' behavior." Successful programs have several things in common: authoritystructures that clearly specify rules and sanctions,anti-criminal modeling and reinforcement of pro-social behavior,pragmatic personal and social problemsolving assistance, programstaff knowledgeable about the use of community resources, andrelationships between staff and clients which are empathic andcharacterized by open communication and trust. Ex-offender-addictcounselors who serve as credible role-models of successfulrehabilitation also are often utilized." The "Stay 'NOut" program (see Appendix A) provides an example of asuccessful program that employs these treatment principles. Conversely, unsuccessful programs are frequently based on amedical (disease) model of criminology which suggests thatcriminal behavior is a sickness.'9 Similarly, interventionprograms based on deterrence models (e.g., "ScaredStraight") have shown very limited effects and have evenbeen associated with increased offending."' Other types ofprograms that have been unsuccessful include those that relysolely on open communication, "friendship" models,inmate-directed therapy groups, and those that arenon-directive.,, While inmate-dircctcd therapy groups have not had a record ofsuccess, behavioral programs that are simply imposed-withoutinvolving inmates in their development-do not appear to workeither. Such programs are often focused on anti-social ratherthan pro-social behaviors and as a result give undue attentionand reinforcement to negative behavior. Other features ofunsuccessful programs include the failure to either neutralize orutilize the inmate's peer group and failure to sustain continuityof care after release from prison. 22 A number of factors have been identified that degradetreatment integrity23 and impede treatment success. Many arecommon to intervention pro grams in any setting. The absence ofsound theoretical basis for treatment is a typical obstacle tothe development of successful programs. Often, the quality andintensity of treatment interventions are inadequate. Sometimesprograms propose treatment interventions that are based on soundprinciples which are not followed when the program isimplemented. Another common problem is lack of staff training andtreatment experience, and/or their inadequate commitment to.boththe clients' and program success. Other impediments to the establishment and maintenance ofsuccessful treatment programs are related to a lack ofcorrectional system support and the negative influence of inmatesubcultures. Fundamental differences between custodial andtreatment perspectives often contribute to the failure of thecorrectional environment to support program staff and goals, Thelack of support from the custodial forces of an institution isexacerbated within prisons by the negative influence of theanti-authoritarian and antitherapeutic "prisoners'code." Under this code, suspicion colors most interactionsbetween staff and inmates. The result may be a program thatreceives neither staff support nor inmate cooperation. Time in community drug treatment is inversely related toposttreatment cocaine-heroin abuse and criminality. Turning to a more quantitative dimension of treatmentprogramming, the available research clearly suggests the longerheroin and cocaine abusers remain in treatment, the greater thereduction in post-treatment criminality. Those who remain incommunity-based residential, methadone, or outpatient programsfor more than three months have lower levels of bothpost-treatment heroin and cocaine abuse and criminality thanthose who drop out before three months and significantly lowerrates than their own pre-treatment levels. Subsequent months oftreatment in these programs yield even greater reductions inpost-treatment criminality, especially after 12 months oftreatment and after each subsequent treatment cycle. Treatment personnel generally agree that it is hard even tostabilize the cocaine-heroin abuser's lifestyle in three months,much less begin to transform long-standing patterns of deviance.After three months, clients can begin to be comfortable with thetreatment regime and start to make progress in changingdisruptive patterns in their lives. However, due to the chronicrelapsing pattern characteristic of the drug addict, several"cycles of treatment" are frequently necessary forhardcore drug abusers to achieve substantial improvement in theirbehavior and lifestyle. Clients who leave treatment early against program advice aresignificantly more likely to recidivate than those who completethe recommended program, Early leavers who later return totreatment ultimately have less heroin use and criminality thanthose who fail to return." Outcome studies have shown that the first 12 months intreatment are critical to long-term reductions in criminalityafter leaving treatment. For cocaine and heroin abusers who areincarcerated and who participate in prison-basedtherapeutic community programs, the optimum period of treatmentappears to be nine to twelve months followed by release into thecommunity. Longer stays are associated with diminishing results.It is believed this occurs for two reasons: First, longer periodsof program participation while in prison creates increaseddependency on the program and less transference of the learnedexperiences to the community upon release. Secondly, some personsare transferred as rehabilitated back into the general prisonpopulation after completing more than a year of treatment, andthe criminal subculture undermines some gains made during thetreatment period. Thus, the timing of treatment and release forprison inmateswith serious drug abuse problems needs to becoordinated to achieve the optimum outcome Conclusion Clearly, much has been learned about effective ways ofreducing the drug involvement of heroin and cocaine abusingoffenders. Given the chronic recurring nature of addiction, noprogram can realistically expect to eliminate severe heroin andcocaine abuse for all offenders. Yet even if a program succeedsonly in reducing the frequency of use, substantial reductions incriminality may follow. The evidence is clear: cocaine-heroinabusers commit much less crime when they use once or twice a weekor less often than when they use once a day or more often. If,for example, daily cocaine-heroin users were placed undercourt-directed intensive surveillance and frequent urinemonitoring which curtailed their use of drugs by half or more, avery substantial drop in their criminality'. would be likely tooccur, especially in crimes such as robbery and burglary- Policy recommendations What steps should be taken by the criminal justice system todeal more effectively with the drug-involved offender? Based onthe research findings discussed in the preceding section and theexperience and opinions of the authors, this sectionpresents a series of policy recommendations. While it may not bepossible to institute all or even most of these recommendationsin many jurisdictions, they are offered as goals or guidelinesfor the practitioner. We argue that the interventions proposedwill improve the system by leading to the effective integrationand coordination of offender supervision and drug treatmentapproaches. Beginning with the crucial need to identify heroin andcocaine abusers at arrest, the recommendations focus in turn onjail-based interventions, inprison programs, and communitytreatment options. Also included are systemwide recommendationspertaining to the organization and staffing of drug abusetreatment programs. All of the recommendations presented in this;ection call for the criminal justice system to supervisecocaine-heroin users frequently and systematically:  Convicted cocaine-heroin abusers under communitysupervision should be intensively supervised and compelled toattend treatment for their maximum period of custody. Optimalsupervision includes near daily validation of employment, time inresidence, associations, and absence of drug use.  Convicted cocainc-hcroin abusers sentenced to prisonshould be required to participate in drug treatment for ninemonths to one year prior to release and to continue incommunity treatment as a condition of parole. Their urine andbehavior should be carefully monitored while under fieldsupervision to insure attendance and prevent relapses."  Steps should be taken to ensure that drug-involvedoffenders in city and county detention facilities are placed intreatment after release, During their confinement, methadonemaintenance should be continued for addicts previously assignedto this program or initiated for other heroin users. Naltrexonecombined with urine surveillance should be used for those heroinusers on work release who opt for drug-frcc treatment. The identification of drug-involvedoffenders In areas with a large number of heroin and cocaine users,urinalysis should be used to identify these users at arrest. Most cocaine-heroin abusers who have contact with thecriminal justice system are arrested about once per year. Resultsof the pretrial drug-testing program operating in Washington,D.C. suggest that recent users of cocaine or heroin can beidentified accurately at arrest through urinalysis. By collcctingurine samples from all arrestees, and analyzing the specimens forfive types of drugs including opiates, the D.C. Pretrial ServicesAgency has been able to identify and increase supervision of drugusers released pen-ding trial. These procedures appear to havereduced the rates of rearrest and failure-to-appear. Moreover, bysystematically retaining the results of the urine tests, theinformation has been made available to help determine appropriatecriminal sanctions for those arrestces ultimatelyconvicted." The costs of a urine testing program may be amply justifiedin any jurisdiction with a significant drug problem. As in D.C.,the data collected should be systematically maintained and usedfor determining conditions of pre-trial release and sanctions forthose convicted. In particular, the opportunity should be seizedto present appropriate treatment options. Jail-based interventions Treatment orientation and referral to drug treatmentprograms should be instituted in metropolitancourts and jails. A central intake staff and/or representatives of drugtreatment programs should be present at court and in jails. Alloffenders who test drug positive at arrest should be required toattend orientation and preliminary intake procedures while indetention. These preliminary treatment steps may help ensure thatthose who are released from custody are placed in appropriatetreatment after returning to the community." Full treatment interventions, however, should not beinitiated for cocaineheroin offenders who will be free of custodyin less than three months. It is neither cost effective northerapeutically wise to implement full treatment programming whenthere is little expectation that treatment can be completed. Methadone programs should be permitted to maintain clientsin jails to facilitate resumption of treatment at the end ofdetention. Methadone treatment has proven effective in reducing dailyheroin use and substantially reducing criminality among heroinabusers. Enrolled methadone clients who are arrested can bemaintained on methadone while detained. In this way, return tomethadone treatment upon release after short-term jail custodywould be facilitated. Those who are convicted and sentenced toincarceration should be given the option (when medicallyrecommended) to remain on methadone or to detoxify from methadoneand enter an in-prison therapeutic community. Considerationshould also be given to initiating methadone treatment in jailsfor chronic heroin addicts. Heroin addicts serving shortsentences who arc introduced to methadone treatment whileincarcerated are more likely to enter and remain in methadonemaintenance treatment in the community when they are releasedfrom custody. Daily naltrexone consumption should be used for someconvicted heroin abusers in combination with drug-free treatmentand intensive supervision. For her-oin-abusing offenders who receive jail orprobation sentences and who opt for drug-free treatment,use of naltrexone (Trexan@), combined with urine surveillance,could be instituted. Its use with jail inmates on work release orschool furlough appears particularly appropriate. Naltrexone isan easily administered narcotic antagonist drug which taken dailyproduces almost immediate withdrawal symptoms in addicts whenthey use an opiatc, but is harmless to nonaddicts. It is mosteffective with heroinaddicted offenders who have a high level ofcommunity integration. It has no effect on cocaine, however;therefore, urine monitoring must be sustained.'o In-prison treatment Therapeutic communities and other intensive milieu drugtreatments should be made available to cocaine-heroin abusingstate prisoners about one year prior to parole eligibility. A successful therapeutic community, the "Stay 'NOut" program (see Appendix A), was developed at twocorrectional facilities in New York Stateone for men and one forwomen. This model therapeutic community in prison holds thegreatest promise for changing hard-core, drug-abusing inmates andreducing recidivism." Despite their proven effectiveness, few therapeuticcommunities such as "Stay 'N Out" are in place forcriminally involved drug abusers. One of the factors that limitsthe creation of additional programs of this type is the concernthat such programs might engage in activities that threatensecurity and encourage inmate resistance to the correctionalsystem. Nonetheless, correctional administrators learn quickly asthey become exposed to the operation of well-run programs thatsuch undesirable variance can be avoided. In fact, ininstitutions where most of these programs have been established,the wardens and correctional officers frequently are their mostvocal champions. To encourage their development, however, staffand administration need education and training. Further, a numberof fiscal and practical issues have to be addressed prior toimplementation- The implementation of prison-based treatment programsrequires isolation from the general prison population. The inimical influence of the criminal inmate subculture("prisoners' code") will inevitably undermine anyattempts to establish viable programming if the program is notisolated from this anti-therapeutic force. Separate livingquarters, recreation, food services, etc. should be maintainedwithin the institution for this separation to be ideallyeffective. Total isolation is, however, neither necessary nordesirable; rather, some contact with the general inmatepopulation is useful for the purpose of allowing the inmate intreatment to see where he has come from and how much he haschanged. In addition, the contact experience provides theopportunity for the program resident to test both his newprosocial values against the inmate subculture and his resistanceto negative influences. This kind of isolation is most possiblein medium security institutions with dormitorytype housing spacewhere one dormitory or two are physically segregated or separablefrom the main institution. Prisoners in therapeutic communities who make goodtreatment progress should be paroled to residential drug-freeprograms that sustain the therapeutic community model prior tocompletion of (heir sentence. They should be required to stay intreatment as a condition of parole until their date of maximumcustody or until the program deems them recovered. It is essential for the successful treatment ofcocaine-heroin abuser offenders to maintain continuity-of-carefrom the outset of treatment to termination of custody. Whilethere is benefit from prison treatment alone, these effects areaugmented and sustained by continuing that specific treat inentin the community. Ideally, release to the community facility would becontingent on the progress made during in-prison treatment. Underthis incentive system, specific behaviors would be rewarded witha specified number of restitution or release "points"that might be administered as a form of "good timc"system. Alternatively, prisoners might earn more favorableconditions of confinement or higher status and associated programprivilege.-,. However it is administered, the basic notion is toreinforce the desirability of pro-social behaviors. Community treatment programs Drug-abusing misdemennants should be considered forcommunitybased sentencing alternatives. In lieu of confining drug-involved offenders in jails andcounty penitentiaries, a range of intermediate sanctions shouldbe considered for heroin and cocaine abusers convicted ofmisdemeanors. These might include house arrest with electronicmonitoring, intermittent sentences (e.g., weekend or eveningincarceration), TASC programs, or residence in a facility such asa "halfway in-halfway out" center (a "HiHo").Again, in any of these alternatives offenders would ideally beable to achieve release status more quickly by providingdrug-negative urine samples, routinely attending andparticipating positively in treatment sessi ns, paying back theirvictims, and providing evidence of prosocial activity.'2 The community treatment resources available to supportintermediate sanctioning policies range from self-help groupsthat meet once a week for a couple of hours to residentialfacilities that provide 24 hour supervision and programming- At aminimum, almost all communities have an Alcoholics Anonymous orNarcotics Anonymous group that provides an context for recoveringsubstance abusers to meet, discuss day-to-day steps formaintaining a drug free life, and participate in many differenttypes of social activities not involving alcohol or drugs."Some communities provide drug treatment counseling through theDepartment of Mental Health. And in many cities, recoveringsubstance-abusers operate group homes that use many of the sameprinciples of Alcoholics Anonymous or therapeutic communitiesfound in prison programs. TASC programs run throughout the nation provide staff who arefamiliar with the particular resources available fordrug-involved offenders in specific communities. And almost allstates have an agency that periodically determines theavailability of both private and public programs available fordrug treatment. A list of these agencies is available fromthe National Association of State Drug and Alcohol AbuseDirectors, in Washington, DC Even if no other treatment is provided, heroin-cocaineabusers who are on probation and parole should be required tohave frequent urine tests. Drug-abusing offenders on probation or parole who are in nospecial treatment programs, as a minimum should be routinelyrequired to provide specimens for urinalysis over the entirelength of their probation or parole. At the outset the frequencyof urinalysis should be near daily, and decreascd as positiveprogress warrants. The effective monitoring of urinalysis resultswill help to interrupt relapse to daily heroin or cocaine use,and, hence, high-rate criminality is likely to dropsubstantially." When drug positive urines are detected,offenders should be immediately confronted, clearly warned afterthe first such incident, be required to enter treatment fordiagnosis and assessment after the second positive urine, and berequired to remain in treatment if relapse seems imminent or hasoccurred. Refusal to enter treatment upon an affirmativediagnosis should be considered a violation of release conditions. Organization and staffing issues The integrity of the treatment programs for convictedoffenders must be maintained by developing structural safeguardsof independence and autonomy from correctional management. All too often well designed interventions operated bycompetent and motivated agency and institutional staffs do notsucceed. Usually, the efforts arc not trusted by the criminaljustice clients, are overwhelmed by the difficulty of theclients' problems, are weakened by inadequate funding andinstitutional resistance, and are subject to high rates of staffburnout and turnover. For a treatment program to last long enoughto make a substantial difference, it must maintain its ownintegrity, ie., honesty and commitment to the treatment goals andprogram participants. The staff must also have sufficientindependence and automony to deliver on their promises. Treatment programs conducted by organizations independent of(but closely linked to) corrections agencies are more likely tomaintain their integrity thz programs operated by correctionalstaff within institutions or community corrections settings. Thissuggests that an outside agency working in cooperation with orunder contract to the Department of Corrections may be the mostappropriate treatment organization. Management responsibility forthe rehabilitation program should be assigned to a team ofcommitted treatment professionals, as well asex-addict/ex-offender peer counselors, For this approach to work,the power and authority of the treatment team should becomparable to and complement the criminal justice authority. Thismanagement group should be associated with and monitored byrespected professional self-help/therapeutic communityorganizations, for example, Therapeutic Communities of America. Probation and parole officers should have their functionsdivided into Surveillance Officers and Community 'fteatment TeamLeaders. For many years, correctional observers have debated thewisdom of vesting probation and parole officers with thepotentially conflicting responsibilities of surveillance andtreatment. In the opinion of the authors, surveillance andtreatment functions of field supervision officers should beseparated to resolve the inherent conflicts and strengthen eachfunction. Essential to the effectiveness of thetreatment/counseling relationship is trust and confidentiality.Persons tinder field supervision are unlikely to freely admitcriminal acts or drug use to someone in a position to return themto prison for such violations. Therefore, surveillance andrehabilitation responsibilities should be handled by staffs whowork separately but cooperatively to avoid role confusion forboth officer and offender. As the next recommendation suggests,both types of officers should be augmented by carefully selectedexoffeiider-addicts who would serve as Monitors for theSurveillance Officers and as Treatment Team staff for theCommunity Treatment Team Leader. The Treatment Team staff should rotate between working inprison and the community to maintain continuity between therehabilitation efforts in both environments. For in-prisonprograms, the objective of separating custodial and treatmentfunctions is satisfied by the organization discussed in thepreceding point. Former addict-offenders who have shown clear evidence ofprosocial change should have training and employmentopportunities, for example, as Monitors and Rntment Team members. Large numbers of offenders who have been chroniccocaine-heroin abusers are unable to gain and to keels legalemployment. Their background is so limited and so stigmatizedthat legal employers are reluctant to employ them, and suspiciousafter they do. Thus, even after making good treatment progress,many offenders may still be unable to gain stable employment.First, systematic skill development and training programs shouldhe providcd. Second, providing employment to ex-addict-offenderswithin the treatment program itself is a valuable opportunity todeal with this unemployment issue as well as cope with shortagesof field supervision personnel. The employment of ex-addict-offenders in a variety ofprogressively more responsible paraprofessional and professionalrolcs will help new monitoring and drug treatment systemsfunction effectively. They also will serve as role models tooffenders they supervise. The ex-addict offenders are the rolemodels (as in "Stay 'N Out") whose presencedemonstrates the realistic possibility of achieving successfulrehabilitation. Graduation from a drug treatment program,evidence of successful integration into community life, andadditional training are prerequisites for the employment ofex-addictoffenders as Monitors and Treatriient Team members. Conclusion By substantially reducing their cocaine-heroin abuse, thecriminality of drug-involved offenders may be reduced by 20 to 50percent or more. To do so, however, the criminal justice systemmust develop an alliance with the drug treatment system geared toachieve the goals of effective rehabilitation, enhanced prosocialbehavior, and reduced recidivism. The difficulties inherent in bringing about this allianceshould not be minimizcd. Some reallocation of resources clearlywill be required, with all the tensions attendant on anysignificant shift in funding and operational priorities. Ifcustodial and treatment functions are to be effectivelyseparated, recruitment, training, and retraining programs willhave to be developed for community corrections personnel.Institutional corrections environments must be prepared to acceptindependent treatment organizations. Procedures must be developedto identify and train those therapeutic community graduates bestqualified to become competent treatment team members andmonitors. The problem of intensive community resistance toaccepting community treatment facilities (HiHo's) that housefelons and substance abusers must also be addressed. Withinprisons, space will have to be reallocated to create therapeuticcommunities to house clients during treatment. If institutionsare converted for total therapeutic community utilization,abandoned mental hospitals may be utilized, with significantcapital expenditures necessary for conversion. Beginning at thepoint of arrest, screening procedures will have to be developedto monitor drug use and to identify cocaine-heroin users who canmost benefit from the proposed interventions. Perhaps most important, cooperation will be needed amongstable drug abuse agencies and drug treatment programs andcriminal justice organizations (courts, probation, corrections,and parole) that traditionally have had competing political andfiscal interests and often lack a history of successful Jointventures. Careful documentation of pilot results will also beneeded to evaluate whether the system is moving in desired orunanticipated directions. For this, evaluation researchers willhave to be in place from the outset. Since many problems willarise that have the potential for compromising the interventions,the evaluation design must provide decision makers with timclyinformation to assist them in formulating corrective actions. Atthe same time, ongoing dissemination of outcome informationthrough professional and media channels will help foster andmaintain the support necessary to accomplish the changesproposed. Appendix A "Stay 'N Out": A model for prison-based drugtreatment "Stay 'N Out" is a therapeutic community(TC), in part based upon the Phoenix House model, that has beenoperating in the New York State prison system for the last tenyears. Over time the program has been modified to operate moreeffectively within the prison environment. The program has beenfortunate to be operated by many of the founding staff who haveprovided the vision, commitment, and determination necessary fora successful prison program. An early evaluation of the "Stay 'N Out" programindicated that it was successfully implemented, maintained apositive TC environment, and produced positive psychological andbehavioral changes in participants. In 1984, the NationalInstitute on Drug Abuse funded an evaluation of "Stay'N Out", comparing it to two other prison-bascd programs inNew York State and a control group of inmates on program waitinglists, but receiving no treatment. A milieu program and astandard counseling program were the comparison groups. Althoughparticipants were not randomly assigned to thcsc treatmentconditions, preliminary results of the comparison areprovocative. The data indicate the "Stay 'N Out"participants who remained in the program for nine to twelvemonths were less likely to have problems while on parole thaneither those who left "Stay 'N Out" earlier or those inother prison-based programs. For example, "Stay 'N Out"participants who remained in the program more than nine monthswere more likely to have a positive parole discharge (80 percentpositive) than those who remained in the program less than threemonths (50 percent positive). Positiv e parole discharge isdefined as no reported violations of parole during the parolecustody period. Long-term (9-12 months) participants of the otherprograms studied also had fewer cases of positive paroledischarge; the milieu program reported a 56 percent positivedischarge rate and the counseling program a 47 percent positiverate. Preliminary analysis indicates that long-term "Stay 'NOut" participants may also have a more encouraging patternof re-arrest than those in the other programs. Continuingfollow-up shows that only 27 percent of the TC participants werere-arrested compared to 35 percent of the milieu participants, 50percent of the counseling participants, and 42 percent of thewaiting list persons. In addition, TC participants averaged 18months to rearrest compared to 11 months for the milieu and ninemonths for the counseling group. These data should be interpretedwith caution, however, as variation in the actual number of daysat risk may vary greatly among samples. Program overview 64 Stay IN Out" programs were begun as a joint effortamong New York State Division of Substance Abuse Services (DSAS), New YorkTherapeutic Communities (NYTC), New York Department ofCorrectional Services (DOCS), and the New York State Division ofParole. Currently, NYTC. operates the programs, DOCS suppliesfunding, and Parole provides increased opportunities for programresidents. The DSAS Bureau of Research and Evaluation continuesto evaluate the program. The current program consists of two treatment units for maleinmates in one facility with 35 beds per unit (a total capacityof 70 beds), and one treatment unit with 40 beds for women-inmates in another facility. Each unit is staffed by a total ofseven persons, including both professionals andparaprofessionals. Inmates selected for the programs arerecruited at Statc correctional facilities. The criteria forselection are: history of drug abuse, at least 18 years of age,evidence of positive institutional participation, and no historyof sex crimes or mental illness. "Stay IN Out" clientsare housed in units segregated from the general prisonpopulation. They cat in a common dining room, however, and attendmorning activities with other prisoners. The optimum length oftreatment is from nine to twelve months. Most program staff areex-addict-offenders who are graduates of community T)Cs: they actas "role models" exemplifying successfulrehabilitation. The course of treatment is a developmental growthprocess with the inmate becoming an increasingly responsiblemember of the program. During the early phase of treatment, the clinical thrustinvolves assessment of client needs and problem areas.Orientation to the prison TC procedures occurs through individualcounseling, encounter sessions, and seminars. Clients are givenlow-level jobs and granted little status. During the later phasesof treatment, residents are provided opportunities to earnhigherlevel positions and increased status through sincereinvolvement in the program and hard work. Encounter groups andcounseling sessions are more in-depth and focus on the areas ofself-discipline, self-worth, selfawareness, respect forauthority, and acceptance of guidance for problem areas. Seminarstake on a more intellectual nature. Debate is encouraged toenhance self-expression and to increase self-confidence. Ilpon release, participants are encouraged to seek furthersubstance abuse treatment at cooperating community TCs. Extensiveinvolvement with a network of community TCs is central to theprogram's operation. Staff and senior residents of community TCsvisit "Stay IN Out" on a regular basis to recruitresident inmates for their programs. These visitors provideinspiration since they are ex-addicts and ex-felon role modelswho are leading economically and socially productive lives. "Stay 'N Out" Components Program Elements  Isolated Unit  Utilization of Ex-Offender/Ex-Addict Staff * Establishment of Psychological and Physical Safety  Hierarchical Therapeutic Community  Confrontation and Support Groups  Individual Counscling  Community and Relationship Training  Program Rules with Opportunities to Learn from Misbehavior * Immediate Discharge for Drug Possession, Violence andSexual Misbehavior  Developing Pro-Social Values: Honesty, Responsibility, andAccountability  Continuity-of-Care: Networking with Community TCs Administmtive Components DOC Contract Arrangement with Private Agency AdministrativeOffices Outside Prison Membership in Local and National Professional OrganizationsMaintain Political Relations with Alternative Funding Sourccs andLegislators Institutional Relations Earned Respect of Prison Administrators and Guards Development of a Model Unit Impressive to Visitors Placcment of Program Residents in Important Prison Jobs Relations With Inmate Culture Earned Respect of General Population Inmates Opportunities to Test TC Values Glossary Contingency contracting: A behavioral modificationtechnique in which desired behaviors are negotiated or contractedfor and rewards or sanctions meted out as that contract'sobligation is fulfilled. Detoxification: Gradual removal of an illicitsubstance from a user's body through decreasing dosage of thatsubstance with the support of therapeutically compatiblesubstances. Electronic monitoring: A supervision system usingelectronic devices, usually anklet/bracelets, which emit codedsignals to a central computer monitoring system. This systemallows continuous monitoring of persons under house arrest. Full treatment intervention: The maximum use ofcombined treatment resources, for example, drug treatmentprograms, urinalysis, intensive counseling, etc. Hi-Hos (Halfway In - Halfway Out Houses): Transitionalresidential facilities in which releasees are supervised by bothprison staff and community services personnel. House arrest: A system of incarceration in which anoffender is confined to his or her own home instead of in atraditional correctional facility. Intermediate sanction: A sanction more severe thantraditional probation and less onerous than incarceration. Interpersonal cognitive problem-solving: Therapeutictechniques which teach an array of skills and strategies forresolving problems, particularly those encountered in relationswith others. Intervention: A therapeutic regimen or action designedto stop or change an individual's course of drug use or criminalactivity. Methadone: A long lasting (24-36 hours) syntheticnarcotic analgesic medication. Methadone treatment: The use of methadone,administered orally in daily dosages, to either detoxify ormaintain (through maintenance of same dosage level) a narcoticaddict. Miliett Program: Therapeutic programs in whichparticipants live together in an isolated environment designed topromote behavioral change; see also therapeutic community. Misdemeanor: A relatively minor violation of criminallaw, generally penalized through fines or a short period ofincarceration. Modeling: An attempt to gradually alter behaviorthrough observation of socially appropriate behavior. Narcotic antagonist: (Naltrexone, Naloxone, Narcan) Asubstance designed to discourage the use of opiates through twoactions: 1) when introduced into a user's system after ingestionof narcotics, withdrawal ensues- and 2) when introduced into auser's system prior to ingestion of narcotics, thepharmacologic effect of the narcotics is blocked. Opiate: Any natural drug derivative of opium orsynthetic opiates with similar pharmacological action (methadone,percodan, Dilaudid) capable of producing physiological addictionand withdrawal symptoms with repeated use. Prisoners code: An unwritten code of ethics developedby the culture in a prison setting with its own norms, values,and sanctions. This code is in general hostile and suspicious ofauthority and discourages cooperation with officials of thecorrectional system or their representatives. Prosocial. Socially acceptable. Recidivism: An offender's return to patterns ofcriminal behavior or drug abuse which were evident prior totreatment or incarceration. This may include official re-entryinto the criminal justice system, for example, rearrest, or areturn to drug use or criminal activity even if undetectedofficially. Restitution: A system of pay back or reparation for anoffense either to society in general or to specific victim.Restitution may be made a condition of release. Restitution points: A behavioral accounting system inwhich a quantifiable sequence of steps using positive andnegative reinforcement determine speed of release fromincarceration. TASC: (Treatment Alternatives to Street Crime@ A nationalprogram which provides alternatives to incarceration andassistance after release to substance abuse offenders through-referrals to drug treatment and special supervision programs. Therapeutic community (in drug treatment): A specifictype of Milieu Program; a residential, drug free treatmentprogram utilizing community or peer counseling, role modeling,and increasing levels of responsibility to prepare for re-entryinto the community. Programs require full-time participation andmay last a few months to over a year. Reference notes 1. BJS 1983c,def; 1985a; 1986b,d, Sanchez and Johnson 1987. 2, Chaiken and Chaiken 1982; Chaiken 1986. 3. Toborg 1984; Toborg et al. 1996; Carver 1986; Wish, Brady,and Cuadrado 1984, 1986. 4. Wish 1987. 5. Wish 1987; John Carver 1987 (personal communication): DCPretrial Services Agency; 400 F St., NW; Washington, DC20001. 6. Anglin and McGlothlin 1984; Ball, Shaffer, and Nurco 1983;Collins, Hubbard, and Rachal 1985; Hanson et al. 1985; Johnson etal. 1985; Johnson and Wish 1987; Sanchez and Johnson 1987. 7. Hanson et al. 1985, Johnson et al. 1985; Johnson and Wish1987; Sanchez and Johnson 1987; Hunt, et al. 1984. 8. Belenko 1981; Carver 1986; Chaiken and Chaiken 1984;Toborg et al. 1986; Wish 1986; Wish et al. 1980; Wish, Brady, andCuadrado 1986: Chaiken and Chaiken 1987. 9. Belenko 1984; BJS 1983f; Lynott 1986; Petersilia et al.1985; Wish, Brady, and C'tjadrado 1986, 10. Anglin and McGlothlin 1984; BJS 1983f; DeLeon 1984a,b;1985, Hubbard et al. 1984; Robins 1973; Sells 1974; Sells and Simpson 1976. 11. Anglin and McGlothlin 1984; Dole and Joseph 1979;DesJarlais et al. 1982; Hubbard et al. 1984,, McGlothlin 1979; McGlothlin, Anglin, and Wilson 1977;McGlothlin and Anglin 1981a,b; Senay 1984, 1985; Simpson 1984. 12. Kleinman and Lukoff 1975-, Hunt et al. 1984; Hunt 1985. 13. DeLeon et al. 1980; DeLeon, Wexler, and Jainchill 1982;DeLeon 1984a,b, 1985 Hubbard et al. 1984; Simpson and Sells 1982;Tims and Ludford 1984; Wexler and DeLeon 1977; Wexler andWilliams 1986. 14. Carver 1986; Collins and Allison 1983; Goldsmith et al.1984; Hunt et al. 1984,, Johnson et al. 1985; Wish, Brady,Cuadrado 1986; Wish 1986. 15. Alexander and Parsons 1973; Andrews 1980; Chandler 1973;Gendreau and Ross 1979; Peters 1981; Philips, Phillips, and Wolf1973; Ross and McKay 1976, Walter and Mills 1979; Wexler, Lipton,and Foster 1985; Wexler and Williams 1986. 6. Bandura 1979; Nctticr 1978; Niezel 1979. 17. Gendreau and Ross 1983-1984. 18. Andrews and Kiessling 1980; Lee and Haynes 1980; Platt, Perry, and Metzger 1980; Ross andMcKay 1976; Wexler and Williams 1986. 19, Balch 197,5; Ross and Ciendreau 1980. 20. Blumstein, Cohen, and Nagin 1978; Critelli and Crawford1980; Erickson, Gibbs, and Jensen 1977; Hart 1978. 21. Craft, Stephenson, and Grangcr 1964; Fenton 1960; Grantand (irant 1959; Kassebaum, Ward, and Wilner 1971. 22- Ross and McKay 1978. 23. Gendrau and Ross 1979; Quay 1977; Ral)t3eport et al.1979; Repucci et al. 1973; Sechrest et al. 1979a,b. 24. Des Jarlais et al. 1982. 25. Wexler, Lipton, and Foster 1985. 26. Ball et al. 1979, 1981; Collins, Hubbard, and Rachal1985; Des Jarlais et al. 1982; Hunt, Lipton, and Spuiit 1984;Johnson et al. 19R5; Ntirco et al. 1985; Sanchez and Johnson1987; Speckart and Anglin 19R6a,b. 27. Anglin and McGlothlin 1984-1 Carver 1986; McGlothlin,Anglin, and Wilson 1977. 28. Carvcr et al. 1986; Toborg et al. 1986, Wish et al. 19RO,198.1; Wish, Brady, and Cuadrado 1984, 1986; Wish, Cuadrado, andMontorana 1986; Wish, Cuadrado, and Mortorana 1986. 29. Collins. Hubbard, and Rachal 1985; National Associationof State Drug Abuse Program Coordinators 1978; Toborg et al.1975. 30. Braheii 1983; Brahen et al. 1979. 31. Wexler 1985; Wexler and Lipton 1985; Wexler, Lipton, andFoster 1985; Wexler and Sharron 1985; Wexler and Williams 1986. 32. Wish, Brady, and Cuadrado 1986. 33. Chaikeii, Marcia 1979. 34. NASAD is located at 444 W Capitol St,, NW, Suite 530;Washington, DC 20001. 35. Carver 1986; Chamlee 1986; Toborg ct al. 1986. Reference Notes Alexander, J.F. and Parsons, R.J. 1973- Short-term BehavioralIntervention with Delinquent Families: Impact on Family Processand Recidivism. Journal of Abnormal Psychology, 81,219-225. Andrews, D.A. and Kiessling, I.]. 1980. Program Structure andEffective Correctional Practices: A Summary of the CAVICResearch, In R.R. Ross and P. Gendreau (eds.) EffectiveCorrectional Treatment. 1980. Toronto: Butterworths. Andrews, D.A. 1980. Some Expcrimcntal Investigations of thePrinciples of Differential Association Through DeliberateManipulation of the Structure of Service Systems, AmericanSociological Review, 45, 448-462. Anglin, M.D. and McGlothlin, W.C. 1984. Outcome of narcoticaddict treatment in California. Pp. 106-128 in Frank M. Tims andJacqueline P. Ludford (eds.). Drug Abuse Treatment Evaluation.Strategies, Progress, and Prospects. Research MonographSeries 51. Rockville, Md.: National Institute on Drug Abuse. Balch, R.W. 1975. The Medical Model of Delinquency:Theoretical, Practical, and Ethical Implications. Crime and Delinquency, 21, 116-129. Rail, J.C-, Shaffer, ].W. and Nurco, D.N. 1983. Theday-to-day criminality of heroin addicts in Baltimore: A study inthe continuity of offense rates. Drug and Alcohol Dependence,12 (1): 19-142. Ball, J.C., Rosen, L., Flueck, J.A. and Nurco, D.N. 1981. Thecriminality of heroin addicts when addicted and when off opiates.Pp. 39-65 in J.A. Inciardi, (ed.), The Drugs-Crime Connection.Beverly Hills, Calif.: Sage. Ball, J.C., Rosen, L., Flueck, J.A. and Nurco, D.N, 1982,Lifetime criminality of heroin addicts in the United States. Journalo Drug Issues. 3: 225-239. Ball, J.C., Rosen, L., Friedman, E.G. and Nurco, D.N. 1979.The impact of heroin addiction upon criminality. Pp. 163-169 inL. Harris (cd.), Problems of Drug Dependen,,e, 1979.Research Monograph Series 27, Rockville, Md.: National Instituteon Drug Abuse, Bandura, A. 1979. The Social Learning Perspective: Mechanismsof Aggression. In H. Toch (ed.) Psychology of Crime andJustice. New York: Holt, Rinehart and Winston. Relenko, S. 1981. Drugs and the criminal justice system: Theprocessing and impact of drug cases in New York. Report preparedfor Joseph A. Califano, New York State Heroin and Alcohol Study. Belenko, S. 1984. Lower cast side narcotics arrests, August1982: Court outcomes and rearrests. Research Department. NewYork: New York City Criminal Justice Agency. Blumstein, A., Cohen, J., and Nagin, D. (eds.) 1978.Deterrence and Incapacitation: Estimating the Effects of CriminalSanctions on Crime Rates. Washington, D.C.: National Academy ofScience. Boyle, J.M. and Brunswick, A.F. 1980. What happened inHarlem? Analysis of a decline in heroin use among a generationunit of urban black youth. Journal of Drug Issues: 109-29. Brahen, L.S., Capone, T., Bloom, S., Adams, H.E., Seniuk,M.P. and DeJulio, P. 1979. An alternative to methadone forprobationer-addicts: inarcatic antagonist treatment. Journalof Drug Education, 9 (1): 117-132. Bureau of Justice Statistics (BJS). 1981. Expenditure and Employment Data for the Criminal Justice System, 1978. Washington, D.C.: U.S. Department of Justice. Bureau of Justice Statistics (BJS). Jail Inmatev 1982. Bulletin. Washington, D.C.: U.S. Department of Justice. Bureau of Justice Statistics (BJS). 1983b. JusticeExpenditure and Employment in the US. 1979. Washington, D.C.:U.S. Department of Justice. Bureau of Justice Statistics (BJS). 1983c. Prisoners andAlcohol. Bulletin. Washington, D.C.: U.S. Department ofJustice. Bureau of Justice Statistics (BJS). 1983d. Prisoners andDrugs. Bulletin, Washington, D.C.: tJ.S, Department ofJustice. Bureau of Justice Statistics (BJS). 1983e. Privoner-s inPrison. Bulletin. Washington, D.C.: U.S. Department ofJustice. Bureau of Justice Statistics (BJS). 1983f. Report to theNation on Crime and Justice. Washington, D.C.: U.S.Department of Justice. Bureau of Justice Statistics (BJS). 1985a. Jail Inmates1983. Bulletin. Washington, ac.:.U.S. Department of Justice. Bureau of Justice Statistics (BJS). 1985b. JuvticeExpenditure and Employment Extracts., 1980 and 1981.Washington, D.C-- LJ,S. Department of Justice. Bureau of Justice Statistics (BJS). 1985c. JusticeExpenditure and Employment, 1982. Bulletin. Washington, D.C.:U.S. Department of Justice. Bureau of Justice Statistics (BJS). 1996a. FelonyCase-Processing Time. Bulletin. Washington, D.C.: U.S.Department of Justice. Bureau of Justice Statistics (BJS). 1986b. Jail Inmates1984. Bulletin. Washington, D,C,: U.S. Department of Justice. 28 References and bibliography Bureau of Justice Statistics (RJS). 1986c. JusticeExpenditurc and Employment. 1983. Bulletin, Washington, D.C.:U.S. Department of Justice. Bureau of Justice Statistic,; (RJS). 1986d. Prisoners in1985. Bulletin. Washington, D.C.: U.S. Department of Justice. Carpenter, C., Glassner, B., Johnson, B.D., and Loughlin, J,1987. Kids, Drugs, Alcohol, and Crime- I-exingion, Mass.:Lexington Books, forthcoming. Carver, J.A. 1986. Drugs and crime.Controlling use andreducing risk through testing. NIJ Reports. Washington, D.C.:National Institute of Justice. Chaiken, J. and Chaiken, M. 1982. Varieties of CriminalBehavior. Santa Monica, Calif.: Rand Corporation. Chaiken, M.R. 1979. Alcoholics Anonymous.- A Sociological Study- University Microfilms. - Chaiken, M.R. 1986. Crime rates and substance abuse amongtypes of Offenders. Pp. 12-54 in Bruce D. Johnson and Eric Wish(eds.), Crime Rates Among Drug-Abusing Offenders. FinalReport to National Institute of Justice. New York: Narcotic andDrug Research, Inc. (haiken, M. and Chaiken, J. 1983. Crime rates and the active offender. Pp. 11-29 in J.Q. Wilson (ed.), Crime and Public Policy. New Brunswick, N.J.: Transaction Books. Chaiken, M. and Chaiken, J. 1984. Offender Types and PublicPolicy. (,rime and Delinquency, 30: 2, 195-226. Chaiken, M. and Chaiken, J. 1987. Selecting 'CareerCriminals'for Priority Prosecution. Submitted to NationalInstitute of Justice, Washington, D.C.: US. Department of@lustice, Chaiken, M.R. and Johnson, B.D. 1988. Characteristics of Different Types of Drug-involved Offenders. Issues and Practices. Washington, D.C.: National Institute of Justice. Chamlee, D.L. 1996. Personal communication. (Chief of FederalProbation.) Chandler, M.J. 1971, Egocentrism and Antisocial Behavior: TheAssessment and Training of Social Perspective-Taking Skills. Developmental Psychology, 9, 326333. Collins, J.J. and Allison, M. 1983. Legal coercion andretention in drug abuse treatment. Hospital and CommunityPsychiatry, 34 (12)1145-49. Collins, J.J., Hubbard, R.L. and Rachal, J.V. 1985. Expensivedrug use and illegal income: A test of explanatory hypotheses. Criminology,23 (4): 743-64. Craft, M., Stephenson, G., and Granger, C.A. 1964. Acontrolled trial of authoritarian and selfgoverning regimes withadolescent 1)sychopaths. American Journal of Orthopsychiatry, 34,543-554. Critelli, J.W. and Crawford, R.F. 1980. The effectiveness ofcourt ordered punishment: fines versus punishment. CriminalJustice and Behavior, 7, 465-470. DeLeon, G. 1984a. Program-based evaluation research intherapeutic communities. Pp. 69-87 in F.M. Tims and J.P. Ludford(eds.), Drug Abuse Treatment Evaluation.Strategies, Progress,and Prospects. Research Monograph Series 51. Rockville, Md.:National Institute on Drug Abuse. DeLeon, G. 1984b. The Therapeutic Community. Study ofEffectiveness. Rockville, Md.: National Institute on DrugAbuse. DeLeon, G. 1985. The Therapeutic Community: Status andEvolution. International Journal of the Addictions, 20(6-7): 823-845. DeLeon, G., Wexler, H.K. and Jainchill, J. 1982. Thetherapeutic community: success and improvement rates 5 yearsafter treatment. International Journal of the Addictions, 17(4): 703-47. DeLeon, G., Wexler, H.K., Schwartz, S., and Jainchill, N. 1980. Therapeuticcommunities for drug abusers. studies of treatment environment. Paperpresented at a meeting of the American Psychological Association. Des Jarlais, D.C.. Joseph, H., Dole, V.P., and Schmeidler, J.1982. Predicting post-treatment narcotics use among patientsterminating from methadone treatment. Advances in Alcohol andSubstance Abuse, 2 (1): 57-68. Division of Criminal Justice Services. 1986. Criminal JusticeStatistics for New York State. Albany. DSAS (Division of Substance Abuse Services). 1985a. Estimatesof Taxes Paid by Working Methadone Patients in 1981. TreatmentIssues Report No. 30. New York. Dole, V.P., and Joseph, H. 1979. The Long-term Consequencesof Methadone Maintenance Treatment. Final Report to NationalInstitute on Drug Abuse. New York: Rockefeller University. IPrickson, M.L., Gibbs, ].P., and Jensen, G.F. 1977. Thedeterrence doctrine and perceived certainty of legal punishment. AmericanSociological Review, 42, 305-317. Fenton, N. 1960. Group counseling in correctional practice. CanadianJournal of Corrections, 2, 229-239, Gendrau, P. and Ross, R.R. 1979. Effective correctionaltreatment: bibliography for cynics. Crime and Delinquency, 25,463-489. Gendreau, P. and Ross, R-R1983-1984. Correctional treatment:some recommendations for effective intervention. Juvenile andFamily Court Journal, Winter., 31-39. Goldsmith, D.S., 14unt, D.E., Lipton, D.S., and Strug, D.L.1984. Methadone folklore: beliefs about side effects and theirimpacts on treatment. Human Organization, 43 (4): 330-40. Grant, J.D. and Grant, M.Q. 1959. A Group Dynamics Approachto the Treatment of Non-Conformists References and bibliography 29 in the Navy. Annals of the American Academy of Political and Sociul Science, 322,126-135. Hanson. B., Beschner, G., Walters, J.M., and Bovelle, E.1985. Life with Heroin.' Voices from the Inner City.Lexington, Mass.: Lexington Books. Hart, R.]. 197R- Crime and punishment in the Army. Journalof Personality and Social Psychology, 161456 1471. Hubbard, R.L., Rachal, J.V., Craddock, and Cavanaugh, E.R.1984. Treatment outcome prospective study (TUPS): clientcharacteristics and behaviors before, during, and aftertreatment. Pp. 42-68 in F.M. Tims and J.P. Ludford (eds.), DrugAbuse @atment Evaluation: Strategies, Progress, and Prospects. ResearchMonogral3h Series 51. Rockville, Md.: National lntitute on DrugAbuse. Hunt, D. 1985. The Violent Offender in Trcatment. Paper presentedat meeting of Academy of Criminal Justice Science, Las Vegas,Nevada. Hunt, D.E., Lipton, and Spunt, B. 1984. Patterns of criminalactivity among methadone clients and current narcotics users notin treatment. Journal of Drug Issues. (Fall): 687-702. Johnson, B.a, Goldstein, P., Preble, E.. Schmeidler, J.,Lipton, D.S., Spunt, B., and Miller, T. 1985. Taking Care ofBusiness.- The Economics of Crime By Heroin Abusers. Lexington,Mass.: Lexington Books. Johnson, B.D. and Wish, E.D. 1987. Criminal Events AmongSeriously Criminal Drug Abusers. New York: Narcotic and DrugResearch, Inc. Kassebaum, Ci-, Ward, a and Wilncr, D. 1971. PrisonTreatment and Parole Survival.- An Empirical Assessment. NewYork: Wiley. Kleinman, P.H. and Lukoff. I.F. 1975. MethadoneMaintenanceModest Help for a Few.- Final Report, New York:Addiction Research and Treatment Corporation Evaluation Team, NewYork: 30 References and bibliography Columbia University School of Social Work. Lee, R. and Haynes, N.M. 1980. Project CREST and theDualTreatment Approach to Delinquericy: Methods and ResearchSummarized. In R.R. Ross and P. Gendreau (eds.) Effective(,orrect;onal Treatment. 1980. Toronto: Butterworths. Lynott, D. 1986. Operation Pressure Point. Presentation toNIDA Community Epidemiology Work Group. New York: New York CityPolice Department. McDonald, D. 1980. The Price of Punishment.- PublicSpending for Corrections in New York, Boulder, Colo.:Wcstview Press. McGarrell, E.F., and Flanagan, T.J. (eds.) 1985. Sourcebook of Criminal Justice Statistics-1984. U.S. Department of Justice, Bureau of Justice Statistics. Washington D.C.: U.S. Government Printing Oifice, McGlothlin, W.C. 1979. Criminal justice clients. Pp. 203-209in Robert L. DuPont, Avram Goldstein and John O'Donnell (eds.), Handbookon Drug Abuse. Rockville, Md.: National Institute on DrugAbuse, McGlothlin, W.C. and Anglin, M.D. 1981a. Long term follow-ut3of clients of high- and low-dose methadone programs. Archivesof General Psychiatry, 38; 1055-63, McGlothlin, W.C. and Anglin, M.D. 1981b. Shutting offmethadone: costs and benefits. Archives of General Psychiatry,38., 885-92. McGlothlin, WC,, Anglin, M.D. and Wilson, B.D. 1977. AnEvaluation of the California Civil Addict Program. Rockville,Md.: National Institute on Drug Abuse. Miller, J.D,, Cisin, I.H., GardnerKeaton, H., Wirtz, P.W.,Abelson, H.I., and Fishburne, P.M. 1982. National Survey onDrug Abuse., Main Findings 1982. Wahington, DC,: U.S.Government Printing Office. National Association of State Drug Abuse ProgramCoordinators, Inc. 1978. TASC.- An Approach for Dealing with the SubstanceAbusing Offender., Guidelines for Development of a TreatmentAlternative to Street Crime Project. Washington, D.C.: U.S.Department of Justice. Nettler, G. 1978. Explaining Crime. New York-.McGraw-Hill. Nietzel, M.T. 1979. Crime and Its Modification.- ASocial Learning Perspective. New York: Paragamon. Nurco, D.N., Ball, J.C., Shaffer, J.W., and Hanlon, T.E.1985. The criminality of narcotic addicts. Journal of Nervousand Mental Disease, 173 (2): 94-102. Peters, R. 1981. Deviant Behavioral Contracting with ConductProblem Youth; A Review and Critical Analysis. Department ofPsychology, Queens University. Kingston, Ontario. Petersilia, J., Turner, S., Kahan, J., and Peterson, J. 1985.Granting Felons Probation: Public Risks and Alternatives. SantaMonica, Calif.: Rand. Philips, F.L., Phillips, R.A-, and Wolf, M.W. 1973. Behaviorshaping works for delinquents. P.%vchology Today, 6,75-79. Platt, J.J., Perry, G.M., and Met7ger, D.,S, 1980, Theevaluation of a heroin addiction treatment program within acorrectional environment. In R.R. Ross and P. Gendreau (eds.)Effective Correctional Treatment. 1980. Toronto:Butterworths. Quay, H.C. 1977. The three faces of evaluation: what can beexpected to work. Criminal Justice and Behavior, 4,341-354. Rappeport, J., Seidman, E., and Davidson II, W.S. 1979.Demonstration research and manifest versus truc adoption: the natural history of a research project. InR.E Munoz, L.R. Snowden, and J.G. Kelly (eds.) Social and Psychological Research and Com tni4nity SOllings. 1979.San Francisco: Jossey-Bass. Repucci, N.D., Sarata, B.P., ,;aunder,.;, JT, McArthur, AV,,and Michlin, L.M. 1973. We bombed in Mountville: Lessons learnedin consultation to a correctional facility for adolescentoffenders. In I.I. Goldberg (ed.) The Helping Professions inthe World of Action. 1973. Boston: D.C. Heath. Robins, L.N. 1973. A Follow-up of Vietnam DrugUsers. Washington, D.C. U.S. Government Printing Office. Ross, R.R. and Gendreau, P. 1980. Effective Correctional Treatment, Toronto:Butterworths. Ross, R.R. and McKay, H.B. 1976. A study of institutionaltreatment programs. International Journal of Offender Therapyand C'omparativp Criminology, 20, 165-173. Ross, R.R. and McKay, H.B. 1978. Treatment in corrections:requiem for a panacea. Canadian Journal of Criminology, 120:279-295, Sanchez, J.E., and Johnson, B.D. 1987. Women and the drugcrime connection: crime rates among drug-abusing women at RikersIsland. Journal of Psychoactive Drugs, 19 (2): 205-216. Sechrest, L., West, S.G., Philips, M.A., Rcdner, R., andYeaton, W. 1979a. Some neglected problems in evaluation research:strength and integrity of treatments. In L. Sechrest, S.G. West, M.A. Philips, R. Redner, and W. Yeaton (eds.) Evaluation Studies Annual Review (Vol. 4), 1979a. Beverly Hills: Sage. Sechrest, L., White, S.O., and Brown, G.D. (eds.) 1979b. TheRehabilitation of Criminal Offenders. Washington, D.C.:National Academy of Sciences. Senay, E.C. 1984. Clinical implications of drug abusetreatment outcome research. Pp. 139-150 in Frank M. Tims andJacqueline P. Ludford (eds.), Drug Abuse Treatt?zentEvaluation Strategies, Progress, and Prospects. ResearchMonograph Series 51. Rockville, Md.: National Institute on DrugAbuse. Senay, E.C. 1985. Methadone maintenance treatment, InternationalJournal of the Addictions, 20 (6-7): 803-22. References and bibliography 31 Sells, S.B., and Simpson, D.D. 1976. Effectiveness of DrugAbuse Treatmeni. Vols. 111, IV, and V. Cambridge, Mass.:Ballinger. Simpson, D.D. 1984. National treatiiient system evaluationbased on the drug abuse reporting program (DARP) followupresearch. Pp. 29-41 in Frank M. Tims and Jacqueline P. Ludford(eds.), Drug Abuse Treatment Evaluation.Strategies, Progress,and Prospects. Research Monograph Series 51. Rockville, Md.:National Institute on Drug Abuse. Simpson, D.D. and Sells, S.B. 1982. Effectiveness oftreatment for drug abuse: an overview of the DARP researchprogram. Advances in Alcohol and Substance Abuse, 2 (1):7-29. Speckart, G. and Anglin, M.D. 1986a. Narcotics use and crime:a causal modeling approach. Journal of QuantitativeCriminology, 2: 3-28. Speckart, G. and Anglin, M.D. 1986b. Narcotics use and crime:an overview of recent research advances. Presentation to Drugs,Alcohol, and Crime Conference, sponsored by National Institute ofJustice. San ]Francisco, California. Time. 1986. Drugs: The enemy within. September 15:58-73. Tims, F.M. and Ludford, J.P. (eds.) 1984. Drug Abuse Treatment Evaluation: Strategies, Progress, and Prospects. Research Monograph Series 51. Rockville, Md.: Slational Institute on Drug Abuse. Toborg, M. 1984. Drug use and pretrial crime in theDistrict of Columbia, Research in Brief. Washington, D.C.: National Institute of Justice. Toborg, M.A., Bellassai, J.B., Yezer, A.M.J., Carver, J.,Clarke, J., and Pears, E. 1986. The Washington, D.C. UrineTesting Prograt?i for atrestees and defendants awaiting trial., asummary of interim findings. Washington, D.C.- ToborgAssociates. 32 References and bibliography Toborg, M.A., Levin, D,R., Milkman, R.H., and Center, L.J. 1975.Treatment alternatives to street crime (TASC).- an evaluativeframework and state of the art review. Washington, D.C.:Lazar Institute. Walter, T.L., and Mills, C.M. 1979. A Behavioral-EmploymentIntervention Program for Reducing Juvenile Delinquency. In J.S.Stumphauzer (ed.), Progress in Behavior Therapy withDelinquents. 1979. Springfield, Illinois: Thomas. Wexler, H.K. 1985. Therapeutic communities'role in thePrivatization of corrections. Paper presented at Ninth WorldConference of Therapeutic Communities, San Francisco, California,September. Wexler, H.K. and DeLeon, G. 1977. The therapeutic community:multivariate prediction of retention. American Journal of Drugand Alcohol Abuse, 4 (2): 145-51. Wexler, H.K. and Lipton, Douglas S. 1985. Prison drugtreatment.- the critical 90 days of m-enity. Paper presentedat meeting of the American Society of Criminology, San Diego,California. Wexler, H.K. and Sharron, A. 1985. Prison drug treatment.two year followup of successes and failures. Paper presentedat meeting of the American Society of Criminology, San Diego,California. Wexler, H.K., and Williams, R, 1986. The "Stay 'NOut" therapeutic - community: prison treatment for substance abusers. Journal of Psychoactive Drugs, 18(3): 221-230. Wexler, 14-K,, Lipton, D.S., and Fostcr, K. 1985. Outcomeevaluation of a prison therapeutic community for substance abusetreatment.preliminary results. Paper presented at meeting ofthe American Society of Criminology, San Diego, California, Wish, E.D. 1982. Are heroin users really nonviolent? Paperpresented at meeting of the Academy of Criminal Justice Sciences, Louisville, Kentucky. Wish, E.D. 1986. Personal Communication. Wish, E.D. 1987. Drug use forcasting.- New York 1984 to1986, NIJ Research in Action. Wash-ngton, D.C.: National Institute of Justice, U.S.Department of Justice, February. Wish, E.D., and Johnson, B.D. 1986. The impact of substanceabuse on criminal careers. Pp. 52-88 in Alfred Blumstein,Jacqueline Cohen, Jeffery A. Roth, and Christy A. Visher, CriminalCareers and "Career Criminals." Volume 2.Washington, D.C.: National Academy Press. Wish, E.D., Brady, E., and Cuadrado, M. 1984. Drug use and crime in arrestees inManhattan. Paper presented at the 47th Meeting of theCommittee on Problems of Drug Dependence, New York, Narcotic andDrug Research, Inc. Wish, E.D., Brady, E. and Cuadrado, M. 1986. Urine testing of arrestees.- findingsfrom Manhattan. New York: Narcotic and Drug Research, Inc. Wish, F,.D-, Citadrado, M,, and Mortorana, J.A. 1986. Estimatesof drug use in intensive supervision probationers.- results froma pilot test. New York: Narcotic and Drug Research, Inc. Wish, E.D., Klumpp, K.A., Moorer, A.H. and Brady, E. 1980. Ananalysis of crime among arrestees in the District of. Columbia. Institutefor Law and Social Research. Springfield, Va.: National TechnicalInformation Services. Wish, E.D., Johnson, B.D., Strug, D., Chedekel, M., andLipton, D.S, 1983. Are urine tests good indicators of thevalidi@v of se(f'reports of drug use? Paper presented atmeeting of the American Society of Criminology, Denver, Colorado. Zedlewski, Edwin. 1987. Making Confinement Decisions.-Research in Brief. Washington, D.C.: National Institute ofJustice, U.S. Department of Justice, July. -U.S. G.P.O. 1988-202 Olt5l8OO82 CliffSchaffer's Home Page WT01-B26-27IA031-000651-B014-162http://206.61.184.43:80/schaffer/GOVPUBS/doff90.htm 206.61.184.43 19970122120844 text/html 6121HTTP/1.0 200 OKDate: Wednesday, 22-Jan-97 12:08:33 GMTServer: WebSitePro/1.1f (S/N wpo-0deb)Allow-ranges: bytesContent-type: text/htmlLast-modified: Saturday, 28-Dec-96 06:14:38 GMTContent-length: 5904 DRUG OFFENSES ACCOUNT FOR A LARGER PERCENTAGE OF JAILINMATES DRUG OFFENSES ACCOUNT FOR A LARGER PERCENTAGE OF JAILINMATES WASHINGTON, D.C.-- Drug offenses accounted for 23 percent of the charges against the almost 400,000 men and women beingheld in local jails during 1989--up from 9 percent in 1983, theBureau of Justice Statistics announced today. The Bureau, a componentof the Office of Justice Programs in the U.S. Department of Justice,reported that the number of inmates in the nation's 3,312 local jailsgrew 77 percent from 1983 to 1989. More than 40 percent of thatgrowth resulted from the increased number of persons held for orconvicted of drug offenses. "The dramatic increase in the number of persons in jailson drug charges occurred both among those awaiting trial andthose already convicted of crimes," said Bureau DirectorSteven D. Dillingham. "And more than one-half of all convictedjail inmates said they had committed the offense for which they wereincarcerated under the influence of drugs or alcohol or both." The findings were drawn from a nationally representative survey of 5,675 inmates held in 424 local jails. SimilarBureau surveys of jail inmates were conducted in 1972, 1978 and1983. A jail is a locally administered institution that holds peopleawaiting trial or already sentenced, usually for one year or less. About half of all jail inmates in 1989 had been convicted and were serving time, 7 percent had been convicted but not yetsentenced, 26 percent were awaiting or on trial and 16 percent wereawaiting arraignment. An estimated 46 percent of the jail inmates in 1989 were on probation, on parole, on bail or were in some other criminaljustice status at the time of their arrest. More than three-quartersof all inmates being held in 1989 for any offense had had a priorsentence of probation or incarceration. At least a third of the inmateswere in jail for a violent offense or had been previously sentencedfor a violent offense. Other survey results: --More than four of every 10 convicted inmates said they had been using an illegal drug during the month before theycommitted the offense for which they were incarcerated. About one in fourconvicted inmates said they had used a major drug, such as heroin,cocaine, crack, LSD or PCP, in that month. --Women and Hispanic prisoners were the most likely among all jail inmates to be held on drug charges--about one-third ineach group. --Among convicted inmates, 29 percent reported they had committed their offenses under the influence of only alcohol,15 percent under the influence of only drugs and 12 percentunder the influence of both. --Almost one-third of all jail inmates said they had participated in a substance abuse treatment program at sometime in their lives--about 18 percent of the inmates had receivedtreatment for drugs, 9 percent for alcohol and 6 percent for both. --More than four of every 10 female inmates reported they had been abused at some time before their currentincarceration--33 percent physically and 36 percent sexually. --About 39 percent of all jail inmates had grown up in a single parent household and an additional 11 percent hadlived in a household without either parent. --The racial and ethnic composition of local jails changed between 1983 and 1989--blacks increased from 38 percent to 42percent of the inmates population, Hispanics increased from 14percent to 17 percent and the percentage of white non-Hispanics decreasedfrom 46 percent to 39 percent. --The female jail population increased from 7.1 percent in 1983 to 9.5 percent in 1989. One of every four female inmateswas in jail for larceny or fraud. --About 11 percent of the inmates were being held for other authorities--most awaiting transportation to a state prison. --Among the inmates who had been sentenced to serve theirtime in local jails, half had received a sentence of six months ofless. It is estimated that about half of the inmates sentenced tolocal jails would serve less than five months. Single copies of the special report, "Profile of JailInmates, 1989," (NCJ-129097), as well as other Bureau of JusticeStatistics publications and statistical information may be obtained fromthe National Criminal Justice Reference Service, Box 6000,Rockville, MD 20850. The telephone number is 1-301-251-5500. The toll-freenumber from areas other than Maryland and metropolitan Washington,D.C., 1-800-732-3277. . CliffSchaffer's Home Page WT01-B26-28IA031-000651-B014-177http://206.61.184.43:80/schaffer/GOVPUBS/DRUGCRT.HTM 206.61.184.43 19970122120851 text/html 18170HTTP/1.0 200 OKDate: Wednesday, 22-Jan-97 12:08:44 GMTServer: WebSitePro/1.1f (S/N wpo-0deb)Allow-ranges: bytesContent-type: text/htmlLast-modified: Saturday, 28-Dec-96 06:14:17 GMTContent-length: 17952 DRUG COURTS: Proposed Rule DRUG COURTS: Proposed Rule DEPARTMENT OF JUSTICE 28 CFR Part 93 Office of Justice Programs [OJP No. 1014] January 26, 1995 RIN 1121-AA26 Drug Courts AGENCY: U.S. Department of Justice, Office of JusticePrograms. ACTION: Proposed Rule. SUMMARY: This notice announces a proposed rule and requestscomments on the Drug Court Program as authorized by Title V ofthe Violent Crime Control and Law Enforcement Act of 1994. Thisrule gives general guidance regarding the program andspecifically delineates the prohibition on participation byviolent offenders. Detailed program guidelines and applicationmaterials for the Fiscal Year 1995 Drug Court Program will beavailable in early 1995. DATE: All comments must be received by February 24, 1995. ADDRESS: All comments should be addressed to Reginald L.Robinson, Deputy Assistant Attorney General, Officeof Justice Programs, 633 Indiana Avenue, N.W., Washington, D.C.20531. FOR FURTHER INFORMATION CONTACT: The Department of Justice Response Center at 1-800-421-6770or 202-307-1480. SUPPLEMENTARY INFORMATION: Overview of Title V-Drug Courts Federal discretionary grants are being made available underthe Violent Crime Control and Law Enforcement Act of 1994, TitleV, Public Law 103-322, 108 Stat. 1796 (September 13, 1994), 42U.S.C. 3796ii-3796ii-8 [hereinafter the "Act"] toStates, units of local government, Indian tribal governments, andstate and local courts for assistance with drug court programs.The Act gives the Attorney General, and through statutoryauthority contained in the Omnibus Crime Control and Safe StreetsAct, an authorized designee (in this case the Assistant AttorneyGeneral for the Office of Justice Programs), the authority tomake grants to the above-mentioned entities for drug courtprograms that involve continuing judicial supervision overnon-violent offenders with substance abuse problems and theintegrated administration of sanctions and services including:(1) mandatory periodic testing for, the use of controlledsubstances or other addictive substances during any period ofsupervised release or probation for each participant; (2)substance abuse treatment for each participant; (3) diversion,probation, or other supervised release involving the possibilityof prosecution, confinement, or incarceration based onnoncompliance with program requirements or failure to showsatisfactory progress; and (4) programmatic, offender management,and aftercare services such as relapse prevention, health care,education, vocational training, job placement, housing placement,and,child care or other family support services for eachparticipant requiring such services. Section 50001 of Title V of the Act requires that regulationsbe issued to ensure exclusion of violent offenders from thesefunded programs. This proposed rule responds to that requirement.To more fully develop and define the grant program and to providedirection and guidance to potential applicants, programguidelines, will be issued subsequent to the publication of thisproposed rule. This Supplementary Information section isintended, in part, to elicit comment on a broad range of issuesrelevant to the development and implementation of those programguidelines. Statement of the Problem More than half of all individuals brought into the criminaljustice system have substance abuse problems. Many of theseindividuals are non-violent offenders who repeatedly cyclethrough the court, corrections, and probation systems withouthelp to change their behavior. The underlying problem of suchnon-violent substance abusing offenders frustrates and inhibitsjudicial effectiveness. All too often, the non-violent drugoffender faces little certainty of punishment and represents along-term, recurring problem for both the criminal justice systemand society. In too many cases, the criminal justice system fails tosubject non-violent, drug abusing offenders to interventionmeasures that provide the mix of services and sanctions necessaryto change their behavior, or if necessary, coerce abstinence.Some courts and prosecutors, however, have cost-effcctivelyaddressed the problem through the use of treatment drug courts.Their results suggest that "drug courts" cansignificantly enhance the offender's opportunity to break thecycle of substance abuse and crime. Those who are coming intocontact with the criminal justice system for the first time maybe particularly susceptible to effective early intervention. Indeed, research and evaluation demonstrate that the"drug court" approach is effective in reducing bothdrug abuse and drug-related crime. The Drug Court discretionarygrant program of Title V seeks to support the development ofinnovative measures that provide courts additional resources toassure certainty of punishment for drug abusing offenders throughthe integrated administration of services and sanctions,including close supervision and coerced abstinence. The Violent Crime Control and Law Enforcement Act of 1994 The Department of Justice (Department) recognizes that nosingle model exists for an effective drug court. To the contrary,the Department believes there may be a variety of validapproaches that deal effectively with non-violent offenders withsubstance abuse problems. Consequently, the Drug Court grantprogram will maintain flexibility in providing funds to supportthe development of a variety of initiatives that coordinatetreatment and coerced abstinence. The Department also recognizes the great diversity in thestructure and operation of state and local courts and criminaljustice systems. Hence, the Department is committed to a flexibleapproach that allows jurisdictions to tailor local initiatives tobest suit their needs and local conditions. Program flexibility,however, is necessarily balanced by statutory requirementsconcerning the design and administration of the funded programs.Accordingly, Drug Court programs that receive grant awards must: exclude violent offenders from program participation; include a long-term strategy and detailed implementation.plan; explain the applicant's inability to fund the program adequately without Federal assistance; use Federal support to supplement, and not supplant, State, Indian tribal, and local sources of funding that would otherwise be available; identify related governmental or community initiatives which complement or will be coordinated with the proposal; consult with all affected agencies and insure that there will be appropriate coordination with all, affected agencies in the implementation of the program; certify, that participating offenders will receive continuing judicial supervision by one or more designated judges with responsibility for the drug court program; specify plans for obtaining necessary support and continuing the proposed program following the conclusion of Federal support; and describe the methodology that will be used in evaluating the program. Consistent with Congressional intent, program evaluation willbe crucial. Grant recipients will be required to cooperate with anational evaluation team throughout their involvement with theprogram. Recipients will also be required to provide forindependent evaluation of the impact and effectiveness of theirfunded programs. The following issues will be especiallyimportant in determining whether programs receiving grants underthis initiative are effective: (1) reduction in recidivism ratesof program participants, (2) maintenance of acceptable substanceabuse treatment completion rates among program participants, (3)decreased drug use by program participants, and (4) maintenanceof a cost effective program in relation to the overall criminaljustice system. FY 1995 Drug Court Initiative The Fiscal Year 1995 Department of Justice AppropriationsAct, Public Law 103-317, has allocated $29 million for the DrugCourt grant programs. Eligibility of applicants to receive grantswill be based on requirements of the statute and theseregulations, as well as assurances and certifications specifiedin detailed program guidelines and application materials thatwill be available in early 1995 for the Fiscal Year 1995 DrugCourt initiative. While detailed program guidelines will follow the publicationof this notice of proposed rulemaking, the Department has madesome broad programmatic decisions upon which it welcomes comment.Three types of funding will be available under this programduring Fiscal Year 1995. First, planning funding will beavailable for those jurisdictions that express interest ininitiating a drug court but have not engaged in the comprehensiveplanning necessary to make such a program successful. Second,jurisdictions currently operating drug court programs may seekfunding to expand enhalace, or augment these ongoing efforts.Finally, for those jurisdictions that have engaged (or arecurrently engaged) in a comprehensive drug court planningprocess, funding may be available to implement the plans theirefforts have produced. Call For Comments Concerning The Drug Court Initiative Substance abuse-related offender case management is primarilya state and local issue; thus, the Drug Court grant programcontemplates collaboration between federal and state and localagencies. State and local government officials were involved inCongressional hearings and meetings that guided the developmentof this legislation and will continue to be involved as theDepartment moves forward in developing this regulation,establishing policy guidance, and implementing programguidelines. At this time, comments are welcome regarding thebasic program design requirements described in Section 93.4 ofthe proposed rule and to the entire scope of the program. Administrative Requirements This regulation has been drafted and reviewed in accordancewith Executive Order 12866,  1 (b), Principles ofRegulation. This rule is not a "significant regulatoryaction" under Executive Order 12866,  3(f),Regulatory Planning and Review, and accordingly, this rule hasnot been reviewed by the Office of Management and Budget. The Assistant Attorney General for the Office of JusticePrograms, in accordance with the Regulatory Flexibility Act (5U.S.C. S 605(b)), has reviewed this regulation, and by approvingit, certifies that this regulation will not have a significanteconomic impact on a substantial number of small entities. Subpart A-Drug Courts 93.1 Purpose. This part sets forth requirements and procedures to ensurethat grants to States, State courts, local courts, units of localgovernment, and Indian tribal governments, acting directly orthrough agreements with other public or private entities, excludeviolent offenders from participation in programs authorized andfunded under this part. 93.2 Statutory Authority. This program is authorized under the Violent Crime Controland Law Enforcement Act of 1994, Title V, Public Law 103-322, 108Stat. 1796, (September 13, 1994), 42 U.S.C. 3796ii-3796ii-8. 93.3 Definitions. (a) "State" has the same meaning asset forth in Section 901(a)(2) of the Omnibus Crime Control andSafe Streets Act of 1968, as amended. (b) "Unit of Local Government" hasthe same meaning as set forth in Section 901 (a) (3) of theOmnibus Crime Control and Safe Streets Act of 1968, as amended. (c) "Assistant Attorney General" meansthe Assistant Attorney General for the Office of JusticePrograms. (d) "Violent offender" means a personwho either - (1) is currently charged with or convicted of an offenseduring the course of which: (i) the person carried, possessed, or used a firearm or otherdangerous weapon; or (ii) there occurred the use of force against the person ofanother; or (iii) there occurred the death of, or serious bodily injuryto, any person; (iv) without regard to whether proof of any of the elementsdescribed herein is required to convict; or (2) has previously been convicted of a felony crime ofviolence involving the use or attempted use of force against aperson with the intent to cause death or serious bodily harm. 93.4 Grant Authority. (a) The Assistant Attorney General may make grants to States,State courts, local courts, units of local government, and Indiantribal governments, acting directly or through agreements withother public or private entities, for programs that involve: (1) continuing judicial supervision over offenders withsubstance abuse problems who are not violent offenders, and (2) the integrated administration of other sanctions andservices, which shall include-- (i) mandatory periodic testing for the use of controlledsubstances or other addictive substances during any period ofsupervised release or probation for each participant; (ii) substance abuse treatment for each participant; (iii) diversion, probation, or other supervised releaseinvolving the possibility of prosecution, confinement, orincarceration based on noncompliance with program requirements orfailure to show satisfactory progress; and (iv) programmatic, offender management, and aftercareservices such as relapse prevention, health care, education,vocational training, job placement, housing placement, and childcare or other family support services for each participant whorequires such services. (b) Applications for grants under this program shall be madeat such times and in such form as may be specified in guidelinesor notices published by the Assistant Attorney General.Applications will be evaluated according to the statutoryrequirements of the Act and the programmatic goals specified inthe applicable guidelines. Grantees must comply with allstatutory and program requirements applicable to grants underthis program. 93.5 Exclusion of Violent Offenders. (a) The Assistant Attorney General will ensure that grants toStates, State courts, local courts, units of local government,and Indian tribal governments, acting directly or throughagreements with other public or private entities, exclude violentoffenders from programs authorized and funded under this Part. (b) No recipient of a grant made under the authority of thisPart shall permit a violent offender to participate in anyprogram receiving funding pursuant to this Part. (c) Applicants must certify as part of the applicationprocess that violent offenders will not participate in programsauthorized and funded under this Part. The required certificationshall be in such form and contain such assurances as theAssistant Attorney General may require to carry out therequirements of this Part. (d) If the Assistant Attorney General determines that one ormore violent offenders are participating in a program receivingfunding under this part, such funding shall be promptlysuspended, pending the termination of participation by thosepersons deemed ineligible to participate under these regulations. (e) The Assistant Attorney General may carry out or makearrangements for evaluations and request information fromprograms that receive support under this part to ensure thatviolent offenders are excluded from participating in programshereunder. Subpart B - [Reserved] List of Subjects Grant Programs, Judicial Administration For the reasons set out in the preamble, Title 28, Chapter 1,of the Code of Federal Regulations is proposed to be amended byadding a new Part 93, consistent of Subpart A as set forth below. PART 93 - PROVISIONS IMPLEMENTING THE VIOLENT CRIMECONTROL AND LAW ENFORCEMENT ACT OF 1994 Subpart A-Drug Courts Sec. 93.1 Purpose 93.2 Statutory Authority 93.3 Definitions 93.4 Grant Authority 93.5 Exclusion of Violent Offenders Subpart B - [Reserved] Authority: 42 U.S.C. 3796ii-3796ii-8 CliffSchaffer's Home Page WT01-B26-29IA031-000651-B014-196http://206.61.184.43:80/schaffer/GOVPUBS/dojpr1.htm 206.61.184.43 19970122120857 text/html 6055HTTP/1.0 200 OKDate: Wednesday, 22-Jan-97 12:08:51 GMTServer: WebSitePro/1.1f (S/N wpo-0deb)Allow-ranges: bytesContent-type: text/htmlLast-modified: Saturday, 28-Dec-96 06:14:34 GMTContent-length: 5838 THE NATION'S PRISON POPULATION GREW ALMOST 9 PERCENT LASTYEAR THE NATION'S PRISON POPULATION GREW ALMOST 9 PERCENT LAST YEAR U.S. DEPARTMENT OF JUSTICE ADVANCE FOR RELEASE AT 5 P.M. EDT BJS WEDNESDAY, AUGUST 9, 1995 202/307-0784 WASHINGTON, D.C. -- The nation's state and federal prisonshad to find room for 83,294 more inmates last year--the secondlargest annual increase in history and just 1,470 fewer than the84,764 increase recorded in 1989. The total number of men andwomen in prison last December 31 was 1,053,738--a new record.Overall, almost 1.5 million people were incarcerated in theUnited States in 1994. State and federal prisons, which primarilyhold convicted felons serving longer sentences, contained abouttwo-thirds of the total. Locally operated jails, which primarilyhold people awaiting trial or serving sentences of a year orless, held the other third. At the end of 1994 state prisons held 958,704 men and womenand federal prisons held 95,034 inmates. California (125,605) andTexas (118,195) together held more than one in every five inmatesin the nation. Seventeen states, each holding fewer than 5,000inmates, accounted for 4 percent of all prisoners. Prison populations increased by at least 10 percent in 16states last year. Texas reported the largest growth (28 percent),followed by Georgia (20 percent). Alaska and Connecticut reported fewer prisoners who had been sentencedto more than a year. The average sentence length and time served for stateprisoners has remained stable in recent years. Between 1985 and1992, the years for which comparable data are available, half ofthe state prisoners served at least 48 months. In the federal system, however, the "truth insentencing" provisions of the Sentencing Reform Act of 1984have contributed to increasing the median time served in prisonfrom 15 months in 1986 to 24 months in 1992. The incarceration rate for prisoners sentenced to more than ayear reached a record 387 per 100,000 U.S. residents lastDecember 31. States with the highest incarceration rates wereTexas (636 inmates per 100,000 residents), Louisiana (530) andOklahoma (508). North Dakota (78) had the lowest, followed byMinnesota (100) and West Virginia (106). Since 1980 per capita incarceration rates rose the most inthe South (from 188 to 451) and West (from 105 to 333). The ratein the Northeast rose from 87 to 285, and the rate in the Midwestfrom 109 to 297. In absolute numbers, violent offenders were the greatestcontributors to state prison inmate growth. Between 1980 and1993, the number of violent offenders grew by an estimated221,300, the Bureau of Justice Statistics (BJS) estimated using1993 data. More than a quarter of the state and federal inmates were inprison for drug offenses (234,600 prisoners) in 1993. Prisonersserving a drug sentence increased from 8 percent of the state andfederal prison population in 1980 to 26 percent in 1993. Infederal prisons, inmates sentenced for drug law violations werethe single largest group--60 percent in 1993, up from 25 percentin 1980. At the end of the year, states reported they were operatingbetween 17 percent and 29 percent over capacity, while thefederal system was operating at 25 percent over capacity. Because of prison construction and the creation of new prisonbeds, the ratio of the inmate population to the capacity of stateprisons has remained almost the same since 1990. The average growth in the number of state and federalprisoners sentenced to at least a year's incarceration was equalto the need for 1,542 more beds per week in 1994. During 1994 almost 5 percent of all state prisoners--48,949inmates in 21 jurisdictions--were held in local jails or otherfacilities because of prison crowding. The number of female inmates grew 10.6 percent last year,compared to an 8.5 percent increase among male inmates. OnDecember 31, 1994, there were 64,403 women in state and federalprisons--6.1 percent of all prisoners. The rate of incarcerationfor inmates serving a sentence of more than a year is 746 malesper 100,000 U.S. male residents, vs. 45 females per 100,000female population. Between 1980 and 1993, the number of white and black femaleinmates grew at a faster pace than the number of male inmates ineither racial group. During this period the number of white malesgrew 163 percent, the number of black males grew 217 percent, thenumber of white females 327 percent, and the number of blackfemales 343 percent. An estimated 1,471 blacks per 100,000 blackresidents and 207 whites per 100,000 white residents wereincarcerated in the nation's prisons on December 31, 1993. The report, "Prisoners in 1994" (NCJ-151654), waswritten by BJS statisticians Allen J. Beck and Darrell K.Gilliard. Single copies may be obtained from the BJSClearinghouse, Box 179, Annapolis Junction, Maryland 20701-0179.The telephone number is 1-800/732-3277. Fax orders to410/792-4358. Data from tables and graphs used in many BJS reports can beobtained in spreadsheet files on 5.25 and 3.5 inch diskettes bycalling 202/616-3283. After hours contact: Stu Smith at 301-983-9354 CliffSchaffer's Home Page WT01-B26-30IA031-000651-B014-216http://206.61.184.43:80/schaffer/GOVPUBS/dojpr2.htm 206.61.184.43 19970122120906 text/html 4331HTTP/1.0 200 OKDate: Wednesday, 22-Jan-97 12:08:58 GMTServer: WebSitePro/1.1f (S/N wpo-0deb)Allow-ranges: bytesContent-type: text/htmlLast-modified: Saturday, 28-Dec-96 06:14:30 GMTContent-length: 4114 STATE AND FEDERAL PRISON POPULATION TOPS ONE MILLION STATE AND FEDERAL PRISON POPULATION TOPS ONE MILLION U.S. Department of Justice Bureau of Justice Statistics WASHINGTON, D.C. -- The nation's prison population exceeds 1million for the first time in history, the Department of Justiceannounced today. At the end of June, 1,012,851 men and women wereincarcerated in state and federal prisons. State prisons held919,143 inmates and federal prisons held 93,708 inmates.California (124,813) and Texas (100,136) together accounted formore than one in five inmates in the country. The prison population grew by almost 40,000 inmates duringthe first half of 1994, the equivalent of more than 1,500 aweek--or three additional 500-bed prisons. During the last 12 months the prison population expanded bymore than 71,000, the second largest annual increase everrecorded. This growth was slightly greater than the annual growthin the preceding 12 months (69,525) and exceeds by 11 percent theaverage annual growth (63,793) during the previous five years,that is from July 1988 to June 1993. The incarceration rate of state and federal prisonerssentenced to more than a year reached a record 373 prisoners per100,000 U.S. residents last June. The states with the highestincarceration rates were Texas (545 per 100,000), Louisiana(514), South Carolina (504) and Oklahoma (501). During the 12 months preceding June 30, 1994, eleven statesrecorded prisoner growth rates of 10 percent or more, led byConnecticut (20 percent), Texas (18 percent), and Tennessee (15percent). In the last decade the U.S. prison population doubled on aper capita basis. During this 10-year period, the incarcerationrate doubled both for white inmates and black inmates. At the endof last year (the latest available data) there were 1,432 blackinmates per 100,000 black U.S. residents and 203 white inmatesper 100,000 white residents. During the first six months of 1994, the number of femaleinmates grew 6.2 percent, compared to a 3.9 percent increaseamong male inmates. On June 30, 1994, there were 61,872 women in state andfederal prisons--6.1 percent of all prisoners. The maleincarceration rate, 719 per 100,000 male residents, was more than16 times higher than the female incarceration rate--43 per100,000 female residents. The Bureau of Justice Statistics (BJS) collects state andfederal prisoner data twice a year--on June 30 and December 31.These counts are designed to provide regular updates to thepublic on the number of people confined by state and federalauthority. The data have been published since 1926. The report was prepared by Allen J. Beck and Thomas P.Bonczar, statisticians in the Department's Bureau of JusticeStatistics (BJS). Data from tables and graphs used in many BJSreports can be obtained in spreadsheet files on 5 1/4 and 3 1/2inch diskettes by calling 202-307-0784. To receive a fax copy of the 3 tables with complete statedata call 301-216-1827. Single copies of other BJS bulletins andreports may be obtained from the BJS Clearinghouse, Box 179,Annapolis Junction, Maryland 20701-0179. The telephone number is1-800-732-3277. Fax orders to 410-792-4358. For additionalinformation and statistics on drugs and crime call the BJS Drugsand Crime Data Center and Clearinghouse on 1-800-666-3332. After hours contact: Stu Smith 301-983-9354. . CliffSchaffer's Home Page WT01-B26-31IA031-000651-B014-237http://206.61.184.43:80/schaffer/GOVPUBS/dojpr3.htm 206.61.184.43 19970122120913 text/html 4606HTTP/1.0 200 OKDate: Wednesday, 22-Jan-97 12:09:07 GMTServer: WebSitePro/1.1f (S/N wpo-0deb)Allow-ranges: bytesContent-type: text/htmlLast-modified: Saturday, 28-Dec-96 06:14:26 GMTContent-length: 4389 THE NATION'S CORRECTIONAL POPULATION TOPS 5 MILLION THE NATION'S CORRECTIONAL POPULATION TOPS 5 MILLION U.S. DEPARTMENT OF JUSTICE ADVANCE FOR RELEASE AT 5 P.M. EDT BJS SUNDAY, AUGUST 27, 1995 202/307-0784 WASHINGTON, D.C. -- More than 5.1 million Americans-or almost2.7 percent of the adult population--were under some form ofcorrectional supervision last year, the Department of Justicereported today. Almost three-quarters of these men and women werebeing supervised in the community on probation or parole. Theothers were confined in jail or prison. The number of adults incarcerated or under supervision in thecommunity increased 3.9 percent during 1994. Since 1980 thenumber has almost tripled, growing at an average annual rate of7.6 percent. At the end of last year, 2,962,000 adults were on probationunder community supervision rather than incarceration. Anadditional 690,000 adults were on parole--conditional supervisedrelease after serving a prison term but subject to being returnedto incarceration for rule violations or other offenses.Three-quarters of probationers and parolees were required tomaintain regular contact with a supervising agency. The otheroffenders were not required to have regular contact (9 percent)or had failed to report and could not be located (9 percent). Texas had the largest number of adults on probation andparole with more than 503,000 under such supervision, followed byCalifornia with 370,000. At the end of 1994, more than 3.8percent of all adults in Texas were on probation or parole. Thirteen states reported that fewer than 1 percent of theiradult populations were on probation or parole. North Dakota hadthe lowest probation and parole supervision rate (450 offendersper 100,000 adults), followed by West Virginia (517), Mississippi(552) and Kentucky (553). Overall, the state and federal probation and parolepopulations rose by 2.0 percent during 1994. Six states reportedincreases of at least 10 percent in their probation populations,and 11 reported similar increases in their parole populations.Alabama, with a 14.5 percent rise in their probation population,and Iowa, with a 27.1 percent rise in the parole population, ledthe nation. Twelve states and the Federal probation system reported adecrease in the number of adults on probation, led by SouthDakota (down 6.2 percent), California (down 5.8 percent) and theFederal system (down 6.8 percent). Half of all offenders on probation in 1994 were on probationfor a felony. A quarter were on probation for a misdemeanor. Oneof every seven probationers had been convicted of driving whileintoxicated or under the influence of alcohol. Almost all of theoffenders on parole (95 percent) had served a felony sentence injail or prison. Approximately, 21 percent of the nation's probationers werewomen, as were 10 percent of the parolees. About 58 percent of the adults on probation were white, and45 percent were black. Ninety percent of adults on parole weremen. Fifty-one percent of adults on parole were white, 45 percentwere black. These data were collected and analyzed by Darrell Gilliardand Allen Beck, statisticians at the Bureau of Justice Statistics(BJS). The NCJ number is NCJ-156432. Additional information aboutDepartment of Justice Statistics may be obtained from the BJSClearinghouse, Box 179, Annapolis Junction, Maryland 20701- 1079.The telephone number is 1-800/732-3277. Fax orders to410/792-4358. Data from tables and graphs used in many BJS reports can beobtained in spreadsheet files on 5 and 3 inch diskettes bycalling 202/616-3283. After hours contact: Doug Johnson at 703/644-0450 CliffSchaffer's Home Page WT01-B26-32IA031-000651-B014-259http://206.61.184.43:80/schaffer/GOVPUBS/denf90.htm 206.61.184.43 19970122120921 text/html 42040HTTP/1.0 200 OKDate: Wednesday, 22-Jan-97 12:09:13 GMTServer: WebSitePro/1.1f (S/N wpo-0deb)Allow-ranges: bytesContent-type: text/htmlLast-modified: Saturday, 28-Dec-96 06:14:58 GMTContent-length: 41822 Drug Enforcement by Police, 1990 Drug Enforcement by Police, 1990 U.S. Department of Justice Office of Justice Programs Bureau of Justice Statistics Special Report Drug Enforcement by Police and Sheriffs' Department, 1990: A LEMAS Report May 1992 NCJ-134505 Full text with tables available from: BJS Justice Statistics Clearinghouse 1-800-732-3277 Box 6000 Rockville, MD 10850 Few issues are as important in law enforcement today as howgovernments at all levels respond to the challenge to rid our society ofillicit drugs. This report is drawn from the second triennial surveyconducted by the Law Enforcement Management and Administrative Statistics program.The survey included new questions about drugs seized, drug enforcementtechniques, and testing of arrestees and employees. State and local lawenforcement agencies have provided a national understanding of theinnovations in the fight against drugs-special drug enforcement units,interagency task forces, and drug asset forfeiture programs. We salute thedepartments in their cooperation with LEMAS and trust that this profile willprove valuable in their assessments and planning. Steven D. Dillingham, Ph.D. Director Drug Enforcement by Police and Sheriffs' Department, 1990: A LEMAS Report By Brian A. Reaves, Ph.D. BJS Statistician In 1990, about 9,300 local police departments and 2,500sheriffs' departments had primary responsibility for the enforcement ofdrug laws. Collectively, these agencies employed 466,000 full-timeofficers, 92% of all local police and sheriffs' officers nationwide. Inaddition, 34 State police departments, employing 43,000 officers, had primarydrug enforcement responsibilities. This report presents information collected from State andlocal law enforcement agencies with primary drug enforcementresponsibilities. It includes information on types of illegal drugs seized,operation of special drug units, multi-agency task force participation, andreceipts from drug asset forfeiture programs. For all agencies the report also summarizes how drug testingpolicies apply to arrestees, applicants for sworn positions, and employees. Major findings include the following: *Among agencies with primary drug enforcementresponsibilities that served 50,000 or more residents, over 90% of the police departmentsand over 80% of the sheriffs' departments operated special drugenforcement units. *Nationwide, more than 16,000 local police and sheriffs'officers, and over 2,000 State police officers were assigned full time tospecial drug units. *Half of local police and sheriffs' departments with primarydrug enforcement responsibilities were participating in amulti-agency drug enforcement task force. These 6,500 agencies had assignednearly 10,000 officers full time to such task forces. *Among departments with primary drug enforcementresponsibilities, over 90% of the police departments serving a population of 50,000 ormore, and over 90% of the sheriffs' departments serving 250,000 or moreresidents, received money or goods from a drug asset forfeiture program. *Among the State police departments with primary drugenforcement responsibilities, 85% operated a special drug unit, 91%participated in a multi-agency drug enforcement task force, and 94% receivedmoney or goods from drug asset forfeitures. *About 2 in 3 State police departments and 2 in 5 localpolice and sheriffs' departments reported that at least some of thepersons they arrested were required to take a test for illegal drugs. *A majority of State police departments and local policedepartments serving a population of 25,000 or more required that allapplicants for sworn positions take a test for illegal drugs. *About 3% of local law enforcement officers worked foragencies that had a mandatory drug testing program for regular field officers;17% were employed by agencies that had a random selection testingprogram for officers. *Nonprobationary officers could be dismissed after onepositive test in about two-thirds of local police and sheriffs' departmentsand in about three-fourths of State police departments. Nearly alldepartments had a policy specifying dismissal for two positive drug tests. *Treatment alternatives were a part of the drug testingpolicy for employees in about half of State and local police departmentsand two- fifths of sheriffs' departments. Such alternatives weregenerally limited to the first positive test results only. THE LEMAS SURVEY The 1990 Law Enforcement Management and AdministrativeStatistics (LEMAS) survey questionnaire was mailed to all 780 State and locallaw enforcement agencies with 100 or more sworn officers and to a sample of2,338 agencies with fewer than 100 officers. Of the 3,118 agencies receivingthe LEMAS questionnaire, 2,945 (94.5%) responded. The survey used asampling frame based on personnel data from the 1986 Directory Survey of LawEnforcement Agencies. (See Methodology for further discussion ofsampling.) The local police departments included in this report aregeneral purpose agencies operated by municipal or county governments. TheState police departments included in this report are the primary generalpurpose agencies in all States except Hawaii, which does not have aState police department. This report presents only data collected on drug-relatedpolicies. The BJS Bulletins State and Local Police Departments, 1990(NCJ-133284) and Sheriffs' Departments, 1990 (NCJ-133283) present other datacollected in the LEMAS survey. The first section of this report, on drug enforcementactivities, includes only agencies with primary drug enforcement responsibilities.Agencies involved in drug enforcement only in a backup capacity, orthose whose responsibilities are limited to traffic enforcement, jailoperation, court operations or other such duties are not included. The secondsection, on drug testing policies, includes all local police, sheriffs',and State police departments. Drug enforcement activities State and local law enforcement agencies made an estimated1.1 million arrests for drug law violations during 1990, according to theUniform Crime Reports (UCR) of the FBI. Excluding traffic violations, 1 inevery 13 arrests made during the year was for a drug-related offense. Local police and sheriffs' departments During 1990, 77% of the Nation's local police and sheriffs'departments reported they had primary responsibility for the enforcementof drug laws in areas under their jurisdiction. These 11,800 agenciesemployed 466,000 full-time officers, 92% of all local officers nationwide. Over 9,000 local police departments, employing 96% of alllocal police officers, reported they had primary drug enforcementresponsibilities. Nearly all of the police departments in jurisdictions of10,000 or more in population had such responsibilities. These 2,800 departmentsemployed approximately 300,000 full-time officers. Departments intowns with a population of 2,500 to 9,999 (83%), or a population less than2,500 (60%), were less likely to have primary drug enforcementresponsibilities. These 6,500 departments in smaller communities employed about46,000 officers. About 2,500 (81%) of the sheriffs' departments nationwidereported having primary drug enforcement responsibilities in 1990. Sheriffs'departments located in jurisdictions with a population of under 100,000were somewhat more likely to have drug enforcement responsibilities thanthose in larger jurisdictions (83% versus 65%); however, the departmentsserving a population of 100,000 or more employed more officers thanthose in smaller jurisdictions (77,000 versus 42,000). Local police and sheriffs' departments with primary drugenforcement responsibilities seized numerous types of illegal drugsduring the 12-month period ending on June 30, 1990. Across all categories,departments in larger jurisdictions were more likely to have seized eachtype of drug than those in smaller jurisdictions. Most of the police and sheriffs' departments serving apopulation of 50,000 or more seized nearly all of the types of drugs asked aboutin the survey. In the smallest jurisdictions, marijuana and cocaine were theonly drugs seized by more than a third of all departments, and onlymarijuana was seized by more than half. Eighty-six percent of local police depart-ments and 94% ofsheriffs' departments made seizures of marijuana--higher percentagesthan for any other drug. The percentage of departments making marijuanaseizures was 94% or higher for departments in all population categories,except for sheriffs' departments serving a population of 10,000 or less(88%) and police departments serving a population of 2,500 or less(70%). According to UCR data for 1990, 30% of all arrests for druglaw violations were marijuana-related. About 4 in 5 marijuana arrests werefor possession, and the remainder, for offenses related totrafficking. Cocaine was seized by 72% of local police and sheriffs'departments, the second highest total percentage for any drug type. All policedepartments serving a population of 100,000 or more, and over 90% ofthose serving 10,000 to 99,999 residents, reported making seizures ofcocaine. Over 95% of the sheriffs' departments serving 50,000 or more residentsreported making seizures of cocaine. Only among police departmentsserving under 2,500 residents (39%), and sheriffs' departments servingunder 10,000 residents (50%) did less than 75% of the departments in apopulation category report making cocaine seizures. Among police andsheriffs' departments that did seize cocaine, nearly all of themreported seizing the powdered form of the drug, and a majority of them also seizedcrack cocaine. A majority of the police departments serving a population of25,000 or more made heroin seizures, including all of those serving 500,000or more residents. More than two-thirds of the sheriffs' departmentsin jurisdictions with a population of 250,000 or more alsoreported seizing heroin. Amphetamine seizures were made by 40% of all police andsheriffs' departments, including more than 70% of those serving apopulation of 50,000 or more. More than half of the departments serving apopulation of 50,000 or more also reported making seizures of barbiturates,methampheta- mines, and LSD. PCP was seized by most of the policedepartments serving a population of 250,000 or more and the sheriffs' departmentsserving 500,000 or more. An aspect of the drug enforcement effort in manyjurisdictions involves the operation of special drug enforcement units.Where they exist, such units are an integral part of the law enforcementresponse to drug trafficking and use. Since they focus directly onconducting sophisticated investigations of drug traffickers, thesespecial units accumulate substantial knowledge about drugs in general andabout drug- related activity in the community. Nationwide, an estimated 3,270 local police and sheriffs'departments were operating a special drug unit during the 12-month periodending on June 30, 1990 (table 3). Overall, these agencies had over 16,000officers assigned to special drug units on a full-time basis. Included in thistotal were an estimated 12,715 police officers and 3,805 sheriffs'officers. Over 90% of local police departments serving 50,000 or moreresidents were operating a special drug unit, and 75% of all local policeofficers assigned to a drug unit nationwide were in one of thesedepartments. Police departments serving 1 million or more residents hadthe largest special drug units, an average of 240 full-time officerseach. These 13 departments accounted for a fourth of the local policeofficers assigned to drug units nationwide. A majority (62%) of the police departments in jurisdictionswith 25,000 to 49,999 residents also operated a special drug unit. Localpolice departments in small towns were the least likely to operate aspecial drug unit. About 19% of those serving a population of 2,500 to9,999 and 5% of those serving a population of under 2,500 had such a unit. Among sheriffs' departments, over 90% of those serving apopulation of 500,000 or more and over 75% of those serving a population of50,000 to 499,999 operated a special drug unit. About 44% of thesheriffs' departments serving a population of 25,000 to 49,999 operateda drug unit. In the smallest jurisdictions (under 10,000 residents), 11%of the sheriffs' departments had a drug unit. The average size of special drug units in sheriffs'departments ranged from 34 full-time officers in departments serving a population of1 million or more to 1 officer in jurisdictions with fewer than 10,000residents. Many local police and sheriffs' departments operated othertypes of special units that were important to their drug control effort. Over90% of large police and sheriffs' departments (100 or more officers) withprimary drug enforcement responsibilities operated a special unit for drugeducation in schools during 1990, and nearly 60% were operating a specialunit on gangs. Law enforcement agencies recognize the value of coordinatingtheir efforts to reduce drug abuse. For many police and sheriffs'departments, this coordination involves participating in a multiagency drugenforcement task force. Organizationally, such task forces often involve thecooperation of law enforcement agencies across jurisdictional boundaries andgovernmental levels. The police and sheriffs' departments in multiagency taskforces develop coordinated enforcement strategies aimed at accumulating theevidence needed to arrest, prosecute, and convict known drugdistributors. Typically, these strategies involve the use of informants,surveillance, and undercover operations. They may also include complexfinancial investigations designed to trace drug distribution networks.The resources of special drug units often play an important role inimplementing task force strategies. Multiagency drug task forces may alsoattempt to reduce problems associated with the illegal drug trade by includingnot only law enforcement agencies but also other types of governmentagencies, nonprofit organizations, business firms, and community groups. Bycoordinating education and health initiatives these task forces attempt toreduce the harm that illegal drugs do to the community. Among agencies with drug enforcement responsibilities, abouthalf of the local police departments and two-thirds of the sheriffs'departments participated in a task force during the 12-month periodending on June 30, 1990. Overall, an estimated 6,500 local police and sheriffs'departments participated in multiagency drug enforcement task forcesduring this time period. Over 85% of the police and sheriffs' departments in eachpopulation category of 100,000 or more participated in a task force,including over 95% of the departments serving a population of 500,000 ormore. Approximately 80% of the police and sheriffs' departmentsserving a population of 25,000 to 99,999, 65% of those serving apopulation of 10,000 to 24,999, and over 40% of those serving fewer than 10,000residents participated in a task force. During the 12-month period ending June 30, 1990,approximately 6,100 local police officers were assigned to a multiagency drug taskforce full time. Although police departments serving a million or moreresidents had the most officers assigned to a task force on average (29), overhalf of all local police officers assigned to task forces nationwide wereemployed by departments serving a population of under 25,000. Sheriffs' departments had about 3,500 officers assigned fulltime to drug task forces, ranging from an average of 10 officers perdepartment in jurisdictions with 1 million or more residents, to an averageof 1 officer per department in jurisdictions with fewer than 50,000residents. In addition to multiagency task forces, another innovationfor drug enforcement in many jurisdictions is the use of drug assetforfeiture sanctions. Most States have laws that allow the government toseize convicted drug traffickers' cash, bank accounts, planes,boats, cars, homes, and other items purchased with proceeds from theillicit drug trade. State laws vary regarding the disposition of forfeitedassets. Most State statutes require that outstanding liens be paid first, andmany States require that all forfeited drug assets go to the State and/orlocal treasury. In some States, law enforcement agencies may keepproperty such as cars, planes, and boats for official use. In other States,the agencies can keep all property, cash, and proceeds from sales of whatis forfeited. About 4,700 local police and sheriffs' departments reportedthe receipt of money or goods from a drug asset forfeiture program duringfiscal 1990. This represented 41% of all local law enforcement agencieswith primary drug enforcement responsibilities. A higher percentage ofsheriffs' departments (51%) than police departments (38%) had suchreceipts. The percentage of local police departments with assetforfeiture receipts was over 95% in jurisdictions with 50,000 to 999,999residents. Among departments serving 1 million or more residents and thoseserving 25,000 to 49,999 residents, about 85% received money or goods from anasset forfeiture program. Receiving money or goods from an assetforfeiture program was least likely for police departments serving apopulation of under 2,500 (11%). About 95% of sheriffs' departments in jurisdictions with250,000 or more residents, and about 85% of those serving 50,000 to 249,999residents had asset forfeiture pro-gram receipts during fiscal 1990. In thesmallest jurisdictions (under 10,000 residents), an estimated 27% ofthe sheriffs' departments received money or goods from an asset forfeitureprogram. State police departments Thirty-four State police departments, employing approximately43,000 full- time officers, reported they had primary responsibility forthe enforcement of drug laws. Number of Full-time State police sworn officers departments employed Total 49 52,372 Departments with primary responsibility for drug enforcement 34 43,118 All 34 of these departments reported they made marijuana andcocaine seizures during the 12-month period ending June 30, 1990(table 6). A large majority of them also seized amphetamines (94%), heroin(91%), LSD (88%), methamphetamines (88%), barbiturates (85%), and PCP(74%). Like those of local law enforcement agencies, State policedrug enforcement strategies often involve the operation of special units,participation in multiagency drug enforcement task forces, and participationin a drug asset forfeiture program. Twenty-nine (85%) of the State police departments that hadresponsibility for enforcing drug laws were operating special drugenforcement units. These 29 departments had assigned a total of 2,138 officersto these units on a full-time basis--an average of 74 officers perdepartment. Most of these departments (82%) also operated special unitsfor drug education in schools, and 29% of them had special units forgangs. Thirty-one of the departments (91%) participated in amultiagency drug enforcement task force during fiscal 1990. These departmentshad 900 officers assigned to drug task forces, an average of 29 perdepartment. All but two of the departments (94%) responsible for drugenforcement reported they received money or goods from a drug assetforfeiture program during the year. Drug testing policies Local police and sheriffs' departments Nearly 40% of local police and sheriffs' departments reportedthat at least some of their arrestees were tested for illegal drugs. Drugtesting of arrestees was most likely to exist in police departmentsserving a population of 500,000 or more (56%) and in sheriffs'departments serving a population of 1 million or more (60%). Among local police departments that reported testing ofarrestees, about 1 in 8 were responsible for operation of the testing program.In sheriffs' departments with arrestee testing, about 1 in 4 operated thetesting program. About a fourth of both local police and sheriffs' departmentsrequired all applicants for sworn positions to submit to a drug test. Theprevalence of drug testing of applicants increased with the size of thepopulation served. Among local police departments, 80% of those servinga population of 250,000 or more required all applicants for swornpositions to be tested for illegal drugs. About 70% of those serving a population of50,000 to 249,999 and just under 50% of those serving a population of10,000 to 49,999 had such a requirement. The percentage of policedepartments with a mandatory drug testing policy for applicants was smallestamong those serving 2,500 to 9,999 residents (25%) and those servingfewer than 2,500 residents (14%). Slightly more than 40% of sheriffs' departments serving apopulation of 100,000 or more had a policy requiring drug testing of allapplicants for sworn positions. About 30% of departments serving from 25,000to 100,000 residents had such a policy. Sheriffs' departments serving apopulation of less than 25,000 (15%) were the least likely to require allapplicants for sworn positions to undergo tests for illegal drugs. Small percentages of all local police and sheriffs'departments had a mandatory drug testing requirement for probationary officers,regular field officers, candidates for promotion, officers in drug-relatedpositions, or civilian personnel. In every population category, less than25% of the police and sheriffs' departments had mandatory drug testingfor the above personnel types, except the following: Probationary officersand officers in drug-related positions in police departments serving apopulation of 500,000 or more. Small percentages of local police and sheriff's departmentswere also using random selection to test applicants or employees for illegaldrugs. An estimated 2% of all departments tested applicants throughthis method, and the percentage of departments with random drug testing was nomore than 5% for any personnel position. Random selection testing was mostcommon for officers in drug-related positions employed by policedepartments serving a population of 1 million or more (36%). About 10% of all local police and sheriffs' departmentsrequired regular field officers suspected of using illegal drugs to take adrug test. The percentage of departments with suspicion-based testing wassimilar for other types of employees. About 2% of the departments hadsuch a policy for applicants. Departments in larger jurisdictions were more likely thanthose in smaller jurisdictions to have a suspicion-based drug testing program.For example, among local police departments, about two-thirds of localpolice departments serving 250,000 or more residents authorizedtesting of regular field officers suspected of drug use, compared to about halfof those serving a population of 50,000 to 249,999, about a third ofthose serving a population of 25,000 to 49,999, and a ninth of those servingpopulation of 2,500 to 9,999. In police departments serving a population ofunder 2,500, roughly 1 in 30 authorized testing of regular field officerssuspected of illegal drug use. About 40% of the sheriffs' departments serving a populationof 1 million or more had a policy authorizing testing of regular fieldofficers suspected of illegal drug use. About 30% of the departments serving apopulation of 500,000 to 999,999, and 20% of those serving a population of100,000 to 499,999 had such a policy. Less than 10% of the sheriffs'departments located in jurisdictions with fewer than 100,000 residentshad a policy that authorized drug testing of officers suspected of druguse. Nationwide, the local police departments that had asuspicion-based drug testing program for regular field officers employed 50% ofall local police officers. The sheriffs' departments with such a testingprogram employed 31% of all sheriff's officers. An estimated 17% of all localpolice officers and 12% of sheriffs' officers worked for departmentsthat had a random selection program for regular field officers. About 3%of local police officers and 4% of sheriffs' officers were employed bydepartments that had a mandatory drug testing requirement for fieldofficers. Local police departments that tested civilian employeessuspected of drug use employed 45% of all such employees nationwide. About 30%of civilian employees in sheriffs' departments worked in department witha suspicion- based testing program for civilians. Civilian employees in sheriffs' departments were more likelyto be a part of a random selection drug testing program than theircounterparts in local police departments (9% versus 3%). About 5% of the civilianemployees in local police and sheriffs' departments were subject to amandatory drug testing requirement. For comparison, the results of a 1988 survey conducted by theDepartment of Labor showed that 3% of private nonagricultural businesseshad a drug testing program of some type, including 43% of those with1,000 or more employees. Overall, about 20% of private sector employeesworked for a company with a drug testing program. (Bureau of LaborStatistics, Survey of Employer Anti-drug Programs, Report 760, January 1990.) Among local law enforcement agencies with an employee drugtesting program, an estimated 61% of the police departments and 69% of thesheriffs' departments specified dismissal as a possible disciplinarysanction against nonprobationary officers after one positive drug test. Local police officers testing positive for the first timewere most likely to face dismissal as a possible sanction in largerjurisdictions. All police departments serving a population of 1 million or morehad a policy specifying dismissal as a possible sanction after onepositive drug test, and 83% of those serving a population of 250,000 to 999,999had such a policy. Suspension was the most serious disciplinary sanctionspecified for an initial positive drug test in 14% of the police and sheriffs'departments that tested employees for illegal drugs. After a second positive drug test by a nonprobationaryofficer, the percentage of local law enforcement agencies specifyingdismissal as the most serious disciplinary sanction increased to 93% forpolice departments and to 98% for sheriffs' departments. Treatment was specified as a possible alternative fornonprobationary officers with positive drug test results in almost half ofthe local police and sheriffs' departments with a testing program. The drugtesting policies of local police departments specified treatmentalternatives more often than those of sheriffs' departments (49% versus 39%).Treatment alternatives were generally limited to the first offense. Among police departments, treatment alternatives were mostlikely to exist in jurisdictions with a population of 50,000 to 249,999,where two-thirds of them had such a policy. Among sheriffs' departments, thoseserving 500,000 to 999,999 residents (62%) were the most likely tohave treatment alternatives specified in their drug testing policy. Police departments serving a population of 1 million or more(20%) were the least likely of all local law enforcement agencies to specifytreatment as a possible alternative for officers who test positive fordrugs. State police departments Thirty-three (67%) of the 49 primary State police departmentsreported that at least some of the persons they arrested were being testedfor illegal drugs. Four (8%) of the departments reported that they hadprimary responsibility for operation of the testing program. Percent of departments in which at least some arrestees are tested Total 67% Agency-operated program 8 Not agency-operated 59 Just over half (55%) of State police departments reportedthey required drug tests of all applicants for sworn positions. Two (4%) ofthe departments reported they required all regular field officersto undergo tests for illegal drugs, and five (10%) tested all officersworking in drug-related positions. None of the State police departmentsreported having a mandatory drug testing policy for civilianpersonnel. Some State police departments used a random selection processto test probationary officers (12%), regular field officers (8%),candidates for promotion (8%), and officers working in drug-relatedpositions (10%). One department (2%) had a random selection drug testing programfor applicants, and two departments (4%) required civilian personnel to beincluded in a random selection drug testing program. Although no State police departments had a mandatory drugtesting requirement for civilian employees, nearly half (45%) of allcivilian State police employees worked in departments that tested civilianemployees suspected of using illegal drugs. A similar proportion ofsworn State police employees (53%) were subject to suspicion-based drugtesting. About 7% of State police officers were employed by departments withrandom selection testing for regular field officers and an equalpercentage worked in departments with a mandatory drug testing requirement forsuch officers. About three-fourths (77%) of the State police departmentswith a drug testing program specified dismissal as a possible sanctionagainst probationary officers after one positive drug test. After asecond offense, dismissal was a possible sanction specified by 91%of the departments. Half of the departments with employee drug testing specifiedtreatment as a possible alternative after the first offense. As in local lawenforcement agencies, treatment alternatives were generally not availableto State police officers who tested positive for drugs a second time. Methodology The Law Enforcement Management and Administrative Statistics(LEMAS) survey collects data from a nationally representative sample of thenearly 17,000 publicly funded State and local law enforcement agencies inthe United States. All 780 State and local law enforcement agencies in theUnited States with 100 or more sworn officers (as reported in the 1986 DirectorySurvey of Law Enforcement Agencies) received the full-length LEMASquestionnaire. The 780 self-representing (SR) agencies were supplemented by anationally representative sample of all agencies with fewer than 100sworn officers. These nonself-representing (NSR) agencies were chosen using astratified random sample with cells based on the type of agency (localpolice, sheriff, or special police), size of population served, andnumber of sworn officers. The 2,338 NSR agencies received a slightlyabbreviated LEMAS questionnaire, which did not contain items about jobclassifications, residency requirements, special pay, collective bargaining,police membership organizations, special units, or written policydirectives. The initial mailing of the survey questionnaire was conductedin July 1990. The pay period containing June 15, 1990, was used as thereference date for personnel-related questions and June 30, 1990, for otherquestions. The data were collected by the Bureau of the Census for theBureau of Justice Statistics. After two followup mailings and additional telephone calls asneeded, a final total of 2,945 agencies responded to the LEMASquestionnaire, including 738 SR agencies and 2,207 NSR agencies. The overallresponse rate was 94.5%. The final data-base includes responses from1,830 local police departments, 840 sheriffs' departments, 226 specialpolice departments, and the 49 primary State police departments. The base weight for all SR agencies is 1. For NSR local andspecial police departments, the base weight is 8.128, and for NSR sheriffs'departments it is 4.09857. The final weight associated with every agency,both SR and NSR, is the product of the base weight and a factor thatadjusted for any nonresponding agencies in each sample cell. This agencynonresponse factor was based on number of sworn officers for SR agencies and onnumber of agencies for NSR agencies. Some responding agencies did not completely answer the LEMASquestionnaire. When an agency did not supply a response to an item, a donoragency was randomly selected from responding agencies in the same samplecell. The donor agency's value for the item was placed into thenonresponding agency's response field with an indicator that the value hadbeen imputed. Complete documentation regarding sampling procedures andnon-response adjustments is available upon request. Because the data from agencies with fewer than 100 swornpersonnel were collected from a sample, the results are subject to samplingerror. All statements of comparison in this report have been tested toensure that observed differences between values are significant at 2standard errors (the 95-percent confidence level) or higher. References Federal Bureau of Investigation, Crime in the United States, 1990. National Institute of Justice, Local-level drug enforcement:New drug strategies, March 1989. National Institute of Justice, Multijurisdictional drug lawenforcement strategies: Reducing supply and demand, December 1990. National Institute of Justice, The police and drugs,September 1989. How to order the data set Data utilized in this report are available from the NationalArchive of Criminal Justice Data at the University of Michigan, P.O. Box1248, Ann Arbor, MI 481 106; 1-800-999-0960. The dataset is archived asLaw Enforcement Management and Administrative Statistics, 1990(ICPSR 9749). Brian Reaves, BJS Statistician, wrote this report. Tom Hesteredited it. Pheny Z. Smith provided statistical review. Lawrence A.Greenfeld and Richard W. Dodge reviewed the publication. It was produced byMarilyn Marbrook, Priscilla Middleton, Betty Sherman, and Jayne Pugh.The data were collected by the Governments Division, Bureau of theCensus. May 1992, NCJ-134505 The Assistant Attorney General is responsible for matters ofadministration and management with respect to the OJP agencies: Bureau ofJustice Assistance, Bureau of Justice Statistics, National Instituteof Justice, Office of Juvenile Justice and Delinquency Prevention, andOffice for Victims of Crime. The Assistant Attorney General establishespolices and priorities consistent with statutory purposes of the OJPagencies and the priorities of the Department of Justice. . CliffSchaffer's Home Page WT01-B26-33IA031-000651-B014-291http://206.61.184.43:80/schaffer/GOVPUBS/fedconvs.htm 206.61.184.43 19970122120932 text/html 1104HTTP/1.0 200 OKDate: Wednesday, 22-Jan-97 12:09:23 GMTServer: WebSitePro/1.1f (S/N wpo-0deb)Allow-ranges: bytesContent-type: text/htmlLast-modified: Saturday, 28-Dec-96 06:13:54 GMTContent-length: 888 Federal Convictions of Public Officials 1970 - 1988 Federal Convictions of Public Officials 1970 - 1988 Excerpted from THE ECONOMICS OF PROHIBITION, by Mark Thornton. Reference Source: USDoJ "Report to Congress on theActivities and Operations of the Public Integrity Section" CliffSchaffer's Home Page WT01-B26-34IA031-000651-B014-318http://206.61.184.43:80/schaffer/GOVPUBS/JLCROWD.HTM 206.61.184.43 19970122120950 text/html 26418HTTP/1.0 200 OKDate: Wednesday, 22-Jan-97 12:09:36 GMTServer: WebSitePro/1.1f (S/N wpo-0deb)Allow-ranges: bytesContent-type: text/htmlLast-modified: Saturday, 28-Dec-96 06:13:21 GMTContent-length: 26200 Systemwide Strategies To Alleviate Jail Crowding Systemwide Strategies To Alleviate Jail Crowding Andy Hall U.S. Department of Justice National Institute of Justice January 1987 The words "jail" and "crowding" seeminseparable these days. A 1983 National Institute of Justicesurvey of more than 1,400 criminal justice officials from allparts of the country identified jail and prison crowding as themost serious problem facing criminal justice systems.(1) The reality of more prisoners than available beds creates adilemma for local justice officials. Crowded jails may compromisepublic safety through a lack of space to confine those who poseserious threats to the community. Lawsuits challenging crowdedconditions may constrain a community's ability to incarcerate, A recent Bureau of Justice Statistics Bulletin notesthat 22 percent (134) of the Nation's 621 largest jails (thosewith a capacity of more than 100) were under court order in 1984to expand capacity or reduce the number of inmates housed, and 24percent (150) were under court order to improve one ormore conditions of confinement. (2) Building or expanding facilities is often necessary to housethose who must be incarcerated. The time and costs ofconstruction and operation of new institutions, however, arguethat other options should not be overlooked. (3) For the local sheriff or jail administrator, jail crowdingcreates increased prisoner and staff tensions, increased wear andtear of facility and equipment, budgetary problems from overtimestaffing, and an inability to meet program and service standards.Less frequently recognized are the problems crowding creates forother justice system officials: Judges, prosecutors, probation and parole, and other officials often find crowding a severe constraint in cases where jailing offenders appears necessary but space is unavailable. Prosecutors, public defenders, and pretrial services officers find their functions impaired by delayed access to inmates caused by difficulty in processing large numbers of offenders. Court functions overall may suffer when crowding affects the movement of inmates to and from scheduled appearances. Too often, however, agencies outside jail management are notfully involved in efforts to cope with the problem. Many jurisdictions address the symptoms of jail crowding butleave the underlying causes unaddressed. Other jurisdictions,however, view jail crowding as a problem that demands thecooperative involvement of all key figures in the local justicesystem. Given the success of this systemwide approach in anumber of locations, the National Institute of Justice sponsoreddevelopment of Alleviating Jail Crowding: A SystemsPerspective (NCJ 99462, 1985), based on a survey of justicesystem officials and programs throughout the United States. Thereport stresses that while construction of new facilities may bepart of a community's solution to crowding, emphasis must also beplaced on ensuring that existing bed space is used effectively.Accordingly, the report highlights the role of each localcriminal justice agency in ensuring the effective use of jail bedspace to prevent crime and maintain public safety. This Researchin Brief summarizes the full report. Looking at the local justice system Virtually every decisionmaker in the local justice systemexercises discretion that can affect the jail population.Jurisdictions using a systemwide approach to jail crowding seethe local justice system as a screening mechanism that can bemodified to enhance the use of scarce jail space. These jurisdictions develop case-processing flowcharts tounderstand the details of their case-handling process from theinitial contact to final disposition. Flowchart, illustrate thestages of the legal process, specify the points at whichdecisionmaker actions affect the jail population, and identifyopportunities to alleviate crowding. Understanding the local flow of cases can help policymakersidentify program and process changes to reduce crowding. Programchanges frequently involve eliminating the jailing of personswhom a community deems inappropriate for criminal justiceprocessing, such as the mentally ill. Process changes improve system efficiency, eliminatingcase-handling "catch points" that unnecessarily prolongthe confinement of persons who might eventually be releasedthrough bail, probation, or transfer to the State prison. Reducing length of confinement often becomes the first focusof population reduction, because efficiency measures aregenerally less costly and more readily implemented than newprograms. Local analysis often reveals that the primaryunderlying cause of crowding is excessive length of confinementdue to inefficient case processing. How system decisionmakers can affect jail crowding System studies in a number of jurisdictions have suggested,as one judge said, "a lot of little ways" to halt orreverse jail population increases without releasing seriousoffenders. The following discussion highlights just a few of the"little ways" available at different parts of thesystem. Law enforcement - Decision, surrounding local arrestpractices whether to arrest, transport to jail or stationhouse, book or detain for bail setting - are criticaldeterminants of jail population size. Law enforcement practicesboth before and after arrest can be modified to reduce jailadmissions. Jurisdictions such as San Diego County, California,and Frederick County (Winchester), Virginia, use perhaps the mostcommon form of prearrest diversion through short-term"sobering up" facilities for public inebriates. San Diego has been successful in reducing crowding throughthe use of a privately operated detoxification reception programwhere inebriates must remain for a minimum 4-hour period. Thoughin a largely rural area, the Winchester, Virginia, detoxificationprogram, operated by the Division of Court Services, has alsodiverted a large number of persons from jail. Similar prearrest diversion programs are in effect forpersons involved in family disputes(4) and for homeless personsin a number of jurisdictions throughout the United States. Law enforcement officials in Galveston County, Texas, haveinstituted practices to divert the mentally ill-a population thatfrequently makes up 10 to 20 percent of a jail's population. Ateam of deputies receives special training to assist in meetingthe emergency needs of the mentally ill, thereby allowing theagency to take them directly to a mental health facility. Many agencies also use a number of postarrest practices suchas station-house release before booking, field citations, andcourt-delegated authority to release suspects according to a bailschedule to eliminate unnecessary confinement. Jail administrators - Elected sheriffs or appointed jailexecutives are often viewed as the managers most affected butleast powerful in dealing with jail crowding. While having littledirect control over admissions and length of confinement, jailadministrators nevertheless can help reduce crowding by assuringready access for pretrial release screening and bail review. Quick access to detainees tends to be a common characteristicof successful programs to reduce jail crowding. For example, thesheriff in Mecklenburg County (Charlotte), North Carolina, allowspretrial services staff to be present during the jail admissionsprocess, which gives them access to defendants and speedsdecisionmaking. Individual judges often lack feedback regarding prisoners injail awaiting or following adjudication. Yet such information isof interest to the court and critical to jail populationreduction. The Bexar County (San Antonio), Texas, administratorprovides data to help judges monitor the court status ofprisoners and prevent length of confinement from being extendedthrough oversight or inattention. In some other jurisdictions, jail administrators aredelegated authority to release defendants pretrial or divertdrunk drivers to treatment centers. Other administrators helpdevelop nonjail pretrial-release and sentencing options orcooperate with other jurisdictions to alleviate crowding on amulticounty basis. Prosecutors - Prosecutors act at more case-handlingdecision points than any other officials. This gives them anespecially important role in containing jail population growth. Early case screening by prosecutors reduces unnecessarylength of confinement by eliminating or downgrading weak cases assoon as possible. Assistant prosecutors in Milwaukee County,Wisconsin, review arrests around the clock by examining policerecords and conducting meetings between complainants andsuspects. This practice enables Milwaukee prosecutors to decideon the appropriate charge within 24 to 36 hours after arrest. Prosecutors in Milwaukee also use "vertical caseprocessing" - assigning the same attorney or team ofattorneys to prosecute a case from start to finish. Though notnecessarily the case in all jurisdictions, reassigning cases fromone assistant prosecutor to another while the matter is beforethe court "horizontal case processing" - may causestagnation in caseflow, increased requests for continuances, andlengthened time to trial. Prosecutor cooperation is essential for alternatives inarrest, pretrial confinement, and sentencing. Prosecutorparticipation and leadership are essential to the effectivenessof task forces dealing with jail crowding. Since the prosecutor"owns" cases on behalf of the State, others are rarelywilling to propose case-handling changes without the prosecutor'ssupport. Recognizing that a lack of space to confine dangerous personsis a threat to public safety, prosecutors in a number ofjurisdictions have taken an active role in reducing jail crowdingby serving on "key court officials" groups or chairingjail population reduction boards. Pretrial services - Providing background informationon defendants, release recommendations, and other pretrialassistance can be an important component of solutions tocrowding. Pretrial services can often help merely by adjustingstaff schedules to ensure timely screening and interviews for amaximum number of defendants. In Mecklenburg County, North Carolina, for example, pretrialservices and magistrate bail setting are available 24 hours, 7days a week. In Kentucky, pretrial staff are on call 24 hours aday to interview persons at rested, notify judges by phone of theprisoner's qualifications for release, and supervise the releaseprocess if nonfinancial bail is authorized. Limited release authority is delegated to pretrial servicesstaff in an increasing number of jurisdictions. In San MateoCounty (Redwood City), California, pretrial staff are authorizedto release misdemeanor suspects prior to their first courtappearance. Seattle, Washington, is experimenting with delegatedrelease on certain felony charges. Many pretrial programs respond to jail population pressuresby expanding the range of release options (conditional andsupervised release, third-party custody, unsecured bail, depositbail) and by conducting regular bail reviews for those detainedfor trial. A National Institute of Justice study found that supervisedrelease programs in Miami, Florida; Portland, Oregon; andMilwaukee, Wisconsin, significantly reduced the bail-heldpopulation without significantly increasing the risk to publicsafety. Judiciary - Judges make more decisions affecting jailpopulation than anyone else; this often makes them leaders inseeking jail-crowding solutions. Judges can issue summonsesinstead of arrest warrants; provide guidelines authorizing directrelease by police, jail, and pretrial staff; and provide bailsetting outside normal court hours. Evaluators of the 4-year JailOvercrowding Reduction Project of the former Law EnforcementAssistance Administration found that the project's mostsuccessful sites were those with strong judicial leadership. Many courts provide 24-hour bail-setting magistrates. TheKing County (Seattle), Washington, District Court has a"three-tier" release policy that reduces court time,jail admissions, and length of confinement. The court establishedguidelines specify the charges for which pretrial services staffmay (1) release without consulting the court, (2) release afterphoning a duty judge, or (3) make recommendations to the court inthe most serious felony cases. Reducing court delay is crucial to effective use of jailspace. Bexar County, Texas, seeks to eliminate "deadtime" by having the court administrator work with a jailcase coordinator to identify cases in need of special attentionand processing steps that can be shortened. Each judge receivesweekly a list of prisoners awaiting indictment, trial,sentencing, or revocation in his or her court. One result is a 50-percent time saving in disposing ofmisdemeanor charges and thus a significant cut in overall lengthof confinement. Many judges have worked to extend the range of nonjailsentencing options, using probation supervision, suspended sentences, fines, community service andrestitution, halfway house placements, and specialized treatmentfacilities as true alternatives to incarceration. A growing number of courts now defer service of jailsentences, when the jail is at capacity, in cases in which jailis believed an appropriate sentence but immediate jailing is notessential for the community's safety. Defense - The National Institute's field test on EarlyRepresentation by Defense Counsel found that early screening forindigency, defender appointment, and defendant contact candecrease length of confinement and thus yield substantial savingsof jail space.(6) Vertical case processing in defense officesalso helps cut length of confinement. In Mecklenburg County, pretrial conferences between defenseand prosecution help identify, eliminate, or downgrade marginalcases and facilitate plea negotiation. Both offices can thusbudget staff time efficiently and lessen pretrial confinement. In St. Louis, Missouri, efforts to reduce staggering defendercaseloads by appointing private attorneys in felony cases havealso reduced case disposition time, stimulated bail review, andresulted in shorter pretrial confinement. Probation and parole - Not only do probation andparole agencies provide nonjail alternatives for sentencing, theycan enhance case- processing efficiency by streamliningpresentence investigation (PSI) procedures and expeditingrevocation decisions. All this helps cut length of confinement. In Brevard County, Florida, the jail population oversightcommittee spotlighted PSI delays and worked with probation andparole officers to cut PSI preparation time from 90 days to 30 or35 days for jail cases. The county also cut to 24 hours the timerequired for decisions on probation revocation, thus decreasingthe use of jail beds for persons on probation "hold"orders. Outside the local level - State legislation, courtrules, executive orders, and other "external factors"can affect jail populations - Guidelines on diversion, bailpolicy, appointment of legal counsel, sentencing practices, andjail operation all can affect the range of solutions available. Other outside factors that need to be considered in localplanning for jail use include local -demographics, availabilityof State and Federal resources, public opinion and media coverageof criminal justice issues, activities of local civic groupsand community organizations, and political campaigns andreferendums. Outside the system-Organizations outside the justicesystem can be instrumental in alleviating shortages of jail space by providing emergency shelter, detoxification,and treatment facilities for the mentally disturbed, publicinebriates, and drunk drivers. Many jurisdictions use localmental health centers to provide prompt mental healthassessments, diversion, and outpatient treatment. Privateagencies in several jurisdictions provide temporary shelter forjuveniles, pretrial supervision, and community serviceplacements. Formulating solutions While individual parts of the system can help through suchpractices as those highlighted above, one or two agencies in thelocal justice system are not enough to bring about comprehensivesolutions to crowding. Jail crowding results from the actions ofmany, with their decisions interacting to determine jailadmissions and length of confinement. Effectively combatingcrowding requires taking into account the interactive nature ofthe problem. Jurisdictions that successfully implemented a systemwideapproach to jail crowding have identified as critical needs (1)the participation of key decisionmakers in formulating solutionsand (2) detailed information on case processing and on the actualcharacteristics of the jail population. Key decisionmaker participation - Whether it is a"jail population management board" or some other body,experience in many jurisdictions argues for a forum thatencourages communication and participation by judges,prosecutors, sheriffs, police, probation officials, and otherpolicymakers in developing solutions to crowding. Collective involvement provides increased awareness of theimpact of one agency's actions on another and of the otheragency's procedures. Also, recommendations of a broadlyconstituted planning group are more likely to gain systemwidesupport. Finally, the political pragmatism that may accompanycommittee action may permit some participants to support moreimaginative policies. Information - A systemwide approach to jailcrowding requires improved information about jail use. Inaddition to the detailed flowcharts that help assess thetimeliness of case-processing decisions and the availability ofnonjail options, planners need information on precisely who orwhat type of person is in jail and why and how long they stay.This permits administrators to learn the frequency of admissionsand the size and variation of distinct segments of the jailpopulation, as well as indicating sluggish case processing. Statistical analysis of the population identifies symptoms ofjail crowding, greatly enhancing the ability to identify andtreat the causes. But while jail population data are valuable,they should not overshadow case-processing information. Analysis of data on the jail population might show, forexample, that persons detained before trial are released onlyafter 7 to 10 days. Alone, this finding could indicate theneed for a special pretrial services program to expeditescreening and bail review. Information on caseflow, however,might reveal the actual cause to be inefficient case processing. Evaluation information is also critical to developingeffective strategies. Evaluation data should be collected andanalyzed to determine if planned modifications in decisionmakingare being made and the resulting positive or negativeimplications for crowding and public safety. Implementing strategies and conclusions Localities that take a systemwide approach to jail crowdinggenerally follow some important steps: Involve all key system decisionmakers; Collect all necessary data on jail population and caseprocessing; Identify, implement, and evaluate appropriate changesin programs or processes; and Inform the public of system changes when initiated andsuccessful strategies when confirmed. While many communities have taken great steps, experience hasalso confirmed the complexity of the jail crowding problem andthe futility of seeking a panacea through one or two changes.Long-term success requires a variety of solutions and, mostimportant, the time, patience, and attention of the entirecriminal justice community. Notes 1. Stephen Gettinger, "Assessing Criminal JusticeNeeds," National Institute of Justice Research in Brief,June 1984, NCJ 94072. 2. Jail Inmates 1984. 3. Those jurisdictions that must build or expand jails canlearn from the experiences of others through the NationalInstitute of Justice Corrections Construction Initiative. Forinformation, call 800-851-3420 or 301-251-5500 and ask to speakwith a corrections specialist. 4. In violent family disputes, however, research nowindicates that arrest is the preferred police response. Thisresearch, now being replicated under NIJ sponsorship, wasreported in Lawrence W. Sherman and Richard A. Berk,Minneapolis Domestic Violence Experiment, Washington, D.C.,Police Foundation, 1984, NCJ 98905. 5. James Austin, Barry Krisberg, and Paul Litsky,Evaluation of the Field Test of Supervised Release - Final Report,1984 NCJ 95220. 6. An executive summary of the Early Reprensentation byDefense Counsel evaluation, by E.J. Fazio, Jr., et al., isavailable in microfiche as NCJ 97595. Andy Hall is an associate of the Pre-Trial ServicesResource Center, Washington, D.C., and principal author of theNIJ publications Alleviating Jail Crowding: A SystemsPerspective and Pretrial Release Program Options (NCJ94612). From theDirector Communities throughout the Nation face the problem of jailcrowding: Having more prisoners than space to house them. Despiteconstruction innovations that may help cities or counties expandtheir confinement capacity both more quickly and at less expense,a host of problems, including fiscal pressures sometimes, mayindicate solutions other than construction. Some consequences of jail crowding are well known: Increasedvictimization and fear, decreased public confidence thatdangerous persons can be locked up, lawsuits, court-imposedlimits on the number of prisoners, damage to facilities andequipment. Crowding increases both tension in the institution andthe strain on correctional budgets. Less obvious but equally worrisome are delays in caseprocessing due to cumbersome access to prisoners and the limitsput on such necessary judicial options as pretrial release andsentencing. National Institute of Justice surveys have shown thatofficials in law enforcement, courts, corrections, and otherparts of the justice system were virtually unanimous in namingprison and jail crowding their number one concern. Recognition of the gravity of jail crowding, however, offersa glimmer of hope. Officials in a growing number of jurisdictionshave concluded that if each part of the local justice system doeswhat it can to ease crowding, the sum of all these smallsolutions has a notable cumulative effect. The separate decisions of law enforcement, judicialprosecution, defense, pretrial services, probation, corrections,and other officials can interact to influence the number of jailadmissions and length of confinement. Jurisdictions taking thissystemwide approach find that seemingly minor modifications incase processing can both reduce crowding and, more important,improve the overall administration of justice. Jail crowding is a local problem that must be dealt withlocally. The National Institute of Justice hopes to contribute tosuch endeavors, however, by assessing and synthesizinginformation on the program and process changes that localjurisdictions may want to consider. Without information on theexperience of other jurisdictions, informed policy decisions arehard to come by. At the Institute, our role is one articulated byPresident Reagan and Attorney General Meese: To support, not todirect, local responsibilities. Experience demonstrates that wehave many useful tools to deal with jail crowding. ThisResearch in Brief offers local jurisdictions their choiceamong such options. James K. Stewart Director National Institute of Justice CliffSchaffer's Home Page WT01-B26-35IA031-000651-B015-16http://206.61.184.43:80/schaffer/GOVPUBS/crimhi93.htm 206.61.184.43 19970122121003 text/html 7158HTTP/1.0 200 OKDate: Wednesday, 22-Jan-97 12:09:56 GMTServer: WebSitePro/1.1f (S/N wpo-0deb)Allow-ranges: bytesContent-type: text/htmlLast-modified: Saturday, 28-Dec-96 06:15:41 GMTContent-length: 6941 Highlights of the Crime Problem, 1993 Highlights of the Crime Problem, 1993 From the Bureau of Justice Statistics ADVANCE FOR RELEASE AT 5 P.M. EST BJS SUNDAY, NOVEMBER 21, 1993 202-307-0784 20 YEARS OF MEASURING CRIME SHOWS FEWER OFFENSES OVERALLBUT INCREASED VIOLENCE AGAINST MINORITIES AND THE YOUNG WASHINGTON, D.C. -- After 20 years of asking Americans whattheir actual experiences with crime have been, the JusticeDepartment's Bureau of Justice Statistics (BJS) today identifiedseveral long-term trends: --Overall, the number of criminal victimizations dropped 6percent since the annual National Crime Victimization Surveybegan in 1973. --The steepest declines are in household burglary and theft.--Blacks are substantially more likely to be violent crimevictims than are whites. --Young minority males in central cities are violent crimevictims at the highest rates the survey ever recorded. The dataare from the survey's 20th anniversary report, which noted thatmore than 4.4 million interviews were conducted from 1973 throughlast year. "While the overall trends are positive, somegroups of Americans are disproportionately the victims ofincreasing crime," observed Lawrence A. Greenfeld, theacting BJS director. "For example, last year blacksexperienced the highest per capita rates of violent crime in thesurvey's history." "The survey also documented thegrowing ratio of violent crime," Greenfeld pointed out."In 1973 about 15 percent of all crimes were violentcompared to 20 percent in 1992. Moreover, about a third of allvictims of violence report an injury." During the last twodecades an estimated 37 million victims were injured, and morethan one-third of those injured had no health insurance or werenot eligible for public health benefits. Among other reporthighlights: --Handguns are used in about 10 percent of all violentcrimes. Handgun crime rates are above the 1986 low but have notreturned to the highest rate reached in 1982. --During 1991 an estimated $19.1 billion were lost directlyfrom personal and household crimes. --Males are much more likely to be victims of violenceinflicted by strangers than by family members or other closeassociates, whereas females are as likely to be hurt by familymembers and close associates as by strangers. --About 30 percent of all violent crimes and 25 percent ofhome burglaries occur when the victim or victims are away fromhome on a leisure activity. --In approximately half of all female rapes the victim knewthe offender. Strangers used some type of weapon in 29 percent ofthe offenses, compared to 17 percent by non-stranger rapists. --In robberies during which the offender threatened thevictim before the attack, those victims who defended themselvesin some way were less likely to lose property but were morelikely to be injured than were victims who took no action. Whenthe offender had a handgun, the victim was seriously injured in 1percent of the incidents in which self- protective measures werenot taken, compared to 7 percent when such action was taken. --Households earning more than $30,000 annually are generallymore likely than are households in most other income categoriesto experience theft of a motor vehicle, but as household incomerises, burglary rates fall. --Black male teenagers (that is boys and young men from 12through 19 years old) are more likely to be violent crime victimsthan any other group of people. Their average annual rate is 113victimizations per 1,000 residents--or almost one in nine blackteenagers. For white male teenagers the rate was 90 per 1,000--orabout one in 11. --For adult black males (35 through 64 years) the violentvictimization rate was 35 per 1,000. For adult white males, 18per 1,000; adult white females, 15; adult black females 13;elderly (65 years or more) black males 12; elderly black females,10; elderly white males, 6 and elderly white females, 3 per1,000. The rate of criminal victimizations for all U.S. residentscompared to other life experiences is as follows: Occurrences Yearly rate per 1,000 adults Accidental injury, all circumstances 220 Accidental injury at home 66 Personal theft 61 Accidental injury at work 47 Violent victimization 31 Assault (aggravated and simple) 25 Motor vehicle accident injury 22 Death, all causes 11 Victimization with injury 11 Aggravated assault 8 Robbery 6 Death from heart disease 5 Death from cancer 3 Rape (women only) 1 Accidental death, all circumstances 0.4 Death from pneumonia or influenza 0.4 Death in motor vehicle accident 0.2 Suicide 0.2 Death from HIV infection 0.1 Homicide and capital punishment executions 0.1 The survey measures rape, robbery, assault, burglary,personal and household larceny and motor vehicle theft. It doesnot measure murder, kidnapping or commercial crimes. Last year 39 percent of all these crimes were reported topolice--the highest since 1973, when it was 32 percent. Theincreased reporting rate was consistent with the fact thatviolent crime and motor vehicle theft have made up an increasingproportion of total crime during the last two decades. Thehighest reporting rate last year was for completed motor vehicletheft--92 percent. The lowest was for personal larceny withoutcontact--15 percent. Single copies of the BJS special report, "Highlightsfrom 20 Years of Surveying Crime Victims" (NCJ-144525), aswell as other BJS statistical bulletins and reports may beobtained from the National Criminal Justice Reference Service,Box 6000, Rockville, Maryland 20850. The telephone number is 1-800-732-3277. Data from the tables and graphs used in many BJS reports canbe made available to news organizations in spreadsheet files on 51/4" and 3 1/2" diskettes by calling 202-307-0784. # ## 93-76 After hours contact: Stu Smith 301-983-9354 CliffSchaffer's Home Page WT01-B26-36IA031-000651-B015-41http://206.61.184.43:80/schaffer/GOVPUBS/fax1994.htm 206.61.184.43 19970122121026 text/html 80160HTTP/1.0 200 OKDate: Wednesday, 22-Jan-97 12:10:12 GMTServer: WebSitePro/1.1f (S/N wpo-0deb)Allow-ranges: bytesContent-type: text/htmlLast-modified: Saturday, 28-Dec-96 06:14:11 GMTContent-length: 79942 DRUGS AND CRIME FACTS, 1994 DRUGS AND CRIME FACTS, 1994 A summary of drug data published in 1994 by the Bureau of JusticeStatistics Drug data produced by BJS 2 Access to current drug data 4 Drug use by offenders at the time of offense 5 Prior drug use by offenders 8 Drug-related crime 9 Drug control budget 11 Drug law enforcement 12 Drug enforcement operations 14 Pretrial release of drug defendants 18 Prosecution and sentencing of Federal drug law violators 20 of drug law violators in State courts 22 Drug offenders in correctional populations 24 Drug enforcement in correctional facilities 26 Recidivism of drug law violators 29 Drugs and youth 31 Gangs 34 Drug use in the general population 35 Public opinion about drugs 36 ONDCP Drugs & Crime Clearinghouse 38 Source notes 40 For more information call or write: ONDCP Drugs & Crime Clearinghouse National Criminal Justice Reference Service Box 6000 Rockville, MD 20849-6000 1-800-666-3332 U.S. Department of Justice Office of Justice Programs Bureau of Justice Statistics Jan M. Chaiken, Ph.D. Director This report was prepared for the Bureau of Justice Statistics(BJS) by the Office of National Drug Control Policy (ONDCP) Drugs& Crime Clearinghouse under Contract Number OJP-94-C-006. TheONDCP Drugs & Crime Clearinghouse is a component of theNational Criminal Justice Reference Service. At the ONDCP Drugs& Crime Clearinghouse, Anita Timrots prepared the report. InBJS, Benjamin H. Renshaw III and Sue A. Lindgren directed theproject. Single copies of any report cited here or any other BJSpublication can be ordered from the ONDCP Drugs & CrimeClearinghouse, National Criminal Justice Reference Service, Box6000, Rockville, MD 20849-6000, toll-free 800-666-3332. Please order using NCJ numbers listed in the source notes,pages 36-37. Public-use tapes for BJS data sets and other criminal justicedata are available from the National Archive of Criminal Justice Data, P.O. Box 1248, AnnArbor, MI 48106 (1-800-999-0960 or 1-313-763-5010). Pleasespecify the ICPSR number shown in the source notes, pages 36-37,when ordering. NCJ-154043 June 1995 DRUG DATA PRODUCED BY BJS Many Bureau of Justice Statistics (BJS) programs produce dataon drug law enforcement, drug offenders, and drugs and crime. Forexample -- * the BJS National Crime Victimization Survey (NCVS)asks victims of personal crimes if they believed the offendershad been using drugs * the BJS Law Enforcement Management andAdministrative Statistics (LEMAS) program produces information ondrug-related programs of State and local police agencies * the BJS National Pretrial Reporting Program (NPRP) examinesdrug law violators' criminal histories and status at time ofarrest, pretrial release/detention status, trial appearance, anddisposition * the BJS National Judicial Reporting Program (NJRP) comparessentences given to drug offenders with those given to otheroffenders * BJS reports on Federal and State prisoners, jail inmates,and incarcerated youth including data on their histories of druguse and drug offenses the BJS Federal Justice Statistics Program collects and publishes detailed data on drug law violators in the Federal justice system * the annual BJS Sourcebook of criminal justice statistics presents data on drug use in the general population and on public opinion toward drugs and enforcement of drug laws. Drugs and crime facts, 1994 presents the most currentinformation available relating to drugs and crime published byBJS in over two dozen different reports through the end ofcalendar 1994. This publication also highlights other drug datasources frequently used by the Office of National Drug ControlPolicy (ONDCP) Drugs & Crime Clearinghouse in responding torequests. Among other BJS reports published in calendar 1994 were thefollowing: * Pretrial release of Federal felony defendants, 1990 (BJSSpecial Report, February 1994) examines the likelihood ofpretrial release, type of release, and pretrial misconduct ofFederal defendants, including Federal drug offenders. * Women in prison (BJS Special Report, March 1994) reports onfemale inmates in State prisons in 1991 including prior drug andalcohol use, needle sharing behaviors, treatment, and priorphysical or sexual abuse of drug offenders. * Comparing Federal and State prison inmates, 1991 (September1994) describes the results of the first joint survey ofprisoners held in State and Federal prisons, including data onthe proportion of inmates incarcerated for a drug offense, priordrug use, sentence length, prior treatment, use of a weapon, andHIV infection. * Felony sentences in the United States, 1990 (BJS Bulletin,September 1994) compares sentencing statistics on State andFederal courts, including the number of convictions for drugoffenses, type of sentence, sentence length, and estimated timeto be served. * National Corrections Reporting Program, 1992 (October 1994)is part of an annual series detailing the characteristics ofpersons, including drug offenders, admitted to and released fromthe prison and parole systems in the United States. * Pretrial release of felony defendants, 1992 (BJS Bulletin,November 1994) reports on criminal history, pretrial processing,pretrial misconduct, adjudication, and sentencing of felonydefendants, including drug offenders, in State courts in largeurban counties. * Federal law enforcement officers, 1993 (BJS Bulletin,December 1994) reports on the number of Federal law enforcementofficers authorized to carry firearms and arrest offenders,including Federal drug law violators. Felony sentences in State courts, 1992 (BJS Bulletin, December 1994) reports on the number of felony drug convictions, sentence type and length, and case processing time for drug offenders. * Felony defendants in large urban counties, 1992 (December 1994) describes demographic characteristics, criminal history, pretrial release information, and sentencing for felony offenders, including drug offenders, in the Nation's 75 most populous counties. ACCESS TO CURRENT DRUG DATA This issue of Drugs and crime facts summarizes drug datapublished by BJS in 1994 or earlier. For updated analyses of drugdata or more recently released reports, readers may contact theONDCP Drugs & Crime Clearinghouse or send the order form atthe end of this report. The Drugs & Crime Clearinghouse was established in 1987by BJS, with funding from the Bureau of Justice Assistance, toprovide policymakers, criminal justice practitioners,researchers, and the general public with ready access tounderstandable information on drug law violations anddrug-related law enforcement. In October 1994, the Clearinghousebecame a component of the National Criminal Justice ReferenceService (NCJRS). ONDCP began funding the Clearinghouse inNovember 1994. Clearinghouse products and services are describedin detail on pages 34-35. The toll-free line is 1-800-666-3332. Many of the reports cited in this publication are accessiblethrough the Internet or the NCJRS Electronic Bulletin BoardSystem (*BBS). The NCJRS Gopher provides information from the Office ofJustice Programs agencies, as well as the Office of National DrugControl Policy, and provides a direct link to the NCJRS*BBS. Thegopher address is: ncjrs.aspensys.com 71 Through the World WideWeb, NCJRS provides a graphical interface to NCJRS information,as well as to information from other criminal justice resourcesaround the world. The address for the NCJRS World Wide Web pageis: http://ncjrs.aspensys.com:81/ncjrshome.html First-time users of NCJRS can send an e-mail message toreceive a reply outlining the services of NCJRS to:look@ncjrs.aspensys.com For technical assistance or specific questions on drugs andcrime or other criminal or juvenile justice topics, please sendan e-mail to: askncjrs@aspensys.com To access the NCJRS*BBS through the Internet-- * telnet to:ncjrsbbs.aspensys.com or * gopher to: ncjrs.aspensys.com 71 To access the NCJRS*BBS directly, dial: (301) 738-8895.Modems should be set up to 9600 baud at 8-N-1. DRUG USE BY OFFENDERS AT THE TIME OF OFFENSE The BJS National Crime Victimization Survey asks victims ofthe violent crimes of rape, robbery, and assault about theirperceptions of the offender's use of alcohol and drugs. In 30% ofviolent crime victimizations in 1992, victims reported that theybelieved their assailants were under the influence of drugs oralcohol. In half of violent crime victimizations, the victim didnot know whether the offender was under the influence. Violent offenders under the influence of drugs or alcohol, asperceived by victims, 1992 Percent of violent crime victimizations where victimperceived the offender to be: Not known Type of Not under if under crime Total the influence the influence __________________________________________________ Crimes of 100% 20.8% 49.9% violence Rape 100 23.1* 38.3 Robbery 100 15.2 59.9 Aggravated assault 100 12.7 55.9 Simple assault 100 27.2 41.8 __________________________________________________ (continued) Percent of violent crime victimizations where victimperceived the offender to be: Under the influence ________________________________________ Not Type of Alcohol Drugs sure which crime Total only only Both substance __________________________________________________ Crimes of violence 30.2% 18.0% 4.3% 6.1% 1.6% Rape 38.6 18.2* 8.0* 12.4* 0.0* Robbery 24.9 10.8 5.4 6.1 2.6* Aggravated assault 31.4 16.7 4.3 8.2 1.8* Simple assault 31.1 21.3 3.7 4.7 1.2 __________________________________________________ Note: Percents may not total 100% because of rounding. *Estimate is based on 10 or fewer sample cases Source: Criminal victimization in the United States, 1992. Data from BJS corrections surveys show that a quarter ofconvicted jail inmates, a third of State prisoners, andtwo-fifths of youths in long-term, State-operated facilitiesadmit that they were under the influence of an illegal drug atthe time of their offense. Among jail inmates in 1989-- * 44% used drugs in the month before the offense * 30% used drugs daily in the month before the offense * 27% used drugs at the time of the offense. Jail inmates convicted of drug offenses most frequentlyreported having been under the influence of drugs at the time oftheir offense (39%), followed by convicted burglars (38%) androbbers (36%). Jail inmates convicted of driving whileintoxicated (DWI) (12%), assault (14%), and homicide (18%) werethe least likely to report having been under the influence ofdrugs at the time of the offense. Reported drug use by convicted prison and jail inmates Percent who used Percent who used drugs at the time drugs inthe month of the offense before the offense 1989 1991 1989 1991 Drug Type Jail Prison Jail Prison inmates inmates inmates inmates __________________________________________________ Any drug 27% 31% 44% 50% Marijuana 9 11 28 32 Cocaine/crack 14 14 24 25 Heroin/opiates 5 6 7 10 __________________________________________________ Sources: Drugs and jail inmates, 1989. Survey of State prisoninmates, 1991. In 1991, 49% of all State prison inmates reported that theywere under the influence of drugs or alcohol or both at the timethey committed the offense for which they were currentlysentenced: 17% were under the influence of drugs only, and 14%were under the influence of drugs and alcohol. Half of the State prisoners said they had taken illegal drugsduring the month before committing the crime. Among violent offenders in State prisons-- * 61% said that they or their victims were under theinfluence of drugs or alcohol at the time of the offense * 50% reported being under the influence of alcohol or drugsat the time of the offense * 30% said their victims were under the influence of alcoholor drugs. Nearly 40% of the youth incarcerated in long-term,State-operated facilities in 1987 said they were under theinfluence of drugs at the time of their offense. Data from the National Institute of Justice (NIJ) Drug UseForecasting (DUF) program revealed that of a sample of adultmales arrested in 23 U.S. cities in 1993, the percent testingpositive for any drug ranged from 54% in Omaha and San Jose to81% in Chicago. Among the 20 cities reporting data on femalearrestees, the percent of females testing positive for any drugranged from 42% in San Antonio to 83% in Manhattan. Sources: Criminal victimization in the United States, 1992.Drugs and jail inmates, 1989. Survey of State prison inmates, 1991. Survey of youth incustody, 1987. U.S. Department of Justice, National Institute ofJustice, Drug Use Forecasting 1993 Annual Report on AdultArrestees. PRIOR DRUG USE BY OFFENDERS Data from BJS surveys show that 78% of jail inmates in 1989,79% of State prisoners in 1991, 60% of Federal prisoners in 1991,and 83% of youth in long-term public juvenile facilities in 1987had used drugs at some point in their lives. Although drug use by State prison inmates in the month beforethe offense fell between 1986 and 1991, a higher proportion ofinmates reported use of cocaine or crack in 1991 than 1986. Onein three inmates who ever used drugs in the past used a needle toinject drugs. Fifteen percent of inmates who had ever used drugshad shared a needle at least once. Prior drug use by State prison inmates Percent of inmates who had ever used drugs Type of drug 1986 1991 Any drug 80% 79% Marijuana 76 74 Cocaine/crack 44 50 Heroin/opiates 26 25 Among 1989 jail inmates who used drugs, the median age atwhich they began to use-- * any drug was 16 * a major drug (including heroin, crack, cocaine, PCP, LSD,and methadone) was 18 * a major drug regularly was 20. Sixty percent of jail inmates who ever used any drug reportedthey had done so more than a year before their first arrest. Ofinmates who reported using a major drug regularly, 55% had notdone so until after their first arrest. Almost 83% of youth in long-term, State-operated juvenilefacilities in 1987 reported use of an illegal drug in the past,and 63% had used an illegal drug on a regular basis. The mostcommonly mentioned drugs were marijuana, cocaine, andamphetamines. Among drug-using youth in long-term, State- operated juvenilefacilities, 19% said they first used drugs before age 10; 38%reported their first use was before age 12. Sources: Drugs and jail inmates, 1989. Survey of State prisoninmates, 1991. Comparing Federal and State prison inmates, 1991.Survey of youth in custody, 1987. DRUG-RELATED CRIME Overall, 10% of Federal prison inmates in 1991, 17% of Stateprison inmates in 1991, and 13% of convicted jail inmates in 1989said they committed their offense to obtain money for drugs.Twenty percent of Hispanic State prison inmates said theycommitted their offense to get money for drugs, compared to 15%of white inmates and 17% of black inmates. Twenty-four percent offemale inmates said they committed their offense to get money tobuy drugs, compared to 16% of male inmates. Inmates incarcerated for robbery, burglary, larceny, and drugtrafficking most often committed their crime to obtain money fordrugs. Inmates who committed homicide, sexual assault, assault, andpublic-order offenses were least likely to commit their offenseto obtain money for drugs. Percent of inmates who committed their offense for money tobuy drugs Most Federal State serious prison prison Jail current inmates inmates inmates offense 1991 1991 1989 __________________________________________________ All offenses 10% 17% 13% Violent offenses 18% 12% 12% Homicide(a) 3 5 3 Sexual assault(b) 0 2 2 Robbery 27 27 32 Assault 2 6 3 Property offenses 9 26 24 Burglary 32 30 31 Larceny/theft 13 31 28 Motor vehicle theft -- -- 7 Drug offenses 9 22 14 Possession 7 16 10 Trafficking 10 25 19 Public-order offenses 6 5 3 (a) Includes murder, nonnegligent manslaughter, and negligent manslaughter. (b) Includes rape. -- Not reported The Uniform Crime Reporting Program (UCR) of the FederalBureau of Investigation (FBI) reported that in 1993, 5.5% of the23,271 homicides in which circumstances were known werenarcotics- related. This includes only those murders thatoccurred specifically during a narcotics felony, such as drugtrafficking or manufacturing. Those homicides that involved anarcotics felony and a more serious felony, such as armedrobbery, were not tabulated as drug-related. Drug-related homicides Number Percent Year of homicides drug-related 1986 19,257 3.9% 1987 17,963 4.9 1988 17,971 5.6 1989 18,954 7.4 1990 20,273 6.7 1991 21,676 6.2 1992 22,716 5.7 1993 23,271 5.5 Note: Includes only those homicides where circumstances wereknown. Table constructed by ONDCP Drugs & Crime Clearinghousestaff from Crime in the United States, 1991 through 1993 (FBI),p. 21. A study of murder cases disposed in the Nation's 75 mostpopulous counties in 1988 found that circumstances involvingillegal drugs, such as a drug scam or dispute over drugs,accounted for 18% of the defendants and 16% of the victims. In 7%of cases, victims and their killers were both at the murder scenebecause of drugs. Of victims, 12% were involved with the killerin a drug relationship. Sources: Comparing Federal and State prison inmates, 1991.Survey of State prison inmates, 1991. Drugs and jail inmates,1989. Women in jail 1989. Murder in large urban counties, 1988.Federal Bureau of Investigation, Crime in the United States, 1991through 1993. DRUG CONTROL BUDGET According to the Office of National Drug Control Policy(ONDCP),the Federal drug control budget increased from $1.5billion in fiscal 1981 to $13.2 billion in fiscal 1995. Total Federal drug control budget FY 1981 actual $ 1,531,800 FY 1989 actual 6,663,700 FY 1990 actual 9,758,900 FY 1991 actual 10,957,600 FY 1992 actual 11,910,100 FY 1993 actual 12,265,300 FY 1994 estimate 12,136,200 FY 1995 requested 13,179,800 Fiscal 1995 Federal drug control budget by function Total $13,179,800 Drug treatment $ 2,874,400 Education, community action, and the workplace 2,050,700 Criminal justice system 5,926,900 International 427,800 Interdiction 1,205,600 Research 531,600 Intelligence 162,800 ONDCP also reported that State and local governments spent$15.9 billion on drug control activities during fiscal 1991, a13% increase over the $14.1 billion spent during fiscal 1990. State and local spending for drug control, fiscal years 1990and 1991 FY FY 1990 1991 Total $14,075,000 $15,907,000 Justice $11,525,000 $12,619,000 Police protection 4,035,000 4,223,000 Judicial and legal services 1,346,000 1,449,000 Corrections 6,045,000 6,827,000 Other 100,000 120,000 Health and hospitals $ 2,184,000 $ 2,784,000 Education $ 366,000 $ 503,000 Source: Office of National Drug Control Policy, as reportedin Fact sheet: Drug data summary. DRUG LAW ENFORCEMENT Federal, State, and local agencies share responsibility forenforcing the Nation's drug laws, although most arrests are madeby State and local authorities. State and local police made anestimated 1.1 million arrests for drug law violations in 1993,according to the FBI. Estimated number of arrests for drug violations reported byState and local police, 1984-93 Year Sale/manufacture Possession Total 1984 155,848 552,552 708,400 1985 192,302 619,098 811,400 1986 206,849 617,251 824,100 1987 241,849 695,551 937,400 1988 316,525 838,675 1,155,200 1989 441,191 920,509 1,361,700 1990 344,282 745,218 1,089,500 1991 337,340 672,660 1,010,000 1992 338,049 728,351 1,066,400 1993 334,511 791,789 1,126,300 Percent change 1984-93 114.6% 43.3% 59.0% Note: Table constructed by ONDCP Drugs & CrimeClearinghouse staff from Federal Bureau of Investigation, Crimein the United States, 1984 through 1993. As reported in the 1993 BJS Sourcebook of criminal justicestatistics-- * the Federal Government seized 6,605 clandestine druglaboratories between fiscal years 1975 and 1993 * in fiscal year 1993, of the 286 labs seized, 237 (83%)manufactured methamphetamines * in 1993 the Drug Enforcement Administration's (DEA) programfor eradicating domestic marijuana resulted in the destructionof393 million plants in 64,132 plots, 12,397 arrests, 6,062weapons seized, and assets seized valued at $52 million * in fiscal year 1993 DEA confiscated 133,665 pounds ofcocaine, 1,590 pounds of heroin, 39 pounds of opium, 314,054pounds of marijuana, 2.8 million dosage units of hallucinogens,and 80.5 million dosage units of stimulants * in fiscal year 1993 the DEA completed 16,690 asset seizuresvalued at $680 million * in fiscal year 1993 the U.S. Customs Service seized 507,249pounds of marijuana, 175,318 pounds of cocaine, and 17.9 milliondosage units of drugs such as LSD and barbiturates * in 1993 the U.S. Coast Guard confiscated 48,441 pounds ofmarijuana and 32,313 pounds of cocaine * in fiscal year 1993 the U.S. Postal Service made 2,193arrests for mailing controlled substances * in 1992 State and Federal courts authorized wiretaps in 634narcotics cases. Drug seizure data from different Federal agencies should notbe added together because in many instances more than one agencyparticipated in the operations. The Federal-wide Drug SeizureSystem (FDSS) reflects the combined drug seizure efforts of theDEA, FBI, and the U.S. Customs Service within the jurisdiction ofthe United States, as well as maritime seizures by the U.S. CoastGuard. FDSS eliminates duplicate reporting of a seizure involvingmore than one Federal agency. Preliminary data indicate that the following amounts of drugswere seized in fiscal 1993 by the Federal agencies participatingin FDSS: Pounds Drug seized Heroin 3,345 Cocaine 238,053 Marijuana 752,114 Hashish 26,080 Sources: Federal Bureau of Investigation, Crime in the UnitedStates, 1984 through 1993. The Drug Enforcement Administration,the U.S. Coast Guard, the U.S. Customs Service, the FederalBureau of Investigation, the U.S. Postal Service, and theAdministrative Office of the U.S. Courts; all as reported in theBJS Sourcebook of criminal justice statistics, 1993. ONDCP Drugs& Crime Clearinghouse, Fact sheet: Drug data summary. DRUG ENFORCEMENT OPERATIONS As reported in Federal law enforcement officers, 1993, as ofDecember 1993, Federal agencies employed about 69,000 full-timepersonnel authorized to make arrests and carry firearms. The DEAemployed 2,813 full-time agents. These officers investigate majornarcotics violators, enforce regulations governing themanufacture and dispensing of controlled substances, and performa variety of other functions in support of drug traffickingprevention and control. The FBI employed 10,075 full-time agents. These agentsinvestigate more than 250 types of Federal crimes. The FBI hasconcurrent jurisdiction with the DEA over drug offenses under theControlled Substances Act. According to the BJS Law Enforcement Management andAdministrative Statistics (LEMAS) program, in 1990, about 9,300local police departments, 2,500 sheriffs' departments, and 34State police departments, employing over 500,000 full-timeofficers, had primary responsibility for drug law enforcement. Drug-related law enforcement activities include makingarrests and seizing drugs as well as laboratory testing of drugs,drug education, and drug testing of arrestees and agencyemployees. Most agencies serving 50,000 or more residentsoperated a special drug enforcement unit, participated in amultiagency task force, and received money or goods from an assetforfeiture program: * Special drug units focus on conducting investigations ondrug traffickers and drug-related activities in the community. * To coordinate efforts with other law enforcement agenciesto accumulate evidence, most large agencies participate in amultiagency task force. These task forces develop enforcementstrategies such as the use of informants, surveillance, andundercover operations. * Most States have laws that allow the government to seizeconvicted drug traffickers' assets, such as cash, bank accounts,planes, boats, cars, and homes. Many State laws require that allforfeited assets go to the State and/or local treasury uponpayment of outstanding loans. In some States, law enforcementagencies can keep all property, cash, and proceeds from sales ofwhat is forfeited. Drug-related participation by agencies with primary drugenforcement responsibilities, 1990 Percent of agencies with primary responsibility for drugenforcement that: ________________________________ Receive money Type of Participate or goods from agency and Operate in adrug asset population special multiagency forfeiture served drugunit task force program __________________________________________________ State police departments 85% 91% 94% Police departments All sizes 25% 51% 38% 1,000,000 or more 93 93 86 500,000-999,999 95 100 96 250,000-499,999 100 87 100 100,000-249,999 96 86 98 50,000-99,999 94 81 95 25,000-49,999 62 82 85 10,000-24,999 36 65 62 2,500-9,999 19 55 33 Under 2,500 5 28 11 Sheriffs' departments All sizes 39% 68% 51% 1,000,000 or more 92 95 95 500,000-999,999 90 97 97 250,000-499,999 86 91 94 100,000-249,999 77 86 88 50,000-99,999 75 72 81 25,000-49,999 44 80 53 10,000-24,999 28 66 42 Under 10,000 11 49 27 __________________________________________________ Note: Table includes only agencies with primaryresponsibility for drug enforcement. Source: Drug enforcement bypolice and sheriffs' departments, 1990. In 1990-- * 45% of State police agencies had primary responsibility forlaboratory testing of drugs, but only the largest municipal andcounty agencies tended to have such responsibility * 90% of municipal police departments with 100 or moreofficers had special units for drug education in the schools,while 60% operated special gang units * 94% of State police departments, 38% of local police, and51% of sheriffs' departments received money or goods from anasset forfeiture program. More than 1 in 3 local police andsheriffs' departments and 2 in 3 State police departmentsreported that at least some of their arrestees were tested forillegal drug use. One of four local police and sheriffs' departments and 1 of 2State police departments required applicants for sworn positionsto submit to a drug test. Employees tested for drugs in a mandatory testing program inState and local police and sheriffs' departments, by size ofpopulation served, 1990 Percent of agencies with a mandatory testing program for: ____________________________________ Type of agency and Regular population Probationary field served Applicants* officers officers __________________________________________________ State police departments 55% 6% 4% Police departments All sizes 26% 4% 2% 1,000,000 or more 79 29 0 500,000-999,999 71 29 8 250,000-499,999 85 8 5 100,000-249,999 63 7 1 50,000-99,999 71 7 1 25,000-49,999 52 7 4 10,000-24,999 44 7 3 2,500-9,999 25 4 1 Under 2,500 14 3 2 Sheriffs' departments All sizes 23% 4% 3% 1,000,000 or more 46 0 0 500,000-999,999 42 5 4 250,000-499,999 40 7 0 100,000-249,999 44 3 2 50,000-99,999 33 5 3 25,000-49,999 26 7 7 10,000-24,999 15 2 1 Under 10,000 14 2 1 ________________________________________________ (continued) Percent of agencies with a mandatory testing program for: _______________________________ Type of agency Candidates Officers in and population fordrug-related served promotion* positions __________________________________________________ State police departments 2% 10% Police departments All sizes 2% 3% 1,000,000 or more 21 43 500,000-999,999 18 25 250,000-499,999 14 13 100,000-249,999 7 10 50,000-99,999 9 14 25,000-49,999 6 6 10,000-24,999 2 5 2,500-9,999 1 2 Under 2,500 1 1 Sheriffs' departments All sizes 3% 4% 1,000,000 or more 4 10 500,000-999,999 0 7 250,000-499,999 0 6 100,000-249,999 3 6 50,000-99,999 3 5 25,000-49,999 6 7 10,000-24,999 1 2 Under 10,000 1 2 ________________________________________________ Note: Mandatory programs are those in which all are tested. *Sworn positions only. Sources: Federal law enforcement officers, 1993. Drug enforcement by police and sheriffs' departments, 1990.State and local police departments, 1990. Sheriffs' departments1990. PRETRIAL RELEASE OF DRUG DEFENDANTS The National Pretrial Reporting Program (NPRP) revealed thatof persons charged with a felony drug offense in 1992 in the 75most populous counties-- * 68% were released prior to case disposition * 27% were held with bail set * 5% were held without bail. The median amount of bail set for a person charged with adrug offense was $5,000. Defendants charged with a drug offensewere more likely to secure release (29%) when bail was set at$20,000 or more than those charged with a violent offense (17%),public-order offense (18%), or a property offense (11%). Of felony drug defendants released prior to the dispositionof their case, 51% were released within 1 day of their arrest,79% within 1 week, and 93% within 1 month. Of felony drug defendants released before case disposition,27% failed to make a scheduled court appearance within 1 year.Seventy percent of the defendants who failed to appear returnedto court by the end of the 1-year study period, while 30%remained fugitives. Sixteen percent of released drug defendants were known tohave been rearrested while on pretrial release. Of all released defendants rearrested for a drug offense, 59%were once again granted pretrial release. Pretrial status of defendants charged with drug offenses,1988-92 Pretrial status and type of release 1988 1990 1992 Total 100% 100% 100% Released 72% 65% 68% Financial total 36% 28% 27% Surety 19 18 15 Full cash 10 7 7 Deposit 6 3 5 Other 1 1 1 Nonfinancial total 36% 35% 39% Detained 28% 35% 32% Note: Detail may not add to total because of rounding. Percent of felony defendants released before trial, by typeof offense, 1988-92 Most serious felony Percent released prior arrest charge tocase disposition 1988 1990 1992 All offenses 66% 65% 63% Murder 39 37 24 Rape 55 54 48 Robbery 52 51 50 Assault 69 75 68 Burglary 53 56 51 Theft 64 67 67 Drug offenses 72 65 68 Sales/trafficking 69 61 66 Other 75 70 71 Public-order 70 69 65 Data from the Federal Justice Statistics Program (FJSP)showed that in 1990, 54% of Federal drug defendants were releasedprior to case disposition. About half of these releases occurredwithin 1 day of arrest, 76% within 1 week, and 89% within 1month. Pretrial status of Federal defendants charged with drugoffenses, 1990 Pretrial status and type of release Total 100% Released 54% Financial* 23 Unsecured bond 23 Recognizance 7 Conditional 1 Detained 46% Held on bail 10 Denied bail 37 * Includes deposit bond, surety bond, and property bond. Of Federal drug defendants released prior to casedisposition, 18% committed pretrial misconduct-- * 4% failed to appear in court as scheduled 4% were rearrested for a new offense 11% committed a technical violation, including reporting violations and violations of conditions involving the use of illegal drugs. Sources: Pretrial release of felony defendants, 1992.Pretrial release of felony defendants, 1990. Pretrial release offelony defendants, 1988. Pretrial release of Federal felonydefendants, 1990 . PROSECUTION AND SENTENCING OF FEDERAL DRUG LAW VIOLATORS The number of suspects prosecuted for drug offenses increasedfrom 7,697 in 1981 to 25,663 in 1991. U.S. attorneys declined toprosecute 22.3% (7,814) of suspected drug offenders who wereinvestigated in matters closed in 1991, a lower percentage thanfor offenders suspected of violent offenses (29.5%), propertyoffenses (48.5%), and public-order offenses (36%). The number of persons convicted of violating Federal druglaws rose to 17,349 in 1991 from 5,981 in 1981. This 190%increase exceeded the 53% growth in U.S. district courtconvictions for all Federal offenses during the same years andaccounted for over 67% of the total increase in Federalconvictions. The number of defendants convicted of drug possessionoffenses increased from 498 in 1981 to 1,163 in 1991 -- a 134%increase. Drug possession convictions were 7% of all drugconvictions in 1991. Drug offenses accounted for 19% of all defendants convictedin 1981 and 35% of all defendants convicted in 1991. Drugtrafficking offenses alone accounted for 33% of all defendantsconvicted in 1991. The conviction rate for drug defendantsincreased from 76% in 1981 to 84% in 1991. The percentage of offenders convicted of drug offensessentenced to prison rose from 73% in 1981 to 87% in 1991. The average prison sentence for persons charged with Federaldrug violations was longer than for all other offenses exceptviolent crimes in 1991. Average sentence length for persons sentenced to Federalprisons for drug and nondrug offenses, 1991 All offenses 62 mos. Violent offenses 91 Property offenses 21 Federal drug offenses 86 Trafficking 87 Possession 22 Public-order offenses 38 Drug offenders are receiving longer sentences and are servinga larger percentage of their sentence than in the past. Theaverage Federal prison sentence for drug offenses rose from 62months in 1986 to 86 months in 1991. The average percent ofsentence served until first release increased from 60% in 1985 to68% in 1990. Contributing to these increases are the sentencingguidelines that went into effect in 1987 and the 1986 and 1988anti-drug abuse laws which prescribed stiffer sentences andmandatory minimum incarceration terms for Federal offenders. Sources: Federal drug case processing 1985-91: With preliminary data for 1992. Federal criminal caseprocessing, 1982-91: With preliminary data for 1992. Federalsentencing in transition, 1986-90. Federal criminal caseprocessing, 1980-1987. PROSECUTION AND SENTENCING OF DRUG LAW VIOLATORS IN STATECOURTS In the United States in 1990 there were an estimated-- * 324,235 adults arrested for drug trafficking * 168,360 felony drug trafficking convictions * 129,637 drug traffickers sentenced to incarceration * 82,496 drug traffickers sentenced to State prison or 25 forevery 100 drug trafficking arrests. According to data from theBJS National Prosecutor Survey Program, in 1992, 1 in 5 Stateprosecutors' offices had a specialized narcotics unit. Based onstatutes enacted in the previous 3 years-- * 23% of the offices prosecuted cases based on recentlyenacted statutes addressing controlled substances, such asanabolic steroids and precursor chemicals * 21% prosecuted cases addressing illegal drugs in a schoolzone 9% prosecuted cases for drug possession. The number of drug trafficking convictions in State courts more than doubled between 1986 and 1990. Ofpersons convicted of drug trafficking in State courts in 1990-- * 85% were male * 42% were white, 57% black, and 1% of other races * the average age was 30 * 50% were between ages 20 and 29. Ninety percent of drug trafficking convictions in 1990resulted from guilty pleas; 4% resulted from jury trials; and 4%resulted from bench trials. Drug offenders comprised a third of all persons convicted ofa felony in State courts in 1990. Drug traffickers accounted for 20% of all convicted felons;drug possessors also accounted for 13% of all convicted felons. Seventy-seven percent of persons convicted of drugtrafficking in 1990 were sentenced to some kind of incarceration:28% to jail and 49% to prison; 23% were sentenced to probation.The average prison sentence for persons convicted of drugtrafficking was 6 years 2 months, of which the estimated time tobe served was 1 year 11 months. Disposition of felony arrests in State courts In the UnitedStates, 1990 For 100 arrests: ________________________________ Sentenced to incarceration ____________________ Arrest State offense Convicted Total Prison __________________________________________________ Murder* 55 52 50 Rape 54 47 36 Robbery 37 33 27 Aggravated assault 13 10 6 Burglary 38 28 20 Drug trafficking 52 40 25 __________________________________________________ *Includes nonnegligent manslaughter. Source: Felony sentences in State courts, 1990. Of persons convicted of drug possession, 29% were sentencedto jail, 35% to prison, and 36% to probation. The average prisonsentence was 4 years 1 month, of which the estimated time to beserved was 13 months. Mean State prison sentence and estimated time to be served inprison, 1990 Most Mean serious State Estimated conviction prison time to be offense sentence served(a) __________________________________________________ Murder(b) 243 mos. 104 mos. Rape 160 62 Robbery 115 45 Aggravated assault 78 26 Burglary 80 26 Larceny(c) 49 13 Drug offenses 66 19 Trafficking 74 23 Possession 49 13 __________________________________________________ (a)Derived by multiplying percentage of sentence actuallyserved by the mean sentence imposed. Percentage of sentenceactually served was estimated by the source from table 2-8,National corrections reporting program, 1989 (NCJ-138222),November, 1992. (b)Includes nonnegligent manslaughter. (c)Includes motor vehicle theft. Source: Felony sentences in State courts, 1990. The average (mean) time from arrest to sentencing was 223days for a drug trafficking case resulting in a State courtconviction in 1990. The average time was 286 days for jurytrials, 219 days for bench trials, and 221 days for guilty pleas.Of 27,052 drug offenders sentenced to probation in 1986 in 32counties across 27 States-- * 61% had a probation sentence combined with a jail term * 20% were not recommended for probation by the probationdepartment * 11% were assigned to intensive supervision * 38% were required to participate in a drug treatmentprogram * 48% were required to be tested for drug use. According to probation records, among probationers with knowndrug problems, 42% were not required to submit to drug testing orparticipate in drug treatment. Sources: Felony sentences in State courts, 1990. Prosecutors in State courts, 1992. Recidivism of felons onprobation, 1986-89. DRUG OFFENDERS IN CORRECTIONAL POPULATIONS Drug law violators make up a growing share of the prison andjail population: * drug offenders accounted for 61% of sentenced inmates inFederal prisons in 1993, up from 38% in 1986 and 25% in 1980 * the proportion of drug offenders in State prisons increasedfrom 9% in 1986 to 21% in 1991 * the proportion of drug offenders in local jails increasedfrom 9% in 1983 to 23% in 1989. Of State prisoners in 1991: * 8% were sentenced for drug possession and 13% weresentenced for drug trafficking * women were more likely to be incarcerated for a drugoffense than men (33% versus 21%) * inmates serving time for drug trafficking accounted for 3%of inmates sentenced to life or death * blacks were more likely to be serving time for a drugoffense than whites (25% versus 12%), but less than Hispanicinmates (33%). ....... *Obtained by ONDCP Drugs & Crime Clearinghouse fromBureau of Prisons Key Indicators Strategic Support System,January 25, 1994. In 1991, 10% of the 57,661 juveniles detained in publicjuvenile facilities were committed for drug-related offenses,according to the Office of Juvenile Justice and DelinquencyPrevention, as presented in the 1993 BJS Sourcebook of CriminalJustice Statistics. Juveniles held in facilities, by type ofoffense, 1991 Juveniles detained or committed for: Male Female Delinquent offenses 97% 81% Offenses against persons 33 20 Property offenses 37 30 Alcohol offenses 1 1 Drug-related offenses 10 5 Public-order offenses 4 5 Other delinquent offenses 12 19 Nondelinquent reasons 3 19 The BJS 1990 Census of State and Federal CorrectionalFacilities reported on drug treatment and intervention programsfor 1,024 correctional facilities. Prisons may offer many typesof drug intervention or treatment: detoxification, counseling,education and or awareness programs, urine surveillance, andtreatment in special residential units within the facility-- * Federal facilities reported they could test 33% of inmatesfor drugs; State confinement facilities, 10%; and community-basedfacilities, 57%. * Counseling was available for 14% of inmates in Federalfacilities, 12% in State, and 48% in community-based facilities. * Residential treatment program capacity was from 1% to 2% ofinmate population for all types of institutions. Of all Federal inmates, 9% were enrolled in some form of drugtreatment on June 29, 1990. Among State prisoners, 14% inconfinement facilities were enrolled and 37% in community-basedfacilities were enrolled. The two most common types of programsfor both Federal and State correctional facilities were educationand counseling. According to data from the 1991 Survey of Inmates in StateCorrectional Facilities, 43% of all inmates had participated in adrug treatment program; 36% received their most recent treatmentwhile incarcerated. Group counseling was the most frequent typeof treatment program. In 1991, about 57% of Federal drug offenders and 52% of drugoffenders in state prisons were tested for the humanimmunodeficiency virus (HIV). In Federal prisons, property (1.4%)and violent (1.1%) offenders had higher positive HIV rates thandrug (0.6%) and public-order offenders (0.6%). In State prisons,drug (3.2%) and property (2.7%) offenders had higher rates thanpublic-order (1.9%) and violent (1.4%) offenders. Drug using offenders have a higher risk for infection withAIDS-- * 3.2% of Federal inmates and 4.9% of State inmates who useda needle to inject drugs, tested positive * 5.5% of Federal inmates and 7.1% of State inmates whoshared needles to inject drugs, tested positive. About 4% of drugoffenders in Federal prisons and 15% of drug offenders in Stateprisons who had shared needles, were HIV positive. Sources: Survey of State prison inmates, 1991. Profile of State prison inmates, 1986. Profile of jailinmates, 1989. Drugs and jail inmates, 1989. Office of JuvenileJustice and Delinquency Prevention, as reported in the BJSSourcebook of criminal justice statistics, 1993. Drug enforcementand treatment in prisons, 1990. Comparing Federal and Stateprison inmates, 1991. DRUG ENFORCEMENT IN CORRECTIONAL FACILITIES Data from the BJS 1990 Census of State and Federal Correctional Facilities describe the various methodsused to prevent illegal entry of drugs into prisons and to stopthe use of illegal drugs by those under correctional supervision.These methods include drug testing, questioning, patdowns,clothing exchanges, and body cavity searches. Most prison facilities required new admissions and inmatesreturning from temporary release to be patted down and requiredthem to exchange their clothing for prison-furnished clothing. Drug interdiction activities for prison inmates/residents, bytype of facility, June 1990 Type of facility Drug inter- ____________________________ diction Federal State activity, by confine- Confine- Community inmate group ment ment based __________________________________________________ Inmates at admission Verbal questioning 83.8% 74.9% 79.2% Patdown 87.5 77.7 71.2 Clothing exchange 87.5 59.0 26.0 Body cavity search 61.3 45.1 14.4 Inmates returning from temporary release Verbal questioning 72.5% 66.5% 68.0% Patdown 81.3 79.7 81.6 Clothing exchange 72.5 54.5 29.2 Body cavity search 63.8 47.6 20.4 __________________________________________________ Source: Drug enforcement and treatment in prisons, 1990. Interdiction efforts were more stringent in maximum securityprisons than in medium or minimum security facilities. AllFederal maximum security prisons required clothing exchanges,compared to 81% of Federal medium security prisons and 78% ofFederal minimum security facilities. Prison visitors are alsosubjected to interdiction activities. Most visitors werequestioned verbally and were subjected to searches of theirbelongings. Patdowns and body cavity searches were usuallyconducted if visitors were suspected of carrying drugs orparaphernalia. Drug interdiction activities for prison visitors, by type offacility, June 1990 Type of facility ______________________________ Federal State Interdiction confine- Confine- Community- activity ment ment based __________________________________________________ Verbal questioning 97.5% 78.7% 82.4% Patdown 51.3 69.4 39.6 Belongings search 92.5 87.4 75.6 Body cavity search 27.5 22.4 5.2 __________________________________________________ Source: Drug enforcement and treatment in prisons, 1990. To prevent drugs from being brought into facilities, prisonstaff are subjected to interdiction activities, particularly whenunder suspicion of drug smuggling. Staff were questioned in 45%of Federal facilities and 23% of State facilities upon suspicionof drug involvement. Staff were patted down on suspicion in 19%of Federal facilities and 14% of State facilities. The 1990 Census revealed that 7 out of 8 institutions conducturine tests on inmates to detect drug use. Of the tests conductedbetween July 1, 1989, and June 30, 1990, evidence of drug useamong State prison inmates was detected in about-- * 1 in 16 tests for marijuana * 1 in 28 tests for cocaine * 1 in 50 tests for methamphetamines * 1 in 75 tests for heroin. Among tests conducted among Federal prison inmates, positivetest results were found in approximately-- * 1 in 100 tests for marijuana * 1 in 250 tests for cocaine * 1 in 250 tests for heroin * 1 in 1,000 tests for methamphetamines. Most facilities conducted urine tests upon suspicion of druguse. One in five facilities systematically conducted urine testson all inmates at least once during their confinement. Percent of inmates tested for drug use, by criteria fortesting and type of facility, June 1990 Criteria for All Federal inmate drug tests facilities confinement __________________________________________________ Total 87% 100% Systematically on everyone at least once during stay 20 31 Randomly on samples 63 96 On indication of possible drug use 76 94 __________________________________________________ (continued) Criteria for State State inmate drug tests confinement community-based __________________________________________________ Total 83% 98% Systematically on everyone at least once during stay 12 46 Randomly on samples 57 76 On indication of possible drug use 74 76 __________________________________________________ Source: Drug enforcement and treatment in prisons, 1990. Jail inmates, 1992. The 1992 Annual Survey of Jails revealed that 308 out of 503large jail jurisdictions conducted urinalysis on inmates. Of the308 jurisdictions testing for drug use, 219 reported testinginmates upon suspicion of drug use, 159 conducted random tests,153 tested inmates on return from the community, and 35 testedall inmates at least once. Sources: Drug enforcement and treatment in prisons, 1990.Jail inmates, 1992. RECIDIVISM OF DRUG LAW VIOLATORS Of 27,000 drug offenders sentenced to probation in 32counties across 17 States in 1986, 49% were rearrested for afelony offense within 3 years of sentencing. Percent of drug Rearrest offense probationers rearrested Total 48.9% Violent offenses 7.4 Property offenses 10.3 Drug offenses 26.7 Trafficking 14.9 Possession 11.8 Weapons offenses 1.0 Other offenses 3.5 Of all probationers rearrested within the 3-year period, 1out of 3 were arrested for a drug offense. Drug abusers were more likely to be rearrested thannon-abusers: Percent of probationers Drug abuse rearrested within 3 years Non-abuser 36% Occasional abuser 44 Frequent abuser 55 Compliance with drug testing or drug treatment while onprobation indicates a lower likelihood of rearrest: Percent of probationers rearrested Did not Special Satisfied satisfy conditions Total condition condition Testing or treatment 51% 38% 66% Testing and treatment 51 36 65 Testing only 53 34 67 Treatment only 47 42 67 No testing or treatment 48 -- -- -- Not applicable. In a separate study, BJS gathered 3 years of criminal historyrecords for a sample of persons released from prison in 1983 in11 States. The percentage of offenders rearrested within 3 yearswas: * 50.4% of drug offenders * 54.6% of public-order offenders * 59.6% of violent offenders * 68.1% of property offenders. Drug offenses accounted for 14% of new charges against allthose rearrested. Among drug violators released from prison,24.8% were rearrested for a drug offense. Percent of drug law violators released from prison in 1983who within 3 years were Rear- Recon- Reincar- Offense rested victed cerated Drug offenses 50.4% 35.3% 30.3% Possession 62.8 40.2 36.7 Trafficking 51.5 34.5 29.4 Other drug offenses 45.3 34.5 29.1 Sources: Recidivism of felons on probation, 1986-89. Recidivism of prisoners released in 1983. DRUGS AND YOUTH The National Institute on Drug Abuse has sponsored a surveyof high school seniors each year since 1975. As reported in the1993 BJS Sourcebook of criminal justice statistics, of 1993 highschool seniors-- * 35.3% reported having ever used marijuana/hashish * 6.1% reported having ever used cocaine * 1.1% reported having ever used heroin. 1993 High school seniors reporting they could obtain drugsfairly easily or very easily Marijuana 83.0% Amphetamines 61.5 LSD 49.2 Cocaine powder 45.4 Barbiturates 44.5 Crack 43.6 Tranquilizers 41.1 Heroin 33.7 PCP 31.7 Crystal metham- phetamine (ice) 26.6 Amyl and butyl nitrates 25.9 In 1993, 26% of high school seniors reported use of marijuanawithin the previous 12 months, up from 21.9% in 1992. Marijuanause within the last 30 days increased from 11.9% in 1992 to 15.5%in 1993. Reported illegal drug use by high school seniors, 1993 Used within the last Drugs 12 months(a) 30 days Marijuana 26.0% 15.5% Cocaine (other than crack) 2.9 1.2 Crack 1.5 .7 Hallucinogens 7.4 2.7 Heroin .5 .2 Other opiates(b) 3.6 1.3 Inhalants 7.0 2.5 Stimulants(b) 8.4 3.7 Sedatives(b) 3.4 1.3 Tranquilizers(b) 3.5 1.2 Steroids 1.2 0.7 (a)Including the last 30 days. (b)Includes only drug use which was not under a doctor's orders. Cocaine use among high school seniors peaked in 1985: Used cocaine within the last: Year 12 months* 30 days 1975 5.6% 1.9% 1976 6.0 2.0 1977 7.2 2.9 1978 9.0 3.9 1979 12.0 5.7 1980 12.3 5.2 1981 12.4 5.8 1982 11.5 5.0 1983 11.4 4.9 1984 11.6 5.8 1985 13.1 6.7 1986 12.7 6.2 1987 10.3 4.3 1988 7.9 3.4 1989 6.5 2.8 1990 5.3 1.9 1991 3.5 1.4 1992 3.1 1.3 1993 3.3 1.3 *Including the last 30 days. Self-reports of drug use among high school seniors mayunderrepresent drug use among youth of that age because highschool dropouts and truants are not included, and these groupsmay have more involvement with drugs than those who stay inschool. The 1993 high school seniors were asked, "How much doyou think people risk harming themselves?" Those students answering "great risk" in regularuse accounted for the following percentages-- * marijuana, 72.5%, up from a low of 34.9% in 1978, but downfrom 76.5% in 1992 * cocaine, 90%, up from a low of 68.2% in 1977 and 1978 * heroin, 88.3%, virtually stable since 1975 * LSD, 79.4%, following a low of 79.1% in 1977 and a high of84.5% in 1990. Data from the National Crime Victimization Survey School Crime Supplement show that in the first half of 1989,2 out of 3 students ages 12 to 19 reported availability of drugsat their school. Availability of drugs was reported more often by-- * public school students (70%) than by private schoolstudents (52%) * students in grades 9 to 12, compared to students in grades6 to 8. Similar rates of drug availability were reported by-- * white students (69%) and black students (67%) * students residing in cities (66%), suburban areas (67%),and nonmetropolitan areas (71%). The survey also showed that most drugs, while available, weredifficult to obtain. As reported in the 1991 BJS Sourcebook of criminal justicestatistics, a 1990 national survey of fifth and sixth gradersfound that-- * 15% knew adults or older kids who tried or who usemarijuana; 5% knew kids their own age who tried or who usemarijuana * 10% knew adults or older kids who tried or who use cocaine;2% knew kids their own age who use cocaine or crack * 90% agreed with the statement "drugs bought on thestreet are not safe to use" * 7% said they will probably have tried drugs by the timethey enter high school. Sources: School crime. Lloyd D. Johnston, Patrick M. O'Malley, and Jerald G. Bachman, Smoking, drinking, and illicit drug use among Americansecondary school students, college students, and young adults,1975-1993 and NFO Research Inc., Final report, drug awareness andattitude study as reported in BJS Sourcebook of criminal justicestatistics, various editions. GANGS About 6% of State prison inmates belonged to a gang prior toincarceration, according to data from the 1991 Survey of Inmatesin State Correctional Facilities. Among inmates who were gang members . 81% reported past drug use . 69% said they manufactured, imported, or sold drugs as agroup . 92% reported their gang fought other groups. Of inmates who reported belonging to a gang before enteringprison, 32% were still members at the time of incarceration. Onaverage, they had joined a gang at age 14. Half reported thattheir gang had 60 or more members. In 1991, among Federal offenders who had trafficked in,grown, or manufactured illegal drugs or who had managed drugmoney, 25% said they were a member of a group or organizationthat engaged in illegal drug activities. About 11% were leadersor middle men in a drug organization. About 9% belonged toorganizations with 11 or more members. Fifteen percent of students ages 12 to 19 reported thepresence of street gangs at their school, according to 1989 datafrom the National Crime Victimization Survey School CrimeSupplement. Seventy-eight percent of students who reported gang presenceat their school said drugs were available compared to 66% ofstudents who reported gangs were not present. Students at schools with gangs were more likely to fear anattack both at school and on the way to school and were morelikely to avoid certain areas inside the school. Sources: Survey of State prison inmates, 1991. Comparing Federal and State prison inmates, 1991.School crime. DRUG USE IN THE GENERAL POPULATION According to data from the 1993 Substance Abuse and MentalHealth Administration (SAMHSA) National Household Survey on DrugAbuse-- * 77 million Americans age 12 or older (37% of thepopulation) reported use of an illicit drug at least once intheir lifetime * 12% reported use of a drug within the past year * 6% reported use of a drug within the past month. Preliminary data from the 1993 survey show that marijuana andcocaine use is most prevalent among those ages 18 to 34. Age of respondent Drug use 12-17 18-25 26-34 35+ Marijuana Last month 4.9% 1.1% 6.7% 1.9% Last year 10.1 22.9 13.8 4.0 Lifetime 11.6 47.4 59.2 26.6 Cocaine Last month .4% 1.5% 1.0% .4% Last year 0.8 5.0 4.4 1.1 Lifetime 1.1 12.5 25.6 8.5 As reported in the 1993 BJS Sourcebook of criminal justicestatistics, rates of drug use by college students were among thelowest during the past 10 years. Marijuana and cocaine use among college students, 1984-93 Drug use 1984 1985 1986 1987 1988 __________________________________________________ Marijuana Daily within last month 3.6% 3.1% 2.1% 2.3% 1.8% Last month 23.0 23.6 22.3 20.3 16.8 Last year 40.7 41.7 40.9 37.0 34.6 Cocaine Daily within last month .4% .1% .1% .1% .1% Last month 7.6 6.9 7.0 4.6 4.2 Last year 16.3 17.3 17.1 13.7 10.0 __________________________________________________ (continued) Drug use 1989 1990 1991 1992 1993 __________________________________________________ Marijuana Daily within last month 2.6% 1.7% 1.8% 1.6% 1.9% Last month 16.3 14.0 14.1 14.6 14.2 Last year 33.6 29.4 26.5 27.7 27.9 Cocaine Daily within last month 0% 0% 0% 0% 0% Last month 2.8 1.2 1.0 1.0 0.7 Last year 8.2 5.6 3.6 3.0 2.7 __________________________________________________ Source: Drug use among American high school seniors, collegestudents, and young adults as reported in the BJS Sourcebook ofcriminal justice statistics, 1993. Another measure of drug use in the general population is thenumber of drug-related emergency room episodes and drug-relateddeaths. The SAMHSA Drug Abuse Warning Network (DAWN) reported anestimated 433,493 drug-related episodes in hospital emergencyrooms nationwide in 1992, an 10% increase from 393,968 in 1991. Atotal of 7,532 deaths related to drug abuse were reported in 1992by medical examiners in 38 metropolitan areas. Sources: Substance Abuse and Mental Health ServicesAdministration, National Household Survey on Drug Abuse, asreported in ONDCP Drugs & Crime Clearinghouse, Fact Sheet:Drug data summary. Lloyd D. Johnston, Patrick M. O'Malley, andJerald G. Bachman, Smoking, drinking, and illicit drug use amongAmerican secondary school students, college students, and youngadults, 1984-1993 as reported in the BJS Sourcebook of criminaljusticestatistics, 1993. Drug Abuse Warning Network, as reportedin Fact sheet: Drug data summary. PUBLIC OPINION ABOUT DRUGS As reported in the 1993 BJS Sourcebook of criminal justicestatistics, the percentage of Gallup Poll respondents describingdrug abuse as the single most important problem facing ourcountry peaked in 1989: Drug abuse most serious Date of poll problem January 1985 2% July 1986 8 April 1987 11 September 1988 11 May 1989 27 November 1989 38 April 1990 30 July 1990 18 March 1991 11 March 1992 8 January 1993 6 January 1994 9 Among Gallup Poll respondents, the use of drugs was mostoften mentioned as one of the biggest problems for schools intheir communities. Giving that response in 1993 were-- * 14% of public school parents * 9% of nonpublic school parents * 17% of those with no children in school * 16% of all surveyed. When asked about spending for various social problems, 60% ofthe respondents to a 1993 National Opinion Research Center (NORC)Poll said this country is spending too little to deal with drugaddiction. In 1990 Gallup Poll respondents were asked how best thegovernment should allocate its resources in its fight againstdrugs: * 40% said "teaching young people about the dangers ofdrugs" * 28% said "working with foreign governments to stop theexport of drugs to this country" * 19% said "arresting people in this country who selldrugs" * 5% said "helping drug users to overcome theiraddiction to drugs" * 4% said "arresting the people who use drugs." Gallup Poll respondents were asked, "What is the mostimportant thing that can be done to help reduce crime?" In1989, the most frequent response was to cut the drug supply(25%), followed by harsher punishment (24%). In 1981, 3% ofrespondents mentioned cutting the drug supply, while harsherpunishment was mentioned by 38% of respondents. NORC has asked adults (age 18 or older) about legalization ofmarijuana since 1973. In 1993, 22% believed that marijuana shouldbe made legal, down from a peak of 30% in 1978. College freshmen have been surveyed by NORC since 1968. In1993, 28.2% of those surveyed agreed strongly or somewhat thatmarijuana should be legalized, down from a high of 52.9% in 1977and up from a low of 16.7% in 1989. Of 1993 high school seniors-- * 22.8% felt using marijuana should be legal, down from 32.9%feeling that way in 1978 and up from a low of 14.9% in 1986 * 75.5% reported worrying often or sometimes about drugabuse, up from 65.5% in 1978 and down from 82.6% in 1990. In 1990 a Gallup Poll asked what respondents felt would bethe effect of legalizing drugs: Effect of legalization would increase: Drug use in public schools 65% The number of addicts 67 The number of drug overdoses 63 Drug-related crime 52 Sources: The Gallup report; National Opinion Research Centerdata made available through the Roper Center for Public OpinionResearch; Alexander W. Astin, et al., The American freshman:Twenty year trends;Lloyd D. Johnston, Jerald G. Bachman, andPatrick M. O'Malley, Monitoring the future 1975-1992; Lloyd D.Johnston, Patrick M. O'Malley, and Jerald G. Bachman, Drug use,drinking, and smoking: National survey results from high school,college, and young adult populations, 1975-1988; all as reportedin the BJS Sourcebook of criminal justice statistics, 1993 andearlier editions. ONDCP DRUGS & CRIME CLEARINGHOUSE The ONDCP Drugs & Crime Clearinghouse serves thedrugs-and-crime information needs of-- Federal, State, and local policy-makers * criminal justice and public health practitioners * researchers and universities * private corporations * the media * the public. The Clearinghouse was established in 1987 to provide specialattention to the needs of State and local government agencies,especially those seeking data to meet the statisticalrequirements of the Anti-Drug Abuse Grant Program of the Bureauof Justice Assistance (BJA). In 1994, the Clearinghouse became acomponent of the National Criminal Justice Reference Service,with funding from the Office of National Drug Control Policy. The ONDCP Drugs & Crime Clearinghouse responds torequests for current data on-- * illegal drugs * drug-related crime * drug law violations * drug-using offenders in the criminal justice system * drug treatment for offenders * the impact of drugs on criminal justice administration. The clearinghouse component-- * disseminates ONDCP, BJS and other Department of Justicepublications relating to drugs and crime * prepares and distributes fact sheets and selectedbibliographies on specific drugs-and- crime topics * responds to information requests utilizing a bibliographicdatabase of statistical and research reports, books, and journalarticles on drugs and crime * searches the bibliographic database to fill requests fordata on specific topics * advises requesters on data availability and usefulness andon data sources that may meet their needs * provides statistics and bibliographic citations by mail ortelephone * maintains a reading room where visitors can use theclearinghouse collection of library documents and vertical fileitems on drugs and crime * coordinates with Federal, State, and local agencies inidentifying other data resources and makes referrals. During 1994 the Clearinghouse-- * handled nearly 10,000 requests for information * expanded the bibliographic database to about 4,500documents and total library holdings to about 13,000 items * distributed about 75,000 drugs-and-crime documents, 33% ofwhich were Clearinghouse products, 12% were BJS publications, and7% were other Office of Justice Programs publications * attended seven conferences * distributed nine publications of the Office of NationalDrug Control Policy including the 1994 National Drug ControlStrategy, Pulse Check, and Marijuana Situation Assessment prepared Drugs and crime facts, 1993 (August 1994), which presents existing BJS data on the subject from diverse BJS reports * prepared State drug resources: 1994 National directory (September 1994), a guide to State and Federal agencies that address drug abuse concerns. * prepared the fact sheets Drug-Related Crime, Drug Data Summary, and Drug Use Trends, summarizingup-to-date statistics on the relationship between drugs andcrime. The toll-free line for the ONDCP Drugs & CrimeClearinghouse is 1-800-666-3332. The clearinghouse is located atAspen Systems Corporation, 1600 Research Boulevard, Rockville,MD, 20850. SOURCE NOTES Single copies of any report with an NCJ number can beobtained from the ONDCP Drugs & Crime Clearinghouse, 1600Research Blvd., Rockville, MD 20850; 800-666-3332. Most titlesare free of charge. Sources with an ICPSR number have a data set available ondata tape, CD-ROM, or diskette. For more information, contact theNational Archive of Criminal Justice Data at the University ofMichigan, P.O. Box 1248, Ann Arbor, MI 48106, 1-800-999-0960. Comparing Federal and State prison inmates, 1991, September,1994, NCJ-145864 Crime in the United States, 1993, Federal Bureau ofInvestigation, December 1994 Criminal victimization in the United States, 1992, April1994, NCJ-145125, ICPSR 8864 Drug enforcement and treatment in prisons, 1990 (BJS Special Report), July 1992, NCJ-134724 Drug enforcement by police and sheriffs' departments, 1990(BJS Special Report), May 1992, NCJ-134505, ICPSR 9749 Drug Use Forecasting 1993 annual report on adult arrestees,National Institute of Justice, November, 1994, NCJ-147411 Drugs and jail inmates, 1989 (BJS Special Report), August1991, NCJ-130836, ICPSR 9419 Fact sheet: Drug data summary, Drugs & Crime Data Center& Clearinghouse, July 1994, NCJ-148213 Federal criminal case processing, 1982-1991: With preliminarydata for 1992, November 1993, NCJ-144526, ICPSR 9296 Federal criminal case processing, 1980-1987, May 1990,NCJ-120069, ICPSR 9296 Federal drug case processing, 1985-91: With preliminary datafor 1992, March 1994, NCJ-144392 Federal law enforcement officers, 1993 (BJS Bulletin),December 1994, NCJ-151166 Federal sentencing in transition, 1986-90 (BJS SpecialReport), June 1992, NCJ-134727 Felony sentences in State courts, 1990 (BJS Bulletin), March1993, ICPSR 6038 Jail inmates 1992 (BJS Bulletin), August 1993, NCJ-143284 Murder in large urban counties, 1988 (BJS Special Report),May 1993, NCJ-140614, ICPSR 9907 National Corrections Reporting Program, 1989, November 1992,NCJ-138222, ICPSR 9849 National Household Survey on Drug Abuse: Population estimates1992, U.S. Department of Health and Human Services, SubstanceAbuse and Mental Health Services Administration, October 1993 Pretrial release of Federal felony defendants (BJS SpecialReport), February 1994, NCJ-145322 Pretrial release of felony defendants, 1988 (BJS Bulletin),February 1991, NCJ-127202, ICPSR 9508 Pretrial release of felony defendants, 1992 (BJS Bulletin),November 1994, NCJ-148818, ICPSR 9508 Profile of jail inmates, 1989 (BJS Special Report), April1991, NCJ-129097, ICPSR 9419 Profile of State prison inmates, 1986 (BJS Special Report),January 1988, NCJ-109926, ICPSR 8711 Prosecutors in State courts, 1992 (BJS Bulletin), December1993,NCJ-145319, ICPSR 6273 Recidivism of felons on probation, 1986-89 (BJS SpecialReport), February 1992, NCJ-134177, ICPSR 9574. Recidivism of prisoners released in 1983 (BJS SpecialReport), April 1989, NCJ-116261, ICPSR 8875 School crime, September 1991, NCJ-131645, ICPSR 9394 Sheriffs' departments 1990 (BJS Bulletin), February 1992,NCJ-133283, ICPSR 9749 Sourcebook of criminal justice statistics, 1993, September1994,NCJ-148211 Sourcebook of criminal justice statistics, 1991, September1992, NCJ-137369 State and local police departments, 1990 (BJS Bulletin),February 1992, NCJ-133284, ICPSR 9749 Survey of State prison inmates, 1991, March 1993, NCJ-136949,ICPSR 6068 Survey of youth in custody, 1987 (BJS Special Report),September 1988, NCJ-113365, ICPSR 8992 Women in jail 1989 (BJS Special Report), March 1992,NCJ-134732, ICPSR 9419 CliffSchaffer's Home Page WT01-B26-37IA031-000651-B015-68http://206.61.184.43:80/schaffer/GOVPUBS/prsn90.htm 206.61.184.43 19970122121042 text/html 24275HTTP/1.0 200 OKDate: Wednesday, 22-Jan-97 12:10:34 GMTServer: WebSitePro/1.1f (S/N wpo-0deb)Allow-ranges: bytesContent-type: text/htmlLast-modified: Saturday, 28-Dec-96 06:12:42 GMTContent-length: 24057 Prisoners in 1990 Prisoners in 1990 U.S. Department of Justice Office of Justice Programs Bureau of Justice Statistics Bureau of Justice Statistics Special Report Prisoners in 1990 May 1991 NCJ-129198 Full text with tables available from: BJS Justice Statistics Clearinghouse 1-800-732-3277 Box 6000 Rockville, MD 10850 ----------------------------------------------------------------- This Bulletin presents counts of the Nation's prisoners atthe end of 1990. The 1990 increase of nearly 59,000 prisonersequals a demand for approximately 1,100 new prison beds per weeknationwide. Prisons were estimated to be operating from 18% to29% above their capacities at yearend. Strong evidence exists that during the 1980's there was anincreasing probability that a convicted offender would go toprison. The ratio of prison admissions to reported serious crimesand arrests for serious crimes increased to levels unequalled inalmost 30 years of reporting. The Bureau of Justice Statistics expresses its appreciationto the departments of corrections in the 50 States, the Districtof Columbia, and the Federal Prison System, that make it possiblefor us to gather and report data on the Nation's prisoners. Steven D. Dillingham, Ph.D. Director ----------------------------------------------------------------- PRISONERS IN 1990 By Robyn L. Cohen BJS Statistician The number of prisoners under the jurisdiction of Federal orState correctional authorities at yearend 1990 reached a recordhigh of 771,243. The States and the District of Columbia added52,331 prisoners; the Federal system, 6,355. The increase for1990 brings total growth in the prison population since 1980 to441,422 - an increase of about 134% in the 10-year period. The 1990 growth rate (8.2%) was less than the percentageincrease recorded during 1989 (13.5%), and the number of newprisoners added during 1990 was 26,271 less than the number addedduring the preceding year (84,957). The 1990 increase translatesinto a nationwide need for approximately 1,100 prison bedspacesper week, compared to 1,600 prison bedspaces per week needed in1989. Prisoners with sentences of more than 1 year (referred to as"sentenced prisoners") accounted for 96% of the totalprison population at the end of 1990, growing by 8.6% during theyear. The remaining prisoners had sentences of a year or less orwere unsentenced (like those, for example, awaiting trial inStates with combined prison-jail systems). The number of sentenced Federal prisoners increased at afaster rate than sentenced prisoners in the States during theyear (10.7% versus 8.5%). For States, the rate of increase in thenumber of sentenced prisoners was lower than in 1989 (13%). Among the 13,318 Federal prisoners with no sentences orsentences of a year or less were 1,910 under the jurisdiction ofthe Immigration and Naturalization Service, a decrease of 45 fromthe number held at the end of 1989 (1,955). The number of Federalprisoners with no sentences or sentences of less than a yearincreased by 1,315 during 1990 (from 12,003 to 13,318), while thenumber of sentenced prisoners increased by 5,040. Total prison populations in Alaska, the District of Columbia,Oregon, Rhode Island, and Tennessee altogether decreased by 1,675inmates during 1990. The District of Columbia accounted for morethan half of this decline. The percentage of growth was thehighest during 1990 in Vermont (15.9%), Washington (15.4%), andNew Hampshire (15.1%). Thirteen States reported total prisonerincreases of 10% or more since yearend 1989. California'sincrease of more than 10,000 prisoners during the year was thelargest gain in the number of prisoners for any singlejurisdiction. At the end of 1990, about 1 in 8 prisonersnationwide were confined in a California institution. Californiaaccounted for more than 17% of the increase nationwide during theyear. Rates of Incarceration Increase On December 31, 1990, the number of sentenced prisoners per100,000 residents was 293, also setting a new record. Ten of the16 jurisdictions with rates equal to or greater than the rate forthe Nation were located in the South, 4 were in the West, 1 wasin the Midwest, and 1 was in the Northeast. Since 1980 the number of sentenced inmates per 100,000residents has risen nearly 111%, from 139 to 293. During thisperiod, per capita incarceration rates have grown most rapidly inthe Northeast, increasing by 167% (from 87 to 232) and the West,up by nearly 163% (from 105 to 276). The per capita number ofsentenced prisoners in the Midwest climbed 119% (from 109 to239), and the rate rose 68% in the South (from 188 to 315). Thenumber of sentenced Federal prisoners per 100,000 U.S. residentshas increased 133% (from 9 to 21) over the same period. Prison Populations in Western States Grow the Fastest Regionally, during 1990 the percentage increase in the numberof sentenced prisoners was highest in the Western States, with again of 9.2%. The number of sentenced prisoners grew by 8.8% inthe Northeast, 8.8% in the South, and 6.9% in the MidwesternStates. The sentenced Federal prison population grew by 10.7%. In 13 States the percentage change in the number of sentencedprisoners during 1990 was equal to or higher than that of 1989.Among these jurisdictions, four had increases of at least 10%,led by New Hampshire (15.1%), Texas (13.7%), Alabama (13.2%), andGeorgia (10.1%). From the end of 1985 to December 31, 1990, net gains in thenumber of sentenced prisoners have averaged about 1,000 prisonersper week - a weekly gain of about 922 State prisoners and 75Federal prisoners per week over the period. The largest net gainshave occurred in the South (306 inmates per week) followed by theWest (243), the Midwest (194), and the Northeast (179). During1990 average growth in the number of sentenced State and Federalprisoners was equal to a demand for 1,131 additional bed- spacesper week, about 354 fewer than the average weekly growth in 1989. The sentenced prisoner population had increased in fourStates by 90% or more since 1985: California (94%), Colorado(107%), Michigan (93%), and New Hampshire (97%). California'sincrease of 45,796 sentenced prisoners since 1985 accounts for72% of the increase for the West and 19% of the increase amongall States over the period. In 1985, 10.8% of the Nation'ssentenced State prisoners were in California; in 1990, 13.7%. Male Prisoner Population Growth Outpaces that of Females The number of male inmates (727,398) increased at a fasterrate during 1990 (8.3%) than the number of female inmates (7.9%).This is the first year since 1981 that the number of male inmateshas increased at a faster rate than the number of female inmates.The rate of incarceration for sentenced males (566 per 100,000males in the resident population) was about 18 times higher thanfor sentenced females (31 per 100,000 females in the residentpopulation). At the end of 1990, women accounted for 5.7% ofprisoners nationwide. The 1990 growth rate (7.9%) for female inmates was less thanthe percentage increase recorded during 1989 (24.4%). As shownbelow, the percentage change was lower in 1990 across all theregions and at the Federal level. Percent Increase in Female Inmate Population 1989-90 1988-89 Total 7.9% 24.4% Federal 13.0 36.8 State 7.2 23.1 Northeast 9.2 29.8 Midwest 7.1 19.5 South 7.2 23.6 West 6.3 22.3 In 1990, 22 States, the District of Columbia, and the Federalsystem had more than 500 female inmates. Among thesejurisdictions, 10 had increases of at least 10%, led by NewJersey's increase of 17.5% (from 886 in 1989 to 1,041 in 1990).California's increase during 1990, 502 inmates, accounted for15.7% of the nationwide increase of 3,199. Local Jails Held More than 18,000 Because of State PrisonCrowding At the end of 1990, 21 jurisdictions reported a total of18,380 State prisoners held in local jails or other facilitiesbecause of crowding in State facilities. The number of Stateprisoners held locally decreased by 3.6% over that of yearend1989. Three States - Louisiana, New Jersey, and Virginia -accounted for more than half of the prisoners sentenced to prisonbut incarcerated locally. Five States - Arkansas, Louisiana, NewJersey, Tennessee, and Virginia - held more than 10% of theirState- sentenced prisoners in local jails because of Statefacility crowding. Overall, 2.4% of the State prison populationwas confined in local jails on December 31, 1990, because ofprison crowding. Prison Capacity Estimates are Difficult to Compare The extent of crowding in the Nation's prisons is difficultto determine precisely because of the absence of uniform measuresfor defining capacity. A wide variety of capacity measures is inuse among the 52 reporting jurisdictions because capacity mayreflect both available space to house inmates and the ability tostaff and operate an institution. To estimate the capacity of theNation's prisons, jurisdictions were asked to supply up to threemeasures for yearend 1990 - rated, operational, and designcapacities. These measures were defined as follows: - Rated capacity is the number of beds or inmates assigned bya rating official to institutions within the jurisdiction. - Operational capacity is the number of inmates that can beaccommodated based on a facility's staff, existing programs, andservices. - Design capacity is the number of inmates that planners orarchitects intended for the facility. Of the 52 reporting jurisdictions, 32 supplied ratedcapacities, 42 provided operational capacities, and 38 submitteddesign capacities. As a result, estimates of total capacity andmeasures of the relationship to population are based on thehighest and lowest capacity figures provided. (Twenty-sixjurisdictions reported 1 capacity measure or gave the same figurefor each capacity measure they reported.) Most Jurisdictions are Operating Above Capacity Prisons generally require reserve capacity to operateefficiently. Prison dormitories and cells need to be maintainedand repaired periodically, special housing is needed forprotective custody and disciplinary cases, and space may beneeded to cope with emergencies. At the end of 1990, nine Statesreported they were operating below 95% of their highest capacity. Forty-two jurisdictions and the Federal prison systemreported operating at 100% or more of their lowest capacity; 34of these held populations that met or exceeded their highestreported capacities. Overall, at the end of 1990 State prisons were estimated tobe operating at 115% of their highest capacities and 127% oftheir lowest capacities. Prisons in Southern States were found tobe operating closest to their reported capacity on each measure. The Federal system was estimated to be operating at 51% overcapacity. Between 1989 and 1990, State and Federal prisoncapacities were estimated to have increased by approximately20,000-50,000 beds. At the end of 1990, prisons nationwide wereestimated to be from 18% to 29% over their capacities. Prison Population Growth may Reflect Increasing Certainty ofPunishment There is some evidence that during the period 1980-89 changesin criminal justice policies have increased a criminal'sprobability of being incarcerated from levels existing in prioryears. Murder, nonnegligent manslaughter, rape, robbery, aggravatedassault, and burglary are among the most serious crimes andaccount for approximately half of prison commitments from courts.In 1960 there were 62 prison commitments for every 1,000 of thesecrimes reported to law enforcement agencies. During the rest ofthe decade this ratio steadily declined reaching 23 in 1970 andwas relatively stable during the 1970's. Between 1980 and 1989the ratio increased from 25 commitments per 1,000 reported crimesto 62. Similarly, between 1960 and 1970 the ratio of prisoncommitments to adult arrests for the selected crimes declinedfrom 299 per 1,000 to 170. This ratio was relatively stableduring the 1970's, but it increased between 1980 and 1989, from196 commitments per 1,000 adult arrests to 332. (SeeMethodological note for more detail on these data.) Prison-admissions-to-crime ratios for individual Statesprovide an alternative measure of prison use to population-basedrates. Population-based incarceration rates take into account thenumber of sentenced prisoners and the size of the residentpopulation in a jurisdiction. The crime-based rate measures entryinto prison relative to the number of crimes reported to lawenforcement agencies during a year. Between 1980 and 1989 the ratio of court commitments toprison and reported crimes increased 148%, from 25 commitmentsper 1,000 crimes to 62. Over the same period the number of prisoncommitments per 100,000 adult residents went up 115%, from 80 to172. The Northeast had the largest percentage increase in thenumber of commitments relative to reported crime and experiencedthe largest gain in prison commitments relative to population.However, in both 1980 and 1989 the South had the largest numberof court commitments to prison relative to reported crime and topopulation. Besides the increased use of prison relative to reportedcrime, arrests, and resident population, prison population hasalso been affected by changes in the extent of the illegal drugproblem. An estimated two-thirds of those in State prisons for a drugoffense were convicted of trafficking or manufacturing illegaldrugs. (For additional information on drug offenders in Stateprisons, see Profile of State Prison Inmates, 1986, BJS SpecialReport, NCJ-109926, January 1988 and Drug Use and Crime, BJSSpecial Report, NCJ-111940, July 1988.) Since 1985 the number ofadult arrests for drug violations has increased by 74%, and thenumber of arrests for sales or manufacturing of illegal drugs hasgrown by 137%. Methodological Note This bulletin is based upon an advance count of prisonersconducted for the National Prisoner Statistics (NPS) programimmediately after a calendar year ends. A detailed, final countcontaining any revisions to the jurisdictions' advance count willbe published later. Explanatory Notes Alabama. Capacity in community programs is not included inthe reported capacity figures. Alaska. In this State, prisons and jails form one integratedsystem. All NPS data include, therefore, both jail and prisonpopulations. Arizona. Population counts are based on custody data.Population counts exclude inmates housed in local jails becauseof crowding. California. Population counts are based on custody data. Colorado. Population counts for "Inmates with over 1year maximum sentence" include an undetermined number of"Inmates with a sentence of 1 year or less." Populationcounts exclude 652 male inmates and 1 female inmate housed inlocal jails awaiting pickup. Connecticut. In this State, prisons and jails form oneintegrated system. All NPS data include, therefore, both jail andprison populations. Delaware. Population counts are based on custody data. Inthis State, prisons and jails form one integrated system. All NPSdata include, therefore, both jail and prison populations. District of Columbia. Population counts are based on custodydata. In the District of Columbia, prisons and jails form oneintegrated system. All NPS data include, therefore, both jail andprison populations. Population counts exclude those inmateshoused in Federal Bureau of Prisons facilities. Population countsexclude 826 male inmates housed in other States as a result ofcrowding. Female capacities are included in the male capacitiesreported. Federal. Population counts for "Unsentencedinmates" include 1,886 males and 24 females who come underthe jurisdiction of the U.S. Immigration and NaturalizationService. Capacity figures apply to Bureau of Prisons institutionsonly and do not include capacity provided by contract facilities.Female capacities are included in the male capacities reported. Florida. Population counts are based on custody data. Georgia. Population counts are based on custody data. Hawaii. In this State, prisons and jails form one integratedsystem. All NPS data include, therefore, both jail and prisonpopulations. Illinois. Population counts are based on custody data.Population counts for "Inmates with over 1 year maximumsentence" include an undetermined number of inmates with amaximum sentence of 1 year. Indiana. Population counts are based on custody data andexclude inmates housed in local jails because of crowding. Iowa. Population counts are based on custody data. Kansas. Female capacities are included in the male capacitiesreported. Maine. Population counts are as of January 1, 1991. Femalecapacities are in the male capacity figures reported. Maryland. While population totals are actual manual counts,the breakdowns for sentence length are estimates based on theactual sentence length breakdowns of Maryland's automated datasystem. Massachusetts. Starting with December 31, 1990, Massachusettsis reporting "unsentenced Inmates." Population countsare based on custody data. Population counts exclude 418 male and12 female inmates housed in local jails because of crowding.Population counts for "Inmates with over 1 year maximumsentence" include an undetermined number of "Inmateswith a sentence of 1 year or less." Population totals areactual counts; however, the male/female breakdown is an estimatebelieved to be within 0.1% of the actual counts. By law,offenders in Massachusetts may be sentenced to terms of up to 21/2 years in locally operated jails and correctionalinstitutions. Such populations are excluded from the State countbut are included in published population counts and rates forlocal jails and correctional institutions. Michigan. Population counts are based on custody data.Capacity figures exclude the capacities of the CommunityResidential Program. Mississippi. Female capacities are included in the malecapacities reported. Montana. Starting with the December 31,1990, data, Montana now reports "Inmates with a sentence of1 year or less." Montana is currently operating underemergency capacity; therefore, they are reporting emergencyrather than operational capacity. Nevada. Female capacities include the Nevada Women's Facilityand the Reno Correctional Facility but exclude space at Nevada'sRestitution Centers. Capacity for women at Nevada's RestitutionCentersis included with the male capacity. New Jersey. Rated, operational, and design capacities include568 bedspaces in county facilities. North Carolina. While population totals are actual counts,the breakdowns for sentence length are estimates believed to beaccurate within 1% of the actual counts. Ohio. Population counts for "Inmates with over 1 yearmaximum sentence" include an undetermined number of"Inmates with a sentence of 1 year or less." Oklahoma. Population counts for "Inmates with over 1year maximum sentence" may include a small undeterminednumber of inmates with a sentence of 1 year. Rhode Island. In this State, prisons and jails form oneintegrated system. All NPS data include, therefore, both jail andprison populations. Tennessee. Population counts for"Inmates with over 1 year maximum sentence" include anundetermined number of "Inmates with a sentence of 1 year orless." Population counts include 1,854 males and 15 femaleshoused in local jails because of overcrowding of State prisonfacilities and exclude 2,593 felons sentenced to serve their timein local jails. (The State pays to house these 2,593 felons, butthe local court maintains jurisdiction.) Texas. Population countsare based on custody data. The courts have ordered that the TexasDepartment of Criminal Justice Institutional Division (TDCJ-ID)cannot house more inmates than 95% of capacity. Approximately2,928 beds are exempt from this rule, and the inmates in thesebeds do not count toward the calculation of 95% capacity. Thepopulation counts include all inmates within TDCJ-ID; however,the capacity figures exclude the 2,928 exempt beds. Vermont. Population counts are as of December 6, 1990. Inthis State, prisons and jails form an almost completelyintegrated system. However, some county and municipal authoritiesdo operate local lockups. NPS data include both jail and prisonpopulations. The counts for jail crowding include 34 male inmateshoused in local lockups. The capacity figures exclude the 34 maleinmates housed in local lockups. Washington. Capacity figures exclude space in Statework-release facilities that housed 609 male and 69 femaleinmates on December 31, 1990. West Virginia. The female population counts are based oncustody data. Population counts exclude 87 male and 15 femaleinmates housed in local jails because of overcrowding. Wyoming. The operational capacity figure is the absolutetotal bedspace available to Wyoming's Department of Corrections,and it includes 60 bedspaces in community centers. -----------------------------------------------------------------Bureauof Justice Statistics Bulletins are prepared principally by BJSstaff. Robyn L. Cohen, statistician, under the supervision ofLawrence A. Greenfeld, corrections unit chief, wrote this report.Thomas Hester edited it. Darrell Gilliard provided statisticalassistance. Marilyn Marbrook, publications unit chief,administered production, assisted by Betty Sherman, YvonneBoston, and Jayne R. Pugh. Collection and processing of NationalPrisoner Statistics data were conducted under the generalsupervision of Lawrence S. McGinn and Gertrude B. Odom, assistedby Carol Spivey, U.S. Bureau of the Census. May 1991, NCJ-129198 The Assistant Attorney General, Office of Justice Programs,coordinates the activities of the following program offices andbureaus: Bureau of Justice Statistics, National Institute ofJustice, Bureau of Justice Assistance, Office of Juvenile Justiceand Delinquency Prevention, and Office for Victims of Crime CliffSchaffer's Home Page WT01-B26-38IA031-000651-B015-104http://206.61.184.43:80/schaffer/GOVPUBS/prsnr92.htm 206.61.184.43 19970122121058 text/html 22143HTTP/1.0 200 OKDate: Wednesday, 22-Jan-97 12:10:47 GMTServer: WebSitePro/1.1f (S/N wpo-0deb)Allow-ranges: bytesContent-type: text/htmlLast-modified: Saturday, 28-Dec-96 06:12:35 GMTContent-length: 21925 Prisoners in 1992 Prisoners in 1992 Darrell K. Gilliard BJS Statistician The number of prisoners under the jurisdiction of Federal orState correctional authorities at yearend 1992 reached a recordhigh of 883,593. The States and the District of Columbia added50,809 prisoners; the Federal system, 8,651. The increase for1992brings total growth in the prison population since 1980 to553,772, an increase of about 168% in the 12-year period. The 1992 growth rate (7.2%) was greater than the percentageincrease recorded during 1991 (6.6%), and the number of newprisoners added during 1992 was 8,451 more than the number addedduring the preceding year (51,009). The 1992 increase translatesinto nationwide need for approximately 1,143 prison bedspaces perweek, compared to the nearly 981 prison bedspaces per week neededin 1991. Prisoners with sentences of more than 1 year (referred to as"sentenced prisoners") accounted for 96% of the totalprison population at the end of 1992, growing by 7.3% during theyear. The remaining prisoners had sentences of a year or less orwere unsenenced (for example, those awaiting trial in States withcombined prison-jail systems). The number of sentenced Federal prisoners increased at afaster rate than sentenced prisoners in the States during 1992(15.9% versus 6.8%). These annual rates of increase were higherthan in 1991 when the Federal system grew 12.5%, and Statesystems, 6.4. The number of Federal prisoners with no sentences orsentences of less than a year decreased during 1992 (from 14,912to 14,553), while the number of sentenced prisoners increased by9,010. Prison populations in Maine, New Jersey, North Dakota,Oregon, and Wyoming decreased during 1992. The decrease in these5 States totaled 1,135 inmates. The highest percentages of growthduring 1992 were reported in Texas (18.4%), West Virginia(16.2%), Nw Hampshire (15.9%), Idaho (15.5%), and Wisconsin(15.4%). Eight States reported total prisoner populationincreases of 10% or more since yearend 1991. Texas' increase of 9,501 prisoners during the year was thelargest gain in the number of prisoners for any singlejurisdiction, followed by California (7,688), New York (3,874),and Michigan (2,596). Texas accounted for about 16% of theincrease in prisonpopulation nationwide. Rates of incarceration increase On December 31, 1992, the number of sentenced prisoners per100,000 residents was 329, a new record. Twelve of the 19jurisdictions with rates greater than the rate for the Nationwere located in the South, 4 were in the West, 2 were in theMidwest, and 1was in the Northeast. Since 1980 the number of sentenced inmates per 100,000residents has risen nearly 137%, from 139 to 329. During thisperiod, per capita incarceration rates have grown most rapidly inthe Northeast, increasing by 198% (from 87 to 259), and the West,up by184% (from 105 to 298). The per capita number of sentencedprisoners in the Midwest climbed 149% (from 109 to 271), and therate rose 89% in the South (from 188 to 355). The number ofsentenced Federal prisoners per 100,000 U.S. residents hasincreased 18% (from 9 to 26) over the same period. Prison populations in Southern States grow the fastest Regionally, during 1992 the percentage increase in the numberof sentenced prisoners was highest in the Southern States, with again of 7.8% (table 3). The number of sentenced prisoners grew by6.7% in the Midwest, 5.9% in the West, and 4.6% in the Northest.The sentenced Federal prison population grew by 15.9%. In 22States and the District of Columbia the percentage change in thenumber of sentenced prisoners during 1992 was higher than that of1991. Among these jurisdictions, eight had increases of a least10%, led by Texas (18.4%), Vermont (18.3%), West Virginia(16.2%), New Hampshire (15.9%), Wisconsin (15.5%), and Idaho(15.5%). Since December 31, 1986, net gains in the number of sentencedprisoners have averaged about 1,039 prisoners per week -- aweekly gain of about 946 State prisoners and 94 Federal prisonersper week over the period. The largest net gains have occurred inte South (344 inmates per week) followed by the West (223), theMidwest (202), and the Northeast (176). During 1992, the averagegrowth in the number of sentenced State and Federal prisoners wasequal to a demand for 1,103 additional bedspaces per week, abut139 more than the average weekly growth in 1991. In 1992 the 10 States with the largest prison populationsaccounted for 52% of the total prison population nationwide --California, New York, and Texas accounting for over 25%.Louisiana had the highest incarceration rate with 478 prisonersper 100,000 esidents. Male prisoner population grows at a faster pace The number of male inmates (833,184) increased at a fasterrate during 1992 (7.3%) than the number of female inmates(50,409, 5.9%). The rate of incarceration for sentenced males(636 per 100,000 males in the resident population) was over 18times higher han for sentenced females (35 per 100,000 females inthe resident population). At the end of 1992, women accounted for5.7% of all prisoners nationwide. Overall, the 1992 growth rate (5.9%) for female inmates wasless than the 1991 growth rate (8.4%). The growth rate declinedin the Northeast, from 14.6% in 1991 to 1.7% in 1992, and in theSouth, from 10.0% to 3.6%. These declines in 1992 offset thehighr growth rates in the Midwest and West. Percent increase in female inmate population 1991-92 1990-91 U.S. total 5.9% 8.4% Federal 13.2% 12.8% State 5.0% 7.8% Northeast 1.7 14.6 Midwest 8.2 7.6 South 3.6 10.0 West 7.0 .4 In 1992, 26 States, the District of Columbia, and the Federalsystem had more than 500 female inmates. Among thesejurisdictions, 8 had increases of at least 10%, led by Colorado'sincrease of 16.3% (from 453 in 1991 to 527 in 1992). The Federalprison sstem's increase during 1992, 745 inmates, accounted for26.4% of the nationwide increase of 2,826. Local jails held more than 18,000 because of State prisoncrowding At the end of 1992, 21 jurisdictions reported a total of18,191 State prisoners held in local jails or other facilitiesbecause of crowding in State facilities (table 7). Four States,Louisiana, New Jersey, Virginia, and Tennessee, accounted foralmost 60 of the prisoners sentenced to prison but incarceratedlocally. Four States, Louisiana, West Virginia, New Jersey, andMississippi, held more than 10% of their prison populationlocally. Overall, 2.1% of the State prison population wasconfined in local ails on December 31, 1992, because of prisoncrowding. Prison capacity estimates are difficult to compare The extent of crowding in the Nation's prisons is difficultto determine precisely because of the absence of uniform measuresfor defining capacity. A wide variety of capacity measures is inuse among the 52 reporting jurisdictions because capacity mayrflect both available space to house inmates and the ability tostaff and operate an institution. To estimate the capacity of theNation's prisons, jurisdictions were asked to supply up to threemeasures for yearend -- rated, operational, and design capaciies.These measures were defined as follows: Rated capacity is the number of beds or inmates assigned by arating official to institutions within the jurisdiction. Operational capacity is the number of inmates that can beaccommodated based on a facility's staff, existing programs, andservices. Design capacity is the number of inmates that planners orarchitects intended for the facility. Of the 52 reporting jurisdictions, 38 supplied ratedcapacities, 42 provided operational capacities, and 35 submitteddesign capacities. As a result, estimates of total capacity andmeasures of the relationship to population are based on thehighest and lwest capacity figures provided. (Twenty-fourjurisdictions reported 1 capacity measure or gave the same figurefor each capacity measure they reported.) Most jurisdictions are operating above capacity Prisons generally require reserve capacity to operateefficiently. Prison dormitories and cells need to be maintainedand repaired periodically, special housing is needed forprotective custody and disciplinary cases, and space may beneeded to cope with mergencies. At the end of 1992, 11 Statesreported they were operating at 95% or below their highestcapacity. Forty-three jurisdictions and the Federal prison systemreported operating at 100% or more of their lowest capacity. At the end of 1992, the Federal system was estimated to beoperating at 52% over capacity. State prisons were estimated tobe operating at 118% of their highest capacities and 131% oftheir lowest capacities. Rise in prison population linked to changes in prisonadmissions Underlying the dramatic growth in the State prison populationduring the 1980's were changes in the composition of prisonadmissions. Since 1977 the relative sizes of the two principalsources of admissions to prison, court commitments and returnedconditonal release violators, have changed. Court commitmentsaccount for a decreasing share of all prison admissions: 68.0% in1991, down from 84.3% in 1977 (table 10). As a percentage of alladmissions, those returning to prison after a conditional releasemre than doubled, from 14.5% to 30.5%. These conditional releaseviolators had originally left prison as parolees, mandatoryreleases, and other types of releases involving communtysupervision. The absolute number of conditional release violators returnedto prison grew 7-fold, from 19,617 in 1977 to 142,100 in 1991,while the number of new court commitments nearly tripled, from114,230 to 317,237. Overall, the increase in the number ofconditioal release violators accounted for more than a third ofthe growth in the total admissions to State prisons. An increasing percentage of court commitments sentenced fordrug offenses In 1990, the latest year for which data are available, thenumber of new court commitments for drug offenses reached arecord high, an estimated 103,800. For the first time, the numberof persons admitted for drug offenses was greater than the numberadmited for property offenses (102,400), violent offenses(87,200), or public-order offenses (26,200). An estimated 32.1%of all new court commitments in 1990 were drug offenders, up from11.5% in 1977 (figure 2). In 1990 an estimated 31.7% wereproperty offnders; 27.0%, violent offenders; and 8.1%,public-order offenders. The increase in drug offenders admittedto prison accounted for more than 40% of the total growth in newcourt commitments since 1977. Growth in the number of persons arrested for drug lawviolations and an increase in the rate of incarceration for drugoffenses account for the change in the prison offensedistribution. Between 1977 and 1990, the estimated number ofadult arrests for dru law violations increased by 104.4%, from493,300 to 1,008,300 (table 11). Compounding the impact of moredrug arrests, the rate of drug offenders sent to State prisonrose from 27 per 1,000 adult arrests for drug violations in 1977to 103 admissions per ,000 in 1990. An increasing number of arrests and a rise in the probabilityof incarceration for serious crimes Growth in the prison population was not solely the result ofmore commitments of drug offenders. Between 1977 and 1990 thenumber of persons admitted to prison for selected seriousoffenses, such as murder, nonnegligent manslaughter, sexualassault, robbey, aggravated assault, and burglary, also rose bymore than 50,000. Regardless of the type of offense, the number of adultsarrested and the ratio of prison admissions to arrests increasedbetween 1977 and 1990. The total number of arrests for seriouscrimes rose by 48.8%, from 592,400 to 881,300, while the ratio ofpriso admissions to adult arrests for these crimes increased from121 commitments per 1,000 arrests to 143. Although the prisoncommitment ratio was higher in 1990 than in 1977, it changed fromyear-to-year: increasing from 1978 to 1984, fluctuating between195 and 1988, and then increasing after 1988. Although the number of persons admitted to prison grew foreach of the five selected serious offenses, increases in thenumber arrested for aggravated assault and in the probability ofincarceration for burglary accounted for much of the totalgrowth. Growth in the number of arrests for aggravated assaultaccounted for more than two-thirds of the total increase inarrests for serious crimes. In 1990 an estimated 410,800 adultswere arrested for aggravated assault, up from 209,300 in 1977.When combine with an increase in the probability of going toprison from 32 per 1,000 arrests to 56 per 1,000, aggravatedassault accounted for nearly a third of the total increase inprison admissions for serious offenses. A rise in the prison admissions to arrest ratio for burglaryaccounted for an additional 24% of the total increase in prisonadmissions for serious offenses. While the annual number ofadults arrested for burglary grew by 42,000 between 1977 and1990, thenumber of admissions to prison per 1,000 arrestsincreased from 115 to 160. At least 13,000 more admissions toprison for burglary occurred in 1990 than in 1977 because of thehigher rate of imprisonment. Methodological note This Bulletin is based upon an advance count of prisonersconducted for the National Prisoner Statistics (NPS) programimmediately after the end of each calendar year. A detailed,final count containing any revisions to the jurisdictions'advance count ill be published later. Explanatory notes Alabama. Capacity in community programs is not included inthe reported capacity figures. Alaska. Prisons and jails form one integrated system. All NPSdata include, therefore, both jail and prison populations. Arizona. Population counts are based on custody data.Population counts exclude 95 males housed in local jails becauseof crowding. California. Population counts are based on custody data. Colorado. Population counts for "Inmates with over 1year maximum sentence" include an undetermined number of"Inmates with a sentence of 1 year or less." Connecticut. Prisons and jails form one integrated system.All NPS data include, therefore, both jail and prisonpopulations. Delaware. Population counts are based on custody data.Prisons and jails form one integrated system. All NPS datainclude, therefore, both jail and prison populations. District of Columbia. Prisons and jails form one integratedsystem. All NPS data include, therefore, both jail and prisonpopulations. Florida. Population counts are based on custody data.Population counts for "Inmates with over 1 year maximumsentence" include an undetermined number of "Inmateswith a sentence of 1 year or less." Georgia. Population counts are based on custody data.Population counts exclude an undetermined number of inmateshoused in local jails solely to ease crowding, awaiting pick-up. Hawaii. Prisons and jails form one integrated system. All NPSdata include, therefore, both jail and prison populations.Capacities of female facilities are included in those reportedfor male facilities. Idaho. Population counts are from December 30, 1992. Illinois. Population counts are based on custody data.Population counts for "Inmates with over 1 year maximumsentence" include an undetermined number of "Inmateswith sentence of 1 year or less." Indiana. Population counts are based on custody data andexclude 761 male and 18 female inmates housed in local jailsbecause of crowding. Iowa. Population counts are based on custody data. Maryland. While population totals are actual manual counts,breakdowns for sentence length are estimates based on the actualsentence length data from Maryland's automated system. Massachusetts. Population counts are based on custody data asof January 1, 1993. Population counts exclude 957 male inmateshoused in local jails because of crowding. Population totals areactual counts; however, the totals by sex are estimates believdto be within 0.1% of the actual counts. Michigan. Population counts are based on custody data.Capacity figures exclude the capacities of the CommunityResidential Program. Population totals are estimates believed tobe accurate within 5% of the actual numbers. New Jersey. Each capacity figure includes 788 beds in countyfacilities. North Carolina. While population totals are actual counts,the breakdowns for sentence length are estimates believed to beaccurate to within 1% of the actual counts. Population countsexclude inmates housed in county jails for which the Stategovernmen had parole authority. These inmates are not under thejurisdiction of the North Carolina Division of Prisons. Ohio. Population counts for "Inmates with over 1 yearmaximum sentence" include an undetermined number of"Inmates with a sentence of 1 year or less." Oklahoma. Population counts for "Inmates with over 1year maximum sentence" include an undetermined number of"Inmates with a sentence of 1 year or less." Populationcounts exclude 442 male and 29 female inmates housed in localjails because of crowding Rhode Island. Prisons and jails form one integrated system.All NPS data include, therefore, both jail and prisonpopulations. Populations of inmates given partially suspendedsentences (part served in prison and part on probation) areincluded with th "Inmates with over 1 year maximumsentence" only if the prison portion of the sentence exceeds1 year. As a result, the "Inmates with over 1 year maximumsentence" populations are understated and the "Inmateswith a sentence of 1 year or less" are overstted. Tennessee. Population counts for "Inmates with over 1year maximum sentence" include an undetermined number of"Inmates with a sentence of 1 year or less." Populationcounts include 1,064 male and 56 female inmates housed in localjails because of crowdng and exclude 2,680 felons sentenced toserve their time in local jails. The State pays to house these2,680 felons, but the local court maintains jurisdiction. Texas. Population counts are based on custody data. Vermont. Prisons and jails form an almost completelyintegrated system. However, some county and municipal authoritiesdo operate "local lockups." NPS data include both jailand prison populations. The capacity figures exclude the 18 maleinmates housd in "local lockups." Washington. Capacity figures exclude State work releasefacilities which housed 785 male and 169 female inmates onDecember 31, 1992. State pre-release and work release facilitieshave beds reserved for 336 male State inmates and 90 female Stateinmates The remaining capacity of these facilities is forparolees, probationers, and offenders serving partial confinementsentences. West Virginia. Population counts exclude 362 male and 19female inmates housed in local jails because of crowding. Wyoming. The male operational capacity figure is the absolutetotal bed space available to Wyoming's Department of Corrections,and it includes 150 bed spaces in community centers notdesignated as exclusively male or female. Darrell K. Gilliard wrote this report, under the supervisionof Allen J. Beck. Statistical assistance provided by DanielleMorton and Nneka Shelton. Corrections statistics are preparedunder the general direction of Lawrence Greenfeld. Tom Hester andPrscilla Middleton edited the report. Betty Sherman, Jayne Pugh,and Yvonne Boston, under the general supervision of MarilynMarbrook, produced the report. Data collection and processingwere carried out by Carol Spivey under the supervision ofGerturde Odm and N. Gail Hoff, Demographics Surveys Division,U.S. Bureau of the Census. May 1993, NCJ-141874 The Bureau of Justice Statistics, an agency of the U.S.Department of Justice, is part of the Office of Justice Programs,which also includes the Office for Victims of Crime, the NationalInstitute of Justice, the Bureau of Justice Assistance, and theOffie of Juvenile Justice and Delinquency Prevention. . CliffSchaffer's Home Page WT01-B26-39IA031-000651-B015-140http://206.61.184.43:80/schaffer/GOVPUBS/jailin92.htm 206.61.184.43 19970122121117 text/html 62533HTTP/1.0 200 OKDate: Wednesday, 22-Jan-97 12:11:01 GMTServer: WebSitePro/1.1f (S/N wpo-0deb)Allow-ranges: bytesContent-type: text/htmlLast-modified: Saturday, 28-Dec-96 06:13:46 GMTContent-length: 62315 Jail Inmates 1992 Jail Inmates 1992 August 1993 NCJ-143284 Full text with tables available from: Bureau of Justice Statistics Clearinghouse 800-732-3277 Box 179 Annapolis Junction, MD. 20701-0179 In 1992, for the first time in its 9-year history, the Annual Survey of Jails collected information from the large jurisdictions about the programs that their jails administer -- boot camps, work release, alternatives to incarceration, educational and treatment programs for inmates, and drug testing. The 1992 Annual Survey of Jails and this Bulletin would not have been possible without the generous cooperation of jail administrators and staff whose facilities were selected for the survey. Lawrence A. Greenfeld Acting Director By Allen J. Beck, Ph.D. Thomas P. Bonczar and Darrell K. Gilliard BJS Statisticians At midyear 1992 local jails held an estimated 444,584 persons. From July 1991 to June 1992, the number in jail grew 4%, about the same rate as for the previous 12 months. In 1992 overall jail occupancy was 99% of the rated capacity. The 1992 Annual Survey of Jails provides these findings from data reported by 795 jurisdictions for 1,113 jails, about a third of all jails. Local officials administer these facilities which are able to hold persons for more than 48 hours but usually for less than 1 year. Other survey findings include: *About 1 in every 428 adult U.S. residents were in jail on June 30, 1992. *A majority of jail inmates were black or Hispanic. White non-Hispanic inmates made up 40% of the jail population; black non- Hispanics, 44%; Hispanics, 15%; and non- Hispanic inmates of other races, 1%. *An estimated 2,804 juveniles were housed in adult jails on June 30, 1992. The average daily juvenile population for the year was 2,527. *Based on the most recent census (1988) 503 jurisdictions had an average daily population of at least 100 jail inmates. In 1992, these jurisdictions operated 814 jail facilities, which held 362,217 inmates, or about 81% of all jail inmates in the country. One-day counts On June 30, 1992, the estimated number of inmates held in local jails was 444,584, an increase of 4.2% over the number held on June 28, 1991. About 1 in every 428 adult residents of the United States was in jail on June 30, 1992. Fewer than 1% of the inmates of the Nation's jails in 1992 were juveniles. As estimated 2,804 juveniles were housed in adult jails across the country on June 30, 1992. Most juveniles in correctional custody are housed in juvenile facilities. (For a definition of juveniles and discussion of their detention, see Methodology, page 5.) Since 1970 the number of jail inmates per 100,000 residents has risen 120%, from 79 to 174. During the period, the number of jail inmates at midyear increased more than 2 + times, from 160,863 to 444,584. The rates of incarceration in local jails have risen more rapidly for blacks than whites. In 1984, the earliest year for which data are available, the incarceration rate for blacks was 339 jail inmates per 100,000 residents; by 1992, the rate was 619. For whites, the rates increased from 68 to 109 per 100,000. On June 30, 1992, local jails held an estimated 195,200 blacks and 233,000 whites. Average daily population The average daily population for the year ending June 30, 1992, was 441,889, an increase of 4.6% from 1991. The average daily population for males increased 4.7% from the number in 1991; during the same period, the female average daily population increased 2.8%. The average daily juvenile population for the year ending June 30, 1992, was 2,527. Adult conviction status At midyear 1992, convicted inmates made up 49% of all adult inmates. The number of convicted inmates increased 6% since June 28, 1991. Convicted inmates include those awaiting sentencing or serving a sentence and those returned to jail because they had violated the conditions of their probation or parole. From 1991 to 1992 the number of unconvicted inmates increased 3%. Unconvicted inmates include those on trial or awaiting arraignment or trial. Demographic characteristics Males accounted for 91% of the jail inmate population. The adult male inmate population increased 4% from 1991 to 1992. An estimated 1 in every 226 men and 1 in every 2,417 women residing in the United States were in a local jail on June 30, 1992. White non-Hispanic inmates made up 40% of the jail population; black non-Hispanics, 44%; Hispanics, 15%; and other races (Native Americans, Aleuts, Alaska Natives, Asians, and Pacific Islanders), 1%. Daily population movements On June 30, 1992, local jails had more than 46,000 new admissions and discharges, about equally divided between the two categories. Discharges include sentence completions, bail, and deaths. These data exclude transfers among facilities and readmissions or other departures on June 30, 1992, which can only be estimated to have been within the range of 10,733 and 13,367. (For a discussion on reporting practices, see Methodology.) Occupancy The number of jail inmates increased 4% from 1991, while the total rated capacity of the Nation's jails rose 7%. Between June 28, 1991, and June 30, 1992, the percentage of rated capacity which was occupied fell 2 percentage points to 99%. Facilities with the largest average daily populations reported the highest occupancy rates. Occupancy was 114% of rated capacity in facilities with an average daily population of 1,000 or more, compared to 53% in those with fewer than 20 inmates. Size of Number of Percent of rated facilitya facilities capacity occupied Fewer than 20 1,017 53% 20-49 773 77 50-99 559 82 100-199 370 91 200-999 405 103 1,000 or moreb 76 114 aBased on the average daily population between June 28, 1991, and June 30, 1992. bIncludes an unspecified number of facilities for Cook County, Ill., and Orleans Parish, La., each counted as having 1 facility. Jurisdictions with large jail populations Characteristics In 1992 , an estimated 81% of the total annual number of inmates in the Nation's local jails were housed in the facilities of 503 jurisdictions, each with an average daily population of at least 100 incarcerated persons at the time of the 1988 Census of Jails. Population of large Number jail jurisdictions of large June 30, Daily average jurisdictions 1992 1991-92 Region All 503 362,217 356,471 Northeast 85 68,026 68,384 Midwest 91 44,514 43,329 South 229 152,061 147,644 West 98 97,616 97,114 Between June 28, 1991, and June 30, 1992, these jurisdictions held on average 356,471 inmates. On the day of the survey, June 30, 1992, these large jurisdictions held 362,217. Including an unspecified number of facilities counted as 1 in both Cook County (Chicago), Illinois, and Orleans Parish (New Orleans), Louisiana, these jurisdictions reported data on 814 separate jail facilities -- 73% of all facilities surveyed. Nearly half of these large jurisdictions maintained an average daily population of between 100 and 299 inmates. Although these jurisdictions represented 47% of all large jurisdictions, they held only 13% of the total annual number of inmates in large jurisdictions. Twenty-nine jurisdictions reported an average daily population of between 2,000 and 22,220 inmates. With an average of more than 4 facilities per jurisdiction, they accounted for 16% of all facilities and 41% of the total average daily population in large jurisdictions. 25 largest jail jurisdictions Within the group of jurisdictions that have an annual number of inmates between 2,000 and 22,220 are the Nation's 25 largest jurisdictions. These 25 jurisdictions were in 11 States: 9 in California, 4 in Texas, 4 in Florida, and 1 each in New York, Illinois, Tennessee, Pennsylvania, Arizona, Louisiana, Maryland, and Georgia. These jurisdictions had between 1 and 16 jail facilities in their systems. Six of the jurisdictions had a smaller average daily population in 1992 than in 1991, and six had a smaller population on June 30, 1992, than on June 28, 1991. Harris County (Houston), Texas, reported the largest growth during the year, an increase of 4,919 inmates on the day of the survey. New York City reported the sharpest decline, a decrease of 2,136 inmates. On June 30, 1992, the 25 largest jurisdictions held 32% of all jail inmates nationwide. The two largest jurisdictions, Los Angeles County and New York City, had more than 40,700 inmates, 9% of the national total. Overall, the number of inmates in the Nation's 25 largest jurisdictions on June 30, 1992, was 5% greater than on June 28, 1991. The number of jail inmates in these jurisdictions totalled 143,604, up from 132,506. Inmates held for other authorities Local jail jurisdictions frequently house inmates for other authorities, because of crowding elsewhere or routine needs of other jurisdictions, such as housing detainees pending their transfer or holding convicted inmates while awaiting transfer to State or Federal prison. Among the 503 jurisdictions with 100 or more inmates in 1988, 425 were holding inmates for other authorities in 1992. Approximately 84% of these large jurisdictions had one or more jail facilities holding inmates for other authorities on June 30, 1992. Two-thirds of the large jurisdictions were holding inmates for State authorities; half for Federal authorities. The number of jail inmates being held for other authorities by these large jurisdictions increased by 9,063, up 23% from 1991. The number of State prisoners in local jails grew the most (31%), followed by the number of Federal prisoners (22%). Prisoners held for other local authorities decreased 26%, from 4,548 to 3,355. Court orders to reduce population and improve conditions At midyear 1992 more than a quarter of the 503 large jurisdictions reported that 1 or more of their jail facilities were under court order or consent decree to reduce the inmate population. On June 30, 1992, 131 jurisdictions were under court orders to limit the number of inmates, down from 135 in 1991. Jail administrators in these 131 jurisdictions reported an increase of 13% in their rated capacity during the year, or an increase of 20,160 beds. On average these jurisdictions were operating at about 105% of their rated capacities. Administrators in the 372 jurisdictions not under orders to reduce population or crowding reported less than 1% rise in their rated capacity, and a slight increase in the occupancy rate, from 104% to 105%. Judges intervened most often in the operation of jails with orders to reduce population or crowding, but they also cited other elements of the jail facility, staff, operation, or programs. Overall, 157 of the large jurisdictions were under court order to limit population or to correct a specific condition of confinement. Ninety-four were cited for two or more conditions of confinement: Number of Large jurisdictions conditions with a facility cited by a court under court order 1 63 2-3 33 4-5 11 6 or more 50 Nearly a third of the large jurisdictions with a facility under court order in 1992 were cited for six or more conditions. Forty-one of the 503 jurisdictions were cited for the totality of conditions (that is, the cumulative effect of several conditions). The most frequent condition cited was crowded living units (118 jurisdictions), followed by inadequate recreation facilities (62), medical facilities or services (57), and staffing (53). Fourteen fewer jurisdictions were under court order for specific conditions of confinement on June 30, 1992, than on June 28, 1991. Six fewer jurisdictions were under court order for administrative segregation procedures or policies; three fewer for recreation; and four fewer for food service. Nine more jurisdictions were cited for grievance procedures or policies; eight more for staffing patterns. Jail programs and alternatives to incarceration In 1992, for the first time in the history of the survey, jurisdictions were asked if any of their jail facilities operated a boot camp or daily work release program and if any operated alternative-to-incarceration programs, such as electronic monitoring, house arrest, and day reporting. (Jail jurisdictions reported only for the programs that they operated. Within some counties other agencies may have operated similar types of programs). These programs are defined as follows: boot camp -- a program having a chain of command, highly regimented activity schedules, drill and ceremonies, and stressing physical challenges, fitness, discipline and personal appearance. Work-release -- a program that allows an inmate to work in the community unsupervised by correctional staff during the day and return to jail at night. Electronic monitoring -- a program in which offenders are supervised by correctional authorities outside of the jail facility by use of an electronic signalling device or programmed contact device attached to a telephone. House arrest (without electronic monitoring) -- a program in which offenders are legally ordered to remain confined in their own residence except for medical reasons and employment but are not subject to any electronic surveillance. Day reporting -- a program that permits offenders to remain in their residence at night and weekends while reporting to a correctional official one or more times daily. On June 30, 1992, 9 of the 503 large jurisdictions were operating a boot camp program. About 4% of the jail inmates (1,463) in these jurisdictions with boot camps were participating in the program. Among inmates in all large jurisdictions, fewer than half of one percent were in a boot camp. Daily work release programs were available to inmates in more than two-thirds of the large jurisdictions. On June 30, 1992, 17,887 inmates in 359 jail jurisdictions were in a work release program. On that day, 7% of the inmates in these jurisdictions were participating in work release programs. On June 30, 1992, 180 of the 503 large jurisdictions were operating an alternative-to-incarceration program, such as electronic monitoring, house arrest, or day reporting. Offenders in these programs are not considered jail inmates to be included in the midyear count because they are not in physical custody. They do not serve time in a jail facility but would if not for these programs. Of the differing types of alternative programs, electronic monitoring was the most widely available and had the most participants (118 jurisdictions and 4,582 offenders). Day- reporting programs were offered in fewer jurisdictions (43) and had fewer than 2,445 participants. House arrest programs without electronic monitoring were operated by 18 jail jurisdictions with a total of 602 participants. Other types of alternative programs, such as community service and weekend reporting, were available in 57 jurisdictions. More than 6,100 offenders were participating in these other alternatives. About three-quarters of all jail inmates in boot camps were in two jurisdictions -- Tarrant County (Fort Worth), Texas, and New York City. Each of these jurisdictions had more inmates in a boot camp than the other seven jurisdictions combined. Santa Clara and Los Angeles counties in California had the largest number of jail inmates in daily work release programs. Each of these jurisdictions had more than 1,000 work release participants. Riverside County, California, stretching to the Nevada border east of Los Angeles, had the most offenders (1,435) participating in some type of alternative program. Cook County (Chicago), Illinois, had the second largest number of participants (1,223), and Orange County, California, containing Anaheim and Santa Ana, the third largest number, 1,050 offenders. More than 10% of offenders under the supervision of these jail jurisdictions were in an alternative-to-incarceration program. Drug testing The 1992 Annual Survey of Jails asked the largest jurisdictions if and on whom they conducted urinalysis tests for drugs. Of all large jurisdictions, 308 said that they did test. Jurisdictions were more likely to test upon suspicion (219 jurisdictions) than testing all inmates at least once (35 jurisdictions). The number of jurisdictions that tested at random or on an inmate's return from the community was about the same (159 and 153, respectively). Jurisdictions holding between 2,000 and 3,999 inmates were more likely to have at least 1 facility testing for drugs than any other group, 93%. Those jurisdictions that had from 100 to 199 inmates were least likely to test, 47%. Selected jail programs In the 1992 survey, the 503 largest jurisdictions were asked to report on inmate participation in drug treatment, alcohol treatment, psychological counseling or psychiatric care, and educational programs offered by their jail facilities. On June 30, 1992, at least 1 jail facility in 420 of these jurisdictions reported operating these types of programs. A total of 127 jurisdictions reported operating all 4 types of programs. Educational programs (including literacy, basic education, and GED programs) were offered in more than two-thirds of the large jurisdictions. About 9% of the inmates in these jurisdictions were participating in an education program at the time of the survey. Alcohol and drug treatment programs were offered in more than half of the large jail jurisdictions. On June 30, 1992, 20,100 jail inmates were receiving alcohol treatment; 18,052 were receiving drug treatment. In the jurisdictions operating alcohol or drug treatment programs, the inmate participation rate was lower than 10%. Psychological or psychiatric counseling programs were provided in 212 of the large jurisdictions. More than 14,000 jail inmates were participating in these programs. Inmate deaths A total of 178 large jail jurisdictions (35%) reported one or more jails with an inmate death during the year ending June 30, 1992, compared to 190 (38%) the previous year . Natural causes other than AIDS were the leading cause of death among inmates in large jail jurisdictions (38%), followed by suicide (28%). AIDS-related deaths accounted for 24% of the total, injury by another person, 3%, and accidents or undetermined causes, 7%. Methodology The 1992 Annual Survey of Jails was the ninth such survey in a series sponsored by the Bureau of Justice Statistics. The first was conducted in 1982. Complete enumerations of the Nation's jails are conducted every 5 years. Annual surveys - - which collect data on all jails in jurisdictions with 100 or more jail inmates and on a sample of all other jails -- are carried out in each of the 4 years between the full censuses. The reference date for the 1992 survey was June 30, 1992. Full censuses were done on February 15, 1978, June 30, 1983, and June 30, 1988. A local jail is a facility that holds inmates beyond arraignment, usually for more than 48 hours, and is administered by local officials. Specifically excluded from the count were temporary lockups that house persons for less than 48 hours, physically separate drunk tanks, and other holding facilities that did not hold persons after they had been formally charged, Federal- or State-administered facilities, and the combined jail-prison systems of Alaska, Connecticut, Delaware, Hawaii, Rhode Island, and Vermont. Included in the universe were five locally operated jails in Alaska and eight jails that were privately operated under contract for local governments. The 1992 survey included 1,113 jails in 795 jurisdictions. A jurisdiction is a county, municipality, township, or regional authority that administers one or more local jails. The jails in 503 jurisdictions were automatically included in the survey because the average daily inmate population in these jurisdictions was 100 or more in the 1988 census. The jurisdictions with large jail populations, referred to as certainty jurisdictions, accounted for 814 jails and 362,217 inmates, or 81% of the estimated inmate population on June 30, 1992. The other jurisdictions surveyed constituted a stratified probability sample of those jurisdictions whose average daily population was less than 100 in the 1988 jail census. Data were obtained by mailed questionnaires. Two followup mailings and phone calls were used to encourage reporting. The response rate was 99% for all jails. For the eight jails in certainty jurisdictions and the one jail in a noncertainty jurisdiction not responding to the survey, data were adjusted by applying the average growth factor for facilities in the same stratum and region with the same type of inmates (men, women, or both sexes). National estimates for the inmate population on June 30, 1992, were produced by sex, race, legal status, and conviction status and for the average daily population during the year ending June 30, 1992, by sex and legal status. National estimates were also produced for rated capacity. Administrators of jails in jurisdictions with large jail populations provided counts of inmates held for other authorities, inmate deaths, and jails under court order. Sampling error National estimates have an associated sampling error because jurisdictions with an average daily population of less than 100 were sampled for the survey. Estimates based on a sample survey are apt to differ somewhat from the results of a survey canvassing all jurisdictions. Each of the samples that could have been selected using the same sample design could yield somewhat different results. Standard error is a measure of the variation among the estimates from all possible samples, stating the precision with which an estimate from a particular sample approximates the average result of all possible samples. The estimated relative sampling error for the total inmate population of 444,584 on June 30, 1992, was 0.47%. Results presented in this Bulletin were tested to determine whether statistical significance could be associated with observed differences between values. Differences were tested to ascertain whether they were significant at the 95-percent confidence level or higher. Differences mentioned in the text meet or exceed this 95-percent confidence level. Measures of population Two measures of inmate population are used: the average daily population for the year ending June 30 and the inmate count on June 30 of each year. The average daily inmate population balances out any extraordinary events that may render the 1-day count atypical. The 1-day count is useful because some characteristics of the inmate population -- such as race, Hispanic origin, and detention status -- can be obtained for a specific date, but may not be available on an annual basis. Population movement In contrast with prior years, admission and discharge data were collected for the single day, June 30, 1992, rather than for the entire year preceding the census date to improve data quality and to ease reporting burdens. Intrasystem transfers within jail systems have been removed from counts of admissions and discharges and included with a combined estimate of transfers between jails and long-term medical and mental health facilities and readmissions/other departures. Because some jurisdictions do not maintain separate records for returning inmates who were on temporary transfers to other facilities or readmissions resulting from weekend sentences, medical appointments, and court appearances, it was only possible to provide an estimate of the volume of this movement. Juveniles State statutes and judicial practices allow juveniles to be incarcerated in adult jails and prisons under a variety of circumstances. Juveniles are persons who are defined by State statute as being under a certain age, usually 18 years, and who are initially subject to juvenile court authority even if tried as adults in criminal court. The Juvenile Justice and Delinquency Prevention Act of 1974 requires sight and sound separation from adults for those juveniles not tried as adults in criminal court but held in adult jails. A 1980 amendment to that 1974 act requires the removal of juveniles from local jails, except those juveniles who are tried as adults for criminal felonies. The proportion of juveniles who were housed in adult jails in accordance with these guidelines is not available. This report was written by Allen J. Beck, Thomas P. Bonczar, and Darrell K. Gilliard. Corrections statistics are prepared under the general direction of Lawrence A. Greenfeld. James Stephan reviewed the statistics. Tom Hester edited the report. Marilyn Marbrook administered production, assisted by Betty Sherman, Jayne Pugh, and Yvonne Boston. Collection and processing of the 1992 Jail Survey were conducted by Margaret Ferguson and Linda Huang under the supervision of Alan Stevens, Governments Division, U.S. Bureau of the Census. August 1993, NCJ-143284 Data used in this report will be available from the National Archive of Criminal Justice Data at the University of Michigan, 1-800-99-0960. The data sets will be archived as the Sample Survey of Jails. Jail Inmates 1992 August 1993 NCJ-143284 Full text with tables available from: Bureau of Justice Statistics Clearinghouse 800-732-3277 Box 179 Annapolis Junction, MD. 20701-0179 In 1992, for the first time in its 9-year history, the Annual Survey of Jails collected information from the large jurisdictions about the programs that their jails administer -- boot camps, work release, alternatives to incarceration, educational and treatment programs for inmates, and drug testing. The 1992 Annual Survey of Jails and this Bulletin would not have been possible without the generous cooperation of jail administrators and staff whose facilities were selected for the survey. Lawrence A. Greenfeld Acting Director By Allen J. Beck, Ph.D. Thomas P. Bonczar and Darrell K. Gilliard BJS Statisticians At midyear 1992 local jails held an estimated 444,584 persons. From July 1991 to June 1992, the number in jail grew 4%, about the same rate as for the previous 12 months. In 1992 overall jail occupancy was 99% of the rated capacity. The 1992 Annual Survey of Jails provides these findings from data reported by 795 jurisdictions for 1,113 jails, about a third of all jails. Local officials administer these facilities which are able to hold persons for more than 48 hours but usually for less than 1 year. Other survey findings include: *About 1 in every 428 adult U.S. residents were in jail on June 30, 1992. *A majority of jail inmates were black or Hispanic. White non-Hispanic inmates made up 40% of the jail population; black non- Hispanics, 44%; Hispanics, 15%; and non- Hispanic inmates of other races, 1%. *An estimated 2,804 juveniles were housed in adult jails on June 30, 1992. The average daily juvenile population for the year was 2,527. *Based on the most recent census (1988) 503 jurisdictions had an average daily population of at least 100 jail inmates. In 1992, these jurisdictions operated 814 jail facilities, which held 362,217 inmates, or about 81% of all jail inmates in the country. One-day counts On June 30, 1992, the estimated number of inmates held in local jails was 444,584, an increase of 4.2% over the number held on June 28, 1991. About 1 in every 428 adult residents of the United States was in jail on June 30, 1992. Fewer than 1% of the inmates of the Nation's jails in 1992 were juveniles. As estimated 2,804 juveniles were housed in adult jails across the country on June 30, 1992. Most juveniles in correctional custody are housed in juvenile facilities. (For a definition of juveniles and discussion of their detention, see Methodology, page 5.) Since 1970 the number of jail inmates per 100,000 residents has risen 120%, from 79 to 174. During the period, the number of jail inmates at midyear increased more than 2 + times, from 160,863 to 444,584. The rates of incarceration in local jails have risen more rapidly for blacks than whites. In 1984, the earliest year for which data are available, the incarceration rate for blacks was 339 jail inmates per 100,000 residents; by 1992, the rate was 619. For whites, the rates increased from 68 to 109 per 100,000. On June 30, 1992, local jails held an estimated 195,200 blacks and 233,000 whites. Average daily population The average daily population for the year ending June 30, 1992, was 441,889, an increase of 4.6% from 1991. The average daily population for males increased 4.7% from the number in 1991; during the same period, the female average daily population increased 2.8%. The average daily juvenile population for the year ending June 30, 1992, was 2,527. Adult conviction status At midyear 1992, convicted inmates made up 49% of all adult inmates. The number of convicted inmates increased 6% since June 28, 1991. Convicted inmates include those awaiting sentencing or serving a sentence and those returned to jail because they had violated the conditions of their probation or parole. From 1991 to 1992 the number of unconvicted inmates increased 3%. Unconvicted inmates include those on trial or awaiting arraignment or trial. Demographic characteristics Males accounted for 91% of the jail inmate population. The adult male inmate population increased 4% from 1991 to 1992. An estimated 1 in every 226 men and 1 in every 2,417 women residing in the United States were in a local jail on June 30, 1992. White non-Hispanic inmates made up 40% of the jail population; black non-Hispanics, 44%; Hispanics, 15%; and other races (Native Americans, Aleuts, Alaska Natives, Asians, and Pacific Islanders), 1%. Daily population movements On June 30, 1992, local jails had more than 46,000 new admissions and discharges, about equally divided between the two categories. Discharges include sentence completions, bail, and deaths. These data exclude transfers among facilities and readmissions or other departures on June 30, 1992, which can only be estimated to have been within the range of 10,733 and 13,367. (For a discussion on reporting practices, see Methodology.) Occupancy The number of jail inmates increased 4% from 1991, while the total rated capacity of the Nation's jails rose 7%. Between June 28, 1991, and June 30, 1992, the percentage of rated capacity which was occupied fell 2 percentage points to 99%. Facilities with the largest average daily populations reported the highest occupancy rates. Occupancy was 114% of rated capacity in facilities with an average daily population of 1,000 or more, compared to 53% in those with fewer than 20 inmates. Size of Number of Percent of rated facilitya facilities capacity occupied Fewer than 20 1,017 53% 20-49 773 77 50-99 559 82 100-199 370 91 200-999 405 103 1,000 or moreb 76 114 aBased on the average daily population between June 28, 1991, and June 30, 1992. bIncludes an unspecified number of facilities for Cook County, Ill., and Orleans Parish, La., each counted as having 1 facility. Jurisdictions with large jail populations Characteristics In 1992 , an estimated 81% of the total annual number of inmates in the Nation's local jails were housed in the facilities of 503 jurisdictions, each with an average daily population of at least 100 incarcerated persons at the time of the 1988 Census of Jails. Population of large Number jail jurisdictions of large June 30, Daily average jurisdictions 1992 1991-92 Region All 503 362,217 356,471 Northeast 85 68,026 68,384 Midwest 91 44,514 43,329 South 229 152,061 147,644 West 98 97,616 97,114 Between June 28, 1991, and June 30, 1992, these jurisdictions held on average 356,471 inmates. On the day of the survey, June 30, 1992, these large jurisdictions held 362,217. Including an unspecified number of facilities counted as 1 in both Cook County (Chicago), Illinois, and Orleans Parish (New Orleans), Louisiana, these jurisdictions reported data on 814 separate jail facilities -- 73% of all facilities surveyed. Nearly half of these large jurisdictions maintained an average daily population of between 100 and 299 inmates. Although these jurisdictions represented 47% of all large jurisdictions, they held only 13% of the total annual number of inmates in large jurisdictions. Twenty-nine jurisdictions reported an average daily population of between 2,000 and 22,220 inmates. With an average of more than 4 facilities per jurisdiction, they accounted for 16% of all facilities and 41% of the total average daily population in large jurisdictions. 25 largest jail jurisdictions Within the group of jurisdictions that have an annual number of inmates between 2,000 and 22,220 are the Nation's 25 largest jurisdictions. These 25 jurisdictions were in 11 States: 9 in California, 4 in Texas, 4 in Florida, and 1 each in New York, Illinois, Tennessee, Pennsylvania, Arizona, Louisiana, Maryland, and Georgia. These jurisdictions had between 1 and 16 jail facilities in their systems. Six of the jurisdictions had a smaller average daily population in 1992 than in 1991, and six had a smaller population on June 30, 1992, than on June 28, 1991. Harris County (Houston), Texas, reported the largest growth during the year, an increase of 4,919 inmates on the day of the survey. New York City reported the sharpest decline, a decrease of 2,136 inmates. On June 30, 1992, the 25 largest jurisdictions held 32% of all jail inmates nationwide. The two largest jurisdictions, Los Angeles County and New York City, had more than 40,700 inmates, 9% of the national total. Overall, the number of inmates in the Nation's 25 largest jurisdictions on June 30, 1992, was 5% greater than on June 28, 1991. The number of jail inmates in these jurisdictions totalled 143,604, up from 132,506. Inmates held for other authorities Local jail jurisdictions frequently house inmates for other authorities, because of crowding elsewhere or routine needs of other jurisdictions, such as housing detainees pending their transfer or holding convicted inmates while awaiting transfer to State or Federal prison. Among the 503 jurisdictions with 100 or more inmates in 1988, 425 were holding inmates for other authorities in 1992. Approximately 84% of these large jurisdictions had one or more jail facilities holding inmates for other authorities on June 30, 1992. Two-thirds of the large jurisdictions were holding inmates for State authorities; half for Federal authorities. The number of jail inmates being held for other authorities by these large jurisdictions increased by 9,063, up 23% from 1991. The number of State prisoners in local jails grew the most (31%), followed by the number of Federal prisoners (22%). Prisoners held for other local authorities decreased 26%, from 4,548 to 3,355. Court orders to reduce population and improve conditions At midyear 1992 more than a quarter of the 503 large jurisdictions reported that 1 or more of their jail facilities were under court order or consent decree to reduce the inmate population. On June 30, 1992, 131 jurisdictions were under court orders to limit the number of inmates, down from 135 in 1991. Jail administrators in these 131 jurisdictions reported an increase of 13% in their rated capacity during the year, or an increase of 20,160 beds. On average these jurisdictions were operating at about 105% of their rated capacities. Administrators in the 372 jurisdictions not under orders to reduce population or crowding reported less than 1% rise in their rated capacity, and a slight increase in the occupancy rate, from 104% to 105%. Judges intervened most often in the operation of jails with orders to reduce population or crowding, but they also cited other elements of the jail facility, staff, operation, or programs. Overall, 157 of the large jurisdictions were under court order to limit population or to correct a specific condition of confinement. Ninety-four were cited for two or more conditions of confinement: Number of Large jurisdictions conditions with a facility cited by a court under court order 1 63 2-3 33 4-5 11 6 or more 50 Nearly a third of the large jurisdictions with a facility under court order in 1992 were cited for six or more conditions. Forty-one of the 503 jurisdictions were cited for the totality of conditions (that is, the cumulative effect of several conditions). The most frequent condition cited was crowded living units (118 jurisdictions), followed by inadequate recreation facilities (62), medical facilities or services (57), and staffing (53). Fourteen fewer jurisdictions were under court order for specific conditions of confinement on June 30, 1992, than on June 28, 1991. Six fewer jurisdictions were under court order for administrative segregation procedures or policies; three fewer for recreation; and four fewer for food service. Nine more jurisdictions were cited for grievance procedures or policies; eight more for staffing patterns. Jail programs and alternatives to incarceration In 1992, for the first time in the history of the survey, jurisdictions were asked if any of their jail facilities operated a boot camp or daily work release program and if any operated alternative-to-incarceration programs, such as electronic monitoring, house arrest, and day reporting. (Jail jurisdictions reported only for the programs that they operated. Within some counties other agencies may have operated similar types of programs). These programs are defined as follows: boot camp -- a program having a chain of command, highly regimented activity schedules, drill and ceremonies, and stressing physical challenges, fitness, discipline and personal appearance. Work-release -- a program that allows an inmate to work in the community unsupervised by correctional staff during the day and return to jail at night. Electronic monitoring -- a program in which offenders are supervised by correctional authorities outside of the jail facility by use of an electronic signalling device or programmed contact device attached to a telephone. House arrest (without electronic monitoring) -- a program in which offenders are legally ordered to remain confined in their own residence except for medical reasons and employment but are not subject to any electronic surveillance. Day reporting -- a program that permits offenders to remain in their residence at night and weekends while reporting to a correctional official one or more times daily. On June 30, 1992, 9 of the 503 large jurisdictions were operating a boot camp program. About 4% of the jail inmates (1,463) in these jurisdictions with boot camps were participating in the program. Among inmates in all large jurisdictions, fewer than half of one percent were in a boot camp. Daily work release programs were available to inmates in more than two-thirds of the large jurisdictions. On June 30, 1992, 17,887 inmates in 359 jail jurisdictions were in a work release program. On that day, 7% of the inmates in these jurisdictions were participating in work release programs. On June 30, 1992, 180 of the 503 large jurisdictions were operating an alternative-to-incarceration program, such as electronic monitoring, house arrest, or day reporting. Offenders in these programs are not considered jail inmates to be included in the midyear count because they are not in physical custody. They do not serve time in a jail facility but would if not for these programs. Of the differing types of alternative programs, electronic monitoring was the most widely available and had the most participants (118 jurisdictions and 4,582 offenders). Day- reporting programs were offered in fewer jurisdictions (43) and had fewer than 2,445 participants. House arrest programs without electronic monitoring were operated by 18 jail jurisdictions with a total of 602 participants. Other types of alternative programs, such as community service and weekend reporting, were available in 57 jurisdictions. More than 6,100 offenders were participating in these other alternatives. About three-quarters of all jail inmates in boot camps were in two jurisdictions -- Tarrant County (Fort Worth), Texas, and New York City. Each of these jurisdictions had more inmates in a boot camp than the other seven jurisdictions combined. Santa Clara and Los Angeles counties in California had the largest number of jail inmates in daily work release programs. Each of these jurisdictions had more than 1,000 work release participants. Riverside County, California, stretching to the Nevada border east of Los Angeles, had the most offenders (1,435) participating in some type of alternative program. Cook County (Chicago), Illinois, had the second largest number of participants (1,223), and Orange County, California, containing Anaheim and Santa Ana, the third largest number, 1,050 offenders. More than 10% of offenders under the supervision of these jail jurisdictions were in an alternative-to-incarceration program. Drug testing The 1992 Annual Survey of Jails asked the largest jurisdictions if and on whom they conducted urinalysis tests for drugs. Of all large jurisdictions, 308 said that they did test. Jurisdictions were more likely to test upon suspicion (219 jurisdictions) than testing all inmates at least once (35 jurisdictions). The number of jurisdictions that tested at random or on an inmate's return from the community was about the same (159 and 153, respectively). Jurisdictions holding between 2,000 and 3,999 inmates were more likely to have at least 1 facility testing for drugs than any other group, 93%. Those jurisdictions that had from 100 to 199 inmates were least likely to test, 47%. Selected jail programs In the 1992 survey, the 503 largest jurisdictions were asked to report on inmate participation in drug treatment, alcohol treatment, psychological counseling or psychiatric care, and educational programs offered by their jail facilities. On June 30, 1992, at least 1 jail facility in 420 of these jurisdictions reported operating these types of programs. A total of 127 jurisdictions reported operating all 4 types of programs. Educational programs (including literacy, basic education, and GED programs) were offered in more than two-thirds of the large jurisdictions. About 9% of the inmates in these jurisdictions were participating in an education program at the time of the survey. Alcohol and drug treatment programs were offered in more than half of the large jail jurisdictions. On June 30, 1992, 20,100 jail inmates were receiving alcohol treatment; 18,052 were receiving drug treatment. In the jurisdictions operating alcohol or drug treatment programs, the inmate participation rate was lower than 10%. Psychological or psychiatric counseling programs were provided in 212 of the large jurisdictions. More than 14,000 jail inmates were participating in these programs. Inmate deaths A total of 178 large jail jurisdictions (35%) reported one or more jails with an inmate death during the year ending June 30, 1992, compared to 190 (38%) the previous year . Natural causes other than AIDS were the leading cause of death among inmates in large jail jurisdictions (38%), followed by suicide (28%). AIDS-related deaths accounted for 24% of the total, injury by another person, 3%, and accidents or undetermined causes, 7%. Methodology The 1992 Annual Survey of Jails was the ninth such survey in a series sponsored by the Bureau of Justice Statistics. The first was conducted in 1982. Complete enumerations of the Nation's jails are conducted every 5 years. Annual surveys - - which collect data on all jails in jurisdictions with 100 or more jail inmates and on a sample of all other jails -- are carried out in each of the 4 years between the full censuses. The reference date for the 1992 survey was June 30, 1992. Full censuses were done on February 15, 1978, June 30, 1983, and June 30, 1988. A local jail is a facility that holds inmates beyond arraignment, usually for more than 48 hours, and is administered by local officials. Specifically excluded from the count were temporary lockups that house persons for less than 48 hours, physically separate drunk tanks, and other holding facilities that did not hold persons after they had been formally charged, Federal- or State-administered facilities, and the combined jail-prison systems of Alaska, Connecticut, Delaware, Hawaii, Rhode Island, and Vermont. Included in the universe were five locally operated jails in Alaska and eight jails that were privately operated under contract for local governments. The 1992 survey included 1,113 jails in 795 jurisdictions. A jurisdiction is a county, municipality, township, or regional authority that administers one or more local jails. The jails in 503 jurisdictions were automatically included in the survey because the average daily inmate population in these jurisdictions was 100 or more in the 1988 census. The jurisdictions with large jail populations, referred to as certainty jurisdictions, accounted for 814 jails and 362,217 inmates, or 81% of the estimated inmate population on June 30, 1992. The other jurisdictions surveyed constituted a stratified probability sample of those jurisdictions whose average daily population was less than 100 in the 1988 jail census. Data were obtained by mailed questionnaires. Two followup mailings and phone calls were used to encourage reporting. The response rate was 99% for all jails. For the eight jails in certainty jurisdictions and the one jail in a noncertainty jurisdiction not responding to the survey, data were adjusted by applying the average growth factor for facilities in the same stratum and region with the same type of inmates (men, women, or both sexes). National estimates for the inmate population on June 30, 1992, were produced by sex, race, legal status, and conviction status and for the average daily population during the year ending June 30, 1992, by sex and legal status. National estimates were also produced for rated capacity. Administrators of jails in jurisdictions with large jail populations provided counts of inmates held for other authorities, inmate deaths, and jails under court order. Sampling error National estimates have an associated sampling error because jurisdictions with an average daily population of less than 100 were sampled for the survey. Estimates based on a sample survey are apt to differ somewhat from the results of a survey canvassing all jurisdictions. Each of the samples that could have been selected using the same sample design could yield somewhat different results. Standard error is a measure of the variation among the estimates from all possible samples, stating the precision with which an estimate from a particular sample approximates the average result of all possible samples. The estimated relative sampling error for the total inmate population of 444,584 on June 30, 1992, was 0.47%. Results presented in this Bulletin were tested to determine whether statistical significance could be associated with observed differences between values. Differences were tested to ascertain whether they were significant at the 95-percent confidence level or higher. Differences mentioned in the text meet or exceed this 95-percent confidence level. Measures of population Two measures of inmate population are used: the average daily population for the year ending June 30 and the inmate count on June 30 of each year. The average daily inmate population balances out any extraordinary events that may render the 1-day count atypical. The 1-day count is useful because some characteristics of the inmate population -- such as race, Hispanic origin, and detention status -- can be obtained for a specific date, but may not be available on an annual basis. Population movement In contrast with prior years, admission and discharge data were collected for the single day, June 30, 1992, rather than for the entire year preceding the census date to improve data quality and to ease reporting burdens. Intrasystem transfers within jail systems have been removed from counts of admissions and discharges and included with a combined estimate of transfers between jails and long-term medical and mental health facilities and readmissions/other departures. Because some jurisdictions do not maintain separate records for returning inmates who were on temporary transfers to other facilities or readmissions resulting from weekend sentences, medical appointments, and court appearances, it was only possible to provide an estimate of the volume of this movement. Juveniles State statutes and judicial practices allow juveniles to be incarcerated in adult jails and prisons under a variety of circumstances. Juveniles are persons who are defined by State statute as being under a certain age, usually 18 years, and who are initially subject to juvenile court authority even if tried as adults in criminal court. The Juvenile Justice and Delinquency Prevention Act of 1974 requires sight and sound separation from adults for those juveniles not tried as adults in criminal court but held in adult jails. A 1980 amendment to that 1974 act requires the removal of juveniles from local jails, except those juveniles who are tried as adults for criminal felonies. The proportion of juveniles who were housed in adult jails in accordance with these guidelines is not available. This report was written by Allen J. Beck, Thomas P. Bonczar, and Darrell K. Gilliard. Corrections statistics are prepared under the general direction of Lawrence A. Greenfeld. James Stephan reviewed the statistics. Tom Hester edited the report. Marilyn Marbrook administered production, assisted by Betty Sherman, Jayne Pugh, and Yvonne Boston. Collection and processing of the 1992 Jail Survey were conducted by Margaret Ferguson and Linda Huang under the supervision of Alan Stevens, Governments Division, U.S. Bureau of the Census. August 1993, NCJ-143284 Data used in this report will be available from the National Archive of Criminal Justice Data at the University of Michigan, 1-800-99-0960. The data sets will be archived as the Sample Survey of Jails. . CliffSchaffer's Home Page WT01-B26-40IA031-000651-B015-164http://206.61.184.43:80/schaffer/GOVPUBS/prs94as.htm 206.61.184.43 19970122121126 text/html 37560HTTP/1.0 200 OKDate: Wednesday, 22-Jan-97 12:11:20 GMTServer: WebSitePro/1.1f (S/N wpo-0deb)Allow-ranges: bytesContent-type: text/htmlLast-modified: Saturday, 28-Dec-96 06:12:52 GMTContent-length: 37342 Prisoners in 1994 Prisoners in 1994 August 1995, NCJ-151654 U.S. Department of Justice Office of Justice Programs Bureau of Justice Statistics Bulletin (Note: This file does not contain data tables or figures. Thefull text with tables is available from the Bureau of JusticeStatistics Clearinghouse, 800-732-3277; use the title and NCJnumber to order.) By Allen J. Beck, Ph.D. and Darrell K. Gilliard BJS Statisticians The total number of prisoners under the jurisdiction ofFederal or State correctional authorities was 1,053,738 atyearend 1994. During the year the States and the District ofColumbia added 78,847 prisoners; the Federal system, 5,447.Although the 1994 growth rate (8.6%) nearly equaled the averageannual percent increase since 1980, the total increase of 83,294was the second largest yearly increase on record. Highlights Prisoners Population housed per 100,000 as a percent residentof highest Number of inmates population capacity ------------------------------------------------- Year Federal State Federal State Federal State -------------------------------------------------------- 1980 24,363 305,458 9 130 -- -- 1985 40,223 462,284 14 187 123% 105% 1990 65,526 708,393 20 272 151 115 1991 71,608 754,011 22 287 146 116 1992 80,259 802,241 26 305 137 118 1993 89,587 880,857 29 330 136 118 1994 95,034 958,704 30 356 125 117 ------------------------------------------------------- --Not available. -------------------------------------------------------- * California (125,605) and Texas (118,195) together held morethan 1 in every 5 inmates in the Nation. Seventeen States, eachholding fewer than 5,000 inmates, together held 4% of allprisoners. * At yearend 1994, State prisons were operating at between17% and 29% above capacity, while the Federal system wasoperating at 25% over capacity. * Since 1980 the Nation's prison population more than doubledon a per capita basis. On December 31, 1994, the number ofsentenced prisoners per 100,000 U.S. residents was 387-up from139 in 1980. * States with the highest incarceration rates were Texas(636), Louisiana (530), and Oklahoma (508). North Dakota (78) hadthe lowest rate, followed by Minnesota (100), West Virginia(106), and Maine (118). * In 1993 (the latest available data), the incarceration rateof blacks was 7 times that of whites. At yearend there were 1,471black inmates per 100,000 black U.S. residents compared to 207white inmates per 100,000 white residents. The percentage of State prisoners serving a drug sentence increased almost 3-fold from 1980 to 1993 (6% to 22%). The percentage of Federal prisoners serving a drug sentence more than doubled, from 25% in 1980 to 60% in 1993. In recent years, although the number of drug offenders in the Nation's prisons grew dramatically (55,500 from 1990 to 1993), the number of violent offenders grew the most (up 82,100). ------------------------------------- Table 1. Changes in the State and Federal prison populations,1980-94 Annual increase ----------------Year Number Percentof inmates Number change -------------------------------------1980 329,821 -- -- 1981 369,930 40,109 12.2%1982 413,806 43,876 11.9 1983 436,855 23,049 5.6 1984 462,002 25,147 5.8 1985 502,507 40,505 8.8 1986 544,972 42,465 8.5 1987 585,084 40,112 7.4 1988 627,600 42,516 7.3 1989 712,364 84,764 13.5 1990 773,919 61,555 8.6 1991 825,619 51,700 6.7 1992 882,500 56,881 6.9 1993* 970,444 64,992 7.4 1994 1,053,738 83,294 8.6 Annual average 50,069 8.7% ------------------------------------- Note: All counts are for December 31 of each year and mayreflect revisions of previously reported numbers. --Not applicable. *Includes the jurisdiction populations of Massachusetts andTexas for the first time. For comparisons the final 1993 count(947,492), which excludes the noncustody population in Texas andMassachusetts, may be used. -------------------------------------- State and Federal prisons housed two-thirds of all personsincarcerated in the United States--the other third were in localjails. The 1994 growth rate of 8.6% was greater than the percentageincrease recorded during 1993 (7.4%). The 1994 increasetranslates into a nationwide need to confine an additional 1,602inmates each week. Prisoners with a sentence of more than 1 year (referred to as"sentenced prisoners") accounted for 96% of the totalprison population at the end of 1994, growing by 8.6 % during theyear. The remaining prisoners had sentences of a year or less orwere unsentenced (for example, those awaiting trial in Stateswith combined prison-jail systems). The number of sentenced Federal prisoners increased less thanthat of sentenced State prisoners during 1994 (7.3% versus 8.7%).The rate of increase slowed to about half the 1993 growth rate. During 1994 prison populations increased in 16 States by atleast 10%. Texas reported the largest increase (28.5%), followedby Georgia (20.3%), Nevada (16.0%), Virginia (14.6%), andWisconsin (14.1%). Three States and the District of Columbiaexperienced less than 2% growth. The District had the smallestpercentage growth (.9%), followed by Oklahoma (1.4%), SouthCarolina (1.6%), and Massachusetts (1.6%). Fifty-six percent of the increase during 1994 was accountedfor by Texas (26,182), California (5,654), Georgia (5,642), theFederal system (5,447), and Florida (4,091). These jurisdictionsincarcerate over 40% of the Nation's prison population. * At yearend 1980, 1 in every 453 U.S. residents wereincarcerated; by yearend 1993, that figure grew to 1 in every189. * From 1980 to 1993, the total number of persons held in thecustody of State, Federal, and local jail jurisdictions grew byabout 863,000 persons. Sixty-two percent of the growth can beattributed to the growth in number of State prisoners (533,000). Between 1980 and 1993, the Federal prison population grew at faster rate (an average of 9.9% per year) than the combined State populations (8.2%) and the Nation's local jail populations (7.3%). Despite the higher growth rate, only 5.9% of all inmates were held in Federal prisons in 1993, up from 4.7% in 1980. * On December 31, 1993, almost 4.9 million persons were under some form of correctional supervision, including 2.8 million adults on probation and 671,000 on parole. The percentage distribution of the total corrections population was-- Confinement 28.0% Federal prisons 1.7 State prisons 17.0 Local jails 9.3 Community supervision 72.0% Parole 13.7 Probation 58.3 * Between 1980 and 1993, the number of persons undercorrectional supervision increased by more than 3 million. About19% of this increase occurred because of the growth in the Stateand Federal prison populations. * * * Rates of incarceration increase On December 31, 1994, the number of sentenced prisoners per100,000 U.S. residents was 387. Of the 14 States with ratesgreater than the rate for the Nation, 11 were in the South, 2were in the West, and 1 was in the Midwest. Four States, NorthDakota (78), Minnesota (100), West Virginia (106), and Maine(118) had rates that were less than a third of the national rate. The District of Columbia, a wholly urban jurisdiction, held1,583 sentenced prisoners per 100,000 residents at yearend 1994.Since 1980 the number of sentenced inmates per 100,000 residentshas risen from 139 to 387. During this period, per capitaincarceration rates rose the most in the South (from 188 to 451)and West (from 105 to 333). The rate in the Northeast rose from87 to 285, and the rate in the Midwest from 109 to 297. Thenumber of sentenced Federal prisoners per 100,000 residentsincreased from 9 to 30 over the same period. Prison populations in Southern States grew the fastest During 1994 the average growth in the number of sentencedState and Federal prisoners was equal to a demand for 1,542additional bed spaces per week, about 179 more than the averageweekly growth in 1993. Regionally, during 1994 the percentage increase in the numberof sentenced prisoners was highest in the Southern States, a gainof 13.1%. The number of sentenced prisoners grew by 6.2% in theWest, 5.8% in the Midwest, and 4.1% in the Northeast. In 29States the percentage change in the number of sentenced prisonersduring 1994 was higher than that of 1993. Among these jurisdictions, 16 had increases of at least 10%.They were led by Texas (28.3%), Georgia (20.1%), Virginia(14.9%), New Hampshire (13.9%), and Idaho (13.7%). In five States(Delaware, Maine, Oklahoma, South Carolina, and Massachusetts)and the District of Columbia the number of sentenced prisonersincreased by less than 2%. In two States--Alaska andConnecticut--the number of sentenced prisoners declined during1994. Since 1989 net gains in the number of sentenced prisonershave averaged about 1,162 prisoners per week--a gain of about1,036 State prisoners and 125 Federal prisoners per week over theperiod. The largest net gains occurred in the South (500 inmatesper week), followed by the West (213 inmates per week), theMidwest (180 inmates per week), and the Northeast (144 inmatesper week). Texas accounted for 34% of the total growth in the 16Southern States and the District of Columbia. Californiaaccounted for two-thirds of the growth in the 13 Western States. In 1994 the 10 States with the largest prison populationsheld 55% of the total prison population nationwide, withCalifornia, Texas, and New York accounting for nearly 30%. Texashad the highest incarceration rate, with 636 sentenced prisonersper 100,000 residents, followed by Louisiana (530) and Oklahoma(508). During 1994 the prison population in Texas grew the fastest,increasing 28.5%. Over the past 5 years the State prisonpopulation of New Hampshire grew the fastest, increasing 73.3%.At yearend 1994 North Dakota had the lowest rate of incarceration(78 sentenced prisoners per 100,000 residents), followed byMinnesota (100), West Virginia (106), and Maine (118). Seventeen States, each holding fewer than 5,000 inmates,together held 4% of all prisoners in 1994. The number of sentenced inmates has increased in every Statesince 1989. Alaska (up 1.4% since 1989) and Maine (up 2.2%) hadthe smallest percentage increases. Four other States hadincreases of less than 20% in the last 5 years. Kansas had a5-year rate of growth of 13.5%, followed by Nebraska (13.7%), NewMexico (17.9%), and Wyoming (18.6%). Female prisoner population grew at a faster pace The numberof female inmates (64,403) increased at a faster rate during 1994(10.6%) than the number of male inmates (989,335 at 8.5%). At the end of 1994 women accounted for 6.1% of all prisonersnationwide. Relative to the number of women in the residentpopulation in the States in 1994, Oklahoma (with 96 femaleinmates per 100,000 female residents) and Texas (with 94) led theNation. North Dakota (5 per 100,000) and Maine (9) had the lowestfemale incarceration rates. In 1994, 28 States, the District ofColumbia, and the Federal system had more than 500 femaleinmates. Among these jurisdictions, 14 had increases of at least10%, led by the Texas increase of 27.2% (from 6,949 in 1993 to8,839 in 1994). Six States held fewer than 100 female inmates at yearend1994. Women represented less than 4% of all prisoners in NorthDakota, Montana, and Vermont. In 1994, 7.5% of inmates in theFederal system were female--higher than all State systems exceptfor Oklahoma (9.7%), Hawaii (7.7%), and Texas (7.5%). Local jails held almost 49,000 prisoners because of Stateprison crowding At the end of 1994, 23 jurisdictions reported atotal of 48,949 State prisoners held in local jails orotherfacilities because of crowding in State facilities. Texasaccounted for 42% of the prisoners sentenced to prison butincarcerated locally. Eight States--Louisiana, Texas, Virginia,West Virginia, Mississippi, New Jersey, Tennessee, andIdaho--held more than 10% of their prison population in localjails. Overall, because of prison crowding, 4.6% of the Stateprisoners were confined in local jails, down from 5.2% in 1993. Prison capacity estimates are difficult to compare The extentof crowding in the Nation's prisons is difficult to determinebecause of the absence of uniform measures for defining capacity.The 52 reporting jurisdictions apply a wide variety of capacitymeasures to reflect both available space to house inmates and theability to staff and operate an institution. To estimate thecapacity of the Nation's prisons, jurisdictions were asked tosupply three measures for yearend 1994: rated, operational, anddesign capacities. These measures were defined as follows: Rated capacity is the number of beds or inmates assigned by arating official to institutions within the jurisdiction. Operational capacity is the number of inmates that can beaccommodated based on a facility's staff, existing programs, andservices. Design capacity is the number of inmates that planners orarchitects intended for the facility. Of the 52 reporting jurisdictions, 38 supplied ratedcapacities, 43 provided operational capacities, and 37 submitteddesign capacity. As a result, estimates of total capacity andmeasures of the relationship to population are based on thehighest and lowest capacity figures provided. (Twenty-fivejurisdictions reported 1 capacity measure or gave the same figurefor each capacity measure they reported.) Most jurisdictions are operating above capacity Prisonsgenerally require reserve capacity to operate efficiently.Dormitories and cells need to be maintained and repairedperiodically, special housing is needed for protective custodyand disciplinary cases, and space may be needed to cope withemergencies. At the end of 1994, 13 States and the District ofColumbia reported that they were operating at or below 99% oftheir highest capacity. Forty-one States, the District ofColumbia and the Federal prison system reported operating at 100%or more of their lowest capacity. By yearend, the Federal systemwas estimated to be operating at 25% over capacity. State prisons were estimated to be operating at 117% of theirhighest capacity and 129% of their lowest capacity. Changing demographic characteristics The demographic characteristics of the Nation's prisonpopulation are changing. Since 1980 the number of female inmatesin the Nation's prisons has increased at a faster rate (up anaverage 12.0% per year) than the number of male inmates (up anaverage 8.5% per year.) Despite their faster population growth,females comprised only 6% of all sentenced prisoners at yearend1994. In 1994 the male incarceration rate, 746 per 100,000 maleresidents, was more than 16 times higher than the femaleincarceration rate--45 per 100,000 female residents. Increasingpercentages of State and Federal inmates are from racial orethnic minority groups. Between 1980 and 1993, the latestavailable data, the percent of sentenced inmates who were blackrose from 46.5% to 50.8%. Relative to the number of residents inthe U.S. population, blacks at yearend 1993 were 7 times morelikely than whites to have been incarcerated in a State orFederal prison. An estimated 1,471 blacks per 100,000 blackresidents and 207 whites per 100,000 white residents wereincarcerated in the Nation's prisons on December 31, 1993. The number of prisoners with sentences of more than a yearrose 616,292 between 1980 and 1993 (up 195%). The number of whitemales grew 163%, the number of black males 217%, the number ofwhite females 327%, and the number of black females 343%. The growth in the number of black male prisoners (304,800)accounted for nearly half of the total increase during the13-year period. Hispanics, who may be of any race, are the fastest growingminority group--increasing from 7.7% of all State and Federalinmates in 1980 to 14.3% in 1993. During this period, theHispanic incarceration rate more than tripled--from 163 sentencedprisoners per 100,000 Hispanic residents in 1980 to 529 per100,000 Hispanic residents in 1993. At yearend 1993 nearly139,000 Hispanics were in State or Federal prisons. The total number of Hispanic inmates may actually be somewhatlarger. Because of variations in record keeping, some States areunable to report data on Hispanic origin; other States reportestimates only; and others report only partial counts. Data frompast surveys of State inmates, which are based on inmateself-identification during personal interviews, produce higherestimates of the number of Hispanic inmates. On December 31, 1993, nearly two-thirds of all sentencedprison inmates were black, Asian, Native American, or Hispanic.Growth linked to increasing numbers of inmates in prison forviolent and drug offenses The distribution of the four major offensecategories--violent, property, drug, and public-orderoffenses--changed dramatically in the Nation's prison populationbetween 1980 and 1993. As a percentage of all State and Federalinmates, violent offenders fell from 57% in 1980 to 45% in 1993,property offenders fell from 30% to 22%, drug offenders rose from8% to 26%, and public-order offenders rose from 5% to 7%. The rise in the number of drug offenders was the greatestamong Federal inmates. Prisoners sentenced for drug lawviolations were the single largest group of Federal inmates (60%)in 1993, up from 25% in 1980. The increase in drug offendersaccounted for nearly three-quarters of the total growth inFederal inmates. The percentage of inmates in State prison for a drug crimealso rose significantly, from 6% in 1980 to 22% in 1993. Nearly10 times as many inmates were serving time in State prisons fordrug offenses in 1993 (186,000) as in 1980 (19,000). In absolute numbers, however, the growth in State inmates wasgreatest among violent offenders. Between 1980 and 1993, thenumber of violent offenders grew by 221,200, while the number ofdrug offenders grew by 167,000. As a percentage of the totalgrowth in sentenced State inmates during the period, violentoffenders accounted for 42% of the total growth, drug offenders31%, property offenders 19%, and public-order offenders 7%. Average sentence length and time served for State inmatesrelatively unchanged Data on prison admissions and releases collected annually inthe National Corrections Reporting Program (NCRP) suggest thatgrowth in the State prison populations has not been the result oflonger sentences. (Each year participating States provideinformation on sentencing and time served for persons entering orleaving prison. In 1993, 38 States and the District of Columbiasubmitted data, accounting for nearly 93% of all admissions and85% of all releases nationwide during the year.) Between 1985 and1992, years in which comparable data are available, the average(mean) maximum sentences of prisoners actually declined from 78months to 67 months. The median sentence length (the 50th percentile) of prisonersadmitted from court remained constant at 48 months. Moreover,despite the increasing use of mandatory minimums and sentencingenhancements during the period, the percent of inmates whoreceived a maximum sentence of 10 years or longer actuallydeclined (from 19.7% in 1985 to 17.7% in 1992). The NCRP data also reveal no significant changes in the timeserved by offenders released from State prison during the period.In 1992 State prisoners released for the first time on theircurrent offense (that is, first releases) served an average of 22months in prison and 5 months in jail. (Time served in jail isthe amount of time an inmate spends in jail prior to enteringState prison and is credited towards time served on the totalsentence.) The amount of time served in prison was slightly lowerin 1985 (20 months), higher in 1986 (24 months), and about thesame since 1987 (22 months). These data reflect the time served by prisoners actuallyreleased. Some prisoners will never be released but will die inprison. Some prisoners with very long sentences do not show upamong released prisoners for many years. As a result, measures oftime served based on released prisoners tend to understate theactual time to be served by persons entering prison. Changing Federal sentencing linked to population growth The Sentencing Reform Act of 1984 introduced "truth insentencing" to the Federal justice system. The Act created acommission that specified sentencing guidelines, which went intoeffect in late 1987. The guidelines took into account the gravityof the crime and the offender's criminal record. Under theguidelines offenders convicted of Federal offenses are expectedto serve a minimum of 85% of the actual sentence. After 1986 the average Federal sentence to prison for violentcrimes decreased, while overall time served increased. The resultis a rapidly growing Federal prison population. After 1986 theaverage time served by persons released from Federal prison rosefrom 15 months to 24 months (a 60% increase). For violentoffenses, the time served by first releases increased from 50months to 56 months and for drug offenses, time served increasedfrom 22 months to 33 months. The sentencing reforms also increased the likelihood ofincarceration for convicted Federal offenders. Between 1980 and 1992 the number of defend-ants convicted inU.S. district courts rose from 29,943 to 51,936, and thepercentage sent to prison increased from 46% to 75%. As a result,the number of offenders sent to Federal prisons rose from 13,766to 33,622--an increase of 144%. ("Federal Criminal CaseProcessing, 1980-90," September 1992, NCJ-136945;"Federal Criminal Case Processing, 1982-91, With PreliminaryData for 1992," November 1993, NCJ-144526.) Rise in State prison population the result of increasingnumber of arrests and higher probabilities of incarceration Underlying the growth in the State prison population has beenan increase in the number of arrests from nearly 8.3 millionadult arrests in 1980 to 11.6 million in 1993. Although the totalgrew by nearly 41%, for some offenses the percent increase wassubstantially greater: simple assault (139%), drug abuseviolations (116%), aggravated assault (86%). Compounding theimpact of more adult arrests for selected serious offenses, therate of sending offenders to prison rose between 1980 and 1992(the latest year for which data are available). Except for murderand nonnegligent manslaughter, the number of admissions to Stateprison per 1,000 arrests for serious crimes rose significantly.The likelihood of incarceration upon arrest increased 5-fold fordrug violations, increased 4-fold for weapons offenses, anddoubled for larceny/theft, motor vehicle theft, and sexualassault other than rape. As a result of the compounding nature of these factors, thenumber of admissions to State prisons from court rose from131,215 sentenced prisoners in 1980 to 318,069 in 1993, anincrease of 142%. Methodology National Prisoner Statistics This Bulletin is based on an advance count of prisonersconducted for the National Prisoner Statistics (NPS) programimmediately after the end of each calendar year. A detailed,final count containing any revisions to the jurisdictions'advance count will be published later. Most States provide jurisdiction counts, that is, the numberof inmates under their jurisdiction on December 31, regardless ofthe location of their inmates. These counts exclude inmateshoused for other jurisdictions, such as other State's inmates andpretrial detainees, that are housed in a jurisdiction'sfacilities. Some States provide custody counts, that is, the number ofinmates housed in State facilities regardless of jurisdiction.(See Jurisdiction notes.) These counts exclude inmates housedoutside of each State's prison facilities, such as inmates housedin local jails. Custody counts are used to calculate the totalnumber of inmates in prisons and jails. Estimation procedures The offense distributions of State prisoners at yearend wereestimated for 1980, 1985, and 1990-93. To obtain estimates of thecustody populations by offense, data from inmate surveysconducted in 1979, 1986, and 1991, were combined with counts byoffense of annual admissions and releases. The surveys providedthe basis for estimating the offense distributions of the otheryears. The offense distributions were estimating using forward andbackward stock-flow procedures as outlined in CorrectionPopulations in the United States, 1992 (January 1995,NCJ-146413). Data from the 1979 survey were used for forwardestimates for 1980; data from the 1986 survey (conducted in March1986) were used for 1985 estimates, 1990 forward estimates, and1980 backward estimates; and data from the 1991 survey for 1991estimates and 1992-93 forward estimates. To obtain flow populations for each year, the offensedistributions of admissions and releases were drawn from annualreports of the National Prisoner Statistics (1980-82) program andthe National Corrections Reporting Program (1983-92). Data fromthe 1992 NCRP were used to estimate flows for 1993. The offense distributions of Federal inmates are forprisoners of any sentence length on September 30 in 1980 and1985. Data for 1990-93 are taken from the BJS Federal justicedatabase. Jurisdiction notes Federal--The rated capacity of Federal facilities on December31, 1994, was 68,221 inmates. This does not include contract bedspaces. The number of contract bed spaces at the end of the yearwas 9,534. Alabama--The capacity of the community programs is notincluded in the capacity figures reported. Population countsinclude 1,547 inmates housed in local jails as of December 31,1994, because of overcrowding. Alaska--Prisons and jails form one integrated system. All NPSdata include jail and prison populations. Alaska's capacity isestablished by the Cleary final settlement agreement with theState court and the Community Residential Centers program. Arizona--Population counts are based on custody data.Population counts exclude 118 inmates housed in local jailsbecauseof crowding in the State facilities. Arkansas--Population counts include 565 inmates housed inlocal jails as of December 31, 1994, because of overcrowding. California--Population counts are based on custody data. Colorado--Population counts for m sentence" include anundetermined number of "Inmates with a maximum sentence of 1year or less." Design and operational capacities do notinclude the Bent County Correctional Facility, owned and operatedby the county of Bent (Las Animas, Colorado) and MinnesotaPrairie Correctional Facility (Appleton, Minnesota) which arecontracted. The Bent County facility holds 320 prisoners and theMinnesota facility holds 405 prisoners for the State of Colorado. Population counts include 815 inmates housed in local jailsbecause of crowding in State facilities. Connecticut--Prisons and jails form one integrated system.All NPS data include prison and jail populations. Delaware--Prisons and jails form one integrated system. AllNPS data include jail and prison populations. Capacity countsinclude the halfway houses under the Department of Corrections. District of Columbia--Prisons and jails form one integratedsystem. All NPS data includes jail and prison populations. Florida--Population counts are based on custody data. Georgia--Population counts are based on custody data. Inmates housed in local jails are not considered part of theprison population until they are admitted. Most inmates areawaiting transfer into the prison system. An undetermined numberwere held because of crowding. Hawaii--Prisons and jails form one integrated system. All NPSdata include jail and prison populations. Population counts for"Inmates with over 1 year maximum sentence" includeparole and probation violators. These inmates were previouslycounted as "Unsentenced inmates." Idaho--Population counts include 312 inmates housed in localjails because of crowding of State facilities. Illinois--Population counts are based on custody data.Population counts for "Inmates with over 1 year maximumsentence" include an undetermined number of "Inmateswith a maximum sentence of 1 year." Capacity figures include875 inmates on electronic detention. Indiana--Prison population counts include 903 inmates whowere housed in local jails as of December 31, 1994, because ofcrowding of State facilities. Another floor was opened in afacility to accommodate a larger number of inmates; as a result,capacity was increased and some crowding was reduced. Iowa--Population counts are based on custody data. Kansas--Population counts for "Inmates with over 1 yearmaximum sentence" include a small undetermined number ofinmates with a sentence of less than 1 year (among thosesentenced under the Kansas Sentencing Guidelines Act of 1993). Kentucky--Population counts include 632 inmates who werehoused in local jails as of December 31, 1994, because ofcrowding of State facilities. Louisiana--The rated and operational capacities do notinclude contractual work release facilities. The rated capacityof the contractual work release facilities is 348 inmates. Theoperational capacity of the contractual work release facilitiesis 343 inmates. Population counts include 8,064 inmates housed in local jailsbecause of crowding of State facilities. Maine--Maine has a number of inmates serving concurrentsentences some of which are 1 year or more and some 1 year orless. These inmates are not included in the prison populationcounts. Maryland--Population totals are actual manual counts;however, the breakdowns for sentence length are estimates. Massachusetts--Population counts are based on jurisdictionaldata for the first time. For this report custody counts forDecember 31, 1993, were updated to jurisdictional counts.Population counts exclude the 963 inmates housed in local jailsbecause of crowding of State facilities. Population totals areactual counts, however, the male/female breakdown is an estimatebelieved to be within 0.05% of the actual counts. Populationcounts include 336 inmates without sentence information. Michigan--Population counts are based on custody data. Minnesota--Population counts include 85 inmates housed inlocal jails as of December 31, 1994, because of crowding of Statefacilities. Mississippi--Population counts are as of December 30, 1994.Population counts include 1,569 inmates housed in local jail asof December 30, 1994, because of crowding. New Jersey--"Design" capacity does not includepersons held in halfway houses (686) and persons held under thecounty assistance program (846). North Carolina--While population totals are actual counts,the breakdowns for sentence length are estimates. Because ofcrowding 248 male inmates were housed in local jails; another 937male inmates were housed in private prisons out of State on acontractual basis. The total of 1,185 male inmates are includedin the population counts. Oklahoma--Population counts for "Inmates with over 1year maximum sentence" may include a small undeterminednumber of "Inmates with a sentence of 1 year."Population counts exclude 375 inmates housed in local jailsbecause of overcrowding. Oregon--An undetermined number of inmates for which sentencelength is unknown is included in the count for "Inmates witha sentence of 1 year or less." Pennsylvania--The design capacity figure increased becauseseveral sections in different facilities opened. This State nowtreats the rated, operational, and design capacity the same. Rhode Island--Prisons and jails form one integrated system.All NPS data include prison and jail populations. South Carolina--Population counts include 359 inmates whowere housed in local jails as of December 31, 1994, because ofcrowding of State facilities. Tennessee--Population counts for "Inmates with over 1year maximum sentence" include an undetermined number ofinmates with a sentence of 1 year. These counts are based on theDepartment of Corrections' population report from December 29,1994. Population counts include 1,829 inmates housed in localjails because of overcrowding and exclude an undetermined numberoffelons sentenced to serve their time in local jails. (The Statepays to house these felons, but the local court maintainsjurisdiction.) These counts are based on a jail report fromDecember 16, 1994. Texas--Population counts for December 31, 1994, include20,720 inmates housed in local jails because of crowding. InTexas the minimum sentence for any offender sentenced to a Stateprison is 2 years. Utah--Population counts include 169 inmates housed in localjails because of crowding of State facilities. Vermont--Prisons and jails form an integrated system. All NPSdata include prison and jail populations. Some county andmunicipal authorities operate local "lockups." NPS datainclude the inmates in local "lockups". Populationcounts for sentenced inmates include 305 who were on long-termfurlough. The rated capacity figures decreased due to the closingof one facility for renovations. Virginia--Virginia uses a base capacity method to determinethe rated, operational, and design capacity figures. Under thismethod of determining capacity, only the bunks that touch thefloor are counted; top bunks are not counted. Population countsinclude 4,508 inmates who were housed in local jails because ofcrowding of State facilities. West Virginia--Population counts are based oncustody data.Population counts exclude 383 male and 15 female inmates housedin county or regional jails because of crowding of Statefacilities. Washington--Offenders sentenced to 1 year or less andunsentenced offenders reside in county jails. Capacities reportedexclude state work release and pre-release facilities whichhoused 918 inmates on December 31, 1994. These facilities'capacity of 1,102 inmates are not specifically reserved for Stateprison inmates. These facilities are for prison inmates,parolees, probationers, and offenders serving partial confinementsentences. CliffSchaffer's Home Page WT01-B26-41IA031-000651-B015-189http://206.61.184.43:80/schaffer/GOVPUBS/jails1.htm 206.61.184.43 19970122121134 text/html 42060HTTP/1.0 200 OKDate: Wednesday, 22-Jan-97 12:11:27 GMTServer: WebSitePro/1.1f (S/N wpo-0deb)Allow-ranges: bytesContent-type: text/htmlLast-modified: Saturday, 28-Dec-96 06:13:32 GMTContent-length: 41842 Jails and Jail Inmates 1993-94: Census of Jails and Surveyof Ja Jails and Jail Inmates 1993-94: Census of Jails and Survey ofJails By Craig A. Perkins, James J. Stephan, and Allen J. Beck BJS Statisticians U.S. Department of Justice Office of Justice Programs Bureau of Justice Statistics Bulletin April 1995, NCJ-151651 (This report text does not contain the 23 data tables. A copyof the complete report with tables may be obtained from theBureau of Justice Statistics Clearinghouse, 1-800-732-3277, P.O.Box 179, Annapolis Junction, MD 20701-0179--or fax your name,address, the title, and the NCJ number to 410-792-4358.) The number of inmates held in the Nation's local jails onJune 30, 1994, reached a record high of 490,442. Local jails,which are operated by counties and municipalities andadministered by local government agencies, housed about a thirdof all persons incarcerated in the U.S. at midyear 1994; theother two-thirds were in State or Federal prisons. The jail population grew by 30,638 inmates between July 1,1993, and June 30, 1994, the third largest annual increaserecorded since 1983. The 12-month increase was the equivalent ofa 6.7% rate of growth. Between 1983 and 1993, when comparable statistics werecollected, the number of local jail employees grew at a fasterrate than the number of inmates. During this period, the numberof jail inmates increased at an annual rate of 7.5%, while thenumber of full-time and part-time jail employees grew at anannual rate of 10%. By midyear 1993, local jails employed anestimated 165,500 persons. Highlights After a decade of record growth, the number of inmates inlocal jails reached a high of 490,442 on June 30, 1994 Annual Survey Census of Jails of Jails ------------------------------------------- 1983 1988 1993 1994 -------------------------------------------------------------- Number of inmates 223,551 343,569 459,804 490,442 Rated capacity of jails 261,556 339,949 475,224 504,324 Percent of capacity occupied 85% 101% 97% 97% Number of jails 3,338 3,316 3,304 -- Number of staff 64,560 99,631 165,500 -- Number of inmates per employee 3.5 3.4 2.8 -- Annual operating expenditures per inmate $9,360 $10,639 $14,667 -- --Not collected. * The number of jail inmates per 100,000 U.S. residentsincreased from 96 in 1983 to 188 in 1994. * In 1993, 8 States had over 200 local jail inmates per100,000 residents: Louisiana (377), Georgia (328), Texas (307),Tennessee (282), Florida (250), Virginia (225), California (222),and Nevada (215). * Between 1983 and 1993 the number of jail inmates increased106%; the total jail staff increased 156%; and the number ofcorrectional officers grew 165%. * At midyear 1994 the capacity of the Nation's local jailswas 504,324 inmates, as measured by the number of beds allottedby State or local rating officials. * The jail population was 97% of rated capacity. Jail spaceincreased 93% between 1983 and 1994. * White non-Hispanics made up 39% of the jail population;black non-Hispanics, 44%; Hispanics, 15%; and non-Hispanics ofother races, 2%. Factors underlying the growth in the Nation's jail populationincluded: * an increase in adult arrests * a growth in jail admissions * an increased number of felons sentenced to local jails * an increased number of inmates charged with or convicted ofdrug offenses * more inmates held in jails because of crowded State orFederal facilities. Data sources The data in this report are based on results from the 1993Census of Jails and the 1994 Annual Survey of Jails. Every 5years the jail census collections provide detailed information onlocal jail inmates, staff, facilities, and programs. Previouscensuses were conducted in 1970, 1972, 1978, 1983, and 1988.Beginning in 1982 and in years between each jail census, a sampleof jails has been surveyed to obtain basic information on inmatesand jail capacity. These annual surveys provide national-levelestimates on fewer characteristics than the census. (SeeMethodology at end.) As defined in this report, jails are locally operatedcorrectional facilities that confine persons before or afteradjudication. Inmates sentenced to jail usually have a sentenceof a year or less, but jails also incarcerate persons in a widevariety of other categories. Jails-- * receive individuals pending arraignment and hold themawaiting trial, conviction, or sentencing readmit probation, parole, and bail-bond violators and absconders * temporarily detain juveniles pending transfer to juvenile authorities * hold mentally ill persons pending their movement toappropriate health facilities * hold individuals for the military, for protective custody,for contempt, and for the courts as witnesses release convicted inmates to the community upon completion of sentence * transfer inmates to Federal, State, or other authorities * relinquish custody of temporary detainees to juvenile andmedical authorities * sometimes operate community-based programs with electronicmonitoring or other types of supervision. Not included in the survey or census are inmates in sixStates with combined jail and prison systems. At midyear 1994these States-Alaska (except for 5 local jails), Connecticut,Delaware, Hawaii, Rhode Island, and Vermont--held nearly 6,000inmates who were unsentenced or had sentences of less than ayear. These inmates and the facilities that house them areincluded in BJS prison statistics. The 1993 Census of Jails also included, for the first time,seven Federal facilities that perform the pretrial functions oflocal jails. Data on these Federal facilities and inmates arereported separately. (See the section on Federal jails.) Local jail inmates On June 30, 1994, the Nation's jails held 490,442 inmates, anincrease of 6.7% over the number held on June 30, 1993. The jailpopulation grew by more than 30,000 inmates during the 12-monthperiod, the third largest increase ever recorded. Since 1983 the jail inmate population has nearly doubled on aper capita basis. During this period, the number of jail inmatesper 100,000 residents rose from 96 to 188. At midyear 1994 about1 in every 398 adult residents of the United States was in alocal jail. An estimated 6,725 persons under age 18 were housed in adultjails on June 30, 1994. Over three-quarters of them had beenconvicted or were being held for trial as adults in criminalcourt. Most juveniles in correctional custody are housed injuvenile facilities. Who is a juvenile? Most, but not all, States define a juvenile as a person underage 18 who is subject to juvenile court jurisdiction. Exceptionsusually depend on offense severity or an offender's adjudicationhistory. In the 1993 census and 1994 survey, to achieve reportinguniformity, jail authorities were asked to report the number ofinmates under age 18. Of the 6,725 total in 1994, 76% wereidentified as juveniles tried or scheduled to be tried as adults.Statutes and judicial practice some- times allow youths to beheld in adult jails. Often juveniles accused of acts that arecrimes for adults may be held in local jails or police lockups,given certain conditions: * separated by sight and sound from the general population * held for a limited time, typically less than 6 hours. Most confined juveniles are housed in institutions specifiedfor them. In 1993 about 96,000 were in public and privatejuvenile detention and correctional facilities. The average daily population for the year ending June 30,1994, was 479,757, an increase of 2.9% from 1993. Between 1983and 1993, when separate counts by sex were collected, the averagedaily population of female inmates grew at a faster rate (up11.1% per year) than the average daily population of adult maleinmates (up 7.1% per year). States with the largest jail populations In 1993, 5 States incarcerated slightly less than half of alllocal jail inmates: California (69,298 inmates), Texas (55,395),Florida (34,183), New York (29,809), and Georgia (22,663).Twenty-one States reported a jailpopulation that more thandoubled between 1983 and 1993, with growth ranging from 103% inMaryland to 264% in Texas. States that had the largest number of jail inmates per100,000 residents in 1993 were Louisiana (377), Georgia (328),Texas (307), Tennessee (282), Florida (250), Virginia (225),California (222), and Nevada (215). States with a jailincarceration rate less than half that of the Nation (178 per100,000) were Iowa, Maine, and North Dakota (57), Minnesota andMontana (81), and South Dakota (87). The number of local jail inmates rose the most in the Southand the least in the Midwest. From 1983 to 1993 the inmatepopulation grew 135% in the South, 102% in the Northeast, 81% inthe West, and 79% in the Midwest. For the Nation a declining number of jails held theseincreasing numbers of inmates. In 1993 the total of 3,304facilities was 12 fewer than 5 years before and 34 fewer than in1983. Facility size and the percentage of the inmate populationheld A small number of jails held a disproportionate share of theNation's jail inmates. About 6% of the jail facilities housedmore than half of all jail inmates on June 30, 1993. Facilitieswith an average daily population of 500 or more during the annualperiod ending June 30, 1993, held 53% of local jail inmates.Facilities with an average daily population of fewer than 50persons comprised 57% of all jails but housed about 8% of allinmates. Demographic characteristics of local jail inmates Male inmates made up 90% of the local jail inmate populationat midyear 1994, down from 93% in 1983. An estimated 1 in every212 adult men and 1 in every 2,048 adult women were held in alocal jail on June 30, 1994. On June 30, 1994, a majority of local jail inmates were blackor Hispanic. White non-Hispanics made up 39% of the jailpopulation; black non-Hispanics, 44%; Hispanics, 15%; and otherraces (Asians, Pacific Islanders, American Indians and AlaskaNatives), 2%. Relative to the number of residents in the U.S. population,black non-Hispanics were more than twice as likely as Hispanics,nearly 7 times more likely than white non-Hispanics, and over 9times more likely than persons of other races to have been heldin a local jail on June 30, 1994. Federal jails June 30, 1994 ----------------------------------------- Estimated number Number of inmates of inmates per 100,000 population ------------------------------------------------------------ Total 490,442 188 White non-Hispanic 191,900 100 Black non-Hispanic 215,400 691 Hispanic 75,500 290 Other race 7,700 74 Note: U.S. resident populations were estimated. Inmate countswere adjusted for nonresponse and rounded to the nearest 100.Rates were based on relevant population subgroups. Adult conviction status, mid-1993 On June 30, 1993, the most recent date for available data, atleast half the Nation's adult jail inmates had been convicted ontheir current charge. Convicted inmates include those awaitingsentencing, serving a sentence, or returned to jail for aviolation of probation or parole. Between 1983 and 1993 thereported number of convicted inmates more than doubled (from107,660 to 226,600). The number of jail inmates awaiting courtdisposition also doubled (from 113,984 to 228,900). In 1993 female inmates were somewhat more likely than maleinmates to have been convicted. Among adult female inmates, 52%had been convicted on their current charge, compared to 50% ofthe male inmates. Rated capacity and percent occupied At midyear 1994, therated capacity of the Nation's local jails totaled 504,324. Ratedcapacity is the maximum number of beds or inmates allocated byState or local rating officials to each jail facility. During the12 months ending June 30, 1994, an estimated 29,100 beds wereadded. Nearly a quarter of a million beds have been added since1983. As of June 30, 1994, 97% of the local jail capacity wasoccupied. As measured by a ratio of the number of inmates housedin jail facilities to the rated capacity, the percent of capacityactually occupied may have been somewhat lower than 97%. Includedamong the total jail inmates were an unknown number of inmateshoused outside of jail facilities--under electronic monitoring,on house arrest, under other kinds of community supervision, ortemporarily in hospitals or treatment centers. As a ratio of all inmates to capacity, the percent ofcapacity occupied increased considerably after 1983, reaching arecord 108% in 1989 and then falling to 97% in 1993. Since 1989rated capacity has risen by nearly 137,000 beds, while the numberof inmates has increased by 95,000. In 1993 the total jail population exceeded jail capacity ineight States and the District of Columbia. Percent of jail State capacity occupied --------------------------------------- Virginia 160% South Carolina 124 District of Columbia 121 New Jersey 120 Texas 115 California 113 Massachusetts 106 Washington 102 Pennsylvania 101 In eight other States, excluding Alaska, the total jailpopulation was below 75% of the combined capacity of all localjails. The lowest occupancy rates were in North Dakota (43%),followed by Wyoming (52%), South Dakota (54%), and Montana (60%).Between 1988 and 1993 the capacity of the Nation's local jailsincreased by 40%, from 339,949 beds to 475,224. In eight Statesthe capacity of local jails increased by more than 60% during the5-year period. Jails in New Hampshire and Massachusettsexperienced the largest percentage increase in capacity. Duringthis period the combined capacities of jails declined in thefollowing jurisdictions: West Virginia, Montana, and the Districtof Columbia. In every census year, facilities with the largest averagedaily populations have reported the highest occupancy rates. In1993 occupancy was 111% of rated capacity in jails with anaverage population of 1,000 or more inmates, compared to 67% inthose with fewer than 50 inmates. The 25 largest jail jurisdictions In 1994 the Nation's 25 largest jail jurisdictions accountedfor 30% of all jail inmates. The jurisdictions were in 12 States:7 in California; 5 in Texas; 4 in Florida; and 1 each in NewYork, Illinois, Louisiana, Tennessee, Arizona, Pennsylvania,Maryland, Georgia, and Michigan. New York City's system, with 15 institutions, had the largestnumber of facilities. The two jurisdictions with the most inmates, Los AngelesCounty and New York City, together held more than 38,284, or 8%of the national total. Overall, the 25 largest jurisdictions on June 30, 1994, had atotal population of 149,082 inmates, 10% more than the 135,060 ayear earlier. In 1994, 15 jurisdictions reported having a larger averagedaily population than in 1993. Dallas County, Texas, reported the largest single yeargrowth--2,123 inmates--and the largest growth from 1988 to1994--5,494. Shelby County (Memphis), Tennessee, reported thelargest decrease from 1993 to 1994--1,327 inmates. Local jail employees Local jails employed an estimated 165,500 persons on June 30,1993. Including all full-time and part-time, payroll andnonpayroll staff, the total staff grew by more than 100,000between 1983 and 1993, an increase of 156%. The staff total included 117,900 correctional officers, theemployees most responsible for providing a secure environment andfor directly supervising inmates. Correctional officers comprisedabout 7 in every 10 jail employees in the 3 censuses, 1983-93. Characteristics of local jail staff At midyear 1993 men comprised 70% of all paid jail staff and76% of correctional officers. Excluded were nonpayroll jailemployees, such as teachers or counselors, who were paid byagencies other than jails. Between 1988 and 1993 the female staff in local jails nearlydoubled, from 25,642 to an estimated 48,000. In 1993 nearly athird of all paid staff and a quarter of correctional officerswere women. The race and ethnic composition of jail staffremained unchanged between 1988 and 1993. White employees made upan estimated 71% of the payroll jail staff in 1993, including 69%of the correctional officers. Blacks comprised 22% of all employees, including 23% of thecorrectional officers. Hispanics accounted for 6% of the totalpaid staff and 7% of correctional officers. Inmate-to-staff ratios, 1993 From 1983 to 1993 the number of U.S. jail employees increased156%, as the number of correctional officers went up 165%. Jailstaffs in the Northeast had the largest percentageincreases--more than tripling in 10 years--while those in theMidwest had the smallest, more than doubling. The South, theregion with the largest number of jail employees, registered thegreatest regional growth (75%) from 1988 to 1993. The West, withless than half the number of employees in the South, also had theleast growth in staff (50%). Throughout the period, 1983-93, thejail staff in the Nation and in every region grew more rapidlythan the inmate population. In 1993 jails held 2.8 inmates peremployee. The ratio in 1993 was almost a fifth lower than the 3.4inmates per employee in 1988. As a measure of workload, the number of inmates percorrectional officer also declined, from 4.7 in 1988 to 3.9 in1993. All four regions had decreases in inmate-to-correctionalofficer ratios. The West reported the sharpest decline, from 7.1inmates per officer in 1983 to 5.3 in 1993. The smallerfacilities had fewer inmates per correctional officer (2.4) thandid larger jails (4.6 inmates per officer in the jails with a1,000 or more inmates). The jails that were operating with aninmate population at least 10% over their rated capacity had aninmate-to-correctional officer ratio almost twice that of jailswith less than 75% of capacity occupied. Jails with 91% to 110%of capacity filled employed a correctional officer for more thanevery 4 inmates. Annual jail expenditures Local jails throughout the United States spent a total ofslightly over $9.6 billion during the year ending June 30, 1993.This estimated total (not adjusted for inflation) was more thandouble the $2.7 billion spent in 1983. Approximately 71% of all reporting facilities were able toprovide data on expenditures in 1993. These jails reported totalannual expenditures were nearly $7.8 billion; operating costs,about $5.5 billion; and capital expenditures, $2.2 billion. Gross salaries and wages, employer contributions to employeebenefits, purchases of food, supplies, contractual services, andother current operating costs accounted for 71% of expenditures.Construction costs, major repairs, equipment, improvements, landpurchases, and other capital outlays accounted for the remaining29%. In 1988, operating costs made up 78% of all expenditures andcapital outlays, 22%. Average operating cost per inmate Excluding capital outlays in 1993, the average cost to keepone jail inmate incarcerated for a year was $14,667. Over 10years the cost per inmate had risen 57% from $9,360. (Adjustedfor inflation to 1983 dollars the annual cost per inmate haddecreased by 11%.) The Northeast had the highest averageoperating expenditure per inmate ($22,678) and the South, thelowest ($11,697). Excluding Alaska and the District of Columbia,average annual operating costs per inmate by State were highestin New York ( $29,297) and lowest in Mississippi ($7,014). Inmate deaths During the year ending June 30, 1993, 647 inmate deathsoccurred in the jurisdiction of the jail authorities who provideddata on such deaths. Although asked to report the death ofinmates under the jurisdiction of jail authorities, regardless ofwhere the death took place, some facilities could report onlydeaths that occurred on the jail premises. In addition, about 10%of all jails were unable to report whether any inmate deaths hadoccurred in 1993. In 1993 illness was the leading cause of death in local jails(45%), followed by suicide (36%). Acquired immune deficiencysyndrome (AIDS) accounted for about 10% of reported inmatedeaths; homicide, 3%; and other causes, 6%. The death rate among jail inmates fell by more than a thirdbetween 1983 and 1993, from 232 to 149 per 100,000 inmates. Whilethe rate of death from illness, including AIDS, remainedrelatively constant over the period, the rate of suicide declinedsharply, from 129 per 100,000 in 1983, to 85 in 1988, to 54 in1993. Federal jails In 1993 the Federal Bureau of Prisons maintained a smallnumber of detention facilities that functioned as jails. Thesewere not counted among the city, county, or regional adultdetention facilities called local jails in this report. Localfacilities, however, did hold about 12,000 persons for Federalauthorities, according to data reported by 90% of all facilities.At midyear 1993 the Bureau of Prisons operated 7 jails, holding5,899 persons who were awaiting adjudication or serving asentence, usually of a year or less. Inmate demographics Ninety-three percent of Federal jail inmates were men, aslightly higher proportion than in local jails (90%). Seventy-twopercent were white, 25% were black, and 3% were Asians, PacificIslanders, American Indians, or Alaska Natives. Conviction status Slightly more than half of the Federal inmates wereunconvicted and were awaiting arraignment, trial, or thecompletion of their trial. Facility capacity The 7 Federal jails had a combined rated capacity of3,810-the population being 155% of that capacity. The percentoccupied was about 50% higher than that of local jails ofcomparable size. Inmate deaths Eight inmates died while under the jurisdiction of Federaljail authorities during the annual period ending June 30, 1993.Four deaths resulted from illness or natural causes, two weresuicides, and two were drug overdoses. Staff Seventy-five percent of Federal jail employees were male, ahigher percentage than the 70% of employees for local facilities.A majority of the Federal jail employees were correctionalofficers. Overall, there were 2.9 inmates per staff member in Federaljails, about the same as in local facilities where the ratio was2.8 inmates per employee. However, the number of inmates percorrectional officer (5.5) was higher than in local jails with500 to 999 inmates (4.4). Expenditures Federal jail expenditures totaled slightly more than $166million during the annual period ending June 30, 1993, excludingthose at the Guaynabo, Puerto Rico, facility, in operation only afew months at the time of the census. Gross salaries and wages,contributions to employee benefits, purchases of food, supplies,contractual services, and other current operating costs accountedfor 76% of expenditures. Construction costs, major repairs,equipment, improvements, land purchases, and other capitaloutlays made up the remaining 24%. The average cost to house one Federal jail inmate during theyear ending June 30, 1993, exclusive of capital expenditures was$22,773, as compared to $14,667 among local jails. Characteristic Number of facilities 7 Number of inmates 5,899 Male 5,490 Female 409 White 4,271 Black 1,462 Other 166 Status of inmates Convicted 47% Unconvicted 53% Rated capacity 3,810 Percent of capacity occupied 155% Inmate deaths during annual period ending June 30, 1993 - 8 Cause Illness/natural cause 4 AIDS 0 Suicide 2 Homicide 0 Other* 2 Number of employees 2,009 Male 1,499 Female 510 Administrators 89 Correctional officers 1,080 Clerical and maintenance 263 Educational 26 Other** 551 Number of inmates per employee All employees 2.9 Correctional officers 5.5 Annual expenditures*** Total $166,297,143 Capital 39,360,670 Operating 126,936,473 Operating cost per inmate**** $22,773 Note: Facilities are in Los Angeles, CA; San Diego, CA;Miami, FL; Chicago, IL; New York, NY; Otisville, NY; andGuaynabo, PR. *Drug overdose. **Professional and technical workers, such as public healthservice employees, case managers, facility managers, andtransportation specialists. ***Excludes Guaynabo, PR, which had operated for only 4months and was not fully occupied or staffed at the time of thecensus. ****Calculated by dividing operating costs for all facilitiesby average daily population (5,574). Factors behind the growing jail population An increasing number of arrests Underlying the dramatic growth of the Nation's local jailpopulation after 1983 was a rise in the number of arrests from11.7 million in 1983 to 14.0 million in 1993. Over the 10-yearperiod, the total number of arrests grew at an annual rate of1.8%. For some offenses the annual rate of growth wassubstantially greater: simple assault (7.6%), aggravated assault(5.8%), drug abuse violations (5.4%), and weapons violations(3.9%). The increase in arrests resulted in a growing number ofadmissions to local jails. On June 30, 1993, an estimated 26,800persons were officially booked and admitted to local jails, andan additional 9,500 inmates were transferred in from otherfacilities or readmitted after having been temporarily released.The estimated number of new admissions totaled nearly 9.8 millionfor 1993, up from an estimated 6.0 million in the annual periodending June 30, 1983. Among inmates facing felony charges, the likelihood of beingheld in a local jail prior to the disposition of their caseremained nearly the same between 1988 and 1992. Based on thebiennial National Pretrial Reporting Program (NPRP) thatdescribes State felony defendants in the Nation's 75 mostpopulous counties, an estimated 37% were held awaitingdisposition in 1992. Roughly the same percentage was detained in1988 (34%) and 1990 (35%). (Pretrial Release of FelonyDefendants, BJS Bulletins, 1988 [February 1991, NCJ-127202], 1990[November 1992, NCJ-139560], and 1992 [November 1994,NCJ-148818]). More felons sentenced to local jail The impact of more arrests and jail admissions was compoundedby a growing number of felons receiving a sentence to local jail.Between 1986 and 1992 the number of convicted felons sentenced toconfinement in local jails almost doubled: Felons sentenced to local jails ------------------------------- Percent of all Year Number convicted felons ---------------------------------------- 1986 122,400 21% 1988 176,000 26 1990 207,300 25 1992 232,300 26 Percent change, 1986-92 90% Source: Felony Sentences in State Courts (1986, 1988, 1990,and 1992). Jail inmates received about the same average sentences Growthin the local jail population between 1983 and 1993 was not theresult of longer sentences. Results from the National JudicialReporting Program (NJRP) indicate that between 1988 and 1992,years in which comparable data on felons sentenced to local jailsare available, the average (mean) maximum jail sentence amongthose entering jail remained constant. In 1988 and 1992 felonssentenced to local jail received a mean sentence of 7 months.(Felony Sentences in State Courts, BJS Bulletins, 1988 [December1990, NCJ-126923], 1990 [March 1993, NCJ-149077], and 1992[January 1995, NCJ-151167]). Data from the 1983 and 1989 surveys of inmates in local jailsalso reveal no significant changes in the sentence lengthsreceived by sentenced inmates overall, including felons andmisdemeanants. About 50% of the jail inmates had been convictedand sentenced at the time of both surveys. (Profile of JailInmates, 1989, BJS Special Report [April 1991, NCJ-129097]).Between 1983 and 1989, there was an increase in the mean sentence(from 14 months to 17 months) but no change in the median. Inboth years half of the sentenced inmates had received a sentenceof 6 months or less. More drug offenders incarcerated in local jails The largest source of growth among inmates in local jails wasdrug law violators. Based on data from inmate surveys in 1983 and1989, the number of jail inmates charged or convicted of drugoffenses rose from 20,800 to 91,000. In 1983 about 1 of every 10inmates were in jail for a drug offense; in 1989 nearly 1 ofevery 4 were in jail for drugs. From 1983 to 1989 the increase inthe number of persons in jail for drug offenses accounted formore than 40 percent of the total increase in the jailpopulation. Between 1983 and 1989 the percentage of jail inmatesdecreased for violent offenses (from 30.7% to 22.5%) and propertyoffenses (from 38.6% to 30.0%), but increased for public-orderoffenses (from 20.6% to 22.8%). During this period, the totalnumber of inmates increased in every category: violent offendersincreased from 68,600 to 89,000; property offenders from 86,300to 118,700; and public-order offenders from 46,100 to 90,200. Although offense information for more recent years is notavailable, estimates may be made using 1989 percentages. Assumingno change in the percentage distributions, the estimated numberof drug offenders in local jails in 1993 was more than 105,800,representing a 5-fold increase since 1983. More jail inmates held for State/Federal authorities The Nation's jail population also grew between 1983 and 1993as a result of crowding in State and Federal prisons. On June 30,1993, nearly 12% of all jail inmates were prisoners being heldfor State or Federal authorities. An estimated 53,900 inmateswere held for State or Federal authorities in 1993, up from17,281 in 1983. Between 1983 and 1993 the number of inmates held for Stateand Federal authorities grew at twice the rate of the inmatepopulation overall (212% compared with 106%). Approximately 34,200 jail inmates in 1993 were in localfacilities as a direct result of crowding of State or Federalfacilities (representing 7.4% of all jail inmates). The other19,700 inmates held for State or Federal authorities were in jailfor other reasons, such as waiting transfer or early release(pending completion of paperwork or transportation),participation in special programs, and special security needs. Methodology Census of Jails The 1993 Census of Jails was the sixth in a series of datacollection efforts aimed at studying the Nation's locallyadministered jails. Previous censuses were conducted in 1970,1972, 1978, 1983, and 1988. As in previous censuses, the U.S.Bureau of the Census collected the data for the Bureau of JusticeStatistics. The 1993 census included all locally administered confinementfacilities (3,287) that hold inmates beyond arraignment and arestaffed by municipal or county employees. The census alsoincluded 17 jails that were privately operated under contract forlocal governments and 7 facilities maintained by BOP andfunctioning as jails. Excluded from the census were temporary holding facilities,such as drunk tanks and police lockups, that do not hold personsafter being formally charged in court (usually within 72 hours ofarrest). Also excluded were State-operated facilities in Alaska,Connecticut, Delaware, Hawaii, Rhode Island, and Vermont, whichhave combined jail-prison systems. Five locally operated jails inAlaska were included. The mailing list used for the census was derived from theNational Justice Agency List, which is maintained by the Bureauof the Census for BJS. The census forms were mailed to 3,506facilities on June 22, 1993. Twenty-eight jails were added to the initial mail out, and230 were deleted, resulting in a total of 3,304 facilities. After extensive follow-up, including additional mail requestsand repeated telephone contacts, all jails (except those in onejurisdiction) provided data for four critical data items--numberof inmates, average daily population, rated capacity, and sex ofinmates housed. Data on the these four items for thenonresponding jails were imputed based on data reported in the1994 Annual Survey of Jails. Completed forms with data for all or most items were receivedfor 2,981 jails, resulting in a 90% response rate. Thesereporting jails housed 93% of all local jail inmates on June 30,1993. Estimation procedures Because there was nonresponse and incomplete data on allcensus items except the four critical items, national totals hadto be estimated. The following procedures were used to estimatetotals when data were incomplete: 1. Each item was first assessed for coverage and internalconsistency. For purposes of estimating the totals, extremevalues were examined and then verified by checking other censusinformation or calling the respondents. Detailed categories werealso checked to determine if they summed to the reported totals. 2. To provide a national total, item values were summed andthen multiplied by a nonresponse adjustment factor (NAF). Formost estimates, the NAF was a ratio of the total number ofinmates in all jails to the number of inmates in jails thatreported valid data. Ratios based on inmate counts were used toestimate the number of adults, the number of inmates by sex andage, conviction status by sex, the number of staff byoccupational category and region (tables 11 and 13), and payrollstaff by sex and race. Ratios based on the total average dailypopulation were used to estimate total expenditures. Estimates of detailed categories were further adjusted so that for each item the sum of the detail equaled the estimated total. For example, the estimated numbers of male and female adult inmates were ratio adjusted so that the final estimates summed to the total number of adult inmates. All estimates of inmates and staff were rounded to the nearest 100. Expenditures were rounded to the nearest million dollars. 5. All rates, ratios, and percentage distributions in thisreport are based on reported data only. Annual Survey of Jails In each of the 4 years between the full censuses, a survey ofjails is conducted to estimate baseline characteristics of theNation's jails and inmates housed in these jails. The 1994 AnnualSurvey of Jails is the 10th such survey in a series begun in1982. The reference date for the 1994 survey was June 30, 1994. Using information from the 1993 Census of Jails, a new sampleof jail jurisdictions was selected for the 1994 survey. Ajurisdiction is a county (parish in Louisiana) or municipalgovernment that administers one or more local jails. The sampleincluded all jails in 796 selected jail jurisdictions and 23multijurisdiction jails. A multi-jurisdiction jail is one inwhich two or more jurisdictions have a formal agreement tooperate the facility. In drawing the sample for 1994, jail jurisdictions were firststratified into two groups: single jurisdiction jails andmultijurisdiction jails. All of the multi-jurisdiction jails wereincluded in the survey. The remaining jurisdictions were thenfurther stratified into two groups: jurisdictions with jailsauthorized to hold juveniles and jurisdictions with jails holdingonly adults. Jurisdictions were then selected based on theaverage daily population in the 1993 census. All jails in 203jurisdictions were automatically included if the jurisdictionheld juveniles and had an average daily population of 250 or moreinmates in 1993 or if they held only adults and had an averagepopulation of 500 or more. The other jurisdictions (593) werethen selected based on stratified probability sampling. Data were obtained by mailed questionnaires. After follow-upphone calls to nonrespondents, the response rate for the surveywas 100%. National estimates for the inmate population on June 30,1994, were produced by sex, race/Hispanic origin, and age groupand for the average daily population during the year ending June30, 1994. National estimates were also produced for ratedcapacity. Sampling error Survey estimates have an associated sampling error becausejurisdictions with smaller average daily populations were sampledfor the survey. Estimates based on the sample survey may differsomewhat from the results of conducting a complete census.Different samples could yield somewhat different results.Standard error is a measure of the variation among the estimatesfrom all possible samples, stating the precision with which anestimate from a particular sample approximates the average of allpossible samples. The estimated relative sampling error for thetotal inmate population of 490,442 on June 30, 1994, was 0.50%.(See appendix tables 1 and 2.) Results presented in this Bulletin were tested to determinewhether differences between 1993 census counts and 1994 surveyestimates were statistically significant. All differencesmentioned in the report meet or exceed the 95-percent confidencelevel. Measures of population Two measures of inmate population are used: the average dailypopulation for the year ending June 30 and the inmate count onJune 30 of each year. The average daily population balances outany extraordinary events that may render atypical the inmatecount on June 30. The June 30 count provides data oncharacteristics of inmates, such as race, Hispanic origin, andage, that may not be available on an annual basis. Juveniles State statutes and judicial practices allow juveniles to beincarcerated in adult jails under a variety of circumstances.Because of the differing statutes and practices, however,accurate and comparable data on juveniles are difficult tocollect. The 1994 Annual Survey of Jails provides new and moreaccurate estimates of the juvenile population. For the firsttime, the survey provides estimates of the total number of jailinmates under age 18, the number held as adults, and the numberheld as juveniles. New sampling procedures were also introducedin 1994 to minimize the standard errors of these estimates. Bystratifying jurisdictions based on the authority to housejuveniles, the precision of the juvenile counts were improved. Returnto Cliff Schaffer's Main Page WT01-B26-42IA031-000651-B015-216http://206.61.184.43:80/schaffer/GOVPUBS/denfcpr.htm 206.61.184.43 19970122121146 text/html 44055HTTP/1.0 200 OKDate: Wednesday, 22-Jan-97 12:11:36 GMTServer: WebSitePro/1.1f (S/N wpo-0deb)Allow-ranges: bytesContent-type: text/htmlLast-modified: Saturday, 28-Dec-96 06:14:48 GMTContent-length: 43837 Drug Enforcement and Treatment in Prisons, 1990 Drug Enforcement and Treatment in Prisons, 1990 U.S. Department of Justice Office of Justice Programs Bureau of Justice Statistics Bulletin Drug Enforcement and Treatment in Prisons, 1990 July 1992 NCJ-134724 Full text with tables available from: BJS Justice Statistics Clearinghouse 1-800-732-3277 Box 6000 Rockville, MD 10850 This study examines how State and Federal correctionalfacilities seek to stop the entry and use of illegal drugs. Based on the 1990Census of State and Federal Correctional Facilities, the report indicatesthat nearly 9 in 10 institutions conduct urine surveillance among the inmatepopulation, usually on a random basis or on suspicion of use. Marijuanaand cocaine were the drugs most commonly detected--in Federal facilitiesabout 1 in 100 of the tests for marijuana and 1 in 250 tests for cocainewere positive while in State facilities about 1 in 16 tests were positivefor marijuana and 1 in 28 were positive for cocaine. I want to express my deep appreciation to the employees inthe 957 State prisons, 80 Federal prisons, and the 250 community-basedfacilities who participated in the census. The 100-percent response rate is,I believe, important testimony to the utility and significance ofnational data on the operations of our Nation's correctional facilities. Steven D. Dillingham, Ph.D. Director Drug Enforcement and Treatment in Prisons, 1990 By Caroline Wolf Harlow, Ph.D. BJS Statistician About 7 of every 8 prisons in the Nation tested an estimatedtotal of 565,500 inmates for one or more illegal drugs between July 1,1989, and June 30, 1990. In State facilities, 3.6% of the tests forcocaine, 1.3% for heroin, 2.0% for methamphetamines, and 6.3% for marijuanafound evidence of drug use. In Federal prisons, 0.4% of the testsfor cocaine, 0.4% for heroin, 0.1% for methamphetamines, and 1.1% formarijuana were positive. This report uses information provided to the Census of Stateand Federal Adult Correctional Facilities. Data were collected from 957State prison facilities, 250 State community-based facilities, and 80Federal prisons operating on June 29, 1990. Censuses were also conducted in1984, 1979, and 1974, but the 1990 census was the first to gatherinformation on drug interdiction practices, drug testing of inmates and staff,and inmate drug treatment programs. Other findings from the 1990 census include the following: *Ninety-eight percent of State community-basedfacilities--those in which at least half of the residents may leave the facilitydaily--tested residents. All Federal prisons and 83% of State prisonsreported that they tested inmates for drug use. *Seventy-six percent of institutions reported testing inmatesfor drugs when drug use was suspected. Twenty percent tested allinmates at least once during confinement. *At State confinement facilities 1.4% of tests for cocaine,1.0% for heroin, 2.3% for methamphetamines, and 5.8% for marijuanaindicated drug use. *At State community-based facilities 8.9% of tests forcocaine confirmed the presence of the drug, as did 2.2% for heroin, 1.1% for methamphetamines, and 8.1% for marijuana. *State confinement facilities that only tested inmatessuspected of drug use had higher positive rates than facilities that tested allor random groups of inmates (6% for cocaine and 14% for marijuanaversus 1.5% for cocaine and 5% for marijuana). *State and Federal facilities used a variety of methods toprevent drugs from being brought into the institution, includingques-tioning, patdowns, clothing exchanges, and body cavity searches. *At admission inmates were required to exchange clothing in88% of the Federal prisons and 59% of State prisons; inmates were patteddown in 88% of Federal prisons and 78% of the State prisons. *In the facilities using the most intrusive interdictiontechnique, body cavity searches, positive drug test results among inmatestested were lower than in facilities using other methods of interdiction. *Questioning and search of belongings were widely used forvisitors to both Federal and State facilities. *Federal confinement facilities reported that they couldprovide drug treatment for an estimated 7,800 inmates; State confinementfacilities, for 114,000; and State community-based facilities, for 9,400. *Federal facilities were using an estimated 62% of total drugtreatment capacity on June 29, 1990; State confinement facilities, 78%;and community-based facilities, 66%. Introduction The Census of State and Federal Adult CorrectionalFacilities, conducted periodically by the Bureau of the Census on behalf of theBureau of Justice Statistics (BJS), included a new series of questions in 1990.(See Methodology on page 12 for further information about thecensus and the questionnaire.) This addendum--designed with the assistanceof the National Institute on Drug Abuse and the Office of NationalDrug Control Policy--asked how facilities interdict drugs andparaphernalia among inmates, visitors, and staff and who was chosen for eachmethod of interdiction. In addition, the addendum gathered information on drugtesting policies, practices, and outcomes. The questionnaire asked facilitiesto estimate the number of inmates in need of drug treatment programs andthe capacity of currently available programs. Methods of drug interdiction Different facilities have a variety of policies and practicesrelated to interdiction of drugs from inmates, visitors, and staff. Facilities may physically check persons entering thefacility. Inmates may be checked for drugs or other contraband when they enter afacility for the first time or reenter after an absence. The checks may berelatively nonintrusive, such as verbal questioning or pat-downs, ormore intrusive, such as body cavity searches and clothing exchanges orsearches of belongings. These checks may be conducted among all enteringpersons, random groups, or only those suspected of carrying drugs.Many prisons may use all of the approaches at different times. The figure below shows a general typology for the range ofmethods for each type of drug interdiction. A plus sign (+) indicates the useof a method and a minus sign (-) means no reported use. Type 1facilities, for example, reported using all three methods to choose personsfor an interdiction activity. Type 4 facilities reported performingan interdiction activity on all persons but not choosing randomor suspected subjects. Interdiction All Random Suspected Type 1 + + + Type 2 + + - Type 3 + - + Type 4 + - - Type 5 - + + Type 6 - + - Type 7 - - + Type 8 - - - Interdiction activities: Most prison facilities patted down inmates and required themto exchange clothes upon admission or any reentry Prison facilities perform many activities to prevent drugsand other contraband from entering. Correctional authorities commonlyquestion inmates, pat them down, require changing intoprison-furnished clothes, and search body cavities. Eighty-eight percent of Federalfacilities reported that they patted down new admissions and required them toreplace their clothes (table 1). Seventy-eight percent of State confinementfacilities and 71% of community-based facilities patted down newlyadmitted inmates. (Community-based facilities are those in which half or moreof the residents are permitted to leave unaccompanied by staff forwork or study. Because inmates regularly leave community-based facilities,drug-related problems in these facilities are different from those insecured facilities.) Fifty-nine percent of State confinement facilities and 26% ofcommunity- based facilities required them to substitute prison clothes.At least three-quarters of both State and Federal facilitiesquestioned new admissions about drugs. When looking for the presence of hidden drugs, facilitieswere less likely to perform body cavity searches than take other interdictionmeasures. Sixty-one percent of Federal facilities, 45% of Stateconfinement facilities, and 14% of State community-based facilitiesreported that they conducted body cavity searches among inmates at admission. Institutions could apply an interdiction activity to allinmates, to groups of inmates selected at random, or to suspected drug users orcouriers. Patting down new and returning inmates and requiring them toexchange clothes generally applied to all inmates (table 2). Over 80%of Federal facilities patted down all inmates and required an exchangeof clothing. Almost 78% of State confinement facilities frisked allinmates, and 57% substituted prison clothes. In 46% of Federal facilities and in 20% of State facilities,body cavity searches were conducted among all entering inmates. About 39%of State confinement facilities reported that a body cavity searchwould be conducted when the staff suspected inmates of carrying drugs. Most facilities searched the belongings of visitors Staff checked visitors' belongings for drugs in 93% ofFederal institutions, 87% of State confinement facilities, and 76% ofthe community-based (table 3). Visitors were patted down fordrugs in 51% of Federal prisons, 69% of State confinement institutions, and40% of community-based facilities. All visitors were generally subjected to searches of theirbelongings (table 4). About 83% of Federal facilities and 57% of Statefacilities looked through the personal possessions of all visitors.Frisking visitors for drugs and checking body cavities occurred primarily ifvisitors were suspected of carrying drugs or paraphernalia. Five in ten ofFederal prisons and 4 in 10 of State facilities patted down visitorson suspicion. About 28% of Federal Facilities and 18% of State facilitiessearched body cavities of visitors if the visitors were suspected ofsmuggling drugs. Staff were also subject to drug interdiction activities: When reporting to work, staff were patted down in about halfof State confinement facilities and in more than a fifth of Federalconfinement and State community-based facilities (table 5). In over 50% ofFederal facilities and 40% of State facilities staff were questioned.Most interdiction activities involving staff were conducted onsuspicion of smuggling drugs. About 45% of Federal facilities and 23% ofState facilities interrogated staff if they were suspected of druginvolvement (table 6). About 19% of Federal facilities also patted downstaff on suspicion, compared to 14% of State facilities. About 23% ofState facilities frisked staff members at random. Maximum security facilities took more stringent druginterdiction measures than other facilities Staff in Federal maximum security prisons were more likelythan those in medium or minimum security facilities to search body cavitiesand to require all inmates to exchange clothing (table 7). AllFederal maximum security institutions required all inmates to put on newprison-issued clothes upon entry or reentry. Nearly 55% of Federal maximumsecurity facilities, compared to 38% of minimum security prisons,conducted body cavity searches of all newly admitted or returning inmates. In maximum security prisons staff were less likely than inother Federal facilities to question all of the inmates or to pat themdown. All inmates were interrogated in 64% of maximum security prisons andfrisked in 73%, while all inmates were questioned in 94% of minimum securityfacilities and patted down in 81%. The staff in State maximum and medium security prisons weremore likely than those in minimum security facilities to make allentering or returning inmates exchange clothes (over 60% of maximum or mediumsecurity prisons, compared to 47% of minimum security prisons). In nearly 1 in5 maximum security State prisons, staff searched the body cavities ofall new or returning prisoners. Staff performed body cavity searches onsuspected inmates in over half of State maximum security facilities. State community-based facilities were less likely than Stateconfinement facilities to search residents to interdict drugs. Staff inabout 59% of State community-based facilities patted down all inmates. In22% of community-based facilities, the staff required all inmates tochange to facility clothing, and in 15%, searched body cavities ofresidents suspected of having drugs. Interpreting measures of drug testing Prevalence of drug use in prisons is difficult to estimate.Part of the difficulty occurs with record keeping and reporting. A drugtest determines the presence of a specific drug at a specificlevel. A single urine sample can be used for a single drug test or formultiple tests for different drugs. Correctional authorities were asked toreport the number of tests for each drug and the number of positive tests.However, some authorities may have reported the number of urine samplestaken if their records included only those figures. Other difficulties in estimating the amount of drug use inprison include the following: *Prisons differ in the selection of whom to test. Mostfacilities do not choose inmates for testing using a sample with a knownprobability of selection: One cannot say that the selected inmates representall inmates in the institution. * Prisons differ in what drugs they test for. Prisonauthorities may not suspect the use of a drug and not test for it, even thoughthe drug is used in their facility. Other prisons may conduct repeated testsfor a drug seldom used. * A single urine specimen can have more than one positivedrug test from an individual using multiple drugs. Describing positive rates bytype of drug will overstate the number of inmates with at least onepositive test. *Prisons differ in how often they test inmates. Drug testingmay be rare in some prisons and frequent in others. *Urine tests only detect the presence of most drugs 48 to 72hours after use, except for PCP and marijuana, which may be detected upto 30 days after use. This varying span, when combined with lack of randomsampling, distorts any estimation of overall drug use. * Depending on various factors, the presence ofmethamphetamines may not be distinguished from amphetamines; therefore, the test resultsfor these two drugs should be considered together. *Prisons may differ in the types of tests used. Some typesare more accurate than others, producing lower numbers of falsepositives and false negatives. Facilities may or may not perform confirmatorytests, and they were not asked to estimate the number of false positives andfalse negatives. For the above reasons, drug test results in this report arenot a measure of the extent of the problem in the various kinds offacilities. Positive results should be interpreted only as indicating thepercentage positive for the specific tests given. Testing urine for drug use Most correctional facilities tested some inmates for illegaldrug use About 87% of all correctional facilities tested inmates forillegal drug use (table 8). All Federal prisons, 83% of State confinementfacilities, and 98% of State community-based facilities reported testinginmates between July 1, 1989, and June 30, 1990. Authorities in facilities which reported data (85% of allfacilities) indicated that they collected 598,000 urine specimens from468,500 inmates. When these figures are projected to all facilities, includingthose which did not respond to these questions, an estimated 565,500inmates provided 721,800 specimens from July 1, 1989, through June 30, 1990.(See "Estimation procedure" in Methodology.) State minimum and medium security and community-basedfacilities were more likely than maximum security institutions to test inmates.About 85% of the lower security facilities and 98% of community-basedfacilities tested inmates, compared to 76% of the maximum security prisons. Most State facilities testing inmates for drugs performed thetests when the staff suspected particular inmates of drug use; 76% ofthe institutions reported checking inmates based on suspicion of use.Forty-two percent tested both suspected inmates and random groups, and anadditional 14% tested all inmates (type 1). Relatively few facilities (20%)tested all inmates at least once during confinement (types 1-4). Most large State confinement facilities tested for drugs About 92% of State prisons with a population of 2,500 or moretested inmates, compared to around 83% of facilities with fewer than1,000 inmates and 77% of facilities with a population between 1,000 and2,499 (table 9). Over half of the largest facilities tested inmates onsuspicion only. Over half of facilities with a population between 250 and 2,499tested all inmates or random groups of inmates in addition to inmatessuspected of drug use. About 70% of community-based facilities testedeither all inmates or random groups and inmates suspected of usingdrugs. Almost all work release facilities tested for drugs About 92% of facilities that provided special work release orprerelease programs tested inmates for drugs (table 10). Ninety-threepercent of facilities that separately handled offenders reincarceratedfor violating some condition of their supervised release also checkedinmates for drugs. Over 90% of facilities that performed "other"functions, such as presentence, psychiatric, or geriatric services also testedtheir residents. Nearly 60% of facilities for youthful offenderstested inmates. For all inmates tested, State prisons reported higherpositive rates than Federal prisons Nationwide, 3.1% of the tests for cocaine in the 12 monthsbefore June 30, 1990, were positive, as were 1.2% of the tests for heroin,1.5% for methamphetamines, and 5.6% for marijuana. State facilitiesreported higher positive rates for drug tests than Federal facilities (table11). In State institutions, 3.6% of tests for cocaine were positive,compared to 0.4% in Federal prisons. State facilities found 2.0% of the testsshowing recent methamphetamine use and 6.3% showing marijuana use; Federalprisons found 0.1% and 1.1%, respectively. I Same percentage of State and Federal facilities reportedpositive drug tests When facilities rather than individual drug tests areconsidered, Federal and State facilities were about equally likely to have founddrug use in their institutions. Around 6 in 10 of both Federal and Statefacilities which tested for cocaine had at least one positive test. Inover 2 in 10 facilities testing for methamphetamines, the use of the drugwas discovered. Marijuana was detected in about 8 in 10facilities testing. Community-based facilities found higher rates of drug usethan confinement facilities Tests had positive outcomes for 8.9% of the cocaine tests and8.1% of the marijuana tests administered by community-based facilities,compared to 1.4% of the cocaine tests and 5.8% of marijuana tests inconfinement facilities (table 12). Methamphetamines, however, were foundmore often in confinement facilities (2.3% tested positive) than incommunity-based facilities (1.1% positive). Among State confinement facilities, positive test resultswere highest in those testing on suspicion only. How inmates were selected for testing affected the rate ofpositive results. Those State confinement facilities testing only whendrug use was suspected recorded higher rates of positive results thanother facilities that tested randomly or comprehensively. When facilitiestested only on suspicion of drug use, 6% of cocaine tests and 14% ofmarijuana tests were positive, compared to 1.5% or less for cocaine and 5% or lessfor marijuana when facilities tested everyone or at random. The results for State community-based facilities wereopposite those of confinement facilities. Testing on suspicion only produced alower percentage of positive results than testing everyone or arandom selection. In community-based facilities which tested on suspicion only,4.8% were positive for cocaine and 6.4% for marijuana; incommunity-based facilities using other selection methods, around 9% of tests for cocaineand 8% for marijuana were positive. The percentages of positive tests were higher in largefacilities Large prisons, whether Federal or State, had higher rates ofpositive drug tests. In Federal facilities with 1,000 or more inmates, 1.4%of the marijuana tests, 0.6% of the cocaine, and 0.6% of the herointests were positive (table 13). In Federal facilities holding fewer than500 inmates, the percentages were 0.5% for marijuana, 0.2% for cocaine,and none for heroin. Among State prisons, the largest facilities with2,500 or more inmates had the highest percentages of positive tests foramphetamines, cocaine, and heroin. The facilities holding 1,000 to 2,499 inmates had the highestrates for marijuana and methamphetamines. Among Federal prisons, themaximum security facilities had higher rates for positive drug teststhan minimum security facilities. In maximum security prisons, 2.5% of thetests for marijuana, .7% of the tests for cocaine, and 1.4% of thetests for heroin were positive. In minimum security, 0.3% for marijuana, 0.3%for cocaine, and none for heroin were positive. State medium security facilities generally had higherpositive rates than maximum or minimum security prisons. For each drug in mediumsecurity facilities, the percentage positive was as follows: 6.8% formarijuana, 4.2% for methamphetamines, 1.7% for cocaine, and 1.4% forheroin. In maximum and minimum facilities, the equivalent findings were5.0% or less for marijuana, 0.6% or less for methamphetamines, 1.4% orless for cocaine, and 0.8% or less for heroin. Positive results from drug tests varied among facilitiesperforming different functions Facilities which confined inmates returned to custody forparole violations had relatively high percentages of positive drug tests (table14). More than 9% of tests for marijuana were positive, as were 6.2% oftests for methamphetamines, 3.5% for cocaine, and 2.9% for heroin.Facilities holding inmates who participated in work release programs orwho were preparing for discharge also had relatively high positivetest rates: 7% for cocaine, 6.9% for marijuana, and 1.8% for heroin. Drug/alcohol treatment in facilities was associated with relatively highpositive results on tests for cocaine and marijuana use--3% forcocaine and 7.6% for marijuana. Facilities handling youthful offenders generally hadrelatively low positive test results: 2.1% for marijuana and 1.5% forcocaine. Positive drug tests were linked to interdiction activities The State confinement facilities that questioned and friskedinmates but did not exchange clothes or search body cavities had higherrates of positive drug tests than facilities doing all these measures(table 15). The tests in the facilities using less stringent measureswere 5.2% positive for cocaine, 13.5% for marijuana, and 16.2% formethamphetamines. Tests in facilities performing all types of specific druginterdiction activities were 1.2% positive for cocaine, 4.6% formarijuana, and 0.6% for methamphetamines. Facilities which performed all types ofinterdiction activities had higher positive drug test rates thanfacilities which did body cavity searches and/or clothing exchanges. Thefacilities doing all types of interdiction may have adopted more measures as areaction to relatively high test rates. The reported rates were fromresults over the 12 months before the census, while the interdiction measureswere those in place on June 29, 1990. Facilities that did not question, frisk, or search visitorshad the following positive test results: 8.3% for marijuana and 7.4%for cocaine. Facilities that inspected visitors' belongings and searchedbody cavities when indicated, but did not both question and pat downvisitors, had the following positive test percentages: 2.9% for heroin, 2.6%for cocaine, and 12% for methamphetamines. Facilities that reported not making special efforts tointerdict the supply of drugs from the staff had 2.6% positive tests for cocaine,2.2% for heroin, and 6.6% for methamphetamines. Facilities thatquestioned staff, patted them down, and took other actions such as drugtesting, when needed had 1.0% positive tests for cocaine and 0.9% for heroin and methamphetamines. Drug testing of staff was highest in Federal facilities While 83% of Federal facilities reported they tested theirstaff for drugs, 42% of State confinement facilities and 32% ofcommunity-based facilities checked their employees (table 16). About 55% of Federalconfinement facilities tested all staff, as did 30% of State confinementfacilities and 19% of community-based facilities. Seventy-six percent of Federal facilities and about 23% ofState facilities tested employees, the primary staff category tested. A higher percentage of Federal than State facility staff weretested for drugs. Fifteen percent of Federal facility staff were testedcompared to 4% of those working in State confinement facilities and 10%in community- based facilities. A positive test was grounds for dismissal in over a third of facilities that tested staff for drugs In over a third of facilities, policies required that stafftesting positive for drugs be dismissed. In over a seventh, affectedstaff were suspended (table 17). Sixty percent of State confinementfacilities and 44% of community-based facilities referred positive drugdetection cases to internal affairs. Fifty-nine percent of Federal facilitiesreferred the case to a departmentally operated program -- generally anemployee assistance counselor who could refer the employee for outsidetreatment. Federal facilities were more likely than State facilities tokeep their staff and continue to check them for drugs or to reassignthem. Twenty- four percent of Federal facilities continued monitoring staffwith drug tests, compared to 10% of State confinement facilities and12%of community- based facilities. Inmate/resident drug treatment programs and capacities Facilities provided estimates of the number ofinmates/residents who could be treated in each of their drug treatment and interventionprograms and estimates of the enrollment in each program. Facilities alsoestimated their total capacity for drug treatment and their totalenrollment. These totals were generally lower than the sum of all theseparately listed programs and interventions, possibly for the followingreasons: *some programs listed were not considered true drug"treatment" programs; *an individual program might have several of the componentslisted on the addendum--for example, counseling, education, and urinesurveillance--and hence be counted several times in the specific listings; *inmates could be participating in more than one program; *facilities could have some treatment slots which could beallocated to more than one program and therefore were counted more thanonce. Drug treatment/intervention on June 29, 1990 Among the 1,287 State and Federal facilities, 1,024 reportedtheir own estimates of total capacity and enrollment in programs theyconsidered to be for drug treatment. Facility capacities and enrollmentsfor drug treatment were-- Among those Federal facilities that reported, administratorsindicated that on a single day the facilities could treat about 6,100inmates and had an enrollment of about 3,800. For reporting State facilities,both confinement and community-based, the estimated capacity was90,900 and enrollment was 69,900. Prisons could treat an estimated 131,900 inmates for drug addiction If the reported capacity is projected to all prisons, Federalconfinement facilities could treat an estimated 7,800 inmates; Stateconfinement facilities, 114,000; and State community-based facilities,9,400. (See "Estimation procedure" in Methodology.) (Treatment capacity and enrollment were estimated from the77.7% of Federal inmates in reporting facilities, 72.9% of State inmates inreporting confinement facilities, and 83.3% of State inmates inreporting community- based facilities.) Federal confinement facilities had the capacity to treat fordrug abuse 14% of the inmate population; State confinement facilities, 18%;and community- based facilities, 55%. Prisons were treating approximately 100,200 inmates If the reported enrollment figures are projected to cover allfacilities, the Federal prison system was treating an estimated 4,800inmates; the State prisons, an estimated 88,700; and community-basedfacilities, an estimated 6,200. (See "Estimation procedure" inMethodology.) (Treatment capacity and enrollment were estimated from the77.7% of Federal inmates in reporting facilities, 72.9% of State inmates inreporting confinement facilities, and 83.3% of State inmates inreporting community- based facilities.) Enrollment in drug treatment was below capacity) Federal inmates were using 62% of the drug treatment capacityon June 29, 1990. State prisoners were using 66% of the capacity incommunity-based facilities and 78% in confinement facilities. Many factors play a role in these utilization figures.Inmates may refuse to participate or may have already completed the program.Inmates may not qualify--too new to the institution, not near enough to theend of their sentence, rule breakers, under administrative segregation, orin the wrong custody level. Facilities also may keep some slots open togain flexibility to deal with unexpected situations. Prisons offered a variety of programs Prisons may offer many types of drug intervention ortreatment: detoxification, counseling, education and/or awarenessprograms, urine surveillance, and treatment in special residential unitswithin the facility. Federal facilities reported they could test 33% ofinmates for drugs; State confinement facilities, 10%; and community-basedfacilities, 57% (table 18). Counseling was available for 14% of inmatesin Federal facilities, 12% in State confinement facilities, and 48% incommunity-based facilities. Residential treatment program capacity was from1% to 2% of inmate population for all types of institutions. Of all Federal inmates, 9% were enrolled in some form of drugtreatment on June 29, 1990. Among State prisoners, 14% in confinementfacilities and 37% in community-based facilities were enrolled. The two mostcommon types of programs for both Federal and State correctionalfacilities were education and counseling. Drug education programs enrolled 13% of Federal prisoners, 7%of State confinement inmates, and 25% of residents in community-basedfacilities. Six percent of those in Federal facilities were beingcounseled, as were 9% of State confinement facility inmates and 32% of those incommunity-based facilities. Methodology The 1990 Census of State and Federal Adult CorrectionalFacilities was the fourth enumeration of State institutions and the first ofFederal institutions sponsored by the Bureau of Justice Statisticsand conducted by the Bureau of the Census. Earlier censuses were completed in1974, 1979, and 1984. Census universe The facility universe was developed from the Census of StateAdult Correctional Facilities conducted in 1984. This list wasrevised using the 1990 American Correctional Association Directory andinformation obtained from State correctional administrators and the Federal Bureauof Prisons. The census included: prisons; prison farms; reception,diagnostic and classification centers; road camps; forestry and conservationcamps; youthful offender facilities (except in California);vocational training facilities; correctional drug and alcohol treatmentfacilities; and State- operated local detention facilities in Alaska, Connecticut,Delaware, Hawaii, Rhode Island, and Vermont. Facilities were included in the census if they: *were staffed with State or Federal employees *housed primarily State or Federal prisoners *were physically, functionally, and administratively separatefrom other facilities *were operational on the reference date, June 29, 1990. The census also included, for the first time, 67 privatefacilities that were under exclusive contract by State governments to houseprisoners. Specifically excluded were-- *privately operated facilities that were not exclusively forState or Federal inmates *military facilities *Immigration and Naturalization Service facilities *facilities operated and administered by local governments,including those housing State prisoners *facilities operated by the U.S. Marshals Service *hospital wings and wards reserved for State prisoners. Questionnaire administration Questionnaires were mailed to facility respondents at the endof June 1990. Second and third request forms and telephone followups wentout in the fall, resulting in a final response rate of 100%. Definitions of community-based and confinement facilities Correctional facilities were classified as community-based if50% or more of the residents were regularly permitted to leave thefacility unaccompanied for work or study. These facilities includedhalfway houses, restitution centers, and pre-release, work release, and studyrelease centers. Correctional facilities in which less than 50% ofthe inmates regularly left the facility unaccompanied were classified asconfinement institutions. Drug addendum An addendum on drug control activities in State and Federalfacilities was included for the first time in the 1990 census. Facilitieswere asked to provide information on the following: *activities they used with inmates, visitors, and staff tokeep out illegal drugs and drug paraphernalia *inmate drug testing practices, including the criteria fortesting inmates, the number of inmates tested in total and by specific drug,and the number positive *staff drug testing, including groups and basis for testing,number tested, and procedures when tests were positive *capacity and enrollment in various types of drug treatmentand intervention programs. Estimation procedures When all prisons in the census did not provide data onparticular variables, estimated figures were used where indicated. Totalfigures were estimated by multiplying the known or reported numbers by theratio of the total relevant population to the reported population. Allfigures were estimated independently and total estimates were thereforelarger than the sum of all subgroup estimates. The total population figureused in the projections varied, depending upon which figure was mostappropriate. The two available population figures are the average dailypopulation and the prison count on the reference day for the census, June 29,1990. For drug testing, table 8, the basis for estimation was the averagedaily population, and for drug treatment capacity and enrollment,the basis was the 1-day count. Because the census was a complete enumeration, the resultswere not subject to sampling error. Public use data tapes for each Census of Adult CorrectionalFacilities in the series, conducted in 1974, 1979, 1984, and 1990, areavailable from the National Criminal Justice Archive, P.O. Box 1248, Ann Arbor,MI 48106. 1- 800-999-0960. Caroline Wolf Harlow wrote this report under the supervisionof Allen J. Beck. Corrections statistics are prepared under the generaldirection of Lawrence A. Greenfeld. Tom Hester edited this report, andJames Stephan, Danielle Morton, and Dorothea Proctor provided statisticalreview. Marilyn Marbrook administered production, assisted by Betty Shermanand Jayne Pugh. July 1992, NCJ-134724 The Bureau of Justice Statistics is a component of the Officeof Justice Programs, which also includes the National Institute ofJustice, the Bureau of Justice Assistance, the Office of Juvenile Justice andDelinquency Prevention, and the Office for Victims of Crime. ************************************************ . CliffSchaffer's Home Page WT01-B26-43IA031-000651-B015-243http://206.61.184.43:80/schaffer/GOVPUBS/corr93.htm 206.61.184.43 19970122121157 text/html 9004HTTP/1.0 200 OKDate: Wednesday, 22-Jan-97 12:11:47 GMTServer: WebSitePro/1.1f (S/N wpo-0deb)Allow-ranges: bytesContent-type: text/htmlLast-modified: Saturday, 28-Dec-96 06:15:45 GMTContent-length: 8787 Correctional Populations in the United States 1980 - 1993 Correctional Populations in the United States 1980 - 1993 Bureau of Justice Statistics Executive Summary U.S. Department of Justice Office of Justice Programs The Nation's correctional population jumped more than 2 1/2times from 1980 through 1993. During 1993 approximately 2.6% ofthe U.S. population--4.9 million adults--were on parole, onprobation, or in jails or prisons, an increase of 3 millionpeople since 1980. More than 909,000 men and women were in thecustody of State and Federal prisons, 455,500 were in localjails, 671,000 on parole, and 2.8 million on probation: --More than two-thirds of the 4.9 million persons undercorrectional supervision were on probation or parole. --The Nation's parole population had the fastest rate ofgrowth, 205% from 1980 to 1993. --During the 13 years between 1980 and 1993, the probationpopulation grew by more than 1.7 million, larger than theincrease in any other correctional population. --In 1993 nearly 1.4 million offenders were in local jail andState or Federal prison. During the 1980-92 period, the percent of black State andFederal prisoners increased from 46.5% to 50% at a time when thepercentage of blacks in the general population increased from11.8% to 12.4%. The Hispanic prison population doubled from 7.7%to 14.1%, while Hispanics in the general population increasedfrom 6.5% to 9.5%. At yearend 1992, there were 4,094 black male inmates per100,000 black adults in the U.S. population, compared to 502white male inmates per 100,000 adult white residents. Among U.S.adults who neither graduated from high school nor earned ageneral equivalence degree (GED), almost 6% of blacks and 1% ofwhites were in a Federal or State prison serving a sentence of ayear or more. The number of convicted drug offenders increased ninefold(from 19,000 to 172,300) from 1980 through 1992. The number ofviolent offenders accounted for a larger share of the growth inthe total prison population (41%, compared to 32% for drugoffenders). The total number of violent offenders in State prisonincreased by nearly 200,000 during the 12-year period. The number of returned parole violators and newly admittedprobation violators soared between 1980 and 1992. Almost 1 inevery 3 offenders admitted to State prisons (142,000) in 1992were probation or parole violators, compared to 1 in every 6(27,000) in 1980. Violent offenders were more likely to be sent to prison in1992 than they were in 1980. Relative to the number of victims ofmurder, rape, robbery, or aggravated assault, the number ofviolent offenders admitted to State prison increased during the12-year period, from 18 admissions per 1,000 violentvictimizations to 27 per 1,000. Between 1980 and 1992 the rate of incarceration in State andFederal prisons more than doubled, from 139 sentenced inmates(inmates serving 1 year or more) per 100,000 U.S. residents to332 per 100,000. In 1992 incarceration rates were nearly 19 timeshigher among adult men than among adult women (883 per 100,000compared to 47) and 8 times higher among adult black men thanamong adult white men. The data are from a 188-page book published by the Bureau ofJustice Statistics (BJS) and listing the correctional populationsof each State and the Federal system. The book lists jail andprison suicide statistics, correctional crowding, electronicmonitoring, sentence commutations, jail AIDS deaths and muchmore. Single copie"s of the publication, "CorrectionalPopulations in the United States, 1992, (NCJ-146413), written byBJS statistician Tracy L. Snell, may be obtained from the BJSClearinghouse, Box 179, Annapolis Junction, Maryland 20701-0179,telephone 1-800-732-3277. Fax orders with name, address, title,and NCJ number to 410-792-4358. Data from tables and graphs used in many BJS reports can beobtained in spreadsheet files on 5. and 3. inch diskettes bycalling 202-307-0784. Note: BJS expects to release population counts for prisonersin State and Federal prisons at yearend 1994, Prisoners in 1994,in early June. Number of adults on probation, in jail or prison, or onparole, 1980-93 Total estimated correctional Year population Probation Jail* Prison Parole -------------------------------------------------------------1980** 1,840,400 1,118,097 182,288 319,598 220,438 1981** 2,006,600 1,225,934 195,085 360,029 225,539 1982 2,192,600 1,357,264 207,853 402,914 224,604 1983 2,475,100 1,582,947 221,815 423,898 246,440 1984 2,689,200 1,740,948 233,018 448,264 266,992 1985 3,011,500 1,968,712 254,986 487,583 300,203 1986 3,239,400 2,114,621 272,735 526,436 325,638 1987 3,459,600 2,247,158 294,092 562,814 355,505 1988 3,714,100 2,356,483 341,893 607,766 407,977 1989 4,055,600 2,522,125 393,303 683,367 456,803 1990 4,348,000 2,670,234 403,019 743,382 531,407 1991 4,536,200 2,729,322 424,129 792,535 590,198 1992 4,763,200 2,811,611 441,781 851,205 658,601 1993b 4,879,600 2,843,445 455,500 909,185 671,470 1980-93 165% 154% 150% 184% 205% Note: Counts for probation, prison, and parole population arefor December 31 each year. Jail population counts are for June 30each year. Prisoner counts are for those in custody only. Because some persons may have multiple statuses, the sum ofthe number of persons incarcerated or under community supervisionoverestimates the total correctional population. *Includes convicted and unconvicted adult inmates. **Jail counts are estimated. Estimated number of sentenced prisoners under State orFederal jurisdiction, per 100,000 adult U.S. residents, by sex,race, and education, 1992 Number of sentenced prisoners per 100,000 adult residents -----------------------------------------Level Male Female of ------------------- -------------------education* Total All** White Black All** White Black----------------------------------------------------------------All inmates 448 883 502 4,094 47 27 202 Less than high school 886 1,734 948 5,896 95 49 326 High school graduate 597 1,248 754 4,834 56 34 223 Some college or more 136 254 154 1,503 18 11 83 *Highest grade of school completed before the currentadmission to prison. General equivalency degree (GED) wascategorized as "High school graduate." **Includes Asians, Pacific Islanders, American Indians, andAlaska Natives. Estimated number of sentenced prisoners under State orFederal jurisdiction per 100,000 adult U.S. residents, by sex,race/Hispanic origin, and age, 1992 Number of sentenced prisoners* per 100,000 adult residents -------------------------------------Male -------------------------------------Age Total** White*** Black*** Hispanic ------------------------------------------------Total 883 407 3,785 1,773 18-19 681 220 2,750 872 20-24 1,458 661 5,309 2,102 25-29 1,867 837 7,210 2,839 30-34 1,538 729 6,299 2,367 35-39 1,099 511 4,415 2,150 40-44 793 417 3,179 1,586 45+ 222 142 768 610 Number of sentenced prisoners* per 100,000 adult residents -------------------------------------Female -------------------------------------Age Total** White*** Black*** Hispanic ------------------------------------------------Total 47 22 188 95 18-19 34 18 103 47 20-24 78 36 261 119 25-29 119 57 426 154 30-34 1,100 47 352 175 35-39 71 33 280 114 40-44 41 21 138 86 45+ 8 4 27 25 *Sentenced prisoners are those with a sentence of more than 1year. **Includes Asians, Pacific Islanders, Native Americans, andAlaska Natives. ***Excludes persons of Hispanic origin. CliffSchaffer's Home Page WT01-B26-44IA086-000618-B046-256http://206.61.184.43:80/schaffer/ACTIVIST/how2men.htm 206.61.184.43 19970122030416 text/html 5640HTTP/1.0 200 OKDate: Wednesday, 22-Jan-97 03:04:11 GMTServer: WebSitePro/1.1f (S/N wpo-0deb)Allow-ranges: bytesContent-type: text/htmlLast-modified: Saturday, 28-Dec-96 07:28:19 GMTContent-length: 5423 Speaking Out Against Drug Legalization Contents | Feedback | Search DRCNet Library | Schaffer Library | The Drug Legalization Debate Speaking Out Against Drug Legalization , or; How To Hold Your Own In a Drug Legalization Debate by The US DEA and Reply to How To Hold Your Own by Clifford A. Schaffer What This Document Is In August, 1994, the Drug Enforcement Administration held aspecial conference to try to deal with the fact that they weregetting beaten -- badly -- every time they tried to come out fora drug policy debate. In the last few years, they have beenbeaten in these debates so often that it is really anembarrasment to the whole drug warrior crew. They don't have asingle argument which stands up to close scrutiny. The reason they were getting beaten is because people beganusing the Persuasive Strategies and they got better educated onthe issue. As a result of the Persuasive Strategies being used bylarge numbers of people across the US, they were getting publiclyhammered every time they came out for a debate. It was really anembarrassing trend, so they had to try to do something about it. Now they have laid out, in detail, their ten biggest argumentson the issues raised in the debate. These arguments will now belaid to rest. Because their book was in large part a response to myPersuasive Strategies, I have undertaken to write a reply totheir book. In short, they still don't have a single argumentwhich stands up to close scrutiny. The debate is over and it istime for them to admit it. Section 1  Introduction  Acknowledgements  Letter of Introduction  Reply to the Letter of Introduction Section 2  Why This Guide is Necessary  The DEA Position  When/Where/How To Use  Remember Section 3  Anti-Legalization Forum  What Motivates Legalization Proponents?  Questions to Ask Claim I - CRIME, VIOLENCE AND DRUGUSE GO HAND IN HAND CLAIM II: WE HAVE MADE SIGNIFICANTPROGRESS IN REDUCING DRUG USE IN THIS COUNTRY. NOW IS NOT THETIME TO ABANDON OUR EFFORTS. CLAIM III: LEGALIZATION OF DRUGS WILLLEAD TO INCREASED USE AND INCREASED ADDICTION LEVELS CLAIM IV: ANY REVENUES GENERATED BYTAXING LEGALIZED DRUGS WOULD QUICKLY EVAPORATE IN LIGHT OF THEINCREASED SOCIAL COSTS ASSOCIATED WITH LEGALIZING DRUGS. CLAIM V: THERE ARE NO COMPELLINGMEDICAL REASONS TO PRESCRIBE MARIJUANA OR HEROIN TO SICK PEOPLE. CLAIM VI: LEGALIZATION ANDDECRIMINALIZATION OF DRUGS HAVE BEEN A DISMAL FAILURE IN OTHERNATIONS. CLAIM VII: ALCOHOL HAS CAUSEDSIGNIFICANT HEALTH, SOCIAL AND CRIME PROBLEMS IN THIS COUNTRY,AND LEGALIZED DRUGS WOULD ONLY MAKE THE SITUATION WORSE CLAIM VIII: DRUG CONTROL SPENDING ISA MINOR PORTION OF THE U.S. BUDGET, AND COMPARED TO THE COSTS OFDRUG ABUSE, SPENDING IS MINUSCULE. CLAIM IX: DRUG PROHIBITION IS WORKING CLAIM X: DRUG LEGALIZATION WOULDHAVE AN ADVERSE EFFECT ON LOWINCOME COMMUNITIES KNOW WHAT YOU'RE GETTING INTO BEFORE SPEAKING AGAINSTLEGALIZATION Some Do's and Don'ts: INVITATIONS: HANDLE WITH CARE DEFINITIONS More to Come ............ Contents | Feedback | Search DRCNet Library | Schaffer Library | The Drug Legalization Debate WT01-B26-45IA087-000632-B021-231http://206.61.184.43:80/schaffer/ACTIVIST/strats.htm 206.61.184.43 19970122093317 text/html 8609HTTP/1.0 200 OKDate: Wednesday, 22-Jan-97 09:32:58 GMTServer: WebSitePro/1.1f (S/N wpo-0deb)Allow-ranges: bytesContent-type: text/htmlLast-modified: Saturday, 28-Dec-96 07:28:16 GMTContent-length: 8392 Strategies to End the Drug War Contents | Feedback | Search DRCNet Library | Schaffer Library | Information for Drug Policy Reform Activists Strategies to End the Drug War Contents Strategies Flier Advertising this library -Suitable for distribution everywhere. Media Awareness Project- to let the media know about this library. What Next? This is my idea of ourcurrent top priorities. Where do we go from here? This is anassessment of where we are, and where we ought to go next. Political Strategies This documentincludes a few ideas for what we need to do nationally to bringdrug policy reform. Local Action Strategies Here are afew things you can do in your own hometown, to help campaign fordrug policy reform. Persuasive Strategies - These arethe Persuasive Strategies which have been giving the DEA suchfits over the last few years. They were originally published onCompuserve and have since been copied to every major onlineservice. In August, 1994, the DEA held a special conference inWashington and flew in law enforcement people, politicians, andpublic relations experts to try to figure out some way to dealwith the fact that they were getting hammered every time theycame out for a debate. These Persuasive Strategies were thespecific reason for that conference and their booklet How to Hold Your Own In a Drug LegalizationDebate was a direct response to, and borrowed from, thePersuasive Strategies. Basic Background Information for Activists The Biggest Studiesof Drug Policy This is a list of the largest and most comprehensive studiesof drug policy done over the last fifty years. This is anexcellent place for anyone to start their research on drugs anddrug policy. Basic Facts Aboutthe War on Drugs This is a brief summary of the major facts about the War onDrugs, in a question and answer format. How to Approach the Black Community byClifford A. Schaffer Local Activist Groups - A list oflocal groups around the world, working for reform Debate Materials Answers to Specific Arguments This document includes most of the common questions that drugwarriors will raise in a debate. For each question, there is ashort answer which almost invariably completely shuts down thedrug warrior. Pot is (Drugs are) Dangerous - Howto Deal with the Argument by Clifford A. Schaffer Sixteen ways to deal with the argument that drugs aredangerous, therefore we ought to throw massive numbers of peoplein prison. Show Stopper Questions for YourOpponent These are questions that the drug warriors justcannot answer. A speech This is a sample of thespeeches I have given. After giving the speech, I have never hadany drug warrior come back with anything but a completelydumbfounded response. More answers to specific arguments -- 30Pages of Debate questions and responses 15 More pages of answers to specificarguments More of the same from above. 25 More pages of answers to specificarguments Other Materials Presentations to Social Clubs - Howto make presentations to social groups such as churches, LionsClubs, Rotary, and other similar groups. The Dollar Cost ofPunishment This file contains miscellaneous notes andreferences regarding the costs of punishing people for drugoffenses. Lots of interesting tidbits. Originally posted onDRCNet. WHEN Mission Statement This is theMission Statement of the Washington Hemp Education Network. It isa good example of how to put together a formal charter for anactivist group. How to Reduce Junk E-Mail This is acontribution by Ryan Rossman, offering good advice on how tocontrol the blizzard of messages coming over the DRCTalk lines. A Review of the ScientificLiterature Re Amotivational Syndrome An excellent synopsis ofthe information regarding the "amotivational syndrome"and marijuana. Complete with citations for further reference.Contributed by Brian of DRCNet. How to Write Letters to the Editor Ashort but well-done instruction manual for how to write effectiveletters to the editor. As a matter of fact, it is a goodinstruction manual for writing effective letters to publicofficials, as well. Telephone and Fax Numbers of membersof Congress - in tab-delimited text format. A Summary of M.K. Gandhi's Technique forPolitical Action By Mary Sibley, February 1995 This is a good discussion of the Gandhi's techniques forpolitical change. Some good interesting advice for activists.Contributed by Mary Sibley of DRCNet. Exclusionary Rule Reform Act of1995 This is the text of HR666, which was introduced into the Houseto repeal many of the rules regarding the admissibility ofevidence in Court. Update on HR666 as of 2-8-95 This is an update on the progress of HR666, as of 2-8-95 CalNORML press release onHR666 This is a press release issued by California NORML criticizingHR666. Bumpersticker Ideas A collection ofideas for anti-drug-war bumper stickers, contributed by variousmembers of DRCNet International List of Activist Groups -Contact information for drug policy reform groups around theworld. Contents | Feedback | Search DRCNet Library | Schaffer Library | Information for Drug Policy Reform Activists WT01-B26-46IA031-000651-B016-39http://206.61.184.43:80/schaffer/GOVPUBS/deacht1.htm 206.61.184.43 19970122121240 text/html 2273HTTP/1.0 200 OKDate: Wednesday, 22-Jan-97 12:12:24 GMTServer: WebSitePro/1.1f (S/N wpo-0deb)Allow-ranges: bytesContent-type: text/htmlLast-modified: Saturday, 28-Dec-96 06:17:05 GMTContent-length: 2056 DEA Charts on Drugs, Cocaine, Heroin Contents | Feedback | Search DRCNet Library | Schaffer Library | Government Publications DEA Charts The following charts were produced by the DEA themselves. Contents | Feedback | Search DRCNet Library | Schaffer Library | Government Publications WT01-B26-47IA031-000651-B016-83http://206.61.184.43:80/schaffer/GOVPUBS/usdta.htm 206.61.184.43 19970122121302 text/html 186951HTTP/1.0 200 OKDate: Wednesday, 22-Jan-97 12:12:45 GMTServer: WebSitePro/1.1f (S/N wpo-0deb)Allow-ranges: bytesContent-type: text/htmlLast-modified: Saturday, 28-Dec-96 06:10:46 GMTContent-length: 186732 U.S. DRUG THREAT ASSESSMENT: 1993 U.S. Department of Justice Drug Enforcement Administration U.S. DRUG THREAT ASSESSMENT: 1993 DRUG INTELLIGENCE REPORT Availability, Price, Purity, Use, and Trafficking of Drugs inthe United States SEPTEMBER 1993 DEA-93042 EXECUTIVE ASSESSMENT COCAINE Availability/Price/Purity In 1992, domestic cocaine prices fluctuated as successful law enforcement operations led to a short-term (3-month) impacton cocaine trafficking from South America. During April through June1992, shortages of wholesale quantities of cocaine resulted in anincrease in the kilogram price in many major U.S. metropolitan areas.Throughout the remainder of the year, however, cocaine was readily availableas kilogram prices in virtually all major metropolitan areasreturned to lower levels. Preliminary data for early 1993 indicate thatkilogram prices remain at low levels. Nationwide purity of cocaine at the kilogram, ounce, and gramlevels averaged 83, 74, and 64 percent, respectively, during 1992compared to 86, 72, and 59 percent, respectively, during 1991. Atemporary decline in purity at all levels of the traffic was noted during Julythrough September 1992. However, by year's end, purity at all levelshad once again increased. Use Regarding the use of cocaine, the National Household Surveyon Drug Abuse for 1992 indicated that the number of past-year andpast-month users of cocaine has decreased significantly since 1985.Nevertheless, frequent or more intense use of cocaine has not shown astatistically significant change during the past several years. According to the 1992 National High School Senior Survey onDrug Abuse, cocaine use continued to decline among high school seniorsand 10th graders. Among 8th graders, however, survey data indicatedincreased use of cocaine. Reporting from the Drug Abuse Warning Network (DAWN) showsthat the estimated number of nationwide cocaine-related emergency roomepisodes, which had been increasing at a fairly constant rate from theearly-to- late 1980s, declined significantly from FY 1989 to FY 1990.During the latter half of FY 1991, however, the number of episodesincreased once again and appears to have stabilized at high levels sincethat time. Reporting from DAWN also indicates that the smoking ofcocaine continues to be the predominant route of administration used bypatients admitted to DAWN emergency rooms for cocaine-related problems. Thepercentage of patients who indicated that smoking was their primary methodof administration increased from 34.3 percent during FY 1989 to41.4 percent in FY 1992. Rates of cocaine use detected through urinalysis testing ofrecently booked male and females arrestees, as reported by the DrugUse Forecasting Program (DUF), remained high in many major U.S.cities in 1992. In fact, rates of cocaine use during the past year were substantially higher than those for opiate and marijuana use. Trafficking Since early 1992, DEA field divisions have increasingly citedCentral American countries as transshipment points for U.S.-boundcocaine shipments. Reporting indicates cocaine is transported fromsource countries to Central American countries by land, air, and sea conveyances. From Central America, cocaine shipments aretransported to the United States by land, sea, and air directly or through Mexico. Cocaine traffickers, perceiving enhanced law enforcementactivity along the United States-Mexican border and in the westernCaribbean, have subsequently diversified their smuggling routes into theUnited States. DEA field divisions report that cocaine traffickers areincreasingly using routes employed four to six years ago. Thisdiversification includes greater use of the eastern Caribbean and the easternBahamas as well as increased importation into the eastern United States. The use of maritime containerized cargo to smuggle bulkquantities of cocaine into the United States continues to challenge U.S.Government drug interdiction efforts. Many DEA field divisions reportthe use of cargo containers to conceal and transport cocaine amonglegitimate goods. Additionally, cocaine trafficking organizationscontinue to use maritime vessels such as pleasure craft and fishing vesselsto smuggle cocaine from source countries into the United States.Moreover, traffickers utilize low-profile vessels designed to eluderadar detection for smuggling cocaine into Puerto Rico. Several DEA field divisions report cocaine traffickingorganizations have increased their use of airdrop operations. Cocainetraffickers are airdropping cocaine shipments in the Caribbean and off thecoast of, as well as within, Central America and Southern Mexico.Additionally, South American cocaine traffickers have acquired several largecargo aircraft, thereby increasing cargo capacity while overcoming thelimited flight range of smaller aircraft. U.S. law enforcement efforts along the United States-Mexicanborder continue to force regional cocaine traffickers to alter their operations. DEA and U.S. Border Patrol seizures since early1992 indicate that cocaine traffickers have decreased the averagesize of cocaine shipments and shifted transportation routes to lesstrafficked ports of entry. For example, in response to an enhanced lawenforcement presence in southern California, traffickers are increasinglyusing U.S. ports of entry as far east as McAllen, Texas, to transportcocaine to California. Domestic Distribution The primary domestic importation points for cocaine remainArizona, southern California, south Florida, and Texas. The principalcities utilized by Colombian cartels for distributing bulkquantities of cocaine include Houston, Los Angeles, Miami, and New YorkCity. Within the United States, cocaine traffickers continue to usecommercial and private vehicles, trains, airlines, and the postalservice to transport cocaine. Concealed compartments within vehicles arecommonly cited by DEA field divisions. Moreover, cocaine traffickersusing tractor-trailers frequently secrete cocaine in hiddencompartments and among legitimate produce. Extensive use of commercial trucksto transport cocaine from the Los Angeles metropolitan area todestinations throughout the United States occurred during the past year. The Cali Cartel's method of operation in the United Statesremains highly sophisticated and compartmentalized. U.S. bases ofoperation are comprised of multiple cells operating within majormetropolitan areas including Chicago, Houston, Los Angeles, New York City,Philadelphia, and San Francisco. The operators of these cells receiveorders directly from top-level cartel managers in Colombia, and operateindependently of other cells within the same metropolitan area. The operatorsutilize the latest technology, such as computers, pagers, facsimilemachines, etc., in their daily operations. Cellular telephones are oftenbought in bulk quantities and then discarded after being used for severalmonths or less in order to thwart law enforcement telephone interceptefforts. In general, the Medellin Cartel's method of operation in theUnited States is not as compartmentalized as that of the CaliCartel. The drug trafficking groups which comprise the Medellin Cartel employa group decision-making process at the top level as opposed to ahierarchical decision-making process employed by the Cali Cartel. At thelower levels, Medellin-related trafficking groups are not asrestricted as those associated with the Cali Cartel regarding the varietyof distributors with whom they transact business. Hispanic trafficking organizations, particularly Colombianand Mexican, continue to dominate wholesale cocaine trafficking anddistribution within the United States. A greater diversity, however, hasbecome involved in these activities at all levels of the domestictraffic since early 1992. During 1992, four cocaine conversion laboratories were seizedwithin the United States, two in New York City, one in California, andone in Florida. To date in 1993, one cocaine base conversionlaboratory was seized within the United States in Hurleyville, New York. CRACK COCAINE Availability/Price/Purity Crack continues to be readily available in virtually everymajor city and, to a somewhat lesser extent, many small towns and ruralareas in the United States. Crack manufacturing and distribution havereached a saturation point in the larger metropolitan areas. The national price for a rock or vial of crack ranges from aslow as $2 to as high as $75, but generally sells for $10 to $50,depending upon the size, normally 1/10 to 1/2 gram. Gram prices range from$45 to $150. Ounce-quantities can be purchased for $475 to $2,500. Whenavailable in kilogram quantities, crack prices are comparable to those forkilogram quantities of cocaine hydrochloride, ranging from $17,000 to$35,000. Analysis of crack samples by DEA laboratories during themid-to-late 1980's revealed that retail purity was consistently high,averaging 80- plus percent. Although current retail purity remainsapproximately at that level, sellers in some areas of the country are sellingpoor- quality crack. Adulterants are increasingly being added toincrease the weight or size of the crack dosage unit. Use The National Household Survey on Drug Abuse for 1992 showedthat the number of lifetime, past-year, and past-month users of crackdeclined significantly from 1991 to 1992. Survey data indicate that314,000 Americans used crack during the past month and over 805,000used it during the past year. According to the 1992 National High School Survey on DrugAbuse, lifetime use of crack among seniors declined from 1991 to1992; however, past-year, past-month, and daily use of crack by this groupremained relatively stable during that period. Nevertheless, overallfrequency of crack use among high school seniors has decreasedsubstantially since 1987. Reporting from DAWN indicates that smoking is the predominantroute of cocaine administration used by patients admitted to DAWNemergency rooms for cocaine-related problems. Trafficking The higher levels of crack trafficking are controlled by manysmall (up to 10 members) and mid-sized (10 to 40 members) trafficking organizations consisting of bands of individuals fromdistinct ethnic groups. The main participants involved in wholesale cracktrafficking are Los Angeles-based street gangs, Jamaican posses, and Haitian and Dominican groups. Saturated markets, low prices, violent competition, andeffective law enforcement pressure in major urban areas have forced somecrack trafficking organizations to develop new markets. Theseorganizations are moving to smaller cities, towns, and rural areas acrossthe nation, creating many problems for local law enforcement and civicauthorities. The largest and more advanced organizations are crisscrossingthe nation in this effort, with the Jamaican posses moving generallywestward and the Crips and Bloods expanding eastward. HEROIN Availability/Price/Purity Within the United States, heroin is readily available in allthe major metropolitan areas having user populations. During 1992 andthe first few months of 1993, there was an increase in purity at theretail level, and increased supplies available from Southwest Asia. (Notethat high- purity heroin has been imported from Colombia in increasingquantities in the past year. This heroin from Colombia, which underwentsignature analysis prior to DEA's development of a South Americanheroin signature in July 1993, was analyzed as having a Southwest Asian (SWA)signature. As a result, it may account in part for both the increasedpurity and quantity of SWA heroin available in the United States.) Data from DEA's Domestic Monitor Program indicate the 1992nationwide average heroin purity at the retail (street) level was 37percent, considerably higher than the average purity of 26.6 percentrecorded in 1991. Heroin purity at the street level was generally highestin the northeastern United States, where a large percentage of thenation's user population lives. According to DEA's Heroin Signature Program (HSP), SoutheastAsian (SEA) heroin was the predominant type of heroin available in theUnited States for the fifth year in a row, accounting for 44 percent of theHSP samples analyzed in FA 1992 and 58 percent of the total netweight of these samples. U.S. airports, particularly New York's JFKInternational Airport, are primary entry points for heroin destined for theU.S. market, based on seizures analyzed through the HSP. Thenationwide average net weight of airport seizures was almost 800 gramsand the average purity of heroin seized at these airports was 73percent. Use The National Household Survey on Drug Abuse for 1992indicated a decrease in the number of past-year heroin users. Survey datashow that the number of Americans 12 years of age or older who haveused heroin at least once in the past year declined from 381,000 in 1991 to323,000 in 1992. During that same time frame, however, the number ofpast-month heroin users increased from 83,000 to 107,000. (Estimates ofheroin use from the Household Survey are considered very conservativedue to the probable under-coverage of the population of heroin users.) According to the 1992 National High School Senior Survey onDrug Abuse, heroin use increased among high school seniors. The surveyrevealed that 1.2 percent of the seniors in the class of 1992 had usedheroin at least once in their lifetime, up from 0.9 percent in the class of1991, yet still below the peak of 1.3 percent reported in the classesof 1989 and 1990. Reporting from DAWN shows that the estimated number ofnationwide heroin-related emergency room episodes, which had beenfluctuating somewhat during the past several years, increasedsubstantially from the first to the second half of FY 1992. During that period, thenumber of heroin-related episodes rose from 18,192 to 24,593, anincrease of 35 percent. Cities showing substantive increases during thelatter half of FY 1992 in the number of heroin-related emergency roomepisodes included Baltimore, Boston, Los Angeles, New York City, and Seattle. Reporting from DAWN also indicates that the injection ofheroin continues to be the predominant route of administration usedby patients admitted to emergency rooms for heroin-related problems.However, the percentage of patients who indicated that injection was theirprimary route of administration has decreased from 79.1 percent in FY1989 to 73.9 percent in FY 1992. During this same period, there wasan increase in the percentage of patients who snorted heroin. Those whosnorted heroin rose from 4.8 percent in FY 1989 to 8.8 percent in FY1992. Rates of opiate use (to include heroin) detected throughurinalysis testing of recently booked male and female arrestees, asreported by the Drug Use Forecasting Program, remained relatively low andstable in 1992 when compared to rates for cocaine and marijuana. Trafficking Major SEA heroin trafficking organizations, often under thecontrol of Sino-Thai and Chinese criminal groups, oversee the smugglingof SEA heroin into the United States, particularly New York City,and are primarily responsible for smuggling the largest bulkshipments, generally in the multihundred-kilogram range. The largestshipments are secreted in containerized freight aboard commercial maritimevessels and air freight cargo. Smaller shipments are smuggled in theluggage of airline passengers, strapped to the body, or swallowed. In addition to Chinese and Sino-Thai traffickers, Nigeriansremain deeply entrenched in the smuggling of SEA heroin. Nigeriantraffickers rely primarily on dispatching large numbers of internal bodycouriers traveling aboard commercial airlines bound for the UnitedStates. As a result of enforcement pressure, Nigerians continue to recruitother ethnic groups, including other West Africans, Europeans, andAmerican citizens, as heroin couriers. Importation and distribution of SWA heroin is much lesscentralized than that for SEA heroin, both geographically and in regard totrafficking groups. Most SWA heroin trafficking groups in the UnitedStates are highly cohesive and difficult to penetrate because they arebased on ethnic, familial, and tribal relationships. As a result, SWAheroin trafficking and distribution are generally more prevalent incities having large populations from Afghanistan, Greece, Lebanon,Pakistan, and Turkey, such as Chicago, Detroit, and New York. Mexican heroin is produced almost exclusively for the U.S.heroin market. The smuggling and distribution of Mexican heroin toand within the United States is controlled by organizations composed ofMexican nationals and Mexican Americans. Mexican traffickingorganizations are often made up of family members, lifelong friends, and othertrusted associates. The availability of heroin from Colombia increased in theUnited States during the latter half of 1992 and early 1993, according toseizure analysis and investigative reporting. At present, Colombianheroin traffickers are attempting to establish distribution outletsin the United States, particularly in the metropolitan areas of thenortheast and, as a result, are smuggling a heroin of very high purity,generally 80-plus percent. According to the El Paso IntelligenceCenter, the number of Colombian couriers who were arrested on commercialairlines carrying heroin into the United States increased from 41 in1991 to over 260 in 1992, with most of these arrests occurring at eitherMiami or New York's international airports. CANNABIS Availability/Price/Potency Marijuana, a Schedule I controlled substance and by-productof the Cannabis sativa L. plant, remained the most commonly usedillegal drug in the United States during 1992. Both the cannabis plant anddelta-9 tetrahydrocannabinol (THC), the plant's primary psychoactivechemical, are controlled substances. According to DEA reporting, 34 percent of a non-sinsemillaplant contains usable material (the leaf and bud components) and 58percent of a sinsemilla plant contains usable material. The yield of acannabis plant is determined by its diameter and the density of thegrow area. The lower the plant density of the grow area, the higher theyield of usable material. The average plant yield for mature,domestically grown sinsemilla is approximately 1.25 pounds per plant. Theaverage plant yield for mature, domestically grown commercial grademarijuana is approximately three-quarters of one pound per plant. Marijuana prices have increased substantially over the pastdecade. Commercial grade marijuana prices rose from $350 to $600 perpound 10 years ago to $300 to $3,000 per pound in 1992. Sinsemillaprices rose from $1,000 to $2,000 per pound 10 years ago to $650 to$9,600 per pound in 1992. Law enforcement efforts have forced some cultivatorsindoors to avoid detection. Indoor growers cultivate higher potencysinsemilla marijuana, which permits them to charge higher prices.Scarcity caused by law enforcement operations also has increased prices. Domestic cultivation trends of significance in recent yearsinclude cultivator efforts to enhance the potency of marijuana byusing advanced agronomic techniques. As a result, the average THCcontent of marijuana has risen considerably in the last ten years.Furthermore, record-high THC contents were reported in 1992 and 1993.These record- high THC contents are an indicator of the continuing trend byindoor growers to produce higher potency marijuana. According to the 1992 National Household Survey on DrugAbuse, approximately 67.5 million Americans have tried marijuana atleast once in their lifetime compared to 61.9 million in 1985.Nevertheless, survey data indicate that the frequency of marijuana use hasdeclined substantially from 1985 to 1992. Overall, past-year,past-month, and past-week use of the drug nave diminished by nearly 45percent during that period According to the National High School Survey on Drug Abuse,the long- term decline in the use of marijuana among 12th graderscontinued in 1992. However, there was also a decrease in the proportion of12th graders who believed there was "great risk"associated with regular marijuana use, possibly presaging a reversal of the downwarduse pattern. In addition, among 8th graders, lifetime, past-year,and past- month use of marijuana marginally increased from 1991 to1992. Moreover, 8th graders in the class of 1992 were less likely to viewmarijuana use as dangerous compared to 8th graders in the class of 1991.Also, the proportion of 8th graders who personally disapproved ofmarijuana use declined from 1991 to 1992. These shifts in perception mayexplain the increased use of marijuana among 8th graders. Reporting from DAWN shows that the estimated number ofmetropolitan area marijuana-related emergency room episodes, which had declinedfrom FY 1989 to FY 1991, increased once again during FY 1992. Thelarge majority, approximately 80 percent, of patients treated forcannabis- related hospital emergencies use marijuana with othersubstances. Patients use marijuana most frequently with alcohol andcocaine. Marijuana use detected through urinalysis testing of recentlybooked male and female arrestees, as reported by the Drug UseForecasting Program, increased significantly in many major U.S. cities in1992. Trafficking Mexico accounted for most of the foreign marijuana availablein the United States during 1992. Colombia ranked as a distantsecond as a foreign source of marijuana. Commencing in early 1992,Jamaican traffickers increased marijuana shipments to the UnitedStates. DEA, in conjunction with Federal and State law enforcementagencies, conducted an aggressive cannabis eradication program in 1992.The effort resulted in the eradication of millions of cannabis plants,the arrest of thousands of violators, the forfeiture of millions ofdollars in assets, and the seizure of several thousand weapons.Moreover, the number of indoor growing operations seized in 1992 (3,849)reached an all-time high. The movement toward indoor production isbelieved due primarily to successful law enforcement efforts to curtailoutdoor cultivation. The five major cultivated cannabis-producing States in 1992were Tennessee, Kentucky, Indiana, Illinois, and Hawaii,respectively. These five States accounted for approximately 44 percent of thecultivated cannabis eradicated during 1992. METHAMPHETAMINE Availability/Price/Purity Methamphetamine is the most prevalent clandestinelymanufactured controlled substance in the United States. Availability isconcentrated primarily in the western and southwestern United States wheremost clandestine methamphetamine manufacture occurs. The price of methamphetamine at the wholesale (pound) levelhas remained relatively constant during the past four years. Currently, methamphetamine prices range from $5,000 to $22,000 perpound, $300 to $2,500 per ounce, and $45 to $200 per gram. Nationwide purity of methamphetamine at the ounce and gramlevels averaged 46 and 53 percent, respectively, during 1992,compared to 35 and 34 percent, respectively, during 1991. (Pound puritylevels are unavailable due to infrequency of purchases at that level.) Use The National Household Survey on Drug Abuse for 1991 showedthat an estimated 5.2 million Americans, 12 years of age and older,have used methamphetamine at least once in their lifetime. (Survey datafor prior years are unavailable. Survey data for 1992 are not yetavailable.) Reporting from DAWN shows that the estimated number ofmetropolitan area methamphetamine-related emergency room episodes decreased ata relatively steady rate from the first half of FY 1989 throughthe first half of FY 1992. However, this downward trend reversed itselfduring the latter half of FY 1992. During the second half of FY 1992,there was a 52-percent increase in the number of emergency room episodesinvolving methamphetamine. DAWN emergency room data also indicate that methamphetamineabuse is concentrated in the metropolitan areas of San Diego, SanFrancisco, and Los Angeles. In San Diego and Los Angeles,methamphetamine-related hospital emergencies increased sharply during the latter halfof 1992. Illicit Manufacture According to DEA reporting, 288 domestic methamphetaminelaboratories were seized during 1992, accounting for 87 percent of allclandestine dangerous drug laboratory seizures. The 1992 figurerepresents a nine- percent decrease from the previous year's total of 315laboratories seized and continues the downward trend in laboratoryseizures, which began in 1990. The main reason for the decrease in laboratory seizures isthe ongoing enforcement of Federal and State chemical-controllegislation. The 1988 Chemical Diversion and Trafficking Act (CDTA) becameeffective in 1989, and enables the Federal Government to regulate listedessential chemicals used in the clandestine synthesis of dangerousdrugs. Over the past three years, most States have passed legislation similarto the CDTA. Approximately 83 percent of the methamphetamine laboratoryseizures during 1992 occurred in the DEA Dallas, Denver, Los Angeles,Phoenix, San Diego, San Francisco, and Seattle, Field Divisions. Thisclearly indicates that the manufacture of methamphetamine is stillbased primarily in the western and southwestern United States. Manufacturing/Distribution Organizations Throughout the United States, numerous individuals, groups,and organizations-from independent entrepreneurs and outlawmotorcycle gangs to Mexican poly-drug trafficking organizations-currentlymanufacture and distribute methamphetamine. (Although late arrivals in the methamphetamine arena, Mexican traffickers are capable ofusing their high-volume production methods and large-scale distributionnetworks to substantially increase the drug's availability in the UnitedStates. For this reason, domestic law enforcement considers the Mexicanpoly-drug traffickers involvement in methamphetamine a significantthreat.) Chemical Diversion Chemical control legislation enacted at the Federal and Statelevel has made it increasingly difficult for laboratory operators toobtain needed chemicals. Consequently, trafficking organizations have beenforced to seek new sources and develop ways in which to circumvent thelaw. LSD Availability/Price/Purity Lysergic acid diethylamide (LSD) availability has increasedin the last two to three years and it is available in at least retailquantities in virtually every State in the United States. The sources ofsupply for most of the LSD available in the United States are located inthe northern California area. LSD is relatively inexpensive with an average street dosageunit or "hit" costing approximately five dollars, and oftenas little as one or two dollars. Retail-level doses are seen primarily in blotterpaper form. Currently, LSD potency or strength, which ranges from 20 to80 micrograms per dosage unit, is considerably below levelsreported during the 1960s and early 1970s when potency ranged from 100 to 200micrograms (or higher) per dosage unit. The National Household Survey on Drug Abuse for 1991estimated that 11.8 million Americans 12 years of age or older have used LSD atleast once in their lifetime compared to 8.4 million in 1985. (Surveydata for 1992 are not yet available.) According to the 1992 National High School Survey on DrugAbuse, current (monthly) use of LSD among 10th and 12th grade studentsremained relatively stable from 1991 to 1992. Among 8th graders,however, current use of LSD increased during that same time frame from 0.6percent to 0.9 percent. Moreover, past-year use of LSD rose in all threegrade levels from 1991 to 1992. In fact, past-year use of LSD amongseniors in the class of 1992 increased to the highest level since at least1985. Reporting from DAWN shows that the estimated number ofnationwide LSD- related hospital emergency room episodes increased from FY1989 to FY 1990. Although abuse patterns have been somewhat erraticsince that period, the current number of LSD-related episodes remainabove those reported during FY 1989. Illicit Manufacture An increasing number of individuals are attempting tomanufacture LSD. Many of these individuals are not associated with thetraditional northern California groups that are believed to have producedmost of the LSD available in the United States since the late 1960s. Distribution At the wholesale production and distribution level, LSDremains tightly controlled by California-based organizations, which haveoperated with relative impunity for over two decades. Mid-leveldistribution networks in the United States are generally comprised of young adultswho have known each other through long years of association and commoninterests. Public and private mail systems appear to be the primarymeans used for the transportation and distribution of retail and wholesalequantities of LSD. A total of six clandestine synthesis LSD laboratories havebeen seized since 1981; however, these were all seized prior to 1987. PCP Availability/Price Phencyclidine, commonly referred to as PCP, is available invarying degrees in a limited number of U.S. cities. During 1992, PCPin liquid form, the most common form available in the United States,sold for $150 to $1,000 per ounce nationally. The lowest liquid ounceprices were reported in Los Angeles, the source for most of the PCPtrafficked in the United States. PCP enjoyed a brief popularity in the late 1960's and againfrom the mid-to- late 1970's. In 1978, PCP was transferred fromSchedule III to Schedule II of the Controlled Substances Act, thusclassifying it as a drug with a high potential for abuse. From the period 1981through 1985, abuse of the drug escalated significantly, particularly amongpersons under the age of 21. Around 1986, and continuing through thelate 1980's and early 1990's, demand for PCP was displaced in largemeasure by the widespread availability and use of crack cocaine. Morerecently, however, there are indications that PCP abuse is increasingonce again in a number of cities. The National Household Survey on Drug Abuse showed thatlifetime and past-year PCP use among the U.S. household populationdecreased from 1985 to 1990; however, 1991 and 1992 survey data indicate anend to this downward use pattern. On the other hand, according to the1992 National High School Senior Survey on Drug Abuse, PCP use among 12thgraders has declined significantly during the past seven years. Thisdiminished use is believed due in large part to a significant increase among12th graders in the perceived risk of harm associated with PCPusage. Reporting from DAWN shows that the estimated number ofmetropolitan-area PCP-related emergency room episodes, which had been decliningat a substantial rate during the past three years, rose from 1,353during the first half of FY 1992 to 2,380 during the second half of FY1992, a more than 75-percent increase. Cities having high or increased PCPabuse rates during the second half of FY 1992 included Baltimore,Chicago, Los Angeles, New York City, Philadelphia, San Francisco, andWashington, D.C. Trafficking and Illicit Manufacture Reporting indicates that the majority of the nation's PCPsupply is manufactured and distributed by Los Angeles-based streetgangs. While buses, trains, and airlines are used to transport PCP fromCalifornia sources of supply, private automobiles are believed to be theprimary means for transporting PCP across the country. Four PCP laboratories were seized in 1992 compared to threein 1991. No PCP laboratories have been seized thus far in 1993. PCPlaboratory seizures since the mid-1980's have ranged from three to 21per year, totals which are considerably less than the high of 79reported in 1978. COCAINE AVAILABILITY/PRICE/PURITY In 1992, domestic cocaine prices fluctuated due to successfuldomestic and international law enforcement operations, which caused ashort-term (3-month) impact on cocaine trafficking from South America.Following a period of adjustment, cocaine traffickers once again foundthe means to facilitate the shipment of multiton quantities of cocaine tothe United States. In 1992, cocaine prices ranged from $11,000 to$42,000 per kilogram nationally in comparison to 1991 prices, whichranged from $11,000 to $40,000 per kilogram nationally. During Aprilthrough June 1992, shortages of wholesale quantities of cocaine resultedin an increase in the kilogram price in many major U.S.metropolitan areas. Throughout the remainder of the year, however, cocaine wasreadily available as kilogram prices in virtually all majormetropolitan areas returned to lower levels. Preliminary data for early 1993indicate that kilogram prices remain at low levels. Nationwide purity of cocaine at the kilogram, ounce, and gramlevels averaged 83, 74, and 64 percent, respectively, during 1992,compared to 86, 72, and 59 percent, respectively, during 1991. Atemporary decline in purity at all levels of the traffic was noted during Julythrough September 1992; however, by year's end, purity at all levelshad increased once again. Nationwide purity of cocaine at the kilogram, ounce, and gramlevels averaged 83, 74, and 64 percent, respectively, during 1992,compared to 86, 72, and 59 percent, respectively, during 1991. Atemporary decline in purity at all levels of the traffic was noted during Julythrough September 1992; however, by year's end, purity at all levelshad increased once again. USE The 1992 National Household Survey on Drug Abuse (seeappendix) showed that the number of past-year and past-month users of cocainehas decreased significantly since the peak year of 1985. During1992, five million Americans 12 years of age and older had used cocainein the past year compared to 12.2 million in 1985. In 1992, 1.3 millionhad used cocaine in the past month compared to 5.8 million in 1985.Nevertheless, frequent or more intense use of cocaine has not shownstatistically significant change during the past several years. Among thefive million people who used cocaine in the past year, 642,000 used itonce a week or more in 1992 compared to 625,000 in 1991 and 662,00 in 1990. The survey also showed that approximately 80 percent ofpast-month cocaine users were young adults ages 18 to 34 in 1992. As inthe past, the rate of past-month cocaine use in 1992 was highest amongyoung adults 18 to 25 years old (1.8 percent of the U.S.population) and ages 26 to 34 years (1.4 percent of the U.S. population). Thepast-month cocaine prevalence rate for the 12- to 17-year-old age grouphas decreased from 1.1 percent of the U.S. population in 1988 to0.3 percent in 1992. Similarly, the 18- to 25-year-old age group hasexperienced dramatic decreases in prevalence from 4.5 percent of the U.S.population in 1988 to 1.8 percent in 1992. For the 26- to 34-year-oldage group, the rate has declined from 2.6 percent to 1.4 percent. Therate for persons aged 35 and older has shown variability, but remainedvirtually unchanged since 1988 (0.3 percent of the U.S. population and0.2 percent in 1992). Lastly, the prevalence rate of past-month cocaineuse among the total U.S. population was estimated at 0.6 percent in1992 compared to 1.5 percent in 1988 and 0.9 percent in 1991. According to the 1992 National High School Senior Survey onDrug Abuse(see appendix for additional survey information),cocaine use continued to decline among high school seniors. Surveyresults showed 6.1 percent of seniors in the class of 1992 said they hadused cocaine at least once in their lifetime, down from 7.8 percent in theclass of 1991 and down from a peak of 17.3 percent in the class of1985. Among 10th graders, lifetime cocaine use decreased from 4.1 percentin 1991 to 3.3 percent in 1992. Among 8th graders, however, lifetime useof cocaine increased from 2.3 percent in 1991 to 2.9 percent in 1992,and past-year use increased from 1.1 percent to 1.5 percent. Other findings from the survey indicate that fewer 8thgraders in 1992 associated great risk of harm with occasional cocaine orcrack cocaine use than did 8th graders in 1991. There was also a decreasein the proportion of 10th graders saying there is great risk of harmwith occasional cocaine use. Reporting from the Drug Abuse Warning Network (DAWN) (seeappendix for further information on DAWN) shows that the estimated numberof nationwide cocaine-related emergency room episodes, which hadbeen increasing at a fairly constant rate from the early-to-late1980's, declined significantly from FY 1989 to FY 1990. During thelatter half of FY 1991, however, the number of episodes increased onceagain and appears to have stabilized at high levels since that time. Anumber of drug epidemiologists and treatment specialists believe apossible explanation for this trend reversal is that many hard-corecocaine users are now experiencing the consequences of long-term addiction.As a result, an increasing number of users are seeking publicmedical assistance. Reporting from the Drug Abuse Warning Network (DAWN) (seeappendix for further information on DAWN) shows that the estimated numberof nationwide cocaine-related emergency room episodes, which hadbeen increasing at a fairly constant rate from the early-to-late1980's, declined significantly from FY 1989 to FY 1990. During thelatter half of FY 1991, however, the number of episodes increased onceagain and appears to have stabilized at high levels since that time. Anumber of drug epidemiologists and treatment specialists believe apossible explanation for this trend reversal is that many hard-corecocaine users are now experiencing the consequences of long-term addiction.As a result, an increasing number of users are seeking publicmedical assistance. Nationwide, during the fourth quarter of FY 1992,approximately one in four(28.3%) emergency room drug abuse episodes involvedcocaine. Metropolitan areas having a significantly higher proportionof drug emergencies involving cocaine include: Baltimore (63.5%),Atlanta (56.3%), Philadelphia (54.1%), New Orleans (48.2%), Chicago(46.7%), New York (46.3%), Newark (44.2%), Detroit (41.4%), Miami (39.1%), Washington, D.C. (37.5%), St. Louis (36.0%), and Boston(34.8%). Reporting from DAWN also indicates that smoking continues tobe the predominant route of administration used by patients admittedto DAWN emergency rooms for cocaine-related problems. The percentageof patients who indicated that smoking was their primary method ofadministration increased from 34.3 percent during FY 1989 to 41.4 percent inFY 1992. During the same time frame, there was a decrease in thepercentage of patients who injected or snorted cocaine. Those who injectedor snorted cocaine decreased from 22.0 percent and 14.0 percent,respectively, during FY 1989, to 20.2 percent and 11.1 percent,respectively, during FY 1992. Rates of cocaine use detected through urinalysis testing ofrecently booked male and female arrestees, as reported by the Drug Use Forecasting Program (DUF) (see appendix for furtherinformation on DUF), remained high in many major U.S. cities in 1992. In fact,rates of cocaine seducing the past year were substantially higher thanthose for opiate and marijuana use. Among the highest was Philadelphia,where 63 percent of the sampled population tested positive for cocaineuse. In New York City, the figure was 62 percent; in Atlanta, 58percent; in Chicago, 56 percent; in Miami, 56 percent; in Cleveland, 53percent; and in Los Angeles, 52 percent. Cocaine use among recently bookedfemale arrestees was also high in many cities. In New York City, 72percent of the female arrestees sampled tested positive for the use ofcocaine; in Philadelphia, 67 percent; in Cleveland, 66 percent; inWashington, D.C., 64 percent; in Kansas City, 62 percent; in St. Louis, 62percent; and in Detroit, 62 percent. TRAFFICKING General Overview The primary domestic importation points for cocaine destinedfor U.S. consumption remain Arizona, southern California, southFlorida, and Texas. The principal cities utilized by Colombian cartels for distribution of multi-hundred or multi-thousand kilogramquantities of cocaine include Houston, Los Angeles, Miami, and New York.While the Medellin Cartel remains a significant supplier of cocaine tothe major U.S. distribution cities, the Cali Cartel continues tocontrol most of the cocaine brought into New York City, Miami, and LosAngeles. Staging sites in the southwestern United States, where somestockpiling occurs while awaiting transportation, are supplied with cocaine byMexican smugglers using couriers or tractor-trailers, other vehicles,and commercial cargo. Organized groups of Cubans, Dominicans,Jamaicans, Mexicans, and African-American gangs provide retail-leveldistribution of the drug in major U.S. cities. In addition, both theMedellin and Cali Cartels maintain operational headquarters in major U.S.cities to control wholesale distribution networks. During the lastyear, as in the past, traffickers shifted or diversified trafficking routesfollowing major seizures. Traffickers appear to be only temporarilyaffected by the interdiction of pipelines and are taking an average of 10to 14 days to reestablish operations. This suggests continued use ofimaginative concealment methods and the use or maintenance ofmultiple-delivery pipelines and systems to avoid law enforcement. Routes Cocaine traffickers perceiving enhanced law enforcementactivity along the United States-Mexican border and in the western Caribbeanhave subsequently diversified their smuggling routes into theUnited States. DEA field divisions report that cocaine traffickers areincreasingly using routes employed four to six years ago. Thisdiversification includes greater use of the eastern Caribbean and the easternBahamas as well as increased importation into the eastern United States.This trend was highlighted by the July 1992 seizure of 5.2 metric tonsof cocaine in Panama which was destined for Baltimore. Moreover, DEAMiami reports that the Medellin Cartel has established a significantpresence in The Bahamas, utilizing the area as a transit point for cocaine enroute to south Florida. Increased cocaine trafficking through the eastern Caribbeanincludes greater use of Puerto Rico, which appears to be a primarytarget of cocaine traffickers who use it as a transshipment point forcocaine destined for the United States, Canada, and Europe. While thesmuggling of cocaine by general aviation aircraft into Puerto Ricocontinues, maritime smuggling is the primary method of transportingcocaine to the island. The appeal of Puerto Rico as a cocaine transit pointis enhanced by two factors: the first is the proximity of Puerto Rico toSouth America, and the second is that once cocaine is successfullysmuggled into Puerto Rico, it can be shipped to the continental UnitedStates with little likelihood of U.S. Customs screening. Since early 1992, DEA field divisions have increasingly citedCentral American countries as transshipment points for U.S.-boundcocaine shipments. This was highlighted by the April 1992 seizure of6.7 metric tons of cocaine in Miami transshipped through Guatemala andby the July 1992 seizure in Panama noted previously. During the pastyear, every Central American country was cited as a transshipment pointfor U.S.- boundcocaine. Reporting indicates cocaine is transported fromsource countries to Central American countries by land, air, and sea conveyances. From Central America, cocaine shipments aretransported to the United States by land, sea, and air directly or throughMexico. U.S. law enforcement efforts along the United States-Mexicanborder continue to force regional cocaine traffickers to alter their operations. DEA and U.S. Border Patrol seizures since early1992 indicate that cocaine traffickers are increasinglytransporting smaller (10 to 50 kilograms) cocaine shipments across less traffickedports of entry such as Calexico and Tecate, as opposed to transportinglarge (multihundred kilogram) cocaine shipments across morefrequently used border crossing points such as San Ysidro. Additionally, inresponse to law enforcement in southern California, traffickersincreasingly use U.S. ports of entry as far east as McAllen, Texas, to smugglecocaine to California. Methods of Transportation and Concealment Maritime Transportation The use of maritime containerized cargo to smuggle bulkquantities of cocaine into the United States continues to challenge U.S.Government drug interdiction efforts. Many DEA field divisions reportthe use of cargo containers to conceal and transport cocaine amonglegitimate goods. Additionally, cocaine is sometimes hidden in the wallsand support beams of cargo containers as well as in, or attachedto, the vessels themselves. DEA reporting indicates an increaseddemand by cocaine traffickers for cargo ships in order to transportbulk quantities of U.S.-bound cocaine. Furthermore, U.S. Customsreports the large volume of cargo arriving at domestic ports, coupledwith the U.S. Customs capability of inspecting only a small portion of thiscargo, continue to be factors operating in favor of smugglingorganizations. The use of low-profile vessels by cocaine traffickers hasmade maritime interdiction extremely difficult off the coast of PuertoRico. DEA reporting indicates these vessels, fabricated of wood and/orfiberglass and measuring up to only 40 feet in length, are difficult tovisually detect since their coloring blends with the ocean. Moreover,their profiles of only one to two feet above the water are notalways detectable by radar. Investigative reporting indicates thesevessels transport up to one metric ton of cocaine and sail directlyfrom Colombia to Puerto Rico without being detected. Cocaine trafficking organizations also rely heavily on theuse of noncommercial maritime vessels. Pleasure craft and fishingvessels are used to smuggle cocaine from source countries into the UnitedStates. Pleasure craft carrying cocaine enter U.S. waters by blendingin with weekend "traffic "along the southeastern coastwhere weekend vessel activity is heavy. Fishing vessels are also used to carrycocaine directly into the United States as well as to transfercocaine to other vessels off the coast. Air Transportation DEA San Diego, Los Angeles, and Miami report cocainetrafficking organizations have increased their use of airdrop operations.Cocaine traffickers are airdropping cocaine shipments in theCaribbean and off the coast of, as well as within, Central America and southernMexico. A combination of law enforcement successes, including thoseof the United States-Mexican Northern Border Response Force, andconflicts between trafficking organizations for control of clandestineairstrips have contributed to trafficker avoidance of landing aircraftin northern Mexico. Consequently, a number of smuggling organizations,including traffickers associated with the Cali Cartel, feel it is lessrisky to airdrop cocaine shipments to ground or maritime crews inCentral America or the Caribbean than to land aircraft in northern Mexico. South American cocaine traffickers have recently acquiredseveral large cargo aircraft for the transport of cocaine, therebyincreasing cargo capacity while overcoming the limited flight range of smalleraircraft. Moreover, cocaine traffickers within The Bahamas andelsewhere in the Caribbean continue to use smaller aircraft as decoys todivert law enforcement interdiction assets from actual smugglingoperations being conducted in a different locale. Land Transportation Cocaine couriers employ several methods to counter traffickerprofiles at or near the United States-Mexican border; these methodsinclude traveling in family-type groups with women and children toavoid suspicion at checkpoints, hiring non-Mexicans to transportcocaine from United States-Mexican border areas into Los Angeles, andrecruiting Anglo drivers and females to transport cocaine shipments. Kilogram bricks continue to be the predominant form ofpackaged cocaine smuggled into the United States. During the past year, DEAfield divisions have frequently cited rubber/waterproofed packagingof cocaine. Additionally, seizures of multihundred kilograms ofcocaine concealed in U-Haul cardboard boxes and 55-gallon drumsincreased. Tile- shaped cocaine (2"x 8"x 8"), vacuum-packed inmetallic-type material, has also been reported. DEA and the U.S. Customs Service reported traffickers smuggleliquefied cocaine into the United States concealed in water tanks ofmobile homes and recreational vehicles. Traffickers also have labeled55-gallon drums of liquid cocaine to reflect the climatic conditions of thelocale where the drums are shipped, i.e., a shipment to Chicago in thewinter is labeled "antifreeze." During May 1992, U.S. Customsin Houston made the first seizure of liquid cocaine at Houston IntercontinentalAirport from an Ecuadorian national enroute to New York City. DEA Miamireported small amounts of liquid cocaine are sometimes concealedwithin liquor bottles. Moreover, DEA San Diego and Baltimore reportedtraffickers are smuggling liquid cocaine into their areas of jurisdiction. Within the United States, cocaine traffickers continue to usecommercial and private vehicles, trains, airlines, and the postalservice to ship cocaine. The use of concealed compartments within vehicles iscommonly cited by DEA field divisions. During the past year, severalcocaine seizures involved multiple concealment sites within the samevehicle, a smuggling technique associated with marijuana trafficking.Popular vehicles among traffickers for transporting cocaine includeNissan vehicles and mini-vans. Additionally, some transportationorganizations use rental vehicles to circumvent vehicle seizures. Cocaine traffickers who use tractor-trailers employ severalmethods to circumvent law enforcement. There is extensive use ofelaborate hidden compartments to secrete cocaine within tractor-trailers.Additionally, cocaine is often hidden among legitimate produce such asonions and watermelons. On the West Coast, tractor-trailers obtainproduce in the San Joaquin Valley to conceal cocaine destined for theMidwest and East Coast cities. Concealment of cocaine in tractor-trailers alsoincludes the use of compartments in air-conditioning units, radiators,and batteries, containers welded in tire rims, and false walls.In the Southwest, large commercial vehicles and trucks are a primarymethod for transporting cocaine. An increase has been noted in the useof tractor- trailers to transport bulk cocaine shipments into the Chicagoarea. DEA reports truckers transporting cocaine sealed in odor-reducingwax among legitimate cargo to avoid detection at checkpoints andscales. Extensive use of commercial trucks to transport cocaine from the LosAngeles metropolitan area to destinations throughout the UnitedStates has occurred during the past year. In addition, traffickerscontinue to seek opportunities to recruit U.S. port officials to facilitatelarge cocaine shipments into the United States from Mexico bytractor-trailer. Domestic Distribution The Cali Cartel's method of operation in the United Statesremains highly sophisticated and compartmentalized. U.S. bases ofoperation are comprised of multiple cells operating within majormetropolitan areas to include Chicago, Houston, Los Angeles, New York,Philadelphia, and San Francisco. The operators of these cells receive ordersdirectly from top-level cartel managers in Colombia and operateindependently of other cells within the same metropolitan area. Cell operatorsutilize the latest technology, such as computers, pagers, and facsimilemachines, in their daily operations. Cellular telephones are often boughtin bulk quantities and discarded after being used for several monthsor less in order to thwart law enforcement telephone intercept efforts. In general, the Medellin Cartel's method of operation in theUnited States is not as compartmentalized as that of the CaliCartel. The drug trafficking groups, which comprise the Medellin Cartel,employ a group decision-making process at the top level as opposed to thehierarchical decision-making process employed by the Cali Cartel. At thelower levels, trafficking groups can transact business with lessrestrictions on their choice of business associates. Peruvian traffickers reportedly ship cocaine concealed inmaritime vessels and aircraft to the United States and distribute itin the Houston area independent of Colombian organizations. The useof Peru as a source area for multiton shipments of cocaine was evidencedduring January 1992 by the seizure of five metric tons of cocaineaboard a maritime vessel. The vessel originated in Peru and wasreportedly destined for the United States and Canada when it wasinterdicted in the Caribbean. Hispanic organizations, particularly Colombian and Mexican,continue to dominate wholesale cocaine trafficking and distributionwithin the United States. However, since early 1992, diverse ethnicgroups, including those of Middle Eastern, East European, CentralAsian, and East Asian descent, have become involved in these activitiesat all levels of the domestic traffic. Cocaine violators in urban areas, such as Boston and Atlanta,have expanded their distribution networks into rural areas, whichhave limited law enforcement resources, thereby reducing the riskof investigation and arrest. MISCELLANEOUS During 1992, the exchange of cocaine for heroin was reportedin Boston, Calexico, New York City, and San Diego. The frequency of suchexchanges appears to be increasing and involves foreign and domesticheroin traffickers seeking cocaine sources in the United States. Inaddition, during the past year, Southwest Asian heroin traffickingorganizations sent heroin and opium via the international mail system toaffiliates in the United States who then purchased cocaine for export toEurope. In 1992, four cocaine base conversion laboratories wereseized within the United States; two in New York City, one in Californiaand one in Florida. One of the laboratories seized in New York City was operational. This represented the first functioning cocainelaboratory seized in that city since 1987. Additionally, the operationalNew York City laboratory used a vapor eliminating device. The device,the first encountered by DEA that employed dry ice, allowed thelaboratory to function in a densely populated area without the strongchemical odors normally associated with clandestine cocaine conversionlaboratories. To date in 1993, only one cocaine base conversion laboratory hasbeen seized within the United States in Hurleyville, New York. Drug traffickers use high-tech equipment, includingnight-vision goggles and radios with scramblers, as well as military hardwareincluding assault rifles, hand grenades, and bulletproof vests.Trafficking organizations use scouts with radios to monitor lawenforcement activities along the United States-Mexican border. A Texascocaine organization recently attempted to purchase hand-held radiosfor surveillance and body armor for their street-level dealers.Traffickers have become more sophisticated in the use of electronicsincluding scanners with police frequencies. Countermeasures employed by cocaine traffickers against U.S.law enforcement include the use of counter-surveillance and paidinformants. Some traffickers study law enforcement methods of operationby reviewing evidence documents during court proceedings. Reportedly,defense attorneys employed by traffickers obtain investigativedocuments through the "right of the discovery process" and thentransmit by facsimile informational reports to Colombia. CRACK COCAINE AVAILABILITY/PRICE/PURITY The simplicity of the crack conversion process allows anyperson with access to cocaine hydrochloride (HCl) to be a potentialsource of crack. Because cocaine HCl is plentiful and cheap and can beobtained in virtually every area of the country, crack is, therefore,widely available. Crack is reported by drug epidemiologists and treatmentprofessionals to be the illegal drug of choice in many U.S. cities. Notableexceptions include cities and towns along the southwest border, wheredrug traffickers are primarily concerned with transshipping thelarge amounts of cocaine HCl, marijuana, and heroin that are smuggled intothe United States, and certain areas within several north-central andnortheastern States that lack large ethnic minority communities,traditional strongholds for crack distribution and abuse. Nonetheless,three Haitian crack sellers were recently arrested in Portland, Maine,indicating that no region is immune to crack trafficking. Crack distribution and use appear to have reached thesaturation point in large urban areas throughout the country. Intensivecompetition in the mid-to-late 1980's inundated the largest consumer poolswith crack. As a result, a number of crack trafficking groups haverelocated or extended their operations to smaller cities, towns, and ruralareas; the primary motivation for this is profit. Simply put, a rock orvial of crack that sells for $5 to $10 in a large, well-populatedarea will command a significantly higher price, usually $25 to $40 in asmaller, less populated area. The national price for a rock or vial of crack ranges from aslow as $2 to as high as $75 but it generally sells for $10 to $50,depending upon the size, normally 1/10 to 1/2 gram. In general, the largercities have the lowest retail prices. Reporting from New York Cityindicates a dosage unit of crack sells for as low as two dollars, while asingle puff on a crack pipe can be obtained for as little as 75cents. Reporting from Philadelphia and Detroit indicates that crackcan be purchased for as low as $2.50 and $3.00 per dosage unit,respectively. Prices for gram quantities of crack generally range from $45to $150 nationally. At the ounce and kilogram level, crack prices arecomparable to cocaine HCl prices and usually range from $475 to $2,500per ounce and from $17,000 to $35,000 per kilogram. In the mid-to-late 1980's, a readily available supply ofinexpensive and high quality crack at the retail level virtually eliminatedany need for users to perform the crack conversion process themselves.Indeed, quality control was a major factor in marketing the drug.Analysis of crack samples by DEA laboratories revealed that purity wasconsistently high during that period, averaging 80-plus percent. Although retail purity remains high, averaging almost 83percent in 1992, sellers in some areas of the country, such as New York,Los Angeles, and several cities in the Southeast, are sellingpoor-quality crack, cut with adulterants such as lidocaine and procaine.These adulterants increase the weight or the size of the crack and,therefore, the profits. Many retailers will sell recently prepared crackthat has not been dried thoroughly and is still wet from theconversion process. This practice is most profitable when dealing in wholesalequantities where transactions are strictly determined by weight. At thedosage unit or retail level, where the size of the rock is of greaterconcern, procaine serves to increase the dimensions of the rock byadding holes or pockets of air, giving rise to the street term"blow-up." Obviously, the smaller the amount of pure cocaine present in the rock,the less intense euphoric reaction the user will experience. Inaddition, a limited number of retailers are selling bogus or"beat" crack to unfamiliar customers because their regular customers consumevirtually the entire supply. Substitutes include soap, chalk, plaster,peanuts, popcorn, and candle wax, which is known on the street as"perp." Practices such as these are creating an increasing number of dissatisfied and wary customers. An almost inexhaustiblesupply of cheap, high-purity cocaine HCl, combined with a relativelysimple and safe production process, makes home conversion by the crackuser more appealing than the risk of purchasing and smoking low-qualityor sham crack. In fact, sellers in some northeastern cities sell twoqualities of cocaine HCl, a high-purity powder for users who willperform the conversion to crack themselves, and a low-purity powder foringestion through snorting only. It has also been reported that usersin Chicago prefer the freebase method of conversion in the belief thatthis method yields a higher purity product than the crack conversionprocess. USE The National Household Survey on Drug Abuse for 1992 showedthat the number of lifetime, past-year and past-month users of crackdeclined significantly from 1991 to 1992. The highest percentages ofcrack use were among those who were disproportionately represented in socioeconomic groups that have historically faced increasedhealth risks, including African-Americans, the unemployed, andhigh-school dropouts, as well as young adults aged 18 to 34. According to the 1992 National High School Survey on DrugAbuse, lifetime use of crack among high school seniors declined from1991 to 1992; however, past-year, past-month, and daily use of crackby this group remained relatively stable during that period.Nevertheless, overall frequency of crack use among high school seniors hasdecreased substantially since 1987. Of particular concern is the slight rise in frequency ofcrack use among 8th graders. From 1991 to 1992, survey data indicate that anincreasing number of 8th grade students had used crack during theirlifetime as well as on a yearly and monthly basis. Also, fewer 8thgraders in 1992 associated great risk of harm with occasional crack use thandid 8th graders in 1991. TRAFFICKING Trafficking/Distribution Levels Crack trafficking is conducted at three broad levels, namely,wholesale trafficking, mid-level distribution, and retail selling. Itmust be emphasized that these classifications are not concrete andthe activities of a specific violator or group may vary. Forexample, as will be explained later, the functions of a Jamaican possemay encompass all three levels within the same organization. Wholesale Trafficking: Crack traffickers purchase cocaine HClin kilogram or multikilogram allotments from traditional cocaineHCl sources, including Colombians and Mexicans. The wholesaletraffickers will either package the cocaine HCl into ounce quantities orconvert it into crack themselves and then divide it into ounces for saleat the next level. Wholesalers usually represent large groups thatare responsible for the majority of the interstate transportationof crack and cocaine HCl intended for crack conversion. The higher levels of crack trafficking are controlled by manysmall (up to 10 members) and mid-sized (10 to 40 members) trafficking organizations consisting of bands of individuals fromdistinct ethnic groups. The main participants involved in wholesale cracktrafficking are Los Angeles-based street gangs, Jamaican posses, andHaitian and Dominican groups. Without exception, each of these groupsstarted out as poly-drug traffickers, dealing primarily in marijuana andcocaine HCl, and continue to sell these drugs. Similarly, street-levelsellers often sell retail units of other drugs in addition to crack. Mid-level Distribution: Distributors further divide theounces of crack into dosage units for sale at the retail level. If theypurchase cocaine HCl, they can perform the conversion process easilythemselves. These distributors often operate crack houses or managestreet-corner sales locations and supervise up to 20 individual sellers.Mid-level distributors can be either members of larger groups orindependent operators. Retail-level Sales: Sellers carry dosage units of cracktotaling no more than a few grams at any one time. Workers in crack houseswill sell dosage units from the one or two ounces that are delivered bythe mid- level distributors. Retailers are typically young males whoare unemployed or destitute and many of them are crack addictsthemselves. At the retail level, crack is sold by countless individualsellers, usually in inner-city sections of large metropolitan areas.Upon arrest, these retailers are almost immediately replaced. While cracksellers and users are present in virtually every ethnic community andeconomic group, the majority are from low-income, urbanAfrican-American and Hispanic neighborhoods. Trafficking Networks Over the past few years, crack trafficking has expanded fromthe large urban centers to smaller cities, towns, and rural areasacross the United States. Major crack trafficking groups, such as theCrips, the Bloods, and Jamaicans, are successfully extending theirnetworks from large cities, including Detroit, Los Angeles, Miami, and NewYork City, to street corners and dwellings in virtually every Stateincluding Alaska and Hawaii. This is occurring primarily for tworeasons. First, these groups are attempting to enlarge their customer poolsand increase their potential profits; second, the threat of disruption bylaw enforcement pressure or aggressive competition has generatedthe search for less hostile environments. Jamaican posses are making advances away from the traditional strongholds of Miami and New York City, targeting new crackmarkets. Areas witnessing increased posse activity include Dallas andKansas City; Alabama, Kentucky, Mississippi, West Virginia; and theFlorida Panhandle. Jamaican posses reportedly have been distributingcrack as far westward as south-central Los Angeles. In a similarmanner, the Crips and the Bloods or their affiliates have been movingeastward into cities such as Birmingham, Denver, Detroit, Las Vegas, andPhoenix, as well as into West Coast cities such as Seattle. Recentreports in the media suggest that these gangs are also moving into New YorkCity. In effect, posses and gangs have crisscrossed the nation withcrack- trafficking networks. When crack first became available in New York City, it wassold by small local bands of independent street sellers. Quite soon,however, these sellers were incorporated into the lowest level of largeorganized networks. The most successful groups increased theirmembership by adopting other gangs through strong-armed persuasion oreliminated their leadership altogether. As the groups grew larger, theyattracted more law enforcement attention. In the late 1980's, New YorkCity's two largest crack distribution organizations, Lido and BasedBalls, were successfully dismantled by Federal, State, and local lawenforcement agencies. Currently, the larger groups in the United States are tryingto insulate themselves from law enforcement detection by scaling down and streamlining their crack production and sales operations. Thetedious and labor-intensive process of shaving off dosage unit sizerocks of crack from larger chunks and packaging them in countless tinyplastic bags or vials in cumbersome factory style operations is illsuited to the clandestine nature of drug distribution. Recentdisruption of a large number of organizations by law enforcement has createda distribution and sales system composed of many small groupsoperating in a limited number of neighborhoods. Trafficking Groups The major crack trafficking organizations consist of streetgangs, such as the Crips and the Bloods, and groups of Jamaicans,Haitians, and Dominicans. They all use similar trafficking and distributiontechniques and are engaged in interstate and intrastate transportationof wholesale amounts of crack and cocaine HCl. They also have theknowledge, experience, drug connections, manpower, and firepower to plytheir trade over long distances. The majority of the information contained in this section wasobtained from the Middle Atlantic-Great Lakes Organized Crime LawEnforcement Network Fifth Annual Conferences on International CaribbeanOrganized Crime held June 15-19, 1992, and June 29 through July 2,1993, in Baltimore. Jamaicans: One of the most effective crack trafficking groupsin the United States is the Jamaican posse. Posses consist of gangsof Jamaican immigrants, often illegal aliens, that are involved in manycriminal activities other than drug trafficking, including robbery,fraud, and money laundering. From these activities, posses receive anestimated one billion dollars annually drug proceeds. The Bureau of Alcohol, Tobacco and Firearms (ATF) estimatesthat, currently, there are approximately 35 posses operating in theUnited States with total membership numbering at least 11,000. Mostposses maintain some type of link to the larger, more establishedgroups or parent posses in New York City or Miami, such as the Shower,Spangler, Dunkirk, and Jungle posses. New York City is generallyconsidered to be the hub of Jamaican posse activity. Jamaican posses are extremely violent, competitive, andindividualistic. As a result, the structure of Jamaican organized crime willremain fragmented, lacking disciplined organizations and allianceswhich are common characteristics of traditional organized crime. Also,successful prosecution by Federal authorities over the past severalyears has disrupted much of the organization and control of the mostprominent posses that operated nationwide. As a result of thesefactors, a large number of newly named splinter groups have evolved under thedirection of new posse bosses. Jamaican posses are attempting to insulate themselves fromlaw enforcement pressure and violent competition by distancingthemselves from the often dangerous day-to-day operation of crack housesand by distributing larger amounts of cocaine, in effect simplysupplying those same crack houses and street level distribution sites.Jamaicans are also initiating alliances with members of other ethnic drugtrafficking groups. For example, Jamaicans have been attempting toestablish connections with Colombian and Mexican wholesale suppliers ofcocaine in order to eliminate middlemen and related additional costs.Also, Jamaicans have been employing other minorities such asHaitians because they are willing to work for less in the lower levels of the distribution chain. Jamaicans also are distributing other illegal drugs such asheroin and marijuana; a few have been able to realize higher profitsfrom heroin distribution. Moreover, some Jamaicans have returned totrafficking marijuana because the Federal penalties for marijuanatrafficking are less severe than those for crack and cocaine HCl, yet theprofit potential is almost as high. A common method of operation by Jamaican posses is termed"drip" trafficking. In an attempt to escape law enforcement effortsand to protect against seizure, loss, or theft by competitors,Jamaican posses do not stockpile large amounts of drugs and money; rather,they move smaller quantities more often and more quickly. In their efforts to expand crack sales and increase profits,Jamaican posses are branching out to other cities and rural areas toestablish new drug markets where competition from rival gangs and lawenforcement activity is lessened. This migration has been observed inDallas, Denver, Kansas City, Washington, D.C., and northern Florida. The Southwest border area has seen a significant influx ofJamaican traffickers during the last five years because cocaine HCland marijuana are much cheaper to purchase in that region of the country.As a result, they have set up storefronts, usually garages, hair salons,or music stores, to mask distribution outlets and to launder proceeds.Since weapons can be purchased for less in Texas than in othersouthern States, Jamaicans often use females to make straw purchasesof guns which are then sent to New York and other cities in theNortheast. Drugs, proceeds, and weapons are all shipped to differentlocations using a variety of means. Commercial airlines have proven tobe an effective method of transportation. When interdiction effortsat particular airports become prohibitive, couriers drive toairports in other cities to elude law enforcement. Buses, trains, andrental vehicles are also popular methods of shipment. Falsecompartments are frequently built into vehicles for transportation of drugs,money, and weapons. Additionally, mail services such as United ParcelService and Federal Express are used to ship drugs and profits for theJamaican posses. Dominicans: While some official estimates of the number ofDominicans living in New York City are as low as 350,000, ATF claims theactual number, including illegal aliens, may be closer to 1,000,000. The hierarchy of Dominican gangs is slightly different thanthat of the Jamaicans in that the Dominican bosses usually run theirnetworks from the Dominican Republic directly, traveling to and from theUnited States as needed. Dominican gangs are always armed and employ modernequipment and techniques in their daily operations, includingwalkie-talkies, "kel" transmitting devices, booby traps (to protectdrugs and money from police action as well as from theft by competitors), and useof counter- surveillance, which they practiced in the Dominican Republicin order to elude the police. Like the Jamaican posses, the Dominican traffickers are veryviolent and competitive and, as a result, do not easily form tightlystructured and disciplined organizations. Although some reports suggest theemergence of a Dominican drug cartel, no evidence has been broughtforth to verify the existence of an organization capable of orchestratinglarge-scale importation and trafficking activities. However, thiseventuality should not be dismissed because, since the early 1980's, theDominican Republic has been used by Colombians as a refueling and transshipmentpoint for drugs destined for the United States and cooperation betweenColombian and Dominican traffickers has flourished. Dominicans have made gains in establishing money-launderingoperations and front companies, most commonly travel agencies and checkcashing businesses. At times, they purchase businesses outright ormake deals with the owners or proprietors to carry out their orders. Itis not known to what extent drug proceeds are sent directly to theDominican Republic. Overall money transfers are estimated to beapproximately $800 million per year. Haitians: Haitian drug traffickers in the United States havebeen able to strengthen their status in the drug trade through twosignificant events. First, an influx of Haitian immigrants since theearly 1970's has provided a large pool of recruits for the drug trade.Second, by the late 1980's, Haiti had become an important way station forcocaine HCl shipped into the United States by the Colombian cartels. At present, Haitian crack traffickers operate in a limitednumber of major cities, primarily Miami and New York, and have notextended their operations as the Jamaicans have. Many Haitian sellers aremoving their way up the distribution hierarchy by working at the lowerlevels of crack operations run by other ethnic groups. Street Gangs: Street gangs, operating under the umbrellanames of the Crips and the Bloods, extended their networks from thestreets of Los Angeles to many major American cities in the last half of the1980's. Sales of crack and cocaine HCl brought them power andinfluence during that time. Gang members learned quickly that the cheapcocaine available in Los Angeles could be sold as cocaine HCl or crack at greatprofit in other parts of the country. Los Angeles street gangs are very loosely organized in smallunits or "sets" falling under the auspices of the twopredominant gangs, the Crips and the Bloods. The general street gang structurebegins with diverse groups of gang members acting as street-level sellersconducting transactions in amounts up to several grams or even ounces onthe street or in rock houses. A few of these sellers rise to becomemid-level distributors, dealing in amounts of up to one kilogram ormore and working between the street-level sellers and the majortraffickers. Capable of brokering multimillion dollar deals, the majortraffickers, often referred to as "high rollers," are notusually visible gang members and often have direct contacts with Colombianwholesale cocaine suppliers. Initially, gangs sold marijuana and PCP prior to enteringinto cocaine HCl and crack trafficking, distribution, and sales.Eventually, they developed a mode of operation that closely resembles theJamaican model. Typically, gang members travel to and establish crackoperations in smaller cities and towns where there is little policepressure and competition from rivals. They often gain entry into acommunity by visiting or living with friends or relatives. In addition tosecuring lodgings, these visits provide access to young people,potential recruits and customers, and help them attain legitimacy andacceptance within the community. Soon, the gang members will seek out inmany instances low-income single mothers and offer them $100 a dayto use their apartment or house as a crack conversion ordistribution site. A common marketing technique known as "double up" isused by these street gangs to attract new customers and involves the sale of twodosage units of crack for the price of one. Sales Locations With few exceptions, crack distribution takes place either inurban or suburban dwellings of all types or at inner-city streetcorner locations. Virtually every large city in America has seen theemergence of both of these retail sales locations. The prevalence ofone site over the other may be directly linked to two factors. First, weather plays a major role in determining the chosenmethod of crack distribution. For example, in cities with cold winters,sellers will set up crack houses to escape the elements themselvesand to offer customers more hospitable accommodations. In summer, theoperation may be moved outdoors where increased pedestrian traffic providesthe necessary cover for street corner sales. Second, the presence of significant law enforcement activitymay force street corner retailers to set up indoor crack facilities toevade detection. Conversely, if gangs are suffering substantiallosses due to police raids on established crack houses, they may dispatchsellers to specific, pre-designated street corner sales locations. The sale of crack at street corner locations is considered tobe ideal because it provides sellers many avenues of escape when facedwith police pressure. If a particular street becomes too"hot" with police activity, the retailers merely move a few blocks away andcontinue selling. Moreover, tactics can be employed to mask streetcorner sales of crack. In New York City, crack distributors have beenknown to dispatch a seller along with up to 10 people dressed exactlyalike to work a street corner in an attempt to disrupt surveillanceefforts. In addition, street corner operations do not requireexpenditures for rent and utilities, as is the case with crack houses. HEROIN AVAILABILITY/PRICE/PURITY Within the United States, heroin is readily available in allmajor metropolitan areas having user populations. During 1992 andthe first few months of 1993, there was an increase in puritynationwide at the retail level and increased supplies available from SouthwestAsia. (It should be noted that high purity heroin has been importedfrom Colombia in increasing quantities in the past year. This heroin fromColombia, which underwent signature analysis prior to DEA's developmentof a South American heroin signature in July 1993, was analyzed ashaving a Southwest Asian (SWA) signature. As a result, it may accountin part for both the increased purity and quantity of SWA heroin in theUnited States.) At present, street-level purity, the key indicatorof availability, is at high levels, particularly in thenortheastern metropolitan areas. Heroin from every major source area is available in theUnited States, which is the most lucrative wholesale and retail level heroinmarket in the world. The origin of heroin smuggled into the UnitedStates and the proportion from each source area is tracked by DEA's HeroinSignature Program (HSP). Each year an in-depth chemical analysis isperformed on 600 to 800 samples taken from heroin seizures and purchasesmade in the United States. The samples selected for signature analysisinclude all DEA seizures at U.S. points of entry and otherseizures/purchases selected at random from DEA, in addition to Federal Bureau of Investigation, and U.S. Customs Service seizures andpurchases. As a result of signature analysis, DEA chemists are able toassociate the heroin sample with a heroin manufacturing process unique to aparticular geographic source area. The proportion of samples associatedwith each geographic area is measured both in terms of the number ofsamples from each geographic source area and, since 1989, the net weightof the heroin samples from each area. In 1991, Southeast Asia (SEA) was the prevalent source areafor heroin in the United States for the fourth year in a row, accountingfor 58 percent of the heroin samples analyzed through the HSP. SWAheroin and Mexican source heroin accounted for half of the remainingsamples with 21 percent apiece. In 1992, the results of the HSP wereskewed by the introduction of a number of samples of purported Colombianheroin. Because a specific signature for heroin from Colombia was notavailable then, most heroin samples of alleged Colombian origin areanalyzed as having a Southwest Asian signature. With this in mind,preliminary HSP figures for 1992 reflect that 44 percent of the heroinsamples analyzed were from Southeast Asia, 39 percent from Southwest Asia orColombia, and the remaining 17 percent from Mexico. Signature analysis also reveals that SEA heroin accounted for88 percent of the total net weight of the heroin samples analyzed in1991, and 58 percent in 1992. SWA heroin (including heroin from Colombia)accounted for nine and 32 percent of the total net weight of the heroinsamples analyzed in 1991 and 1992, respectively. Mexican heroinaccounted for three percent of the total net weight in 1991 and 10 percentin 1992. U.S. airports, particularly New York's JFK InternationalAirport, are primary entry points for heroin shipments destined for theU.S. market. The HSP shows that 91 percent (454 out of 498) of the heroinseizures that took place at the U.S. border and points of entry during1992 occurred at airports, and that over 75 percent of the airportseizures occurred at New York's JFK International Airport. Thenationwide average net weight airport seizure was almost 800 grams and theaverage purity of the heroin seized at these airports was 73 percent. Nationally, in 1992, a kilogram of SEA heroin sold for$90,000 to $250,000. In the northeastern United States, SEA heroin isalso commonly sold in units (700 grams), which sell for $90,000 to$115,000. The price for SWA heroin ranged from $80,000 to $200,000 per kilogram.Wholesale level prices for Mexican heroin were the lowest of any typeof heroin and ranged from $50,000 to $150,000. The wide range in theprice of a kilogram reflects several variables including buyer/sellerrelationship, quantity purchased, purchase frequency, purity, andtransportation costs. Numerous and diverse foreign sources of supply alsoaccount for the wide variances. At the mid-level of the traffic, where dealers sellquantities ranging from an ounce to multiounces, SEA heroin and SWA heroin soldfor $5,500 to $12,000 per ounce. Mexican black tar heroin sold forbetween $1,800 and $4,000 per ounce, and Mexican brown powder heroin pricesranged from $ 1,000 to $ 1,800 per ounce. Domestic prices for Colombian-source heroin are generallycompatible with the prices for heroin from Southeast and Southwest Asia.Kilogram prices quoted in undercover negotiations range up to $150,000and vary depending on final point of delivery. In actual undercoverpurchases of smaller amounts, one-eighth of a kilogram cost $23,500,one-fourth of a kilogram cost $42,500, and one-half kilogram sold for$62,250. Heroin is sold at the retail level in the United States atprices ranging from $10 to $50 and in quantities ranging from 10 to50 milligrams. The retail price remains relatively constant atthis level because retail-level purity, rather than retail-level price,is adjusted by the distributors to account for availability and tomanipulate profit margins. The HSP provides purity information on heroin shipmentssmuggled into the United States at the importation, or wholesale, level.For all types of heroin at this level, the nationwide average purity in1992 was 64 percent. SWA heroin was the purest form available at thewholesale level, averaging 72 percent. SEA heroin nationwide averagedslightly lower at 68 percent, while Mexican heroin averaged 33percent. At the retail level, purity is tracked by DEA's DomesticMonitor Program (DMP), a heroin purchase program designed to provide price,purity, and geographic source area data on heroin being distributed onthe streets of U.S. cities. The program is conducted quarterly in onecity from each of DEA's 19 field divisions and San Juan, Puerto Rico. According to DMP data for 1992, the nationwide average purityfor retail level heroin was 37 percent. This percentage was much higherthan the average of 6.9 percent recorded a decade ago and alsoconsiderably higher than the average purity of 26.6 percent recorded in1991. The increase in average purity corresponded directly to anincrease in availability of high purity SEA and SWA heroin. AlthoughMexican heroin has been traditionally of lower purity than other herointypes in recent years, it too increased in purity at the street level.Street-level purity of SWA heroin analyzed in the DMP during 1992 was thehighest for all sources, averaging 55.8 percent, while Mexican heroin, at25.6 percent, almost doubled between 1991 and 1992. SEA heroinremained widely available in the northeastern United States with anaverage purity of 34.4 percent. Heroin purity at the street level was generally highest inthe northeastern United States, where a large percentage of thenation's user population lives. In New York City, one of the majorimportation and distribution centers for SEA and SWA heroin, the averagepurity at the street level for these types of heroin was, respectively,54.3 percent and 69.7 percent. Boston recorded the highest averagepurity of retail level heroin in all of the DMP cities with an averageof 73.7 percent during 1992. USE The National Household Survey on Drug Abuse for 1992indicated a decrease in the number of past-year heroin users. Survey datashow that the number of Americans 12 years of age or older who haveused heroin at least once in the past year declined from 381,000 in 1991 to323,000 in 1992. During that same time frame, however, the number ofpast-month heroin users increased from 83,000 to 107,000. The increasein the number of lifetime heroin users to 2,653,000 in 1991 appearsto have been an anomaly, as the 1992 estimate has declined to1,840,000. (Estimates of heroin use from the Household Survey areconsidered very conservative due to the probable under coverage of thepopulation of heroin users.) According to the 1992 National High School Senior Survey onDrug Abuse, heroin use increased among high school seniors. Although 1.2percent of the seniors in the class of 1992 reported they had usedheroin at least once in their lifetime, up from 0.9 percent in the class of1991, it was still below the peak of 1.3 percent reported in the classesof 1989 and 1990. Moreover, for the first time in recent years, there wasa statistically significant decline among seniors in theperceived risk of harm associated with heroin use. The National High School Survey also shows that lifetimeheroin use among 8th graders increased from 1.2 percent in 1991 to 1.4percent in 1992, past year use remained steady, and past-month useincreased from a 0.3 percent in 1991 to 0.4 percent in 1992. Among 10thgraders, both lifetime and past-month use remained stable from 1991 to1992, while past-year heroin use increased form 0.5 percent to 0.6percent. Reporting from DAWN shows that the estimated number ofnationwide heroin-related emergency room episodes, which had beenfluctuating somewhat during the past several years, increasedsubstantially from the first to second half of FY 1992. During that time frame, thenumber of heroin-related episodes rose from 18,192 to 24,593, anincrease of 35 percent. Cities showing substantive increases during thelatter half of FY 1992 in the number of heroin-related emergency roomepisodes included Baltimore, Boston, Los Angeles, New York City, and Seattle. Possible explanations for the rising levels of heroin-relatedemergency room episodes have been provided by a number of drugepidemiologists and treatment specialists. Reports indicate that segments of thecrack cocaine user population are using or switching to heroin as ameans to mitigate the depressive effects associated with withdrawalfrom crack. There are additional reports of the appearance, in a limitednumber of areas, of new distributors attempting to establish markets aswell as the growing involvement of youth gangs in the heroin traffic.Moreover, heroin is now being sold in white as well as African-Americanand Hispanic neighborhoods in a limited number of cities. In NewYork City, anecdotal information indicates that more teenagers andfemales are selling heroin than in the past. Lastly, there is aperception among some users that heroin is a safer drug than cocaine, whilecertain others consider heroin use to be "cool." The latterrepresents a radical departure from previous attitudes toward heroin use. Reporting from DAWN also indicates that the injection ofheroin continues to be the predominant route of administration usedby patients admitted to DAWN emergency rooms for heroin-related problems.However, the percentage of patients who indicated that injection wastheir primary route of administration has decreased from 79.1percent in FY 1989 to 73.9 percent in FY 1992. During this same time frame,there was an increase in the percentage of patients who snorted heroin.Those who snorted heroin rose from 4.8 percent in FY 1989 to 8.8percent in FY 1992. Increases in snorting are attributed, in part, to afear of contracting AIDS through needle sharing and the availabilityof high- purity heroin on the street. Opiate use (to include heroin) among recently bookedarrestees as reported by the DUF Program remained relatively low andstable in 1992 when compared to rates for cocaine and marijuana. Citieshaving the highest percentage of positive urinalysis tests for heroinamong booked male arrestees in the first half of 1992 were Chicago at 19percent; New York City at 18 percent; San Antonio at 15 percent; San Diegoat 16 percent; Washington, D.C., at 11 percent; Los Angeles at 11percent; and Philadelphia at 12 percent. Female arrestees tested positiveat high rates in New York City (24%), Portland (22%), Washington,D.C., (19%), San Diego (17%), Detroit (15%), Phoenix (15%), San Antonio(14%), and Los Angeles (13%). TRAFFICKING SEA Heroin Trafficking Major SEA heroin trafficking organizations, often under thecontrol of Sino-Thai and Chinese criminal groups, oversee the smugglingof SEA heroin into the United States. Chinese traffickers in theUnited States with links to these international criminal groups are themost prolific importers and distributors of heroin from Southeast Asia.Chinese or Thai nationals are often used to transport the heroin and aregenerally responsible for the largest bulk shipments, in themultihundred kilogram range, of SEA heroin smuggled into the United States. Around 1986, these Chinese smuggling groups took over themultibillion dollar wholesale heroin trade that had been controlled forover two decades by Traditional Organized Crime groups in the UnitedStates. Over the next few years, ethnic Chinese traffickers flooded thenortheastern United States, the largest heroin market in the country, withbulk shipments of high-purity SEA heroin. In recent years, thesehighly structured clandestine Chinese organizations have increasedthe size and number of heroin shipments to the United States. In the wakeof increased availability, the layers of mid-level distributorsin the New York City area were eliminated and Chinese wholesalers solddirectly to Dominican street-level dealers, a development that resultedin enhanced heroin purity at the street level. SEA heroin traffickers use a variety of transportation routesto smuggle heroin into the United States from the Far East. One of themajor routes originates in Bangkok and terminates in New York City, thelargest heroin importation and distribution center in the UnitedStates. (Each year since 1986, roughly half of DEA's nationwide seizuresoccur in the New York City metropolitan area.) Maritime cargo shipmentsare the primary transport method for smugglers using this route andthe shipments may transit a variety of countries including HongKong, Japan, Korea, the Philippines, Singapore, and Taiwan. Many shipmentsfrom the Far East are also transshipped through Canada and then intothe northeastern United States. Traffickers smuggle heroinshipments aboard commercial airlines originating in Bangkok and then transitalmost any Asian city, as well as a number of cities in Europe andCanada. In addition to New York City, other U.S. cities in theNortheast, including Boston and Philadelphia, are also used as entry points.Traffickers also use West Coast cities such as Los Angeles, San Francisco, andSeattle as entry points for heroin shipments destined for the Northeast. Chinese traffickers employ a variety of smuggling methods.Generally, the size of the heroin shipment determines the smugglingmethod. The largest shipments, ranging from 50- to multihundred-kilogramquantities, are secreted in containerized freight aboard commercialmarine vessels and air freight cargo. Smaller shipments are concealed in theluggage of airline passengers, strapped to the body, or swallowed. SEAheroin smugglers also use the mails and delivery services totransport multigram to kilogram quantities into the country. Traffickers using commercial cargo originating in sourcecountries frequently attempt to disguise the origin of the cargoshipment by first transshipping containers through several other countries orby falsifying the container documentation. In 1992, 35 kilogramsof heroin, which were shipped from Singapore concealed in ceramic tiles,were seized in Newark, New Jersey. In May 1991, the largest heroinseizure in U.S. history occurred near Oakland, California, when 494kilograms of SEA heroin were seized from a commercial cargo of plasticbags aboard a merchant vessel. The shipment originated in Thailand and was transshipped through Taiwan prior to importation into theUnited States. In addition to the Chinese and Sino-Thai traffickers,Nigerians remain deeply entrenched in the smuggling of SEA heroin. Nigeriantraffickers dispatch large numbers of internal body couriers travelingaboard commercial airlines bound for the United States. These"swallowers," including Nigerians as well as other nationalities recruitedas couriers, can smuggle up to two-kilogram amounts of SEAheroin per trip. Moreover, recent reporting suggests that a number of Nigerian trafficking groups are experimenting with smuggling larger (multikilogram) shipments of heroin concealed in commercialmaritime cargo. Most Nigerian organizations are based in Lagos, Nigeria.Since they are formed along tribal lines at the senior levels, theorganizations are close-knit. Drug barons who control the Nigerianorganizations remain well-insulated by directing lower-level traffickers torecruit the numerous couriers, often non-Nigerians, and to organizetravel to the United States. In 1992, Nigerians returned almost all profitsgenerated in the United States to Lagos, Nigeria, or to Europe forlaundering. As a result of enforcement pressure, Nigerians continue torecruit other ethnic groups, including other West Africans, Europeans, andAmerican citizens, as heroin couriers. New York's JFK InternationalAirport was the entry point used most frequently by Nigerian trafficking organizations in 1992. However, during the past year,Nigerian traffickers diversified both the smuggling routes used toreach the United States and their points of entry into the country. Forexample, West Africans, in all likelihood controlled by Nigerians,made a limited number of attempts to smuggle heroin through entry pointsalong the United States Southwest border and the Canadian border during1992. Nigerians have established heroin distribution networks inU.S. cities with well-established Nigerian populations such as Atlanta,Baltimore, Chicago, Dallas, Houston, Newark, New York, and Washington,D.C. These networks are capable of supplying heroin ranging from100-gram to multikilogram quantities on a regular basis. During 1992,reporting from a DEA investigation in Dallas indicated that Nigerian herointraffickers collaborated with members of Jamaican posses in distributingheroin from Jamaican-controlled crack houses in Dallas and hired possemembers as enforcers to protect Nigerian operations. SWA Heroin Trafficking SWA heroin in the United States increased in availability andpurity during 1992 and the first few months of 1993. While some ofthe rise in purity levels for SWA heroin is in all likelihoodattributable to the influx of high-purity heroin from Colombia, investigativereporting and laboratory analysis show that traditional SWA herointraffickers are also smuggling a purer form of heroin into the United States. Importation and distribution of SWA heroin is much lesscentralized than that for SEA heroin, both geographically and in regard totrafficking groups. A number of ethnic groups from Southwest Asia, theMiddle East, and Europe are active in smuggling SWA heroin into the UnitedStates, and its distribution; these ethnic groups include Afghans,Greeks, Iranians, Israelis, Lebanese, Pakistanis, and Turks. SWAheroin is transported to the United States directly from producingcountries, as well as transshipped through Europe and Africa. Significantquantities of SWA heroin bound for the United States are alsotransshipped through the Canadian cities of Montreal, Toronto, and Vancouver.Although New York City is a major SWA heroin importation and distributioncenter, heroin is also smuggled into and distributed throughout theNortheast; in Mid-Atlantic cities such as Baltimore and Washington,D.C.; in some cities on the West Coast such as Los Angeles, San Diego, andSan Francisco; in some Midwestern cities including Chicago andDetroit; and in Puerto Rico. Other points of entry for SWA heroin includeHouston and Miami. Most SWA heroin trafficking groups in the United States arehighly cohesive and difficult to penetrate because they are based onethnic, familial, and tribal relationships. SWA heroin importers andwholesale level distributors generally are very cautious and rarelytransact with outsiders. As a result, SWA heroin trafficking anddistribution are generally more prevalent in cities that have largepopulations from Afghanistan, Greece, Lebanon, Pakistan, and Turkey, such asChicago, Detroit, and New York City. SWA heroin traffickers rely less on commercial cargo as asmuggling method than their counterparts from Southeast Asia.Generally, SWA heroin traffickers, unlike Chinese traffickers, do notsmuggle heroin on a large scale, such as multiple bulk shipments. However, theyare able to regularly smuggle shipments ranging from one to 20kilograms and, on occasion, larger amounts. Many SWA heroin traffickingorganizations use commercial cargo and couriers aboard commercial airlines tosmuggle one to five kilograms on a steady basis. However, severalorganizations are capable of smuggling from five- to 10 kilogram shipmentsaboard maritime vessels on a fairly regular basis. Pakistani traffickers, who smuggle SWA heroin, controlimportation routes into the United States and distribution networks inNew York City and other cities in the East and Midwest. This heroin isoccasionally transshipped through California as well. Pakistanitraffickers are adept at developing new smuggling techniques and unique concealmentmethods, such as specially designed vests with pockets to concealheroin, which are worn underneath the clothes of couriers on airlines. Pakistanis regularly transact business with Afghan and Indian traffickers, and other ethnic groups from Southwest and SouthAsia. Some Nigerians still smuggle and distribute SWA heroin but mostare now more active in trafficking SEA heroin. Lebanese trafficking groups appear to be increasing theirlevel of smuggling into and distribution in the United States,particularly in Boston, Detroit, and New York, cities with large Lebanesecommunities. Moreover, some SWA heroin originally destined for theEuropean market is now smuggled into the United States because Lebanesetraffickers, in an effort to maximize profit margins, are exchanging SWA heroinfor cocaine with Colombian cocaine organizations. (At the wholesalelevel, heroin prices in the United States are higher than in Europe, whilecocaine prices in Europe are higher than in the United States.) Mexican Heroin Trafficking Mexican heroin, in brown powder form as well as the morewidely available black tar form, is produced almost exclusively forthe U.S. heroin market. The smuggling and distribution of Mexicanheroin to and within the United States is controlled by organizationscomposed of Mexican nationals and Mexican-Americans. Mexican trafficking organizations are often made up of family members, lifelongfriends, and other trusted associates. While some Mexican organizations control the entire processfrom opium production and heroin processing in Mexico to the managementof transportation and distribution networks in the UnitedStates, other trafficking organizations operate independently on a smallerscale. Mexico's extensive land border with the United Statesprovides smugglers numerous entry points into the country. Heroin is smuggledacross the U.S. Southwest border in relatively small amounts, most oftenranging from gram- to multiounce quantities, by large numbers ofillegal immigrants and migrant workers. Occasionally, there are largeseizures, such as the April 1993 seizure of approximately 10 kilogramsof black tar heroin at Blythe, California, but such amounts are theexception. Generally, Mexican heroin seizures do not exceed one or twokilograms. The use of numerous couriers to smuggle relatively smallquantities of Mexican heroin is characteristic of the smuggling methodsemployed by Mexican heroin traffickers. These traffickers take advantageof their close proximity to the United States by stockpiling thelarger quantities of heroin in Mexico and then smuggling smalleramounts as transactions in the United States are arranged. Mosttraffickers believe their heroin stockpiles are less susceptible to lawenforcement in Mexico, and by storing heroin there they minimize the dangerof U.S. authorities seizing significant amounts of heroin. Accordingto investigative reporting, even large poly-drug Mexicanorganizations, which are capable of smuggling multiton quantities of cocaineand marijuana, limit smuggling of Mexican heroin into the UnitedStates to kilogram and smaller amounts. Traffickers who distribute Mexican heroin within the UnitedStates are generally Mexican immigrants, primarily from the States ofDurango, Michoacan, Nuevo Leon, and Sinaloa. Mexican organizationscontrol distribution at the wholesale level but are not generallyinvolved in street sales which are often managed by local gangs. Smuggling methods include concealment in motor vehicles,public transportation vehicles, internal and external body carry,and commercial package express services. Females are used muchmore frequently than males as couriers for transporting heroin andmoney across the border. Once the heroin is smuggled into the United States,transportation is arranged to metropolitan areas in the western andsouthwestern States where there are sizable populations of Mexican immigrants.Heroin is also transported to the Chicago, Denver, and St. Louismetropolitan areas, primary markets for Mexican heroin. In the UnitedStates, Mexican black tar heroin is usually sold by the "piece" orMexican ounce, which weighs 25 grams. Colombian Heroin Trafficking The availability of heroin from Colombia increased in theUnited States during the latter half of 1992 and early 1993, according toseizure analysis and investigative reporting. While most evidencesuggests that Colombian traffickers are still operating at a fairly lowlevel, the potential of the Colombian heroin threat is serious,primarily because of the smuggling resources controlled by the Colombiancocaine cartels. At present, Colombian heroin traffickers are attempting toestablish distribution outlets in the United States, particularly inthe metropolitan areas of the Northeast, and, as a result, aresmuggling a heroin of very high purity, generally 80-plus percent. Thehigh purity is essential in order for the Colombian traffickers to breakinto the fiercely competitive retail heroin markets in Boston, Newark,New York City, and Philadelphia, where street level purity averagesover 50 percent. Colombian heroin is also available in southern NewEngland cities, such as Hartford and Bridgeport, Connecticut, andProvidence, Rhode Island, where, according to reporting from the BostonField Division, Cali Cartel cocaine networks are operating.Currently, significant investigations of Colombian heroin traffickingorganizations are underway in Miami, Newark, New York City, San Diego, andSan Juan, Puerto Rico. Since 1991, most of the Colombian heroin smuggled into theUnited States has been transported by couriers aboard commercial airlines,a method requiring numerous couriers carrying amounts ranging up to akilogram per trip. Colombian couriers commonly transport the heroin infalse- sided briefcases and luggage, inside hollowed-out shoe soles,or by internal body carry methods. Much of this activity appears tobe the work of smaller, independent Colombian traffickers, accordingto investigative reporting from the DEA Bogota Country Office. According to the El Paso Intelligence Center, the number ofColombian couriers who were arrested on commercial airlines carryingheroin into the United States increased from 41 in 1991 to over 260 in1992; most of these seizures occurred at either Miami or New York'sinternational airports. The majority of Colombian couriers arrested inMiami confessed to being en route to New York City or possessed follow-ontickets for that destination. Individuals with an end destination ofMiami were often instructed to check into a local hotel and awaitfurther instructions. The primary method of smuggling (ingestion) employed byColombian traffickers and the seizure amounts (usually less than 500grams) indicate that Colombian traffickers presently are not able tosupply heroin on the same scale as Chinese, Nigerian, or SouthwestAsian traffickers. To date, the largest shipment seized involved aJune 1992 airdrop of just under 15 kilograms of heroin on a PuertoRican beach; this shipment may have been tied to the Colombian cocainecartels. However, as the cocaine cartels become more involved inheroin smuggling and distribution, the seriousness of the threat will increase significantly, given their vast resources, control overtrafficking routes, and access to a stable cocaine (crack) clientele inthe United States. CANNABIS AVAILABILITY/PRICE/POTENCY Marijuana, a Schedule I controlled substance and by-productof the Cannabis sativa L. plant, remained the most commonly usedillegal drug in the United States during 1992. Both the cannabis plant anddelta-9 tetrahydrocannabinol (THC), the plant's primary psycho-activechemical, are controlled substances. The flowering tops, also known ascolas or buds, are valued because of their higher THC content. Theflowering tops and leaves are collected, dried, and then smoked in a pipe oras a cigarette. Hashish, which is processed from cannabis, is alsovalued to a limited extent by some individuals in the United States. Typically, 34 percent of a non-sinsemilla (pollinated) plantcontains usable material (the leaf and bud components) and 58 percentof a sinsemilla (unpollinated female) plant contains usablematerial. The higher the plant density of the grow area, the lower theyield of usable material. In addition, the diameter of the plant is moreimportant than the height for yield predictions. Indoor plants are generallysmaller than outdoor plants due to space limitations. The averageplant yield for mature, domestically grown sinsemilla is approximately1.25 pounds per plant. The average plant yield for mature, domesticallygrown commercial grade marijuana is approximately three-quarters ofone pound per plant. Marijuana prices have increased substantially over the pastdecade. Prices for a pound of commercial grade marijuana during theearly 1980's ranged from $350 to $600, while in 1992 the cost ranged from$300 to $3,000. Sinsemilla with its inherently higher THC content,ranged from $1,000 to $2,000 ten years ago. In 1992, the price rangedfrom $650 to $9,600 per pound. Successful law enforcement efforts haveforced some cultivators to move indoors. Cultivators have increasinglymoved indoors to avoid detection and to exploit the profit potential ofpotent sinsemilla marijuana. Indoor growers cultivate sinsemillabecause the higher THC content of sinsemilla permits growers to chargehigher prices. Scarcity created by law enforcement operations hasalso increased prices in some areas. Domestic cultivation trends of significance in recent yearsinclude cultivator efforts to enhance the potency of marijuana bymaking use of advanced agronomic practices such as hydroponics and cloning.Such techniques also involve the use of special fertilizers, planthormones, steroids, and carbon monoxide. During the late 1970's andearly 1980's, the THC content of commercial grade marijuana averaged undertwo percent. By comparison, the average in 1992 was 3.68 percent.The average THC content of sinsemilla in 1992 was 8.34 percentwhich compares to an average of approximately six percent in thelate 1970's and early 1980's. Moreover, in February 1993, a new U.S.record was recorded for the highest concentration of THC analyzed in amarijuana sample. The sample had a THC content of 29.86 percent whichis nearly 32 percent higher than the previous record of 22.67 percentreported during 1992. The record high THC content of this sample is anindicator of the continuing trend by indoor growers to produce higher potencymarijuana over recent years. USE According to the 1992 National Household Survey on DrugAbuse, approximately 67.5 million Americans have tried marijuana atleast once in their lifetime. Of these, approximately 2.2 million werefrom 12 to 17 years of age, nearly 13.5 million were from 18 to 25 yearsof age, and almost 52 million were 26 years of age and older. Of the17.4 million people who used marijuana at least once in the pastyear, nine million used the drug once a month during 1992, and 5.2million used it once a week or more. Survey data also indicate that thefrequency of marijuana use has declined substantially from 1985 to 1992.Overall, past-year, past-month and past-week use of the drug havediminished by nearly 45 percent during that time frame. According to the National High School Senior Survey on DrugAbuse, the long-term decline in the use of marijuana among seniorscontinued in 1992. However, there was also a decrease in the proportion ofthat population who believed there was a "great risk" ofharm associated with regular marijuana use, possibly presaging a reversal of thedownward use pattern. In addition, among 8th graders, lifetime, past-year,and past- month use of marijuana marginally increased from 1991 to1992. Moreover, 8th graders in the class of 1992 were less likely to viewmarijuana use as dangerous compared to 8th graders in the class of 1991.Also, the proportion of 8th graders who personally disapproved ofmarijuana use declined from 1991 to 1992. These shifts in perception mayexplain the increased use of marijuana among 8th graders. Reporting from DAWN shows that the estimated number ofmetropolitan area marijuana-related emergency room episodes, which had declinedfrom FY 1989 to FY 1991, increased once again during FY 1992. Infact, the number of marijuana-related emergency room episodes rose from9,231 in FY 1991 to 12,108 in FY 1992, an increase of more than 30percent. DAWN reporting also shows that nearly one-half of the patientstreated for cannabis-related hospital emergency room episodes during thefirst six months of 1992 were under 26 years of age; approximately 70percent of these patients were male. The large majority, approximately80 percent, used marijuana in combination with other substances. Patientsmost frequently used marijuana in combination with alcohol. Thenext most common combination involved the use of marijuana withcocaine. Marijuana use among recently booked male arrestees asreported by the DUF Program increased in many major U.S. cities in 1992. Thehighest levels of marijuana use were reported in Omaha, where 38percent of the sampled population tested positive through urinalysis. InIndianapolis, the figure was 35 percent; in San Diego, 35 percent; inDenver, 34 percent; in Ft. Lauderdale, 32 percent; and in Miami, 30percent. Marijuana use among recently booked female arrestees alsoincreased in many cities. In Indianapolis, 26 percent of the femalearrestees sampled tested positive for the use of marijuana; in San Diego, 25percent; in Dallas, 24 percent; in Ft. Lauderdale, 21 percent; in Denver,19 percent; and in Kansas City, 18 percent. TRAFFICKING Mexico accounted for most of the foreign marijuana availablein the United States during 1992. Mexican marijuana is smuggled intothe southwestern United States by vehicles, private aircraft,armed backpackers, and horse or mule caravans. Colombia ranks as adistant second behind Mexico as a foreign source of marijuana.Colombian marijuana is smuggled into the United States by noncommercialvessels using traditional maritime routes. Jamaican traffickers haveincreased marijuana shipments since January 1992. Jamaican marijuana issmuggled into the United States by private and commercial aircraft,and maritime vessels. DOMESTIC CULTIVATION/ERADICATION An estimated 6,000 to 6,500 metric tons of cannabis werecultivated in the United States during 1992. During that year,approximately 3,405 metric tons, representing 7.49 million cultivated plants,were eradicated. Reporting indicates that 31 percent of thecannabis plants eradicated during 1992 was sinsemilla. The five major cultivated cannabis-producing States in 1992were Tennessee, Kentucky, Indiana, Illinois, and Hawaii,respectively. These States accounted for approximately 44 percent of thecultivated cannabis eradicated during 1992. Reports from Indiana and Nebraskaover the last two years could signal a possible new trend in marijuanaproduction. The two States report an increase in tended/enhanced ditchweed, aform of marijuana, which grows in the wild. Although ditchweed haslow potency, it is mixed with cultivated marijuana to increase quantity. There has been an increase in the cultivation of cannabisindoors year- round in elaborately supported operations that have rangedfrom several plants grown in closets to thousands of plants grown inspecially constructed underground sites capable of producing marijuanaworth millions of dollars. Growers also continued to plant cannabisin remote outdoor areas, often concealed or camouflaged by surroundingvegetation. During 1992, the 13th annual DEA-sponsored Domestic CannabisEradication and Suppression Program (DCE/SP) was conducted in conjunctionwith other Federal, State and local law enforcement authorities in 50States. The National Guard and Civil Air Patrol also participated. TheDCE/SP resulted in the eradication of 7.49 million cultivatedcannabis plants, 264 million low-potency ditchweed plants, the arrest of12,369 violators, and the seizure of 5,541 weapons. Moreover, thenumber of indoor growing operations seized in 1992 reached an all-timehigh of 3,849, up from 2,848 seized in 1991. Indoor cultivationoperations were confiscated in all 50 States during 1992, with the greatestnumber, 561, seized in the State of Washington. The movement toward indoorproduction is believed due primarily to successful law enforcementefforts to curtail outdoor cultivation. The average indoor cultivationoperation has approximately 100 plants. In addition, an average of oneweapon was seized from each indoor operation. In recent years, the DCE/SP has placed increasing emphasis onthe investigation and prosecution of major domestic cannabiscultivators and trafficking organizations. The net result during 1992 was theseizure of assets valued at over $69.3 million, over twice the amountseized in 1989 ($29.5 million). The U.S. Fish and Wildlife Service,National Park Service, and Bureau of Indian Affairs also have long-termprograms to combat cannabis cultivation on public lands. One of the major accomplishments of the DCE/SP continues tobe Hawaii's Operation WIPEOUT. During 1991, it was estimated that theprogram eradicated approximately 85 percent of Hawaii's summercannabis crop. During 1992, Operation WIPEOUT's continued success wasevidenced by reports that mainland smugglers were attempting to smugglemarijuana into Hawaii in order to fill the vacuum. Operation WIPEOUT isnow conducted as a maintenance program. Every 90 days, theWIPEOUT teams conduct aerial surveillance and eradicate what few cannabisplants they find before the plants reach maturity. More emphasis is alsobeing placed on arresting cultivators. Another major accomplishment of the DCE/SP was the successfullobbying efforts to convince the California State Government toconsider herbicidal spraying as a means of eradication. To date, theCalifornia State Government continues to study the proposal. Previousrequests to use herbicidal spraying in California were met with strongresistance based on environmental, as well as political, concerns.Spraying will be conducted in limited areas on a trial basis. Kansas, SouthDakota, and Texas are also considering herbicidal spray programs. DEA continues to conduct a special enforcement programentitled Operation GREEN MERCHANT that targets major indoor growingoperations. To date, DEA, together with State and local authorities hasseized nearly 4,000 growing operations, arrested over 1,500violators, and frozen millions of dollars in illicitly acquired profits andassets. METHAMPHETAMINE AVAILABILITY/PRICE/PURITY Methamphetamine is available in varying quantities in mostareas of the United States, except for the northeastern and Mid-Atlanticregions where, for the most part, it is encountered infrequently.Availability is primarily concentrated in the western and southwesternUnited States where most clandestine laboratory activity occurs.Methamphetamine is also available in limited retail amounts in the Southeast andsomewhat larger quantities in the Midwest. The production of methamphetamine, as evidenced by the numberof reported clandestine laboratory seizures to DEA, hasdecreased each year since 1989. During 1992, 288 methamphetamine laboratorieswere seized. This is in comparison to 652 laboratories seized in 1989, 429in 1990, and 315 in 1991. The decrease in laboratory seizures is attributed to theongoing enforcement of Federal and State chemical controllegislation. The 1988 Chemical Diversion and Trafficking Act (CDTA) becameeffective in 1989, and enables the Federal Government to regulate listedprecursor and essential chemicals used in the clandestine synthesis ofdangerous drugs. Over the last three years, most States have passedlegislation similar to the CDTA. The price of methamphetamine at the wholesale (pound) levelhas remained relatively constant during the past four years. In 1992,methamphetamine prices ranged from $5,000 to $22,000 per pound, $300 to$2,500 per ounce, and $45 to $200 per gram. Nationwide purity of methamphetamine at the ounce and gramlevels averaged 46 and 53 percent, respectively, during 1992,compared to 35 and 34 percent, respectively, during 1991. (Pound-puritylevels are unavailable due to infrequency of purchases at that level.) USE The National Household Survey on Drug Abuse for 1991 showedthat an estimated 5.2 million Americans 12 years of age and olderhave used methamphetamine at least once in their lifetime. (Lifetimeprevalence rates for 1985, 1988, and 1990 are not available. Thelifetime prevalence rate for 1992 is not yet available. Dataconcerning past- year, past-month, weekly, and daily prevalence rates formethamphetamine are also unavailable.) Reporting from DAWN shows that the estimated number ofmetropolitan area methamphetamine-related emergency room episodes decreased ata relatively steady rate from the first half of FY 1989 throughthe first half of FY 1992. However, this downward trend reversed itselfduring the latter half of FY 1992. During the second half of FY 1992,there was a 52-percent increase in the number of emergency room episodesinvolving methamphetamine. Despite this, second-half FY 1992 emergencyroom episodes remained below those reported in FY 1989. DAWN emergency room data indicate that methamphetamine abuseis concentrated in the metropolitan areas of San Diego, SanFrancisco, and Los Angeles In San Diego and Los Angeles,methamphetamine-related hospital emergencies increased sharply during the latter halfof 1992. Nationally, approximately 75 percent of the patients treatedfor drug abuse episodes involving methamphetamine were white; nearly65 percent were male; approximately 25 percent were between 18 and 25years of age, and 40 percent were between the ages of 26 and 34. Approximately 45 percent of patients treated in emergencyrooms as a result of methamphetamine abuse indicated that their use of methamphetamine was due to dependence. Approximately 20percent had come to the emergency room because of an overdose, approximately30 percent as a result of an unexpected reaction to the drug, and morethan 20 percent came due to the chronic effects associated withmethamphetamine abuse. Reporting from DAWN also indicates that the injection ofmethamphetamine continues to be the predominant route of administration usedby patients admitted to DAWN emergency rooms for methamphetamine-relatedproblems. Despite this, the percentage of patients who indicated thatinjection was their primary method of administration decreased slightlyduring the past year from 38.4 percent in FY 1991 to 34.9 percent in FY1992. Moreover, there has been an increase in the percentage ofpatients who smoked methamphetamine during the past several years. Thosewho smoked methamphetamine increased from 3.9 percent during FY 1989 to6.8 percent during FY 1992. ILLICIT MANUFACTURE Laboratory Seizures Although clandestine methamphetamine laboratory seizuresdeclined during 1992, methamphetamine remained the most prevalent,clandestinely manufactured controlled substance in the United States.According to DEA reporting, 288 methamphetamine laboratories were seizedduring 1992, which accounted for 87 percent of all clandestine dangerousdrug laboratory seizures. The 1992 figure represents a ninepercent decrease from the previous year's total of 315 laboratories seized andcontinues the downward trend in laboratory seizures that began in 1990. DEA field divisions in Dallas, Denver, Los Angeles, Phoenix,San Diego, San Francisco, and Seattle, seized approximately 83 percentof all methamphetamine laboratories during 1992. This clearlyindicates that the clandestine manufacture of methamphetamine is stillprimarily based in the western and southwestern United States. Methamphetamine laboratory seizures declined from 1991 to1992 in 14 DEA field divisions including the San Francisco Division whichcontinued to report the highest number of seizures. Sixty-sevenclandestine methamphetamine laboratories were seized during 1992 by theSan Francisco Division compared to 81 in 1991. However, DEA's LosAngeles, San Diego, Phoenix, Dallas, and St. Louis offices reported anincrease in the number of laboratories seized within their respectiveareas. Clandestine laboratories have been seized from everyimaginable location from suburban homes, garages, apartments, mobile trailers,urban dwellings, and industrial areas to specially-designedunderground vaults. The laboratories have been camouflaged,booby-trapped, buried underground, conveyed, and abandoned. Laboratory Operations Laboratories are usually constructed in very rural areasacross the United States; however, an increasing number of smalllaboratories are being located in urban and suburban neighborhoods where theypose a significant threat to health and safety. Not only aremethamphetamine laboratories used to produce an illegal, often deadly drug,but they have caused explosions, fires, and toxic fumes. Chemicalsassociated with clandestine laboratories have proven to be environmentalpollutants and health hazards. Clandestine laboratories are usually operated on an irregularbasis rather than on a regular schedule. Operators often produce abatch of methamphetamine then disassemble the laboratory and store itor move it to another location while they acquire additional chemicals.Storage facilities are often utilized to house (safeguard) chemicals,glassware, and the finished product. An operator will often utilizedifferent locations to manufacture methamphetamine. Therefore, it isnot uncommon for an organization to have multiple laboratory sites.Relocating the laboratory affords some protection against detection by lawenforcement authorities. Clandestine laboratory operators are often well-armed, andtheir laboratories are occasionally booby-trapped as a securityprecaution. Numerous weapons, including explosives, are routinelyconfiscated in conjunction with clandestine laboratory seizures. Publicsafety, and environmental concerns are of little importance to illicitdrug laboratory operators. Every year, a number of clandestinelaboratories experience fires or explosions which lead to their discovery.Laboratory operators often waste essential chemicals as they attempt tosynthesize a high-quality batch of finished product. They usuallydispose of these and other hazardous chemical wastes by unsafe and illegalmethods, often dumping these wastes on the ground or in nearby streams andlakes, pouring them into local sewage systems, or burying themunderground. Individuals who synthesize methamphetamine are commonlyreferred to as "chemists" or "cooks." This level ofeducation and knowledge of chemistry can vary from high school dropouts with no realchemical knowledge to professional chemists with graduate degrees inchemistry. These "cooks" most typically have very littleformal training; rather, they frequently follow a handwritten recipe or have learnedto synthesize methamphetamine from underground publications, apprenticeships, or during incarceration. There are, however,a number of "chemists" that are fairly adept orknowledgeable with regard to synthesizing methamphetamine. These individuals utilizechemicals more efficiently, thus increasing the yield ratio of chemicals tofinished product. In addition, the "chemist" has theproficiency to solve problems which may occur during the manufacturing process.This is in contrast to operators who simply follow a recipe and who aregenerally unqualified to perform corrective measures. MANUFACTURING METHODOLOGIES Although the manufacture of methamphetamine can beaccomplished by a variety of chemical synthesis methods, it is most commonlyproduced using the phenyl-2-propanone (P2P) or ephedrine reductionroutes of synthesis. The ephedrine reduction method was once most oftenused in clandestine laboratories located in California, and has sincebecome widespread throughout much of the United States. It ispreferred over the P2P method of methamphetamine production for threereasons. First, it is a simpler route of synthesis; second, the effects ofthe resulting product are more pronounced; and, third, ephedrine is morereadily available to clandestine laboratories in California and inthe Southwest. A relatively new and simple procedure to synthesizemethamphetamine has been noted using a variation of the ephedrine reductionmethod. The process is being called a "cold cook" method on thestreets because an external heat source is not required for the synthesis toproceed. The method uses commonly available material and chemicals tomanufacture between one to two ounces of methamphetamine per batch. Theprocess is commonly performed in such readily available containers astwo 32-ounce sports drinking bottles, insulated coffee cups, mugs, or inmodified laboratory glassware. CHEMICAL DIVERSION Integral to the manufacture of illicit methamphetamine arethe chemicals and equipment necessary to operate a clandestine laboratory.Whether the phenyl-2-propanone, ephedrine reduction, or other method ofsynthesis is used, various combinations of chemicals, glassware, andequipment are required. The acquisition of chemicals is, therefore, a vitaland readily identifiable component of the illicit traffickingcycle. Chemical control legislation enacted at the Federal and Statelevel has made it increasingly difficult for operators to obtain neededchemicals. Consequently, trafficking organizations are constantlyseeking new sources and developing ways in which to circumvent the law.They manufacture some of their own chemicals, utilize"runners" to purchase necessary chemicals under threshold amounts, and experimentwith alternate, non-regulated chemicals. Laboratory operatorsobtain regulated chemicals, such as ephedrine, by purchasingover-the-counter products which are exempt from the provisions of the CDTA.Chemicals are also acquired from "rogue" chemical companies or inStates which have less restrictive chemical laws or in such countries as Mexicoand Canada. MANUFACTURlNG/DISTRIBUTION ORGANIZATIONS Methamphetamine manufacturing/distribution operations varygreatly in size, structure, and degree of sophistication. Somelaboratory operators act as their own chemists; others hire chemists to run thelaboratories for them. Many manufacturers are independent producers whocook for various organized groups. This is particularly true of larger organizations which may hire or contract chemists tomanufacture methamphetamine in return for cash, finished product, or acombination of the two. Other cooks manufacture for themselves ratherthan for a particular organization. Leasing storage facilities,procuring chemicals, securing the laboratory site, and setting upglassware and equipment may be the responsibility of one person or manydifferent individuals. Several individuals may simply work together tocombine their expertise, chemicals, etc., on an ad hoc basis. Thenumber of individuals which comprise an operation and the function eachperforms differs from one organization to the next. Throughout the United States, numerous individuals, groups,and organizations from independent entrepreneurs and outlawmotorcycle gangs to Mexican poly-drug trafficking organizations currentlymanufacture and distribute methamphetamine. Nationally, independententrepreneurs represent the largest identifiable group involved inmethamphetamine- related investigations. To a lesser degree, outlaw motorcyclegangs continue to play a role in the distribution aspect andinfluence production in certain areas. They most typically insulatethemselves by financing manufacturing operations rather than becomingdirectly involved themselves. The most noteworthy trend in recent years is currently takingplace in California where Mexican traffickers dominate the large-scaleproduction and distribution of methamphetamine in the San Diego,Riverside, San Bernadino, and Fresno areas. In fact, the high volume ofmethamphetamine manufactured and distributed is the distinguishingcharacteristic of Mexican traffickers involved in dangerous drug production. Numerous 22-liter setups are frequently utilized inlaboratories operated by Mexican traffickers to produce an average of 20to 80 pounds during each manufacturing process. Traffickers set uplaboratories or "cooks" in very remote areas throughout southernand parts of northern California Organizations may purchase property or pay for theshort-term use of a site in order to acquire a secure manufacturinglocation. An organization may utilize one location multiple times. Mexican illegal aliens are most frequently encountered atthese laboratory sites. In some cases, they are hired as helpers orto maintain the reaction process, while the actual chemistvisits periodically to ensure the operation is functioning properly.In other cases, Mexican illegal aliens are responsible for all facetsof the manufacturing process. Chemicals are generally stored instash houses and brought to the laboratory site on a limited basis. Theamount of chemicals present at the laboratory is usually restricted towhat is required to complete a particular cook. Chemicals are procured for these laboratories from sources inthe United States and Mexico. Chemical brokers recruit runners to makepurchases at rogue chemical companies. Additionally, ephedrine, aprecursor for methamphetamine, is easily accessible to Mexican traffickers;the chemical is currently shipped, without restriction, fromGermany to Mexico and subsequently smuggled across the UnitedStates-Mexican border in privately owned vehicles. Moreover, brokers supplychemicals to numerous manufacturing organizations. Organizations assisteach other in obtaining chemicals and glassware. A certain amount ofcooperation exists among many of these organizations; links between thesegroups were already established through their long-standing cocaine,heroin, and marijuana connections. There are indications that groups which previouslymanufactured methamphetamine are now finding it more cost effective topurchase it from Mexican sources. In addition, there is limited evidenceto suggest that Mexican traffickers may be attempting to expand theiroperations to other areas of the country. There are also indications that methamphetamine is currently being manufactured in Mexico and subsequently smuggled into the United States. SOURCE AREAS California is a primary source for methamphetamine in manyareas throughout the United States. However, the manner in whichmanufacturing operations are carried out often makes it difficult todetermine the origin of the source of supply. Operators manufacturing in aparticular area may distribute the finished product to associatesresiding locally, in neighboring States, or in other geographic areas.Privately owned vehicles are the modes of transportation used most frequentlyin the nationwide distribution of methamphetamine. LSD AVAILABILITY/PRICE/POTENCY DEA reporting indicates that LSD (Iysergic acid diethylamide)is available in at least retail quantities in virtually everyState in the United States and that availability is increasing in a numberof States. Reporting also indicates that an increasing number ofindividuals or groups are manufacturing and distributing or attempting tomanufacture and distribute LSD in the United States. In the last twoyears, DEA seized or purchased LSD in 33 States and Washington, D.C. LSD availability has been reported by either DEA offices or Stateand local police authorities in many of the remaining 17 States.Northern California appears to be the source of supply for most of theLSD available in the United States. LSD is available in several forms, including blotter paper,tablets, gelatin, sugar cubes, and liquid. Tablets can be purchased inseveral areas, however, most of the retail doses are in theblotter-paper form. Microdots are available in California, Illinois, Indiana,Michigan, New Jersey, and Vermont. Gelatin in the "windowpane"variety has been reported in Michigan and sugar cubes are available inColorado and the Washington, D.C., area. Personal-use doses of liquid LSD invials have also been reported in Colorado, Illinois, New York, and WestVirginia. LSD is relatively inexpensive. The average price isapproximately five dollars per retail dosage unit and costs less than one dollarper dosage unit in wholesale lots of 1,000 dosage units or more. Whencompared with marijuana, which sells for $40 to $450 per ounce, LSD isperceived by many drug users as a bargain, especially if one considers theduration of its effects which can persist for up to 12 hours in higherdoses. Although there has been some fluctuation in the price of LSDnationally during the past several years, overall prices remainrelatively low. LSD potency or strength is measured in micrograms. In the1960's and early 1970's, LSD potency generally ranged from 100 to 200micrograms per dosage unit or higher. Analysis of exhibits during thelate 1970's indicated an average potency in the 30- to 50-microgramrange. From the mid-1980's to the present, LSD potency has remainedconsiderably below levels reported during the 1960's and early 1970's and hasgenerally been in the range of 20 to 80 micrograms per dosage unit. Asa result of this comparatively low dosage level, many users perceive LSDas "safe," thus enhancing the drug's attractiveness. USE The National Household Survey on Drug Abuse data for LSD arelimited to estimates of lifetime use, defined as the use of LSD at leastonce in a person's lifetime. During 1991, 11.8 million Americans, 12years of age and older, reported having used LSD at least once compared to8.4 million in 1985, an increase of 40 percent. The data revealtwo significant expansions in the number of lifetime users ofLSD; one expansion occurred from 1985 to 1988 and the other from 1990to 1991. According to the 1992 National High School Survey on DrugAbuse, past year use of LSD among seniors in the class of 1992 increasedto the highest level since at least 1985. Current (monthly) use ofLSD among 10th and 12th grade students remained relatively stable from1991 to 1992. Among 8th graders, however, current use of LSDincreased during that same time frame from 0.6 percent to 0.9 percent.Moreover, past- year use of LSD rose in all three grade levels from 1991 to1992. DAWN reports indicate that the estimated number of nationwideLSD- related hospital emergency room episodes increased from FY1989 to FY 1990. Although abuse patterns have been somewhat erraticsince that period, the current number of LSD-related episodes remainabove those reported during FY 1989. ILLICIT MANUFACTURE AND TRAFFICKING A total of six clandestine synthesis LSD laboratories havebeen seized since 1981; however, these were all seized prior to 1987. LSD producers fall into two groups. The first is composed ofchemists, manufacturers, and distributors, located in northernCalifornia, who work together in close association; they are normally major manufacturers capable of distributing LSD nationwide. Thesecond group of producers work independently. The independent producersare encountered in almost any part of the country, however, theirproduct is intended for local consumption only. Wholesale LSD trafficking patterns are not well understood;however, three theoretical models have been developed, which outline organizational structures, production methods, andtrafficking patterns. These theoretical models may help to explain how clandestineLSD activity occurs. Law enforcement officials call theseorganizational patterns: the Independent Entrepreneurial Model, theInner/Outer Circle Group Model, and the Association Model. The Independent Entrepreneurial Model: A number of lawenforcement officials believe some LSD manufacturers and distributors,who are not part of the northern California group, entered the market dueto increased demand and the opportunity for high returns on asmall investment. Examples of this type of loosely-structuredorganization have been noted in cases in Austin, Texas; New Orleans,Louisiana; Hartford, Connecticut; and Denver and Boulder, Colorado. Thecommon feature in each of these cases was an individual or a smallgroup of individuals who manufactured LSD independently from anyCalifornia source of supply. Some entrepreneurs who have manufactured orhave attempted to manufacture LSD have been known to lawenforcement officials for years; however, the number of independenttraffickers appears to have increased recently. The Inner Circle/Outer Circle or Single Group Model: Thismodel is thought to be organized under one close-knit group, the innercircle, which controls the vast majority of LSD manufacturing anddistribution in the United States. The inner circle is probably composedof five to 10 principal individuals who possess specialized functions.These specialists would include chemists, bulk storage custodians, financial/transportation specialists, and executives whomanage overall operations. The inner circle controls the means ofmanufacture; they assemble, operate, disassemble, and store laboratoryequipment; and keep a reserve amount of LSD on hand for distribution. They sellfrom 10- to 200-gram lots to a limited number of multigram distributors.This inner circle presumably accrues multimillion-dollar profits andonly conducts business with the next level of distribution referred to asthe "outer circle." The outer circle consists of multigram distributors whosupply a number of teams, groups, or individuals. They sell LSD at $1,000 to$3,000 per gram and accrue an estimated $300,000 to $600,000 per year. Close Association Model (An alternative theory to the InnerCircle/Outer Circle or Single Group Model): In this model, a small groupof people located in northern California, who have known each other forover two decades, control the manufacture and distribution of LSD.However, in contrast with the Inner Circle/Outer Circle theory, thesepeople do not work in one structured organization. They come together, asnecessary, to acquire chemists, chemicals, working capital, etc. Theywork as consultants or advisors to each other in order to meet theircommon goal of producing and distributing LSD. They may work together asa unit to prepare and distribute one batch of LSD, but after that isaccomplished, they leave the association until another opportunity arises.They have strong loyalty to each other and are living comfortably, butthey are not thought to be motivated primarily by profit. DISTRIBUTION Lower-level distribution of LSD usually occurs in three ways.First, an individual attends a rock concert, meets a source of supply,and exchanges telephone numbers with the source of supply.Normally, these purchases are for retail quantities of up to 100 doses.Second, if this individual decides to continue distributing, he/she wouldthen call the source for additional amounts. Usually the source has eithercontinued on the concert tour or has returned home, which is frequentlynorthern California. If the source intends to stay on the tour-makingsubsequent communication difficult-the source provides the telephonenumber of an associate for future orders. After the initial purchase,almost all transactions are made via the public and private mailsystems. Payments to a source of supply are usually made through legitimatemoney wiring services. Third, some dealers travel directly to Californiato meet their sources of supply. Reporting indicates that shipment methods used to transportboth large and small quantities of LSD are often similar. LSD isfrequently concealed in greeting cards, in cassette tapes, or inarticles of clothing that are mailed to a post office box established bythe recipient. This post office box is usually listed under afictitious name or business. Normally, no return address is provided onthe package or envelope. Moreover, it is suspected that some multigramdistributors will travel to their source in order to obtain supplies. Retail or user level quantities range from one- to 10-dosageunits. Low- level distributors sell 50- to 100-dosage-unit quantities.Mid-level distributors sell 1,000-dosage-unit quantities as well asmultiples of 1,000 units. These distributors normally have more than onesource of supply and sell to several lower-level dealers. The sourcesof supply for gram-distributors are in all likelihood located innorthern California. These sources normally convert LSD from powder orliquid form to blotter form. Multigram distributors travel toCalifornia to obtain LSD personally and are in association with numerouslower-level dealers. PCP AVAILABILITY/PRICE Phencyclidine, commonly referred to as PCP, is available invarying degrees in a limited number of U.S. cities, primarilyBaltimore, Chicago, Los Angeles, New York City, Philadelphia, SanFrancisco, and Washington, D.C. During 1992, PCP in liquid form, the mostcommon form available in the United States, sold for $150 to $1,000 perounce nationally. The lowest liquid-ounce prices were reported inLos Angeles, the source for most of the PCP trafficked in the UnitedStates, where such quantities sold for $150 to $300. Nationwide, the pricefor PCP in powdered form ranged from $400 to $2,000 per ounce. During1992, the price for a gallon of PCP ranged from $3,000 to $10,000 inLos Angeles and up to $13,000 in New York City. Individual cigarettessaturated with PCP sold for between $5 dollars and $70 nationwide. USE PCP is sold on the street under numerous names including:Angel Dust, Crystal, Supergrass, Killer Joints, Ozone, Wack, EmbalmingFluid, and Rocket Fuel. These names reflect the range of its bizarre andvolatile effects. The liquid form of PCP is the most commonlyencountered, but it is also sold in tablets, capsules, and as a powder. PCP istypically applied to a leafy material such as mint, parsley, oregano,or marijuana, and then smoked. PCP has been used to adulterate commercially-manufactured cigarettes, usually by dipping themin liquid PCP, which is PCP dissolved in ether. The most popularcommercial cigarettes are dark paper-wrapped brands such as Shermans orTijuana Smalls. PCP can also be injected hypodermically intocigarettes. In 1957, PCP was developed as a human anesthetic and laterused in veterinary medicine as a powerful tranquilizer. In 1965,medical use for humans was discontinued because of adverse side effects suchas confusion and delirium. In 1978, its commercial manufacturewas discontinued and PCP was transferred from Schedule III toSchedule II of the Controlled Substances Act, thus classifying it as a drugwith a high potential for abuse. PCP enjoyed a brief popularity in the late 1960's when it wastrafficked as a "Magic Peace Pill." Abuse of the drugresurfaced from the mid-to- late 1970's because of low price and powerful effects. Fromthe period 1981 through 1985, abuse of the drug escalated significantly, particularly among persons under the age of 21. Cities whichexperienced significant PCP availability and abuse levels in theearly-to-mid-1980's included Baltimore, Chicago, Detroit, Los Angeles, NewOrleans, New York City, San Diego, San Francisco, St. Louis, and Washington,D.C. Around 1986, and continuing through the early 1990's, demandfor PCP was displaced in large measure by the widespread availability anduse of crack cocaine. More recently, however, there are indicationsthat PCP abuse is increasing once again in a number of cities. The National Household Survey on Drug Abuse showed thatlifetime and past-year PCP use among the U.S. household populationdecreased from 1985 to 1990; however, 1991 and 1992 survey data indicate anend to this downward use pattern. From 1990 to 1992, the number ofAmericans aged 12 years and older, who used PCP at least once, increased fromsix million to 8.2 million, while the number who had used PCP in the pastyear increased from 307,000 to 467,000. Nevertheless, the numberof past-year users in 1992 remained significantly below the numberreported in 1985 when approximately 1.2 million Americans reported using PCPat least once yearly. According to the 1992 National High School Senior Survey onDrug Abuse, PCP use among 12th graders has declined significantly duringthe past seven years. From 1985 to 1992, the percentage of seniors whoused PCP at least once in their lifetime decreased from 4.9 percent to2.4 percent. Comparable declines were also reported during thatsame period in the percentage of seniors who used PCP during the pastyear and past month as well as on a daily basis. This diminished use isbelieved to be due in large part to a significant increase among 12thgraders in the perceived risk of harm associated with PCP usage. Reporting from DAWN shows that the estimated number ofmetropolitan-area PCP-related emergency room episodes, which had been decliningat a substantial rate during the past three years, rose from 1,353during the first half of FY 1992 to 2,380 during the second half of FY1992, more than a 75-percent increase. Cities having high or increasedPCP abuse rates during the second half of FY 1992 included Baltimore,Chicago, Los Angeles, New York City, Philadelphia, San Francisco, andWashington, D.C. TRAFFICKING AND ILLICIT MANUFACTURE Reporting indicates that the majority of the nation's PCPsupply is manufactured and distributed by Los Angeles-based streetgangs. While buses, trains, and airlines are used to transport PCP fromCalifornia sources of supply, private automobiles are believed to be theprimary means for transporting PCP across the country. Femalecouriers are used very frequently and the amounts transported generally rangefrom one to two quarts. PCP traffickers also use the U.S. mail system andexpress delivery services to transport PCP. Four PCP laboratories were seized in 1992 compared to threein 1991. Two of the 1992 seizures were in northern California and one eachnear Chicago and Philadelphia. PCP laboratory seizures since themid-1980's have ranged from three to 21 per year, totals which areconsiderably less than the high of 79 reported in 1978. No PCPlaboratories have been seized thus far in 1993. APPENDIX The NATIONAL HOUSEHOLD SURVEY ON DRUG ABUSE, sponsored by theSubstance Abuse and Mental Health Services Administration (SAMHSA), isa series of national surveys to measure the prevalence and frequency ofdrug use among the U.S. household population aged 12 and over. Thesurvey samples the civilian non-institutionalized population living inhouseholds, college dormitories, and military installations and,therefore, does not include some segments of the U.S. population which maycontain a substantial proportion of drug users, such as transients andthose who are incarcerated. The SAMHSA publishes survey results on anannual basis. The NATIONAL HIGH SCHOOL SENIOR SURVEY is a series ofnationwide studies of drug use frequency and related attitudes among high schoolseniors in the United States. The survey is conducted annually by theUniversity of Michigan's Institute for Social Research and funded byresearch grants from the SAMHSA. In addition to high school seniors, thestudy includes the recently-added national surveys of 8th and 10th gradestudents. For the 1992 survey, approximately 50,000 8th-, 10th-, and12th-grade students across the country were questioned. The DRUG ABUSE WARNING NETWORK (DAWN) is a large-scale datacollection system implemented in 1972 and designed to be an indicator ofthe severity, scope, and nature of the nation's substance abuseproblem. The purpose of DAWN is to provide data on the incidence of drugabuse related episodes from participating hospital emergency roomslocated in 21 U.S. metropolitan areas. DAWN is managed by the SAMHSA. The NATIONAL INSTITUTE OF JUSTICE (NIJ) established the DrugUse Forecasting Program (DUF) in 1987 to identify and monitortrends in drug use among arrestees in the United States. Each quarter, atcentral booking facilities in 24 participating jurisdictions,arrestees are asked to participate in a voluntary, anonymous interview andto provide a urine specimen. Urine samples are analyzed to detect theuse of cocaine, opiates, marijuana, PCP, methadone, benzodiazines(such as Valium), methaqualone, propoxyphene (such as Darvon),barbiturates, and amphetamines. The results of the urinalysis testing arepublished by the NIJ on a quarterly and annual basis. DISTRIBUTION The White House National Security Council Office of National Drug Control Policy Department of Justice Federal Bureau of Investigation/DlU Federal Bureau of Prisons Immigration and Naturalization Service INTERPOL/USNCB Organized Crime Drug Enforcement Task Forces U.S. Marshals Service Department of the Treasury Bureau of Alcohol, Tobacco and Firearms Internal Revenue Service U.S. Customs Service U.S. Secret Service Department of Defense Defense Intelligence Agency National Security Agency Central Intelligence Agency/CNC Department of State U.S. Coast Guard DEA Headquarters, DEA Field Offices, DEA Laboratories El Paso Intelligence Center Financial Crimes Enforcement Network National Drug Intelligence Center International Association of Chiefs of Police (NarcoticsCommittee) National Alliance of State Drug Enforcement Agencies National Sheriffs' Association [NOTE: The published report from which this information wasinput includes additional text and accompanying tables andfigures.] CliffSchaffer's Home Page WT01-B26-48IA031-000651-B016-124http://206.61.184.43:80/schaffer/GOVPUBS/cocccp.htm 206.61.184.43 19970122121315 text/html 32618HTTP/1.0 200 OKDate: Wednesday, 22-Jan-97 12:13:04 GMTServer: WebSitePro/1.1f (S/N wpo-0deb)Allow-ranges: bytesContent-type: text/htmlLast-modified: Saturday, 28-Dec-96 06:17:02 GMTContent-length: 32400 Coca Cultivation and Cocaine Processing Contents | Feedback | Search DRCNet Library | Schaffer Library | Government Publications COCA CULTIVATION AND COCAINE PROCESSING: AN OVERVIEW DRUG ENFORCEMENT ADMINISTRATION INTELLIGENCE DIVISION STRATEGIC INTELLIGENCE SECTION SEPTEMBER 1993 EXECUTIVE SUMMARY Two of the lesser understood aspects of the illicit cocainetraffic are the cultivation of the coca plant and the conversion of the cocaleaf into cocaine hydrochloride (HCl). While the coca plant can be foundthroughout most of Latin America, varieties containing the cocainealkaloid (the basis for cocaine HCl) are cultivated and converted primarily inPeru, Bolivia and Colombia. There are two different species and several differentvarieties of coca plants which contain the cocaine alkaloid and these varietiesprosper under quite different climatic conditions. At the same time, themethods used to cultivate and harvest coca leaf differ depending onclimate,tradition,and other factors. The conversion of coca leaf into coca paste,cocaine base, and cocaine hydrochloride is also a varied process with many stepsinvolved and many chemicals necessary. THE COCA PLANT It has been estimated that there are over 200 Erythroxylumspecies growing in the Western Hemisphere. Only 17 species can be utilized toproduce cocaine. Fifteen of the 17 species contain relatively low levels ofcocaine alkaloid and subsequently are not cultivated. In South America twospecies and two varieties within each of these species are cultivated. Theyare: --E. coca Species var. coca var. ipadu --E. novogranatense Species var. novogranatense var. truxillense These varieties are traditionally cultivated in the followingareas: --Bolivia E. coca var. coca --Peru E. coca var. coca E. novogranatense var. truxillense E. coca var. ipadu --Colombia E. novogranatense var. novogranatense E. coca var. ipadu E. novogranatense var. truxillense The most widely grown variety of coca is E. coca var. cocawhich is cultivated on the eastern slope of the Andes from Bolivia inthe south to as far north as central Ecuador. This area of the Andes has atropical climate and experiences high amounts of rainfall. Coca in this regionis usually grown between 1,650 and 4,950 feet in elevation. E. novogranatense var. novogranatense thrives in the drierregions of Colombia and, to a lesser extent, Venezuela. It is also grownat lower elevations where the climate is generally hotter. The mainvariety of E.novogranatense, var. truxillense, is grown up to anelevation of 4,950 feet. The last variety, E. coca var. ipadu, is found insouthern Colombia, northeastern Peru, and western Brazil in the Amazon basin. E.coca var. ipadu is primarily cultivated by Indians for their own consumptionand is not as high in cocaine alkaloids as the other three. It is not an easy task, even for an expert, to readilydistinguish between the different varieties of coca plants. One of the ways toidentify the variety is to look at the leaves. Both varieties of E. coca(E. coca var. coca and E. coca var. ipadu) have broadly elliptic leaves. Theleaf of var. ipadu has a rounded apex, whereas the apex of var. coca ismore pointed. The leaf of var. coca is large, thick and dark green in color. The leaf of E. novogranatense var. novogranatense is palegreen with a rounded apex and is somewhat narrower and thinner than theleaf of var. ipadu and var.coca. E. novogranatense var. truxillense is verysimilar to var. novogranatense except that it does not possess the linesparallel to the central vein of the leaf that are characteristic to so manyvarieties of coca plant. The cocaine alkaloid content of the E. coca and the E.novogranatense species also serves to distinguish between these species and the manyother species of wild coca that grow in Latin America. These other speciescontain much lower levels of cocaine alkaloid. The usual cocaine alkaloidcontent of a sample of coca leaf material is between 0.1 and 0.8 percent.The cocaine alkaloid content can go much higher, however, as was shown inone sample of coca leaf from the Chapare region in Bolivia that measured 1.2percent. Coca grown on the upper slopes of the Andes also contain morecocaine alkaloids than coca grown in low-lying areas. It is therefore believedthat the best quality coca is grown at higher altitudes. CULTIVATION While methods of cultivating the coca plant are similar inmany ways throughout Peru, Bolivia, and Colombia, there are differencesin techniques because of terrain, tradition, and other factors. Some coca plantations have been in existence for years. Inother areas, however, such as Peru's Upper Huauaga Valley, new plantationsare being established daily. A typical farmer who is preparing a fieldfor coca will usually pick an area that slopes slightly so that water willnot drown his plants. He will then begin clearing his field, normally bycutting trees and stumps and setting fire to the debris, a clearing method knownas slash and bum. The felled trees are left in the field and the coca issimply planted around them. The farmer has no motivation to move the logssince there is no market for the timber. Logs are absent from the older fieldsbecause of rot or because the farmer gradually cleared his field. Once the field is cleared for cultivation, the farmer canready his crop for planting. The first step in cultivation generally begins withthe seed. Seeds are usually gathered from December through March from plantsranging from two to three years in age. They are often poured into water at theonset to identify bad seeds, which will usually float to the top andare discarded. The good seeds are planted in small plots that are kept shadedfrom the sun. Seeds are sown about two inches apart at a depth ofapproximately one half inch in humus enriched soil. These seedbeds are kept wellwatered and weeded frequently and the seeds will usually germinate within 20 to30 days. Sometimes the seeds are presoaked in water to hastengermination which will then occur in about ten days. Seedlings usually reach transplanting size in about twomonths. At this age they are about 12 inches tall. While the measurements vary,seedlings generally are planted in holes about a foot deep and about oneand-one-half feet from each other within rows about three feet apart. Another popular method of establishing new fields of E. ipaduinvolves taking a cutting from an established coca bush and planting it in theground. This method (cloning) is getting more popular as it gives thefarmer a head start. There are two methods of planting a cutting. One involvessticking several branches a couple of feet long into the ground. The othermethod is to cut three or four inch cuttings from a branch, each one withprotruding smaller branches. The cutting is soaked in water a day or so and thenplanted in loose, fertile soil. It is reported that coca leaf can beharvested from these plants within six months and seeds develop on theseplants after one year but the seeds lack embryos and are not viable. A coca plant cultivated from seed will generally reach fullmaturity and its leaves harvested between 12 and 24 months after beingtransplanted. Even though coca growing in the wild has been known to reachheights of up to 30 feet, that which is cultivated is almost always pruned back tofacilitate harvesting the coca leaf. Cultivated fields are usually keptat a height of three to six feet. All picking of coca leaf is done by hand.Harvesters have to be very quick in their work yet careful not to damage theleaf buds on the bush while stripping off the leaves. Leaves are said to beready for harvest when they take on a yellowish tint and have a tendency tocrack when bent. Coca leaf can be harvested between two and six times per yeardepending on climatic conditions. Coca growing at lower altitudes willusually be harvested more often than coca growing at higher altitudes.The most abundant harvest, sometimes accounting for about half of the totalyearly harvest, takes place after the rains in March. Subsequent harvests takeplace in June/July and November, the normal dry season in SouthAmerica. Some harvesting, however, takes place all year round. When the leaves are harvested, they are put in sacks and takento a closed room and spread out on the floor. The next day, the leaves aretaken to a flat area, where they are spread in thin layers on a tarpaulinin direct sunlight and left to dry. If there is a lot of sunshine andminimal cloud cover, the drying phase can be completed in six hours. Duringinclement weather, it takes much longer because at the first sign ofrain the leaves are gathered up and taken into shelter. If a load of cocaleaves is caught by a rainstorm during drying, it could ruin the whole load. Thisis because the leaves will ferment if the moisture goes over 14 percent. Thistends to cause a breakdown of the cocaine alkaloids. After the drying phase is completed, the coca leaves are sweptinto large piles and left for about three days before being taken tomarket and/or processing facilities. The weight of packaged leaves variesfrom the 100 pound "carga" in the Bolivian Chapare, to the 25pound "arroba" in Peru's Upper Huallaga Valley. In Colombia, coca leaves are notusually sold; however, when dried coca leaves are sold, it is usually inpackages of 25 pounds. Peru Peru, the world's largest source of coca, has both licit andillicit cultivation. Licit coca is cultivation by farmers registeredwith the National Coca Monopoly (ENACO). ENACO buys and sells it toretailers either for resale domestically, for chewing or for herbal tea, or forexport to produce soft drink flavoring or pharmaceuticals. The 18,000hectares that have been registered for licit coca cultivation are centeredin the department of Cuzco. Illicit coca cultivation occurs primarily in the UpperHuallaga Valley region of northern Peru including the departments of San Martin,Huanuco, and Ucayali. Other areas under cultivation include the valleys ofLa Convencion and Lares in the department of Cuzco, and the provinces ofHuanta and La Mar along the Rio Apurimac in the department of Ayachucho. Thereare also smaller growing areas located in the departments of Puno and Pasco. The Upper Huallaga Valley is a tropical area with a mildclimate that receives an average of 12.44 feet of rain during the year.June through September is the dry season when the region gets very littlerainfall. The mean annual temperature is 55 degrees Fahrenheit. Coca isusually grown here between 1,980 to 2,640 feet above sea level but is sometimesplanted up to 6,270 feet in altitude. The soil in the Upper Huallaga Valleyis well drained and rich in iron, an important element for all plant life. The area surrounding Cuzco has an average rainfall of between1.32 and 5.94 feet annually which usually falls between the months ofOctober and April. The average temperatures in this region are greater than 53degrees Fahrenheit. Coca is generally grown between 2,409 and 4,257feet above sea level. The soil is especially poor in iron content. A semi-tropical climate with warm days and abundant rain fall,between 6.6 and 7.26 feet per annum, characterizes the Ayacucho area. Cocais usually grown on steep slopes which require terracing at an elevationof between 1,650 and 4,290 feet. Soils in this area are red and high iniron. Bolivia Bolivia is the world's second largest source of coca leaf.There is both licit and illicit coca cultivation occurring in this countryas well. In mid-1988, a law became effective that made coca cultivationillegal in most of the country. The law also established legal, transitional,and illegal zones of cultivation and declared that 12,000 hectares of cocawould be the amount grown to meet the traditional demand for coca. There are roughly three main growing areas in Bolivia. Thethree areas are the Yungas de La Paz, the Chapare, and the Apolo. Cocacultivation in the Yungas de La Paz is located between the cities of Guanay andInquisivi, northeast of La Paz on the eastern slope of the Andes.Cultivation in the Chapare occurs in the provinces of Carrasco, Chapare, andArani in the department of Cochabamba, east of La Paz. The small area ofApolo is in the La Paz department north of the city of La Paz. Nearly all the licit coca is grown in the traditional growingareas of the Yungas. The overwhelming amount of illicit coca is grown inthe Chapare where it is estimated that about 75 percent of the country's cocacrop is cultivated. The amount of coca grown in the Apolo is much lessthan in either of the two other areas. Parts of the Yungas have been cultivated for hundreds ofyears. Coca is planted at between 4,800 and 6,000 feet in altitude onterraced fields, generally on steep slopes. Some of these fields have a slopeof more than 45 degrees. The Yungas is characterized by a five-month rainyseason that runs from December to April receiving about 4 feet of rainfall peryear, followed by seven dry months. The soil content is poor, and this areahas suffered severe erosion problems. In the Chapare, the weather is continually wet and warm, withan annual rainfall averaging around 13 feet. The growing areas in thisregion are broad, low plains containing some hills. Coca is cultivated atbetween 660 and 1,650 feet above sea level where the temperature averagesaround 57 degrees Fahrenheit. The soil is clay based, rich alluvial(sediment deposited by flowing water). The Apolo, located in La Paz department, is also a noteworthycoca-growing region of Bolivia. Coca in the Apolo region is ofteninterplanted with coffee, a major crop in the area. Soil in the Apolo is notsuited very well to coca; the longevity of a coca bush there is only from fiveto eight years. Coca plants in the Apolo are therefore constantly replaced. Colombia Colombia ranks third in worldwide coca leaf production withall cultivation being illicit. There is widespread cultivation in the easternplains region of the Llanos which encompasses about one-half of Colombia.The heaviest areas of cultivation are located in the departments ofPutumayo, Caqueta, Guaviare, and Vaupes. There is substantial expansion of thecoca crop in the Bolivar department in the north-central area of Colombia aswell as areas of cultivation in the south and southwest part of the country. In the southern coca-growing region, the temperature averagesbetween 49.5 and 52 degrees Fahrenheit and there is light rainfall. Coca isnormally grown between 3,300 arid 6,600 feet above sea level. The soil inthis region is iron rich; however, there is some erosion. COCAINE PROCESSING The conversion of coca leaves to coca paste, cocaine base, andcocaine hydrochloride occurs primarily in Bolivia, Colombia, and Peru.Peru and Bolivia are the primary locations for the conversion of leafto coca paste and cocaine base, while Colombia is the primary location forthe final conversion to cocaine hydrochloride. It is believed that bothPeruvian and Bolivian traffickers have begun increasing their production ofHCI in the last few years. There are a number of chemicals and solvents which play vitalroles in the processing of coca leaves to paste, base and HCI. Many ofthese chemicals are quite common; all are theoretically substitutable and all havelegitimate uses making them difficult to control. Coca processing can be broken down into three stages. Thefirst is the conversion of the coca leaf into coca paste; this is almostalways done very close to the coca fields to cut down on the transport of thecoca leaves. The second phase is the conversion of coca paste into cocainebase. This step is usually omitted in Colombia and the process is taken straightthrough from paste to cocaine HCI. The final stage is conversion of base toHCI. Coca Leaves to Coca Paste The conversion of coca leaf into coca paste is accomplished ina coca paste pit, or "pozo. " A typical coca paste pit is a verycrude structure located near the harvesting site and consists of only a very fewitems. Some paste pits have even been reported in peasants' houses. The pastepit is usually a hole in the ground, lined with thick, heavy plastic, or mayeven be a 55-gallon drum with the top cut out. Paste pits are oftenlocated near streams so that the processors will have a constant supply offresh water, which is used in the first stage of processing. The process ofconverting leaves to paste usually takes a few days. Often, however, theleaves will be "worked" or "stomped" for only a few hoursrendering less paste than if "worked" for several days. It is apparentlysometimes more desirable to move the paste out than to get more paste per kilogram of cocaleaf. Depending on the size of the pit and the amount of leaf, the whole processwill require the energy of two to five workers. The following recipe for coca paste is but one of many.Recipes will differ depending on where the laboratory is located. Some will optnot to use water in the first step and amounts and mixing times vary widely.However, this remains a good benchmark formula. --Step 1 The coca leaves are put in an above-ground container or in aplastic lined pit. An alkaline material (sodium carbonate) and water areadded to the leaves. Here the alkaline material enables the cocainealkaloid present in the leaf to be extracted into kerosene. --Step 2 A water immiscible solvent (kerosene) is added to water,solution, and leaves. The mixture is then agitated. Usually this isaccomplished by having several people stomp on the leaves. The solvent acts toextract water insoluble cocaine alkaloids from the alkaline solution. --Step 3 Cocaine alkaloids and kerosene separate from water and leaves.The water and leaves are then drained off. --Step 4 Cocaine alkaloids are extracted from the kerosene into adilute acid solution. Alkaline material (sodium carbonate) is added to theremaining solution which causes a precipitate to form . The acid and thewater are drained off and the precipitate is filtered and dried toproduce coca paste, a chunky, off-white to light brown, putty-like substance. Coca Paste to Cocaine Base The processing of coca paste into cocaine base is morecomplicated than paste production, requiring more sophisticated equipment and addedskills. Cocaine base can be processed at the paste facility, but baselaboratories may be located away from the cultivation zones. Usually the baselaboratories are located near rivers or have a clandestine airstrip located inthe vicinity to facilitate both the movement of coca paste into the baselaboratory, but also the movement of cocaine base to cocaine HCl laboratories. As with the paste recipes, the base recipes have manyversions. This one is one of the more common and a continuation of the paste recipe. --Step 1 The coca paste is added to sulfuric acid or hydrochloric acidand water. The paste is dissolved into the acid solution. --Step 2 Potassium permanganate is combined with water. This mixture isadded to the coca paste and acid solution. Potassium permanganate is usedin this step to extract other alkaloids and material that is undesired in thefinal product. In particular, potassium permanganate is used to break downthe alkaloid ciscinnamoylcocaine found in large concentrations in E.novogranatense varieties. If the coca paste has a high concentration of thisalkaloid and potassium permanganate is not used, then crystallization ofcocaine HCl will be very difficult. --Step 3 This mixture is allowed to stand for about six hours. --Step 4 The solution is filtered and the precipitate is discarded.Ammonia water is added to the filtered solution and another precipitate isformed. --Step 5 The liquid is drained from the solution and the remainingprecipitate is usually dried with heating lamps. The resulting powder iscocaine base. It is common in Colombia to skip the base stage of cocaineprocessing and go right from coca paste to cocaine HCl. This can be accomplishedby eliminating the last part of step number four in coca paste processing andskipping to step number two of the cocaine base phase where the coca pasteis added to the potassium permanganate solution. Cocaine Base to Cocaine Hydrochloride (HCl) The final stage of cocaine processing requires even more skilland equipment, and is much more dangerous than the previously mentionedsteps. Unlike paste and base processing, cocaine HCl processing calls forexpensive chemicals that are harder to find and often not manufactured in theprocessing country. The HCl laboratory usually consists of several buildingsincluding dormitories, eating facilities, an office, storage facilities,and the laboratory itself. Also usually found at HCl laboratories arecommunications operations, generators, filtering and drying equipment, and,more recently, chemical recycling facilities. The HCl laboratory willsometimes have direct access to an airstrip. The following recipe is a continuation of the above two. Atthis point the methods of processing vary only slightly. --Step 1 Acetone or ether is added to dissolve the cocaine base and thesolution is filtered to remove undesired material. --Step 2 Hydrochloric acid diluted in acetone or ether is added to thecocaine solution. The addition of the hydrochloric acid causes thecocaine to precipitate (crystallize) out of the solution as cocainehydrochloride. --Step 3 The remaining acetone/ether solvent can be discarded orreused. --Step 4 Cocaine HCl is dried under heat lamps, laid out to dry withthe aid of fans, or dried in microwave ovens. NATURAL ENEMIES AND ERADICATION EFFORTS Although the coca bush is a very strong plant and will livefor many years and produce many harvests of leaf, it will do better if takencare of, fertilized, and treated with herbicides and insecticides. Occasionally, a coca field will become infested with one ofthe plant's natural enemies. The main pests and the effect that they areknown to have on the plant are discussed below. The larvae of the moth Eloria Noyesi presents the most seriousthreat to the coca plant. This moth lives through out the coca-growingregion of South America and seems to feed almost exclusively on E. coca. Ithas also been recorded feeding on E. novogranatense in Colombia and northernPeru. The larva will develop in about a month and will eat up to 50leaves in its lifetime. The larva will also eat the shoots of the bush thatgrow out after harvest. If Eloria attacks a plant repeatedly, even a strongplant will die. The moth is usually only abundant from December to April. Cocagrowers are using insecticides to eradicate Eloria. The larvae of Eucleodora Coca, a fly, seems to cause harm onlyto Trujillo coca. (There have been major infestations of this insect inthe past usually occuring from April to August.) The larvae spend their entirelives on the plant, feeding on the leaves and shoots . As with the Eloria,Eucleodora is being controlled with insecticides. Very little is known about the effect of the leaf-cutting ant,Acromyrmex, on coca. Growers in the Upper Huallaga Valley report that seriousdamage in the past has been done to their coca cultivation. The damage isoften controlled with the use of insecticides and flooding. The beetle,Aegoidus Pacificus, also poses a threat to Trujillo coca. The adult beetle laysher eggs in the bark of the coca plant, and the larva later burrows into thestem of the plant. This usually results in an infestation of pathogenicfungi which is ultimately responsible for the death of the coca plant. Aswith the other pests, the beetle can also be controlled with insecticides. Most of the other insects which attack coca only do so whenthere are shortages of their normal food supply. Some scientists believethat cocaine and other alkaloids may present some natural defense againstmost pests. Nevertheless, sometimes insects such as spider mites,grasshoppers, leafhoppers, and beetles find it necessary to eat coca. The coca plant is also susceptible to numerous species ofpathogenic fungi. Fungi seem to present the greatest threat to a plant duringthe wet season. The most serious threat seems to come from a fungus called"witches broom ." The exact effect of this fungus on the coca plant is not clearbecause of the limited amount of study which has been done on this fungusinfesting coca plantations. Natural enemies hold hope for control of the coca plant in thefuture. At present, however, the most successful methods in controllingthe growth of coca are herbicides and manual eradication. As of early 1990, all eradication of the coca plant in Boliviaand Colombia was being done manually. The usual method has been for a teamof eradication workers to go into a field and pull up the bushes plant byplant. In Peru, manual eradication of coca is often suspended because ofsecurity reasons. Prior to that time, a number of gasoline-powered cutters hadbeen supplied to the workers making it easier and much quicker to cut the coca.The problem with this method is that sometimes the coca bush will sproutfrom the stump within 12 to 18 months. As such, the cutting must be made veryclose to the ground to insure that the plant does not sprout again. A number of herbicides have been tested for use in eradicatingthe coca plant including hexazinone and tebuthiuron (spike) . Application ofboth has been deemed successful in killing the plant as long as they areapplied in the correct manner and amount. Within ten to twenty days afterapplication of hexazinone or tebuthiuron the coca bush sheds all its leavesand usually within 60 to 90 days the coca plant will be completely dead. The United States is working with some South Americangovernments to develop an herbicidal eradication program; Bolivia, however, hasprohibited the use of herbicides for this purpose. [NOTE: the report from which this text was input containedaccompanying illustrations.] Contents | Feedback | Search DRCNet Library | Schaffer Library | Government Publications WT01-B26-49IA031-000651-B016-153http://206.61.184.43:80/schaffer/GOVPUBS/deaseal.htm 206.61.184.43 19970122121326 text/html 1175HTTP/1.0 200 OKDate: Wednesday, 22-Jan-97 12:13:16 GMTServer: WebSitePro/1.1f (S/N wpo-0deb)Allow-ranges: bytesContent-type: text/htmlLast-modified: Saturday, 28-Dec-96 06:15:01 GMTContent-length: 959 The Drug Enforcement Administration Seal DEA Seal Below is the official seal of the Drug EnforcementAdministration. As a product of the Federal Government, this sealis in the public domain so it may be freely reprinted anywhere,such as on rolls of toilet paper, as long as you are notpretending that you are an official representative of the DEA. CliffSchaffer's Home Page WT01-B26-50IA031-000651-B016-180http://206.61.184.43:80/schaffer/GOVPUBS/const1.htm 206.61.184.43 19970122121335 text/html 26869HTTP/1.0 200 OKDate: Wednesday, 22-Jan-97 12:13:27 GMTServer: WebSitePro/1.1f (S/N wpo-0deb)Allow-ranges: bytesContent-type: text/htmlLast-modified: Saturday, 28-Dec-96 06:15:52 GMTContent-length: 26651 Drug Enforcement Administration - Congressional Testimony DEA Congressional Testimony Statement by: Thomas A. Constantine Administrator Drug Enforcement Administration United States Department of Justice Before the: Senate Foreign Relations Committee Regarding: International Drug Trafficking Organizations inMexico Location: Dirksen Senate Office Building Room 419 Washington, D.C. Date: August 8, 1995 Note: This document may not reflect changes made inactual delivery. Mr. Chairman, Members of the Committee: I'm pleased to appearbefore you today to discuss the growing role of internationaldrug trafficking organizations operating in Mexico and to tellyou what the Drug Enforcement Administration (DEA) is doing toattack these organizations that are responsible for smugglingtons of illegal drugs across the U.S./Mexico border. Mexico is pivotal to the success of any U.S. drug strategy. Notonly do we share a common border, through which three-fourths ofthe cocaine enters our country, but Mexico has long been a majorsource country for heroin and marijuana. Within the last fewyears, it has also become a major source country formethamphetamine, as well as a transit country for chemicals,especially ephedrine, used in the manufacture of methamphetamine. My purpose at this hearing today is to talk about the drugtrafficking situation and to highlight our concerns about theincreased role of these international drug gangs operating inMexico. My comments will be limited to observations ontrafficking organizations and their methods of smuggling, the lawenforcement communities' efforts to work with Mexico, and anassessment of our chances for success in decreasing the flood ofillegal drugs that enter this country each day and have adevastating impact on the citizens on both sides of the border. A Glimpse of the Problem Mr. Chairman, an important 1989 drug seizure gave us a glimpse ofthe magnitude of the problem law enforcement faces and alsoillustrates just how important Mexico is to our efforts tocontrol illegal drugs coming into our country. In late 1989, DEAmade America's largest cocaine seizure on record (over 21.5 tons)in Sylmar, California. This cocaine came across the border at El Paso and was trucked tothe West Coast. Drug law enforcement was encouraged by such ahuge seizure, and we were convinced that we had seriously woundedthe Colombian drug organizations by preventing such a largeamount of illegal drugs from reaching our streets. But, we realized our encouragement was premature when we analyzedseized records. What we found was even more astounding. Welearned that during only a 3-month period, the organization hadsucceeded in smuggling 55 tons of cocaine into the U.S. Thiscocaine had been trucked to Los Angeles and had already beendistributed on our streets. One of the most disturbing aspects of this case is that ten yearsago, we measured drug seizures in grams and pounds. Today, weroutinely measure seizures in tons-even multitons. In January,for example, in Pasadena, Texas, a suburb of Houston, we seized6.5 tons of cocaine. In July, we seized over 5 tons of cocaine inthe border town of El Paso. And one of the primary reasons forthese multiton shipments of cocaine is the efficient andmutually-rewarding relationship that has emerged between thecocaine mafia in Colombia and the drug trafficking groupsoperating in Mexico. In fact, Mr. Chairman, we estimate that the Colombian drug mafiais using Mexico as a cocaine safe haven to store, at any onetime, as much as 70 to 100 tons of cocaine that will eventuallybe smuggled across the U.S. border for distribution on Americanstreets. This is enough to provide a line of cocaine to everyman, woman, and child on this planet--and then some. At aconservative estimate, this cocaine would be worth over $700million to $1 billion on America's streets. Role of the International Drug Traffickers The fact that these traffickers have been able to accommodate thetransportation needs of the Cali cocaine mafia is not somethingthat happened overnight. Criminal organizations from Mexico havehad decades of practice. Traditionally, the Mexican bordereconomies have been significantly affected by the smugglingactivities into and out of the United States. It was theseorganized smuggling organizations that rose to prominence in thelate 1960s and 1970s when marijuana trafficking presented thepotential for huge profits. During the early 1980's, most of the Colombian cocaine enteredthe United States through South Florida by way of the Caribbean.But, traffickers were forced to find new routes when U.S. drugagencies increased enforcement action in the Caribbean and SouthFlorida. The Colombian drug lords naturally turned to thetrafficking groups in Mexico which had what they were lookingfor: proximity to the United States, a 2,000 mile expanse ofborder offering unlimited smuggling possibilities, and an alreadyestablished drug trafficking infrastructure that stood ready toserve their needs. The drug trafficking organizations easily adapted theiroperations to include cocaine trafficking, and by the mid-80's,were well-established and reliable transporters of Colombiancocaine. Delegating cocaine transportation to the traffickers inMexico was a tactical decision on the part of the Cali mafia.With the transportation assistance of these traffickers, thecocaine barons could now move larger bulk quantities throughMexico which would have been logistically impossible to move byany other means. By turning the riskiest part of the cocainedistribution cycle (the transportation) over to thesetraffickers, the Cali mafia could turn its attention to otheraspects of their cocaine enterprise. This drug traffickingpartnership has become one of both convenience and profit. One of the first traffickers to move cocaine through Mexico andto the U.S. was Juan Ramon Matta-Ballesteros, a Honduran, who,from the mid-'70s to the mid-'80s, was actively involved with theMexican Guadalajara Cartel. This was the group responsible forthe kidnapping torture and murder of DEA Special Agent Enrique(Kiki) Camarena in 1985. The death of Agent Camarena outraged theAmerican public. Matta-Ballesteros has been convicted in threeseparate U.S. cases and is serving a term of life imprisonment. Emerging Traffickers Coming into their Own Today, there is no question that drug traffickers operating inMexico have become major players in the international drug trade.These veteran traffickers have been good students and havelearned valuable lessons from the drug experts--the Cali mafia.They have seen the benefit (and profits) of working together in apartnership to provide a needed transportation service to thecocaine organizations in Colombia. Receiving payment in both cashand cocaine, they have begun to establish their own cocainedistribution networks and territories, stretching from theSouthwest border areas as far as New York. In effect, the Calimafia has been a willing partner in helping these organizationscreate distribution and sales networks in the U.S. Like the Cali mafia, these trafficking organizations havedemonstrated their flexibility to change trafficking routes whenlaw enforcement action along any one route becomes too risky totheir business. These drug groups have also followed the lead oftheir predecessors by expanding and diversifying their productline. Sophisticated trafficking organizations based in Mexico nowmanufacture methamphetamine and smuggle the precursor chemicalsnecessary for its manufacture. And, perhaps most important, asthey have expanded their role in the drug trade, they have madevaluable worldwide contacts, which will be necessary as theycontinue to establish themselves as important players in theworld of illegal drugs. There are a number of trafficking groups in Mexico that havegained a firm foothold in the trafficking of drugs, but I'd liketo take a moment to describe the four major drug traffickingorganizations that work closely with the Cali mafia: Tijuana Cartel The organization sometimes referred to the "TijuanaCartel," is headed by Benjamin Arellano-Felix and hisbrother Francisco. They control most of the drugs crossing theborder on the West Coast between Tijuana and Mexicali. Feuding between this group and other organizations has becomeincreasingly violent. In fact, it was the feuding between theArrellano-Felix organization and rival drug dealers that led tothe killing of Catholic Cardinal Juan Jesus Posadas-Ocampo at theGuadalajara airport in 1993 The Arellano-Felix brothers are currently the subjects of anationwide manhunt by law enforcement authorities for theirinvolvement in the Cardinal's killing. On June 23, Mexicanauthorities arrested Hector Luis Palma-Salazar, the leader of arival drug organization that is believed to be behind theattempted assassinations of the Arellano-Felix brothers, as wellas the murder of Cardinal Posadas-Ocampo. Benjamin and FranciscoArellano-Felix have both been indicted in San Diego, California,and are DEA fugitives. The Caro-Ouintero Organization The Caro-Quintero organization is involved in the cultivation,processing, smuggling and distribution of heroin and marijuanaand the transportation of Colombian cocaine into the U.S. Thisorganization was previously led by Rafael Caro-Quintero, known asthe "Mexican Rhinestone Cowboy," who began his criminalcareer at the young age of 12 or 13 as an apprentice to PedroAviles, a notorious Mexican drug trafficker. Caro-Quintero is currently in a Mexican maximum security prisonfor his involvement in the kidnaping, torture and murder of DEASpecial Agent Enrique Camarena, as well as for marijuana andcocaine trafficking. His brother, Miguel Caro-Quintero, now runsthe organization, and is under indictment in Tucson and Denver. Juarez: Cartel One of the most notorious and powerful of these traffickingorganizations is the Amado Carrillo-Fuentes organization,sometimes referred to as the "Juarez Cartel."Carrillo-Fuentes has been the chief transporter for the recentlyarrested Cali mafia leader Miguel Rodriguez-Orejuela. Carrillo-Fuentes owns several airline companies, which enableshim to fly 727s from Colombia into Juarez, where he runs hisorganization from his ranch headquarters. Increasingly, murdersin Juarez have been associated with Carrillo-Fuentes. In July,the leader of the juvenile gangs he recruits to smuggle drugsacross the border was found shot 23 times in the head. Here inthe United States, Carrillo-Fuentes has been indicted in Miami onheroin and marijuana charges, and in Dallas on cocaine charges. Juan Garcia-Abrego Another influential Mexican trafficker acting in concert with theCali mafia is Juan Garcia-Abrego, who is involved in smugglingdrugs from the Yucatan area in Mexico to South Texas and up toNew York. Juan Garcia-Abrego was recently added to the FBI's topten most wanted fugitives, with a $2 million reward for hiscapture. This is the first time an international drug traffickerhas been included on the FBI list. This organization transports large quantities of cocaine for theCali mafia, as well as marijuana and heroin for othertraffickers. Garcia-Abrego pioneered deals in which Mexicantraffickers take payment in cocaine, which substantially raisedtheir profits, and at the same time diversified their involvementfrom beyond smuggling to the role of suppliers to their own drugdistribution networks. He and his organization are notorious forthe violence they employ to further and protect their illicittrade. He also ships bulk amounts of cash for the Cali mafia. During afour-year period, from 1989 to 1993, $53 million was seized inconnection with the Garcia-Abrego organization. Two AmericanExpress bankers in Brownsville, Texas, were indicted forlaundering $30 million for Garcia-Abrego, and to date, 70 membersof his organization have been prosecuted and convicted in theU.S. Juan Garcia-Abrego has been indicted in Houston and remainsa fugitive. Expanding Influence: Cocaine and Methamphetamine DEA is very concerned about the expanding role of drugorganizations based in Mexico which are playing an increasinglylarger role in the shipment and distribution of cocaine andmethamphetamine to the United States. Cocaine In the last few years, we've seen international traffickingorganizations make major changes in their efficiency intransporting bulk shipments of cocaine to transportingorganizations in Mexico. Traditionally trafficking organizationsused twin-engine general aviation aircraft to transport cocainefrom Colombia to transhipment locations in Mexico and theCaribbean. Today, however, the Cali mafia has bought passengerjets (like 727's) gutted them, and are using them to transportmultiton loads of cocaine to the trafficking organizations inMexico. In March of this year, for example, a Caravelle jetaircraft was seized in the Mexican State of Sonora, after beingabandoned by traffickers when its tires became stuck in the dirtrunway. Mexican Government forces later seized 2.8 tons ofcocaine that are believed to have been off-loaded from thatCaravelle. Law enforcement has also uncovered two tunnels built to movecocaine from Mexico into the United States. The first wasdiscovered in Arizona in 1990. The second nearly-completed tunnelwas discovered in 1993 near the Tijuana Airport and led to anunfinished warehouse in the United States. Methamphetamine U.S. law enforcement is also concerned about the growing role oftrafficking gangs operating in Mexico involved in themethamphetamine trade. We directly attribute the increasedamounts of methamphetamine available in the U.S. to thesetrafficking organizations which have replaced domestic outlawmotorcycle gangs as the predominant methamphetamine producers,traffickers, and distributors. Unfortunately, DEA is very much aware of the problem of thesemethamphetamine gangs operating in the U.S. Last summer, DEASpecial Agent Richard Fass was shot and killed in Tucson by amethamphetamine trafficker during an undercover operation. Thering leader of the gang responsible for Agent Fass' death hasstill not been apprehended and is believed to be in Mexico. TheDEA is currently working with both the FBI and Mexicanauthorities to apprehend him. In the last three years, these trafficking organizations havevirtually saturated the western United States market withhigh-purity methamphetamine, known also as "speed"or"crank." In some areas of California, it has nowreportedly replaced cocaine as the drug of choice. With asaturated West Coast market, these traffickers have begun toexpand their markets to the East Coast and in the South. DEA'ssouthern offices report a growing presence of these traffickinggroups providing methamphetamine to domestic traffickingorganizations in rural and suburban areas of Georgia, Tennessee,Kentucky, and the Carolinas. As supplies have increased, prices have fallen, making it a cheapalternative to cocaine. Some have called it the "poor man'scocaine." In 1991, for example, the lowest pound pricenationwide was $6,000. Today, in California, methamphetaminesells for between $2,500 and $3,600 per pound. With increased availability, methamphamine use has increased.According to the Drug Abuse Warning Network, the number ofemergency room episodes involving methamphetamine has increasedsteadily since 1991, particularly in the West. From 1991 to 1993,episodes more than doubled in both Los Angeles and Phoenix. The dominance of Mexico-based, poly-drug organizations inmethamphetamine trafficking is further evidence of their growingsophistication. The smuggling skills developed while transportingcocaine for the Cali mafia has enabled these organizations tobranch out into moving other contraband, such as precursorchemicals, especially ephedrine and pseudoephedrine, used in themanufacture of methamphetamine . They have established international connections in Europe, Asiaand the Far East to obtain the shipment of tons of precursorchemicals, particularly ephedrine, to addresses in both UnitedStates and Mexico. During 1993 and 1994, the majority ofephedrine shipments destined for Mexico were supplied by suchdiverse countries as China, India, the Czech Republic, andSwitzerland. From mid-1993 to early 1995, DEA documented thediversion of almost 170 tons of ephedrine used in illicitmethamphetamine production. It's important to note, however, thatDEA has obtained cooperation from many of these countries to stemthe flow of chemicals going to Mexico. It's difficult to predict where this newest surge ofmethamphetamine use and trafficking will lead, but we must notassume that it has peaked. Unlike other drugs, methamphetamine isone that these criminal organizations can control entirely frombeginning to end. They have the international contacts to obtainthe necessary precursor chemicals to make the drug. They have theclandestine labs to process the chemicals into methamphetamine onboth sides of the border. They have expanded their distributionnetworks across the nation by the use and intimidation of illegalaliens. And, unlike their previous role as middle-men movingcocaine and heroin, they can keep 100 percent of the profits fromtheir methamphetamine sales. U. S. law enforcement may be in for a difficult and violent fewyears as we work to get the methamphetamine problem undercontrol. We've already seen "meth" smuggling gangs faceoff against each other. Recently, in San Diego, a confrontationbetween meth smuggling groups with ties to Mexico resulted in 26homicides. There may be more bloodshed on our streets, as thesedrug gangs fight to protect (and expand) their drug turf. DEA's Response In response to the threats of the Mexico-based traffickingorganizations and their surrogate drug gangs operating here inthe United States, DEA has taken a number of steps to work withour law enforcement partners in Mexico, as well as with ourFederal, state, and local colleagues here at home. DEA has joined forces with the FBI in a Southwest BorderInitiative that targets the major Mexican traffickingorganizations for enforcement actions. Combined teams of state,local and federal law enforcement led by DEA and FBI SpecialAgents are working together with a common goal of disruptingthese gangs and bringing their leaders to justice. For the first time, the DEA, the FBI, the Department of JusticeCriminal Division, and respective U.S. Attorneys in every statealong the Southwest Border are coordinating both intelligence andmanpower resources against a common enemy--the poly-drugtrafficking organizations that are transporting increased amountsof cocaine, heroin, marijuana, and methamphetamine across ourborders. Both the DEA and the FBI hold high expectations for thesuccess for this operation. Three new binational Border Task Forces have been established andwill focus on the four principal trafficking organizations.Senior personnel of the DEA, FBI, and DOJ Criminal Division serveon a U.S./Mexican Plenary Group, working to enhance ourcooperation against narcotics, money laundering, arms smuggling,and other crimes. Mr. Chairman, in this open forum I cannot explain the specificsof how this new initiative will work, but I would be happy todiscuss this in more detail in a closed session or a privatebriefing. Our support for Mexico's drug fighting efforts is critical totheir success--and ultimately to our own. Attorney General Renoand Mexican Attorney General Antonio Lozano-Gracia have pledgedto work cooperatively to address the problems. Hopefully, a closeand coordinated law enforcement response by our two countrieswill have an impact on this growing problem. Future Threats: An Assessment There is no question that the international drug traffickingorganizations operating in Colombia and Mexico have had a directimpact on the multiton quantities of cocaine law enforcement isforced to deal with today. These organizations have proven to bea serious threat to both the United States and Mexico. In recent years, as the political and economic ties between theUnited States and Mexico have strengthened, a new generation ofinternational traffickers have been able to carve out an everlarger share of the world's drug trade and pose a growing threaton both sides of the border. We've seen these traffickingorganizations grow from low-level smuggling groups tosophisticated organizations that smuggle more and more drugs ofevery kind--cocaine, heroin, marijuana, and nowmethamphetamine--into the U.S. They are increasingly being paidfor their transportation expertise with cocaine, a move thatcould prove to be the undoing of the Cali mafia and could shiftthe balance of power within the worldwide cocaine trade. Mr. Chairman, in a few years down the road, I believe it'sentirely possible that these newly emerging groups could rise toan equal (or superior) footing with the Cali mafia. If thishappens, life as we know it in both the United States and Mexicowill change dramatically. They care little for the devastingimpact they have on the people of Mexico and the United States.They are international criminal elements that must be dealt with. The President of Mexico, Ernesto Zedillo, has publically statedto the American media that drug trafficking is a threat toMexican national security, not only because of the crime that isinherent in such activity, but also because of the growing wealththat enables traffickers to corrupt police and governmentinstitutions. As these organizations grow in wealth and sophistication, theythreaten to overwhelm the capabilities of any law enforcementsystem, including Mexico. By comparison, we have a professionallaw enforcement system in the United States, at the Federal,state and local level, that promotes and encourages highstandards in recruitment, training, internal inspections,standards of operations and accountability to electecl officials. We have a criminal justice system that is quick to respond tocharges of unethical or corrupt actions on the part of lawenforcement. It has helped to professionalize our law enforcementagencies and insure a continuing quest for ethics and integrity.Despite our best efforts, unethical or illegal activities dooccasionally occur within the ranks of our law enforcementagencies, requiring swift and decisive government action topreserve the public's faith and trust. As a society, we provide modern and sophisticated resources toour law enforcement agencies to combat the criminal elementsconfronting them. The law enforcement institutions in Mexico donot presently have an infrastructure similar to those in the U.S.The development of such institutions will require a substantialcommitment of time and resources to achieve the necessary levelof professionalism. The potential exists that if this is notdone, they may be overwhelmed by the wealth and influence of thedrug organizations. We are not alone in recognizing this problem. Attorney GeneralLozano has moved to have special police units report directly tohim. He has announced a plan to include reviews of all Federalpolice officers and prosecutors, with mandatory drug testing, tocombat internal corruption. I cite this only to illustrate thatthe Mexican government itself recognizes this is a problem. It is imperative that we work with our partners in Mexico toblunt the influence these drug traffickers are having in both ourcountries. It is also imperative that our own Federal, state, andlocal law enforcement continue to work cooperatively together tomake the best use of our resources, as well as to increase ourimpact on these trafficking organizations. Surely, when we speakof tons of drugs coming across our borders and causing tremendousdamage to the health and well-being of our citizens, we aretalking of a national security threat that demands our immediateand continuous attention. DEA is hopeful that future counterdrug efforts with Mexico willbe successful. In the past year, Mexico has instituted newprograms that include attempts to professionalize its lawenforcement institutions and increase cross-border cooperation toaddress the threat of the international traffickers. The directand cooperative communication between Attorney General Reno andAttorney General Lozano should be of great help in securing acoordination of our resources to address a common problem. Thethreat is serious--and it is real. Returnto Cliff Schaffer's Main Page WT01-B26-51IA086-000619-B002-66http://206.61.184.43:80/schaffer/GOVPUBS/gao/gaomen1.htm 206.61.184.43 19970122032028 text/html 15304HTTP/1.0 200 OKDate: Wednesday, 22-Jan-97 03:20:18 GMTServer: WebSitePro/1.1f (S/N wpo-0deb)Allow-ranges: bytesContent-type: text/htmlLast-modified: Saturday, 28-Dec-96 06:24:27 GMTContent-length: 15086 General Accounting Office Publications on Drugs and DrugPolicy Contents | Feedback | Search DRCNet Library | Schaffer Library | Government Publications | GAO Publications General Accounting Office Document Menu GAO Documents relating to drug policy General Accounting Office WebPage Money Laundering: U.S.Efforts To Fight It Are Threatened By Currency Smuggling(Chapter Report, 03/09/94). Drug Control: U.S. AntidrugEfforts in Peru's Upper Huallaga Valley (12/07/94). In short,not working. High Risk Series: AssetForfeiture Programs (Letter Report, 02/95). The GAO reportsthat asset forfeiture is a government policy with a high risk ofabuse. Expanded MilitarySurveillance Not Justified by Measurable Goals or Results -10/5/93 U.S. CounterdrugActivities in Central America - August 2, 1994 The DRUG WAR- Colombia IsImplementing Antidrug Efforts, but Impact Is Uncertain October5. 1993 Interdiction Efforts inCentral America Have Had Little Impact on the Flow of DrugsAugust 1994 - Like all the other reports on this topic -interdiction seems to be a general waste of time and money withno real effect on the overall flow of drugs. Drug Use Measurement -Strengths, Limitations, and Recommendations for Improvement October5, 1993 - Summarized: They don't really have a clue about theextent of illegal drug use and many of the high-risk groups fordrug use are excluded by the major surveys. Drug Courts: Informationon a New Approach to Address Drug-Related Crime (BriefingReport, 05/22/95, GAO/GGD-95-159BR) Drug Control:Reauthorization of the Office of National Drug Control Policy (Testimony,10/05/93, GAO/T-GGD-94-7). Drug War: Observations onthe U.S. International Drug Control Strategy (Testimony,06/27/95, GAO/T-NSIAD-95-182). Drug War: Observations onU.S. International Drug Control Efforts (Testimony, 08/01/95,GAO/T-NSIAD-95-194). U.S. Attorneys: MoreAccountability for Implementing Priority Programs Is Desirable(Letter Report, 06/23/95, GAO/GGD-95-150). DOD Budget: SelectedCategories of Planned Funding for Fiscal Years 1995-99 (LetterReport, 02/17/95, GAO/NSIAD-95-92). Foster Care: HealthNeeds of Many Young Children Are Unknown and Unmet (LetterReport, 05/26/95, GAO/HEHS-95-114). Border Control: RevisedStrategy Is Showing Some Positive Results (Letter Report,12/29/94, GAO/GGD-95-30). Management Reform: GAO'sComments on the National Performance Review's Recommendations(Letter Report, 12/03/93, GAO/OCG-94-1). (Abbreviated version -drug-related sections only) School Safety: PromisingInitiatives for Addressing School Violence (Letter Report,04/25/95, GAO/HEHS-95-106). Federal CriminalJustice: Cost of Providing Court-Appointed Attorneys Is Rising,but Causes Are Unclear (Letter Report, 07/19/95, GAO/GGD-95-182). U.S. Postal Service:Drug Investigation Data (Fact Sheet, 12/06/94,GAO/GGD-95-29FS). Honduras: ContinuingU.S. Military Presence at Soto Cano Base Is Not Critical(Letter Report, 02/08/95, GAO/NSIAD-95-39). Continental Air Defense:A Dedicated Force Is No Longer Needed (Letter Report,05/03/94, GAO/NSIAD-94-76). Social Security:Disability Benefits for Drug Addicts and Alcoholics Are Out ofControl (Testimony, 02/10/94, GAO/T-HEHS-94-101). Child Welfare: ComplexNeeds Strain Capacity to Provide Services (Letter Report,09/26/95, GAO/HEHS-95-208). Prescription Drugs andthe Elderly: Many Still Receive Potentially Harmful DrugsDespite Recent Improvements (Letter Report, 07/24/95,GAO/HEHS-95-152). Drug Control: The Officeof National Drug Control Policy--Strategies Need PerformanceMeasures (Testimony, 11/15/93, GAO/T-GGD-94-49). Foster Care: ParentalDrug Abuse Has Alarming Impact on Young Children (LetterReport, 04/04/94, GAO/HEHS-94-89). Juvenile Justice:Juveniles Processed In Criminal Court and Case Dispositions (LetterReport, 08/15/95, GAO/GGD-95-170). Juvenile Justice:Representation Rates Varied As Did Counsel's Impact on CourtOutcomes (Letter Report, 06/19/95, GAO/GGD-95-139). Residential Care: SomeHigh-Risk Youth Benefit, But More Study Needed (LetterReport, 01/28/94, GAO/HEHS-94-56). Welfare Dependency:Coordinated Community Efforts Can Better Serve Young At-Risk TeenGirls (Letter Report, 05/10/95, GAO/HEHS/RCED-95-108). Managing for Results:The Department of Justice's Initial Efforts to Implement GPRA (FactSheet, 06/13/95, GAO/GGD-95-167FS). DRUG-EXPOSED INFANTS-- A Generation at Risk - June 1990 The Drug War: U.S.Programs in Peru Face Serious Obstacles. (464138)GAO/NSIAD-92-36, October 21, 1991. GAO Reports Coming Soon The following GAO reports will soon be added to these webpages. Anyone who has a computer text copy of any of thesereports is requested to e-mail it to: schaffer@smartlink.net. Anyone who needs a copy of these reports before they hit the webpage can write to the GAO at the address below. The first copy ofany report is free. Call (202) 512-6000, or fax your * request to (301) 258-4066,or by writing to GAO P.O. Box 6015 Gaithersburg, MD 20884-6015. Drug Treatment: Targeting Aid to States Using Urban Populationas Indicator of Drug Use (GAO/HRD-91-17, November 27, 1990). War on Drugs: Information Management Poses FormidableChallenges (GAO/IMTEC-91-40, May 31, 1991) Justice Department: Coordination Between DEA and the FBI(GAO/GGD-90-59, Mar. 21, 1990) Customs Service and INS: Dual Management Structure for BorderInspections Should Be Ended (GAO/GGD-93-111, June 30, 1993) Drug Control: Heavy Investment in Military Surveillance Is NotPaying Off (GAO/NSIAD-93-220, Sept. 1, 1993) Drug Interdiction: Funding Continues to Increase but ProgramEffectiveness Is Unknown (GAO/GGD-91-10, Dec. 11, 1990) Drug Control: Anti-Drug Efforts in the Bahamas (GAO/GGD-90-42,Mar. 8, 1990) relates to DOJ03. Drug Smuggling: Capabilities for Interdicting Private AircraftAre Limited and Costly (GAO/GGD-89-93, June 9, 1989) U.S. Department of Justice: Overview of Civil and CriminalDebt Collection Efforts (GAO/T-GGD-90-62, July 31, 1990) Federal Prisons: Inmate and Staff Views on Education and WorkTraining Programs (GAO/GGD-93-33, Jan. 19, 1993) Asset Forfeiture Programs (GAO/HR-93-17, Dec. 1992) Drug Control: Coordination of Intelligence Activities(GAO/GGD-93-83BR, Apr. 2, 1993) Drug Control: Inadequate Guidance Results in DuplicateIntelligence Production Efforts (GAO/NSIAD-92-153, Apr. 14, 1992) Intensive Probation Supervision: Crime-Control and Cost-SavingEffectiveness (GAO/PEMD-93-23, June 4, 1993) Prison Boot Camps: Short-Term Prison Costs Reduced, butLong-Term Impact Uncertain (GAO/GGD-93-69, Apr. 29, 1993) Prison Costs: Opportunities Exist to Lower the Cost ofBuilding Federal Prisons (GAO/GGD-92-3, Oct. 25, 1991) Federal Prisons: Revised Design Standards Could Save ExpansionFunds (GAO/GGD-91-54, Mar. 14, 1991) Intermediate Sanctions: Their Impacts on Prison Crowding,Costs, and Recidivism Are Still Unclear (GAO/PEMD-90-21, Sept. 7,1990) "Drug Control: Impact of the Department of Defense'sDetection and Monitoring on Cocaine Flows," GeneralAccounting Office, September 19, 1991 Drug Abuse Research: Federal Funding and Future Needs. GAO/T-PEMD-91-11, September 25, 1991. Asset Forfeiture: Customs Reports Improved Controls Over Salesof Forfeited Property. (246010) GAO/GGD-91-127, September 25,1991. ADMS Block Grant: Drug Treatment Services Could Be Improved byNew Accountability Program. GAO/T-HRD-92-4, October 17, 1991. Drug War: Observations on Counternarcotics Aid to Colombia.(464133) GAO/NSIAD-91-296, September 30, 1991. The Drug War: Observations on Counternarcotics Programs inColombia and Peru. GAO/T-NSIAD-92-2, October, 23, 1991. Drug Policy and Agriculture: U.S. Trade Impacts of AlternativeCrops to Andean Coca. (483555) GAO/NSIAD-92-12, October 28, 1991. Prison Alternatives: Crowded Federal Prisons Can Transfer MoreInmates to Halfway Houses. (182811) GAO/GGD-92-5, November 14,1991. Drug Education: Rural Programs Have Many Components and MostRely Heavily on Federal Funds. (104672) GAO/HRD-92-34, January31, 1992. Drug Control: Communications Network Funding and RequirementsUncertain. (395157) GAO/NSIAD-92-29, December 31, 1991. Drug Enforcement: Assistance to State and Local LawEnforcement Agencies in High-Intensity Drug Trafficking Areas.GAO/T-GGD-92-37, May 6, 1992. Prison Expansion: Staffing New Facilities Will Be a Challengefor BOP. (182208) GAO/GGD-92-75, May 12, 1992. Drug Control: Inadequate Guidance Results in DuplicateIntelligence Production Efforts. (395152) GAO/NSIAD-92-153, April14, 1992. Drug Control: Difficulties in Denying Federal Benefits toConvicted Drug Offenders. (186744) GAO/GGD-92-56, April 21, 1992. Asset Forfeiture: U.S. Marshals Service Internal ControlWeaknesses Over Asset Sharing Cash Distributions. (186740)GAO/GGD-92-59, May 8, 1992. Employee Drug Testing: Estimated Cost to Test All ExecutiveBranch Employees and New Hires. (966499) GAO/GGD-92-99, June 10,1992. War on Drugs: Heroin Price, Purity, and Quantities Seized Overthe Past 10 Years. (186754) GAO/GGD-92-95FS, May 27, 1992. The Drug War: Extent of Problems in Brazil, Ecuador, andVenezuela. (464137) GAO/NSIAD-92-226, June 5, 1992. Prescription Drug Monitoring: States Can Readily IdentifyIllegal Sales and Use of Controlled Substances. (101195)GAO/HRD-92-115, July 21, 1992. Asset Forfeiture: Improved Guidance Needed for Use of SharedAssets. (181960) GAO/GGD-92-115, July 16, 1992. Drug Control: Oversight Needed to Prevent Acquisition ofUnnecessary Equipment. (395182) GAO/NSIAD-92-260, July 30, 1992. Computer Security: DEA Is Not Adequately Protecting SensitiveDrug Enforcement Data. (510882) GAO/IMTEC-92-83, September 22,1992. Employee Drug Testing: Opportunities Exist to LowerDrug-Testing Program Costs. (966469) GAO/GGD-93-13, November 23,1992. Drug Control: Status Report on Counterdrug TechnologyDevelopment. (395194) GAO/NSIAD-93-104, January 28, 1993. Drug Control: Treatment Alternatives Program for DrugOffenders Needs Stronger Emphasis. (186747) GAO/GGD-93-61,February 11, 1993. Federal Prisons: Inmate and Staff Views on Education and WorkTraining Programs. (182813) GAO/GGD-93-33, January 19, 1993. Drug Education: Limited Progress in Program Evaluation, byEleanor Chelimsky, Assistant Comptroller General for ProgramEvaluation and Methodology, before the Subcommittee on SelectEducation and Civil Rights, House Committee on Education andLabor. GAO/T-PEMD-93-2, Mar. 31. Drug Treatment: Despite New Strategy, Few Federal InmatesReceive Treatment. (108743) GAO/HRD-91-116, September 16, 1991. Drug Treatment: State Prisons Move to Enhance Treatment.(108797) GAO/HRD-91-128, September 20, 1991. Drug Control: U.S. Drug Interdiction Issues in Latin America(Testimony, 10/07/94, GAO/T-NSIAD-95-32). Drug Control: Communications Network Funding and RequirementsUncertain (GAO/NSIAD-92-29) Contents | Feedback | Search DRCNet Library | Schaffer Library | Government Publications | GAO Publications