WT01-B27-1IA031-000651-B016-359http://206.61.184.43:80/schaffer/GOVPUBS/Needle1.htm 206.61.184.43 19970122121503 text/html 107937HTTP/1.0 200 OKDate: Wednesday, 22-Jan-97 12:14:50 GMTServer: WebSitePro/1.1f (S/N wpo-0deb)Allow-ranges: bytesContent-type: text/htmlLast-modified: Saturday, 28-Dec-96 06:10:11 GMTContent-length: 107718 The Clinton Administration's Internal Reviews of Researchon Needle Exchange Programs Contents | Feedback | Search DRCNet Library | Schaffer Library | Government Publications The Needle Exchange Report Does needle exchange work to reduce AIDS? Does it encouragedrug use? Here are the answers from the Federal Governmentitself. The Clinton Administration's Internal Reviews of Researchon Needle Exchange Programs Previously Unreleased Documents Plus Background Material Made public March 7,1995 by: The Drug Policy Foundation,Washington, D.C. New York Contents "Talking Points" on needle exchange 4 pages. (Provided along with internal reviews; originuncertain) Agency reviews submitted Dec. 10, 1993 48 pages. Reviews by Clinton administration health agencies ofUniversity of California report on needle exchange programs(Centers for Disease Control and Prevention, Nat'l Institutes ofHealth, Substance Abuse Mental Health Administration, HealthServices and Resources Administration, Food and DrugAdministration). "Update" submitted Nov. 22,1994 8 pages. Update of research and events in the field since 1993review. Legal barriers to federal funding of needle exchanges 2 pages. Appendix of March 1993 report by General AccountingOffice (GAO). These "talking points" were provided along with theClinton administration's reviews, but their origin is uncertain. Needle exchange talking points Origins of the University of California study Former drug czar Bob Martinez and former Centers for DiseaseControl (CDC) director Bill Roper decide in Summer '91 thatobjective review of data on needle exchange programs (NEPs) isneeded University of California (UC), Berkeley and UC San Franciscoagree to do the work Study is funded by CDC through a Cooperative Agreement withthe Association of Schools of Public Health Pls are Arthur Reingold (UC Berkeley) and Philip R. Lee (UCSan Francisco) Lee leaves 7/1/94 to be Assistant Secretary for Health;replaced as Pl by Peter Lurie, formerly Project Director Approximate total cost of study $400,000 Work begins 4/1/92 The University of California study 3 volumes, >700 pages Entailed review of 2000 documents, visits to 23 programs in 15cities in 4 countries, interviews with almost 250 individuals,mail survey of programs not visited, mathematical modeling ofcost-effectiveness Conclusions: available [data] provide no evidence that needle exchangeprograms increase the amount of drug use by needle exchangeprogram clients or change overall community levels ofnon-injection and injection drug use." (page 18 of reportSummary) Multiple lines of evidence suggest that it is likely that NEPsdecrease the rate of new HIV infection: (page 26) 1. Biologic plausibility; removing potentially infectedsyringes from circulation and replacing them with clean ones mustdecrease new infections 2. Behavioral data: 10/14 studies showed a decrease in HIVrisk behavior (the sharing of syringes) and none showed anincrease 3. Three- to four-fold decrease in new hepatitis B infections[with later data this increased to seven- to eight-fold forhepatitis B and C infection] 4. Mathematical models from New Haven (33% decrease in new HIVinfections) and by the UC study model (15-17% Recommendations (page 27): The federal government should repeal the ban on the use offederal funds for needle exchange services." Substantial federal funds should be committed to bothproviding needle exchange services and to expanding research intothese programs. State governments in the ten states and the District ofColumbia that have prescription laws should repeal these laws. States should repeal the paraphernalia laws as they apply tosyringes. Report released 9/30/93 About 12,000 copies of various volumes of the reportdistributed The first review On October 15, 1993, Joe Boufford, Principal Deputy AssistantSecretary for Health (Lee's office), writes to CDC Director DavidSatcher requesting a review of the UC report and providingopinions and recommendations for federal action in response toneedle exchange. CDC consults with NIH (NIDA), FDA, HRSA and SAMSHA (SubstanceAbuse Mental Health Services Administration). Their comments areattached as tabs to the review. Conclusions: The UC research team has done a careful and scientificallysound compilation and review of all the available data on needleexchange and the availability of needles and syringes toinjection drug users." (page 1) The UC team used stringentscientific standards in its analysis and interpretation of thecollected published and unpublished studies ... The UC report isthe most extensive and comprehensive study of needle exchangeever published." (page 6) After reviewing several lines of evidence similar to the fourpoints listed above, the review concludes: Taken together, theseobservations indicate that NEPs are likely to reduce HIVtransmission, even though the epidemiologic studies of NEPs donot definitively demonstrate decreases or increases in HIVtransmission." (page 2) Several findings strongly supportthe conclusion that NEPs reduce HIV transmission." (page 10) No data exists indicating increases related to NEPs in eitherdrug use or in the number of discarded syringes." (page 2)We agree with the UC team conclusion that available data arequite limited but provide no evidence of any NEP-relatedincreases in community levels of drug use." (page 10) "... we believe that the benefits of NEPs as a componentof a comprehensive HIV prevention program for drug users exceedthe theoretical risks of such programs." (page 2) "We conclude that the ban on Federal funding of NEPsshould be lifted to allow communities and States to use Federalfunds to support NEPs as components of comprehensive HIVprevention programs." (page 2) "We also recommend that States consider the repeal oflaws requiring a physician's prescription to buy needles andsyringes and the removal of criminal penalties for the possessionof needles and syringes" (page 2) Fate of the first review Review signed by Satcher and sent to Boufford on December 10,1993. Review has never been made public. Rep. Henry Waxman obtained a copy, but only under conditionthat it not be released to the public. Review not disclosable under the Freedom of Information Act; arequest by San Francisco Chronicle for the review was deniedrecently. Only real press coverage is reference to the coverup on CNN inAugust 1994 and in San Francisco Chronicle in December 1994. The second review In fall 1994, Brian Biles of the Office of the AssistantSecretary for Health, wrote to CDC asking for an update oninformation since the University of California Report. This second review, much shorter and less expansive than thefirst review, is sent to the Associate Director for HIV/AIDS(James Curran) by the Assistant Director for Substance Abuse andHIV Prevention (T. Stephen Jones) on November 22, 1994, andpresumably forwarded on to the Office of the Assistant Secretaryfor Health. The review contains the following: Summary of new evidence from New York City showing a decreasein HIV transmission among NEP clients that concludes thatalthough the numbers are small, the evidence is plausible."(page 1 ). Three additional studies with evidence of decreases in HIVrisk behavior (page 3). No evidence of increased drug use in a San Francisco study(page 3). New data showing that the decrease in hepatitis B and Cinfections associated with needle exchange is now seven- toeight-fold. 'this study demonstrates more clearly than anyprevious research that use of NEPs is associated with decreasesin blood borne infections." (Page 4) Data from Montreal showing higher HIV infection rates, higherrates of HIV risk behaviors and higher rates of new HIV infectionamong NEP clients that "require further study." (page5) This finding is most reasonably interpreted as showing thatNEPs are reaching the drug users at highest risk for HIV (a goodthing). No formal recommendations with respect to federal policy. The existence of this review has never been made public. Public health significance Approximately 1/3 of all AIDS cases occur among injectionsdrug users, their sex partners and their children. Only about 15% of injectors are in drug treatment on any givenday. Over 10,000 drug users, their sex partners and their childrencontract HIV each year. This is 1-2 preventable HIV infectionsper hour. Needle exchange may decrease new HIV infections by 33%,according to the New Haven mathematical model. DEPARTMENT OF HEALTH & HUMAN SERVICES Public HealthService Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC) Atlanta, GA30333 December 10, 1993 SUBJECT: Review of University of California Report on needleExchange and recommendations on Needle Exchange On October 15 you requested that the Center for DiseaseControl and Prevention (CDC) review the University of Californiaresearch report on needle exchange and provide opinions andrecommendations for Federal action in response to needleexchange. The UC report and recommendations were reviewed by CDC staff.CDC also requested and received comments on the UC report andrecommendations for needle exchanges from the National Institutesof Health, the Substance Abuse Mental Health ServicesAdministration, the Health Services and Resources Administration,and the Food and Drug Administration. The comments attached tothe review were provided by the Principal[sic] AIDS Coordinatorsof the four agencies. Directors of these agencies have not beenasked for final concurrence on the review. I am pleased to submit the attached review (Tab A). David Satcher Attachment Tab A - Review of University of California Report on Needle Exchange and Recommendations on Needle Exchange REVIEW OF UNIVERSITY OF CALIFORNIA REPORT ON NEEDLE EXCHANGESAND RECOMMENDATIONS ON NEEDLE EXCHANGE. 1. ISSUE On October 15, 1993, the Principal Deputy Assistant Secretaryfor Health requested that the Centers for Disease Control andPrevention (CDC) review the University of California (UC)research report on needle exchange (executive summary at Tab A)and provide recommendations and opinions on Federal action inresponse to needle exchange to the Principal Deputy AssistantSecretary for Health and the Surgeon General. The UC report and recommendations were reviewed by CDC staff.The CDC also requested and received comments on the UC report andrecommendations and opinions on Federal action in response toneedle exchange from the National Institutes of Health (NIH) (TabB), the Substance Abuse Mental Health Services Administration(SAMHSA) (Tab C), the Health Services and ResourcesAdministration (HSRA) (Tab D), and the Food and DrugAdministration (FDA) (Tab E). Comments on this report to you werealso requested from these agencies. The agencies were not askedfor final concurrence on the CDC response. The attached comments(Tabs B-E) were provided by the Principal AIDS Coordinators ofthe four agencies. 2. SUMMARY The UC research team has done a careful and scientificallysound compilation and review of all the available data on needleexchange and the availability of needles and syringes toinjection drug users (IDUs). The UC team also gathered new datathrough surveys of needle exchange programs (NEPs), key informantinterviews, and focus groups of IDUs. NEPs are intended to decrease human immunodeficiency virus(HIV) transmission associated with injection drug use byreplacing used, potentially HIV-infected syringes with sterileones. They also can help IDUs obtain drug treatment and otherpublic health services. The emergence of more than three dozenNEPs in the United States suggests an increasing acceptance ofthese programs as part of a community response to the dualepidemics of injection drug use and HIV infection. However, insome communities, NEPs have been very controversial. Some lawenforcement, drug treatment, and community leaders are concernedthat these programs give "the wrong message" about druguse and may reduce law enforcement agencies' ability to combatdrug use and associated violence. Other concerns are that NEPshave not been shown to be effective in eliminating HIVtransmission and may draw scarce resources away from other,possibly more effective, programs such as drug treatment. The CDC concurs with the UC findings that (1) NEPs areeffective in removing used, sometimes HIV-contaminated needlesand syringes from circulation and replacing them with sterileones, (2) IDUs using NEPs decrease HIV drug-risk behaviors (e.g.,decreased sharing of injection equipment, decreased frequency ofinjection), (3) NEPs are effective in recruiting IDUs to enterdrug treatment, (4) HIV prevalence in syringes returned to NEPsdecreases, and (5) mathematical models of NEPs estimatesubstantial decreases in HIV transmission among NEP clients.Taken together, these observations indicate that NEPs are likelyto reduce HIV transmission, even though the epidemiologic studiesof NEPs do not definitively demonstrate decreases or increases inHIV transmission. The existing epidemiologic studies are limitedin their ability to detect such changes. No data existsindicating increases related to NEPs in either drug use or in thenumber of discarded syringes. W8 endorse the UC reportrecommendation that additional research and evaluation on NEPs isa high priority to further assess the impact of these programs-sand the relative effectiveness of various models of delivery ofNEP services. Two other issues have prompted reconsideration of Federalpolicy on needle exchange: (1) the magnitude of the HIV epidemicamong IDUs and the related epidemics among their sex partners andnewborns in many areas of this country and (2) the limitations ofalternative intervention options to prevent drug-related HIVtransmission (e.g., limited capacity of drug treatment availableto IDUs and limitations of bleach disinfection of injectionequipment). Based on these observations and the weight of datapresented in the UC report, we believe that the benefits of NEPsas a component of a comprehensive HIV prevention program for drugusers exceed the theoretical risks of such programs. We concludethat the ban on Federal funding of NEPs should be lifted to allowcommunities and States to use Federal funds to support NEPs ascomponents of comprehensive HIV prevention programs. We recommendthat NEPs receiving Federal funds be linked to substance abusetreatment programs and other HIV prevention services. We alsorecommend that such programs be required to include evaluationcomponents to validate their effectiveness. Increasing the ability of IDUs to obtain and possess sterileneedles and syringes should decrease HIV transmission for thosewho will not or cannot stop injecting drugs. Therefore, we alsorecommend that States consider the repeal of laws requiring aphysician's prescription to buy needles and syringes and theremoval of criminal penalities[sic] for the possession of needlesand syringes, while maintaining the criminal penalties on otherdrug use equipment. Additional evaluation of these interventionsis crucial. 3. BACKGROUND The substantial role of injection drug use in the HIV/AIDSepidemic One-third of reported U.S. AIDS cases are related directly orindirectly to injection drug use[1]. A disproportionate number ofAIDS cases among people of color in the United States is relatedto infection drug use. In 1992, almost half of all AIDS casesreported among African Americans (49 percent) and Hispanics (48percent) were directly or indirectly related to injection druguse. The majority of reported AIDS cases among women and childrenin the United States are related to injection drug use. Amongadult and adolescent women reported with AIDS in this country,nearly three-quarters (71 percent) were directly or indirectlyrelated to injection drug use; 50 percent of women with AIDSreported injecting drugs and an additional 21 percent reportedsexual contact with a male who injected drugs. Two-thirds (66percent) of children with perinatally acquired AIDS had motherswho reported injecting drugs themselves and/or having sex with anIDU. Preventing HIV/AIDS associated with injection drug use Use of drug injection equipment (especially needles andsyringes) by more than one person (often called"sharing" or "multiperson use") is theprimary mechanism for the spread of HIV related to injection druguse. Sexual transmission among IDUs also occurs. Several culturaland social factors are associated with the multiperson use ofneedles and syringes and other injection equipment. However,legal restrictions on the purchasing and possession of needlesand syringes by IDUs are central factors in the multiperson useof needles and syringes. IDUs' access to and legal ability topossess sterile needles and syringes are limited by a variety ofState and Federal laws, including (1) prescription laws[2], (2)drug paraphernalia laws[3], and (3) the [1]AIDS cases associated with injection drug use include AIDScases among a) heterosexual men and all women who reportinjecting drugs, b) men who have sex with men who also injectdrugs, c) men and women who do not inject drugs but haveheterosexual relations with drug injectors, and d) newbornchildren whose mothers inject drugs or have sex with male druginjectors. [2]A State law that requires a physician's prescription as acondition for sale of needles and syringes in pharmacies (in 10States and the District of Columbia}. Federal Mail Order Drug Paraphernalia Control Act[4]. InStates without prescription laws, the selective refusal of somepharmacists to sell needles and syringes to persons who might beIDUs is an additional barrier. In its July 1991 report on "The Twin Epidemics ofSubstance Use and HIV, n the National Commission on AIDSrecommended: "Remove legal barriers to the purchase andpossession of injection equipment. Such legal barriers... limitthe availability of new/clean injection equipment and thereforeencourage the sharing of injection equipment, and the increase inHIV transmission. Prevention and treatment for drug dependency and addiction areimportant HIV prevention strategies. However, only 10 to 20percent of all drug users are in drug treatment programs at anygiven time. Drug treatment capacity is not expected to increasesubstantially in the near future, and the capacity will remainsmaller than that required to provide drug treatment for all whoneed it and are willing to start. In addition, a substantialproportion of IDUs are unable or unwilling to stop injectingdrugs and start drug treatment. Outreach programs are another component of HIV prevention forIDUs. In addition to providing condoms and advising drug users tostart drug treatment and to decrease drug use, since themid-1980s, outreach workers have advocated the use of householdbleach to disinfect drug-injection equipment (particularlyneedles and syringes). In April 1993, the CDC, the Center forSubstance Abuse Treatment (CSAT) of SAMHSA, and the NationalInstitute on Drug Abuse (NIDA) of NIH issued an HIV PreventionBulletin describing the limitations of bleach disinfection ofneedles and syringes and indicating that (1) sterile, never-usedneedles-and syringes are-safer than bleach-disinfected,previously used needles and syringes and (2) bleach disinfectionis useful only when there is no other safer option. In thisstatement, Public Health Service (PHS) agencies clearly pointedout the limitations of one of the few HIV risk-reductioninterventions for IDUs who share needles and syringes. [3]A State (or local) law that places criminal penalties onthe possession and distribution of needles and syringes and otherequipment used in the consumption or manufacture of drugs (in 46States and the District of Columbia. [4]The Act includes needles and syringes in the list of drugparaphernalia that cannot be transported by the U.S. PostalService or any other means of interstate conveyance. 4. LEGAL RESTRICTIONS OF FEDERAL FUNDING OF NEEDLE EXCHANGEPROGRAMS IS THE UNITED STATES Congress has included provisions in at least six lawsrestricting the use of Federal funds for NEPs. For example, theFY 1994 Appropriations Act for the Department states that"no funds appropriated under this Act shall be used to carryout any program of distribution of sterile needles for hypodermicinjection of any illegal drug, unless the Surgeon General of theUnited States determines that such programs are effective inpreventing the spread of HIV and do not encourage the use ofillegal drugs, except that such funds may be used for suchpurposes in furtherance of demonstrations or studies authorizedin the ADAMHA Reorganization Act (Public Law 102-321)." 5. THE UNIVERSITY OF CALIFORNIA REPORT ("THE PUBLICHEALTH IMPACT OF NEEDLE EXCHANGE PROGRAMS IN THE UNITED STATESAND ABROAD") This project was carried out by a team of researchers at theSchool of Public Health of the University of California,Berkeley, and the Institute for Health Policy Studies at theUniversity of-California, San Francisco. The study began in April1992 and was supported by funds from the CDC through acooperative agreement with the Association of Schools of PublicHealth. The project staff gathered nearly 2,000 "datasources," including journal articles (475), conferenceabstracts (381), reports (236), and unpublished materials (159).Between May and September 1992, the team carried out site visitsto 15 cities (10 in the United States, -3-in Canada, and 2 inEurope). During these site visits, structured observations of 33needle exchange sessions were made. In addition, 110 keyinformants (including NEP staff, public health officials, andcommunity leaders supporting and opposing the NEP) wereinterviewed, and 18 focus groups of clients and non-clients ofthe-NEPs (12-9 IDUs ~ participated in the focus groups orindividual interviews) were held by the UC project staff. UCproject staff obtained extensive information on the budgets ofthe NEPs visited. To obtain a more complete picture of the NEPsin the United States, the project staff conducted a postal surveyof 20 NEPs not visited. The major findings of the UC study are presented in a Summary,Conclusion, and Recommendations document (43 pages). The detailedanalysis and findings of the UC study are presented in Volume One(519 pages). Volume Two, a city-by-city description of NEPactivities and related information from the site visits to nineU.S. and three Canadian cities, will be available in lateDecember 1993. Drafts of all chapters of the UC report were reviewed by adistinguished panel of expert reviewers representing a range ofopinions on needle exchange (Dr. Mindy Fullilove, Dr. Don DesJarlais, Dr. Ed Kaplan, Dr. Herbert Kleber, Dr. Douglas Owens,Dr. Beny Primm, and Ms. Beth Weinstein). The UC teas used stringent scientific standards in itsanalysis and interpretation of the collected published andunpublished studies on NEPs and needle and syringe availability.The UC report is the most extensive and comprehensive study ofneedle exchange ever published. 6. NEEDLE EXCHANGE PROGRAMS IN THE UNITED STATES AND CANADA The information in this section on NEPs in the United Statesand Canada is derived from the UC report. The first NEP to provide comprehensive services in the UnitedStates opened in 1988 in Tacoma, Washington. As of September 1,1993, there were at least 37 NEPs operating in 30 cities in 12States. By June 1993, more than 5.4 million syringes had beendistributed (almost always in exchange for used syringes) by NEPsin the United States. In calendar year 1992, U.S. NEPsdistributed more than 2.4 million syringes. Needle exchange has provoked intense political debate at thenational level and in some States (e.g., California, New York)and cities (e.g., Baltimore, New York City, Boston, Berkeley).Nonetheless, in many cities (e.g., Seattle, Tacoma, SanFrancisco, Honolulu,- New Haven), large-scale NEPs have beenestablished with substantial community support. In New York City,after years of intense political debate, five NEPs were legallyopened in 1992 and now distribute about one million syringes ayear. The UC team collected U.S. public opinion polls that-at-included questions regarding needle availability needle cleaning.These public opinion polls indicate that approximately half ofthe general public has supported harm reduction efforts,including needle cleaning, legalization of needles sales, needleexchange, and needle distribution. While this public support hastended to increase over time and has been somewhat higher forneedle exchange than for needle distribution, needle exchangeremains a controversial issue. Substantial variations exist among U.S. NEPs in legal status,administrative structure, and sources of funding. Nineteen U.S.NEPs are "legal,"[5] eight are"illegal-tolerated,"[6] and six are"illegal-underground."[7] Six U.S. NEPs areadministered by State or local governments, six bycommunity-based organizations (CBOs with government sponsorship,eight by CBOs without government sponsorship, and thirteen bywhat the UC report called "activist" organizations.Private donations are a major source of funding at 19 U.S. NEPs,more than any other source of funding. Fourteen NEPs arefinancially supported by foundation grants, 12 by funds from aCBO and/or activist organization administering the NEP, 12 bycity or county government, and 4 by State governments. FifteenU.S. NEPs depend entirely on volunteer staff, and all but sevenNEPs use volunteers. Twenty-seven of 33 U.S. NEPs surveyed orvisited have "one-for-one rules" (one sterile syringeis given out for each syringe turned in). Seventeen NEPs provide'starter needles" (one or more [usually three] syringesprovided to new NEP clients without requiring turn-in of usedsyringes). Ten NEPs have limits on the number of syringes thatcan be exchanged. Rules governing the exchange procedures aregenerally well enforced. U.S. NEPs serve ethnically diverse IDU populations thatgenerally reflect local ethnic and racial patterns. The mean ageof U.S. NEP clients ranges from 33-41 years with a mean durationof drug injection ranging from 7-20 years. NEPs successfullyreach IDUs who are not enrolled in drug treatment, with studiesin the United States reporting one-third to one-half of NEPclients having no prior exposure to drug treatment. NEP clientsare at significant risk for drug-related HIV transmission with 10to 60 percent reporting some needle sharing and about one-thirdreported sharing needles in the month preceding interview. U.S. NEPs are reaching thousands of IDUs in the 30 cities inwhich they operate. In addition to needle exchange, a variety ofpublic health services are provided on site or are available byreferral, including drug treatment, HIV counseling and testing,primary medical care, tuberculosis and sexually transmitteddisease screening and treatment, and social services. The UC teamfound that among NEPs visited with data on these activities, sixNEPs had referred more than 2,000 drug users to drug treatmentand that more than 800 drug users had started drug treatmentafter referral by four NEPs. [5]An NEP in a State that does not have a prescription law oran NEP that has a specific exemption to the prescription law. [6]In a state with a prescription law, an NEP which a locallyelected body (e.g., city council) has voted to support orapprove. [7]In a State with a prescription law, an illegal-undergroundNEP which has not been supported by a locally elected body. The median annual budget of U.S. and Canadian needle exchangeprograms visited is relatively low at 5169,000, with governmentrun programs tending to have larger budgets. Some NEPs are moreexpensive because they also provide substantial additionalservices such as drug treatment referrals. The UC team extensively reviewed the previously publishedmathematical models that estimated the impact of NEPs on HIVtransmission, and developed additional models of theeffectiveness and cost-effectiveness of NEPs in the UnitedStates. These efforts, in agreement with other independentreviews (e.g., the General Accounting Office [GAO] review),confirmed the theoretical and technical validity of the modelused to estimate the impact of the New Haven NEP. Applied toother cities, a simplified version of this model predictedreductions ranging from 17 to 70 percent in new drug-related HIVinfections among NEP clients. In one of the cities, the estimatedcost-per-HIV-infection-averted by NEPs was between S3,700 and$12,000. These estimated costs of preventing an HIV infectioncompare very favorably with the costs of other lifesavingprograms and are much less than the present value of the lifetimecosts of medical care for a person with HIV infection ($119,000). The UC report also reviews the development of NEPs in Canada,where the federal government provided leadership and initialfunding (requiring provincial matching funds) for HIV preventionprograms for drug users, including NEPs. In Canada all NEPs arelegal, and there has been very limited community or professionalopposition to the NEPs. Since the first Canadian NEPs were openedin 1989, the number of cities with active NEPs has steadilyincreased to a total of 28 cities in early 1993. More than 2.5million syringes were distributed through December 1992 by thefive Canadian NEPs visited by the UC team. 7. IMPACT OF NEEDLE EXCHANGE PROGRAMS ON DRUG USE Accurate measurement of drug use patterns and numbers of drugusers in communities is technically very challenging, in partbecause drug use is-an illegal activity. Therefore-, it isextremely difficult to quantitatively assess the impact of NEPson community drug use. The UC report provides data on both the behavior of NEPclients and community measures of drug use. The UC report clearlydocuments that substantial numbers of IDUs (both clients andnon-clients of the NEP) have been referred to drug treatmentprograms, a substantial step in reducing drug use by thoseindividuals and in the community. The UC report presents theresults of 26 evaluations in the United States and abroad thatprovide information on changes in drug-risk behavior among IDUswho were using NEPs; 16 of the 26 were judged to be of acceptablescientific quality. Although not definitive, the majority ofthese studies found that drug-related risk behaviors for HIVtransmission were significantly reduced among NEP clients. In addition, the UC team reviewed national drug use indicatorsand the findings of IDU focus groups. The limited data for U.S.cities with NEPs from the Drug Abuse Warning Network (DAWN), DrugUse Forecasting (DUF) system, and Uniform Crime Reports do notshow clear trends in patterns of drug use in those cities withNEPs. The IDU focus groups conducted in cities with NEPsconsistently indicated that the participants believed that NEPswould have little effect on drug use in the community. We agree with the UC team conclusion that available data arequite limited but provide no evidence of any NEP-relatedincreases in community levels of drug use. However, thelimitations of both available research methods and existing dataaddressing this issue underline the need for continuingevaluation and research on the impact of NEPs on drug use.Additional evaluation and research and the development of newresearch methods in this area should be a component of Federallysupported NEPs. A key concern of NEP opponents is that these programs willdirectly or indirectly increase drug use. Opponents view NEPs asdirectly increasing drug use by providing the means (needles andsyringes) to inject drugs. They also see NEPs as indirectlypromoting drug use by appearing to condone and facilitate druguse and thereby undermining the credibility of society's messagethat using drugs is illegal, unhealthy and morally wrong.However, no study in the United States or abroad was found thatshowed that NEPs increase community drug use. 8. IMPACT OF NEEDLE EXCHANGE PROGRAMS ON PREVENTING HIVINFECTION A major question in the policy debate over NEPs is theireffectiveness in preventing-HIV infection among IDU-s-and-theircontacts. Several findings strongly support the conclusion thatNEPs reduce HIV transmission. First, the process of needleexchange removes used, often HIV-contaminated, needles andsyringes from the hands of IDUs and replaces them with sterileneedles and syringes. Second, NEPs are often effective inreferring NEP client and non-client IDUs to drug treatmentprograms. Third, NEP clients report decreases in their HIV drugrisk behaviors. Fourth, mathematical models of the impact of NEPsin New Haven and other cities consistently estimate substantialreductions (ranging from 17 to 70 percent) in HIV transmissionfor the IDUs using NEPs and their sex partners and children.Fifth, there is some evidence that hepatitis B infection isreduced by NEPs. On the other hand, epidemiologic studies whichdirectly address HIV prevalence and incidence in relation to NEPshave been methodologically weak. One case-control study (inAmsterdam) found no protective effect of the NEP on HIVseroconversion among IDUs. However, the Amsterdam study was notprimarily designed to test NEP effectiveness and included only alimited number (31) of new HIV infections. We concur with the UCconclusion that the relationship between NEPs and HIV infectionmay be very difficult to determine conclusively. 9. REVIEW OF UNIVERSITY OF CALIFORNIA RECOMMENDATIONS In this section, the recommendations of the UC study arereviewed. "Recommendations for the federal government The federal government should repeal the ban on the use offederal funds for needle exchange services. Substantial federal funds should be committed both toproviding needle exchange services and to expanding research intothese programs. CDC comment: Both recommendations are reasonable and appropriate with theminor modifications indicated in this section. Given the significance of injection drug use in HIVtransmission in the United States, it is important to implementNEPs as one possible component of comprehensive HIV preventionprograms for drug users. Comprehensive programs should includeincreases in drug treatment, street and community outreach todrug users, and effective school and community-based programs toprevent initiation of drug use. The ban on Federal funding ofNEP-s should be removed-to allow States-and-communities theoption of including NEPs in comprehensive programs. NEPs will bemore readily integrated into comprehensive programs when there isevidence of substantial local support for NEPs as indicated byany of the following: requests for an NEP from a State or localHIV community planning process; substantial funding for NEPs fromlocal and/or State government or nongovernmental organizations;and efforts to reform the laws limiting the sale or possession ofneedles and syringes. The PHS should fund additional evaluations of NEPs[8] togather more data on the impact of these programs and to assessthe relative effectiveness of various models of delivery of NEPservices. Additional research is needed on the initiation of druguse and drug injection and changes in community drug use,particularly in communities with high prevalence of drug use, asthey relate to NEPs and other interventions that increase theavailability of sterile needles and syringes. PHS agenciessupporting research on NEPs should develop and promote the use ofstandardized data elements, methods of data collection, andprotocols for evaluation and analysis. State governments in the ten states and the District ofColumbia that have prescription laws should repeal these laws. - States should repeal the paraphernalia laws as they apply tosyringes. CDC comment: Both recommendations are reasonable and appropriate with themodifications indicated in this section. Although the major focus of the UC report was NEPs, there isample evidence of the importance of allowing access to sterileneedles and syringes for drug users who will not or cannot stopinjecting drugs. In the United States and other countries,difficulty in obtaining and/or possessing needles and syringescontributes to multiperson use of needles and syringes andthereby to HIV transmission. NEPs can provide only a part of theincreased access to needles and syringes that is needed toprevent HIV infection in IDUs, their sex partners and children.Changing the prescription and paraphernalia laws would increaseIDU access to sterile needles and syringes with little or noexpenditure of public funds. An ongoing CDC and Connecticut evaluation of 1992 changes inthe prescription and drug paraphernalia laws in Connecticut[9]provides convincing evidence of the potential benefit of theserecommendations. The evaluation found (1) steady increases of"non-prescription" purchases of needles and syringesfrom pharmacies, (2) that IDUs reported their primary source ofneedles and syringes shifted from street/black-market purchasesto pharmacy purchases and (3) that sharing ("multipersonuse") of needles and syringes decreased from 52 percentprior to the new laws to 32 percent 8 to 12 months after the newlaws were implemented. Similar increases in pharmacy purchasesand decreases in sharing of needles and syringes were found inFrance after a prescription law was repealed in 1987. [9]In 1992, Connecticut removed all criminal penalties for (a)the sale, without a prescription, of up to 10 needles andsyringes and (b) the possession of up to 10 needles and syringes. The implementation of these recommendations is primarily theresponsibility of State governments. We recommend that theFederal government and others support strong evaluation studiesof the impact of changes in these laws on drug use patterns andHIV transmission risk behaviors. The use of standardized researchmethods yielding comparable results should be encouraged. "Recommendations for local governments and communities Local governments should enter into discussions with localcommunity groups to develop a comprehensive approach topreventing HIV in injection drug users. their sex partners. andtheir offspring. This approach should include needle exchangeprograms and the expansion of drug treatment services. Local communities should seek to further increase sterilesyringe availability by encouraging the sale, distribution. orexchange of syringes by pharmacists." CDC comment: Both recommendations are reasonable and appropriate. The experience with implementing NEPs in the United States andother countries indicates that NEPs are better accepted andoperate more efficiently when there is extensive communityinvolvement in planning how the NEP services will be provided.NEPs should be components of comprehensive, multifaceted HIVprevention programs for IDUs. Pharmacy sale of sterile needles and syringes is-an--importantcomponent in increasing the availability of sterile injectionequipment to IDUs. Retail pharmacies could provide widespreadaccess to sterile needles and syringes, especially in areas whereNEPs would be impractical (e.g., rural areas). Pharmacists areimportant "gate keepers" for the availability ofsterile needles and syringes. Many pharmacists will need trainingto realize the importance of their public health role in helpingensure the availability of sterile needles and syringes to IDUs. 10 . INCREASING THE AVAILABILITY OF STERILE NEEDLES ANDSYRINGES CDC believes that increasing the availability of sterileneedles and syringes is appropriate Federal policy for thefollowing reasons: (1) HIV transmission associated with injection drug use is amajor contributor to the growth of the current AIDS epidemic inthe United States. Injection-related HIV transmission has causedincreases in the number of AIDS cases among women and children,in heterosexually acquired HIV infections and in cases oftuberculosis. (2) Restrictions on access to and the possession of needlesand syringes increase the multiperson use ("sharing")of drug injection equipment that transmits HIV. (3) A recent bulletin from the CDC, NIDA, and CSAT indicatesthat bleach disinfection of used drug injection equipment is notas safe as using sterile needles and syringes. Such disinfectionis recommended only when sterile needles and syringes are notavailable. (4) Evaluation of NEPs in the United States and othercountries indicates that these programs can provide services tolarge numbers of IDUs, remove millions of used needles andsyringes from circulation, and increase access to drug treatmentand other high priority public health services. (5) The preponderance of evidence indicates that NEPs diminishHIV transmission without increasing drug use. (6) Evaluation of changes in the prescription and drugparaphernalia laws in Connecticut indicates that drug userschange their usual source of needles and syringes from street and"black market" purchases to purchases -from pharmaciesand substantially decrease sharing of injection equipment. We recommend that the PHS adopt a policy goal of increasingthe availability of sterile needles and syringes for IDUs. Thisspecific HIV prevention strategy would be one component ofcomprehensive, multifaceted HIV prevention programs for IDUs. Thefollowing activities should be considered to implement thispolicy: Allow Federal funding of NEPs, especially when these NEPswould also provide their clients with access to HIV counselingand other priority public health programs (e.g., drug treatmentand tuberculosis screening and treatment). Programs that receiveFederal funding should have substantial evaluation and/orresearch components, either as part of the project or as aseparately funded activity. Continue funding for research and evaluation studies of theimpact of NEPs on HIV risk behaviors and HIV infection. (1) the repeal of State laws requiring a physician'sprescription for the purchase of sterile needles and syringes,(2) the repeal of State and municipal laws and regulations makingthe possession of needles and syringes a crime, and 3) theremoval of needles and syringes from the list of materialscovered by the Federal Mail Order Drug Paraphernalia Control Act.Evaluations of the impact of these changes should be funded Work with the professional associations of pharmacists andpharmacies to develop policies that increase the pharmacy-basedavailability of sterile needles and syringes. Attachments Tab A Tab B Tab C Tab D Tab E Executive Summary University of California needle exchangereport Review of the University of California report by the NationalInstitutes of Health Review of the University of California report by the SubstanceAbuse Mental Health Services Administration Review of the University of California report by the HealthServices and Resources Administration Review of the University ofCalifornia report by the Food and Drug Administration EXECUTIVE SUMMARY THE UNIVERSITY OF CALIFORNIA REPORT (THE PUBLIC HEALTH IMPACTOF NEEDLE EXCHANGE PROGRAMS IN THE UNITED STATES AND ABROAD CONCLUSIONS How and Why did Needle Exchange Programs Develop? Needle exchange programs have continued to increase in numberin the U.S. and by September 1, 1993 at least 37 active programsexist. The evolution of needle exchange programs in the U.S. hasbeen characterized by growing efforts to accommodate the concernsof local communities. increasing likelihood of being legal,growing institutionalization, and increasing federal funding ofresearch, although a ban on federal funding for program servicesremains in effect. How do Needle Exchange Programs Operate? About one-half of U.S. needle exchange programs are legal, butfunding is often unstable and most programs rely on volunteerservices to operate. All but six U.S. needle exchange programsrequire one-for-one exchanges and rules governing the) exchangeof syringes are generally well enforced. In addition to havingdistributed over 5.4 million syringes, U.S. needle exchangeprograms provide a variety of services ranging from condom andbleach distribution to drug treatment referrals. Do Needle Exchange Programs Act as Bridges to Public HealthServices? Some needle exchange programs have made significant numbers ofreferrals to drug abuse treatment and other public healthservices, but referrals are limited by the paucity of drugtreatment slots. Integrating needle exchange programs into theexisting public health system is a likely future direction forthese programs. How Much Does It Cost to Operate Needle Exchange Programs? The median annual budget of U.S. and Canadian needle exchangeprograms visited is relatively low at $169,000, withgovernment-run programs tending to be more expensive. Some needleexchange programs are more expensive because they also providesubstantial non-exchange services such as drug treatmentreferrals. The annual cost of funding an average needle exchangeprogram would support about 60 methadone maintenance slots forone year. Who Are the IDUs who Use Needle Exchange Programs? Although needle exchange program clients vary from location tolocation, the programs generally reach a group of injection drugusers with long histories of drug injection who remain atsignificant risk for human immunodeficiency virus (HIV)infection. Needle exchange program clients in the U.S. have hadless exposure to drug abuse treatment than IDUs not using theprograms. What Proportion of All Injection Drug Users in a CommunityUses the Needle Exchange Program? Studies of adequately-funded needle exchange programs suggestthat the programs do have the potential to serve significantproportions of the local injecting drug user population. Whilesome needle exchange programs appear to have reached largeproportions of local drug injectors at least once, others arereaching only a small fraction of them. Consequently othermethods of increasing sterile needle availability must beexplored. What Are the Community Responses to Needle Exchange Programs? Unlike in many foreign countries, including Canada, proposalsto establish needle exchange programs in the U.S. have oftenencountered strong opposition from a variety of differentcommunities. Consultation with affected communities can addressmany of the concerns raised. Do Needle Exchange Programs Result in Changes in CommunityLevels of Drug Use? Although quantitative data are difficult to-obtain, thoseavailable provide no evidence that--needle exchange programsincrease the amount of drug use by needle exchange programclients or change overall community levels of non injection andinjection drug use. This conclusion is supported by interviewswith needle exchange program clients and by injecting drug usersnot using the programs who did not believe that increased needleavailability would increase drug use. Do Needle Exchange Programs Affect the Number of DiscardedSyringes? Needle exchange programs in the U.S. have not been shown toincrease the total number of discarded syringes and can beexpected to result in fewer discarded syringes. Do Needle Exchange Programs Affect Rates of HIV drug and/orSex Risk Behaviors? The majority of studies of needle exchange program clientsdemonstrate decreased ratios of HIV drug risk behavior, but notdecreased ratios of HIV sex risk behavior. What is the Role of Studies of Syringes in injection Drug UseResearch? The limitations of using the testing of syringes-as a measureof injecting drug users' behavior or behavior change can beminimized by following syringe characteristics over time,. or bycomparing characteristics of syringes returned by needle exchangeprogram clients with those obtained from non-clients of theprogram. Do Needle Exchange Programs Affect Rates of Diseases Relatedto Injection Drug Use Other than HIV? Studies of the effect of needle exchange programs oninjection-related infectious diseases other than HIV providelimited evidence that needle exchange programs are associatedwith reductions in subcutaneous abscesses and hepatitis B amonginjecting drug users. Do Needle Exchange Programs Affect HIV Infection Rates? Studies of the effect of needle exchange programs on HIVinfection rates do not and, in part due to the need for largesample sizes and the multiple impediments to randomization,probably cannot provide clear evidence that needle exchangeprograms decrease HIV infection rates. However, needle exchangeprograms do not appear to be associated with increased rates ofHIV infection. Are Needle Exchange Programs Cost-effective in Preventing HIVInfection? Multiple mathematical models of needle exchange program impactsupport the findings of the New Haven Model. These models suggestthat needle exchange programs can prevent significant numbers ofinfections among clients of the programs, their drug an sexpartners, and their children. In almost ail cases, the cost perHIV infection averted is far below the $119,000 lifetime cost oftreating an HIV-infected person. RECOMMENDATIONS Recommendations for the federal government The federal government should repeal the ban on the use offederal funds for needle exchange services. Substantial federal funds should be committed both toproviding needle exchange services and to expanding research intothese programs. Recommendations for state governments State governments in the ten states and the District ofColumbia that have prescription laws should repeal these laws.[1] States should repeal the paraphernalia laws as they apply tosyringes.[2] Recommendations for local governments and communities Local governments should enter into discussions with localcommunity groups to develop a comprehensive approach topreventing HIV in injecting drug users, their sex partners, andtheir offspring. This approach should include needle exchangeprograms and the expansion of drug treatment services Local communities should seek to further increase sterilesyringe availability by encouraging the sale, distribution, orexchange of syringes by pharmacists. Recommendations for researchers Descriptions of the "kinetics" and determinants ofneedle use patterns: injection drug users sources of needles.methods of disposal of needles, frequency of needle re-use, andneedle-sharing patterns. How do these change when a needleexchange program or other changes in needle availability areimplemented? Evaluations of "natural experiments" in which needleavailability laws pharmacy based syringe sale, distribution, or exchange and toidentify the barriers to their participation. Assessments of the effects of design features of needleexchange programs (e.g., administering bodies, sitecharacteristics, opening hours, and program rules} upon processmeasures of needle exchange programs (e.g., needles distributed,drug treatment referrals discarding of needles). Ethnographic and other qualitative research to assess thefactors involved in drug use initiation and in transitionsbetween various routes of drug use. Case-control studies of the relationship between use of theneedle exchange program and acute hepatitis 8, particularly incities with active surveillance for the infection. Large, multi-center case-control studies within existingcohorts of injecting drug users to assess whether use of theneedle exchange program is associated with hepatitis B or HIVseroconversion Mathematical modeling using program data and behavior changeevaluations to determine which aspects of program designdetermine effectiveness and cost-effectiveness. [1]Prescription laws preclude the purchase of a syringewithout a prescription. limiting sterile syringe availability andcreating a risk of arrest for needle exchange program staff andclients. [2]Paraphernalia laws exist in 46 states and the District ofColumbia and preclude the possession or distribution or syringesexcept for legitimate medical purposes. Conviction under aparaphernalia law is a felony or a misdemeanor Department of Health & Human Services Public Health Service National Institutes of Health Bethesda, Maryland 20892 To: James W. Curran, M.D. Ph.D. Assistant Surgeon General From: Deputy Director Office of AIDS Research Subject: Comments on the CDC's Draft Response on NeedleExchange We have reviewed the draft CDC response to the Office of theAssistant Secretary for Health and the Surgeon General regardingthe University of California report on needle exchange. Inaddition to the comments provided in our earlier review of thereport (included as Tab B in the CDC draft response), we providethe following comments that are specific to the draft CDCresponse letter: 1. Agency Position Issue Page 1: The second paragraph implies that the NIH, along withSAMHSA, HRSA, and the FDA, has provided "recommendation forneedle exchange." This is either inaccurate or misleading.We suggest that the wording "And recommendations for needleexchange" be dropped from the sentence. 2. Research The CDC draft response appropriately includes an emphasis onthe need for increasing research and evaluation of needleexchange programs (NEPs) and other related aspects of HIV anddrug abuse. However, in light of the reported gaps in informationconcerning the efficacy and impact of needle exchange programs,requiring evaluation to be an integral component of any federallyfunded NEP becomes critical if we are to take an iterativeapproach to this issue. The following text changes are recommended: Page 2: In the last sentence of the second paragraph the word"include" should be change (sic) to"require"; Page 11: The first sentence of the last paragraph should be"The PHS should require substantial evaluation be part ofany federally funded NEP so as to continue to gather more data onthe impact..."; and, Page 15: The last sentence of the first paragraph should bechanged to read, "Programs that receive Federal fundingshould be required to have substantial evaluation and/or researchcomponents, either as part of the project or as a separatelyfunded activity." 3. Agency Designation Page 4: The fourth paragraph lists the CDC, CSAT and NIDA asco-sponsors of a bleach use guidance. For parity , all agenciesshould be designated. This could be achieved by indicatingCSAT/SAMHSA and NIDA/NIH, or by stating, " The NationalInstitute on Drug Abuse, part of the National Institutes ofHealth,..." Please feel free to contact me if you have any questions ofneed further information. Jack Whitescarver, Ph.D. Department of Health and Human Services National Institutes of Health Bethesda, Maryland Building 1 Room 201 (301) 496-0357 TO: Associate Director AIDS/HIV, CDC PROM: Deputy Director, - Office of AIDS Research, NIH SUBJECT: NIH comments on- the University of California Report, " Public Health Impact of Needle Exchange Programs in theUnited States and Abroad. " We have reviewed the report, "The Public Health Impact ofNeedle Exchange Programs in the United states and Abroad, "from a research perspective, We have provided several points foryour consideration in your response on needle exchange to theAssistant Secretary for Health: 1. This report is a good initial analysis of this issue andserves as a useful starting point for further examination; 2. Utilizing needle/syringe exchange (NSE) programs as an HIVprevention strategy is a complex issue. The current state of thescience with respect to this issue is neither complete norcomprehensive, .requiring further study on this, as well as,alternative behavioral interventions; 2. There are a number of significant issues and problems withrespect to needle exchange program that the data available to theUniversity of California have not addressed (see attachedanalysis); 3. The report appropriately suggests a substantial federalcommitment to research in this area. Such support should include,but should not be limited to, .funding for: 1) buildingsubstantiai evaluation and/or research components into existingNSEs; 2) research demonstration projects that address NSEprogram: design issues; 3. research on other forms ofneed~e/syringe distribution (e.g., pharmacy or vending machinPstrategies); and, 4) research on the relationships and impact ofNSEs on other prevention strategies (e.g., bleach use) and othernon-injecting at-risk populations (e.g., non-injecting drug userswho trade sex or money for drugs). In addition, until more isdefinitively known and has been time tested, any NSE serviceprograms funded should have appropriate research and/orevaluation components built into them as a prerequisite forFederal funding. For a more detailed analysis of the specific research issuesand questions that remain unanswered by the report, we haveattached comments on the report provided by the NationalInstitute on Drug Abuse. Attachment Jack Whitescarver, Ph. D. Sent by Xerox Telecopier 7021:11-12-93 :10:48 AM : 44323174027789;# DEPARTMENT OF HEALTH AND HUMAN SERVICES Public Health Service National Institutes of Health National Institute on Drug Abuse 5500 Fishers Lane Rockville, Maryland 20857 Memorandum Date: November 12, 1993 To: Jack Whitescarver, Ph.D. Deputy Director Office of AIDS Research National Institutes of Health From: Acting Chief Clinical Medicine Branch Division of Clinical Research National Institute on Drug Abuse Thru: Associate Director for AIDS National Institute on Drug Abuse Topic: Comments on University of California Report, " ThePublic Health Impact of Needle Exchange Programs in the UnitedStates and Abroad" In general, medical/public health interventions, likemedications, may be evaluated within a framework that examinessafety, efficacy, side effects, deleterious effects and bothpositive and negative interactions with other treatments orconditions. With respect to any of the effects, questions includewhat subpopulations are likely to experience the effect and howlong it is likely to last, including recommendations with respectto the length of treatment. In fact, to the degree to which thisReport provides the equivalent of a section of the Physician'sDesk Reference(PDR) devoted to needle/syringe exchange (NSE) itwill be helpful all who are concerned with the implications ofNSEs. Viewing this Report in the aforementioned framework it becomesclear that with respect to overall "effects" NSE isassociated in the aggregate with reductions in self reports ofneedle-related HIV risk behavior. However, a major problem with the existing data examined bythe Report is the lack of sensitivity of the data to detection ofadverse effects of NSE on individuals or subpopulations andinteraction with, for example, the various modalities of drugabuse treatment. There is no equivalent of studies that searchfor individuals who purport to have experienced "adversereactions" or negative consequences or interactions that maybe attributable to participation in NSE. It is questionablewhether in the context of medications development the FederalGovernment would approve and/or provide funds for a medicationfor which this type of data were not available. In the spirit of seeking the information that would be neededfor a complete PDR section on needle/syringe exchange, we willreview some concerns about the potential adverse impact andinteractions of NSE. One major concern of critics of NSEs as an AIDS interventioneffort is the degree to which the availability of sterileneedles/syringes would server to promote drug use. While theneedle exchange studies reported from around the world from thelast two world AIDS conferences do not, and perhaps cannot, provethat the presence and/or use of a needle exchange does notincrease drug use, there have been no reports that confirm suchan increase. However, there are a number of direct and indirectways in which drug use maybe promoted for individuals andsubpopulations that have not been addressed by existing data. Forexample, one wonders what happens to the drug use of individualswho seek drug treatment through an NSE and are told that there isno slot available for them. Analogous to that for needle/syringe exchange, the criticismof the potential for increasing injection drug use was raised forbleach distribution. This particular criticism (although not allcriticisms) with respect to bleach was, in the aggregate andwithin limits, refuted by the results of the National AIDSDemonstration Research data which is consistent with the modelthat when contact is established with drug users, trust is build,information is imparted and risky behavior is reduced, despitethe fact that safe needle use is also being assisted at the sametime(XXXXXXXXXXXXXXX). Nonetheless, the demonstration ofbeneficial effects does not preclude the simultaneous existenceof deleterious effects. NSEs may not be uniformly effective in acting as a bridge toother public health services, depending on such factors as towhat degree the services are "on-site" versus"remote" as well as "immediately available"versus "requiring waiting". Studies of the servicelinkage process suggest that higher rates of successfulengagement with other services will be attained for thoseservices that are on-site and immediately available. It would beuseful to attempt to characterize users and non-users ofadditional services and to delineate those factors that affectthese decisions. Inconsistent of infrequent users of the NSEs may remain and bestabilized at high risk behavior levels. With respect to theinconsistent or infrequent users of the NSEs, it will beimportant to determine the factors influencing periods of useversus non-user. More over, looking at NSEs as an"innovation" with respect to injection drug user, theliterature of models of [LINE LOST IN COPYING - Ed.] middle andlate adopters of NSEs may be useful in terms of delineatingpopulations with distinct patterns of motivations, risk factorsand responses to the NSEs. Change or lack of change in the micro-structure, i.e.,details, of behaviors associated with drug use may negatebeneficial effects of NSEs. In looking at drug risk behaviors, itis important to attempt to assess whether NSEs affect rate ofsharing of cookers, cotton, water, etc. as well as such practicesas frontloading, backloading and booting. With respect to drugrisk behaviors it is thus important to examine NSE effects onbehavioral norms of (1) non-NSE-users and (2) drug usingnon-injectors as well as (3) NSE users. NSE users may sell paraphernalia or exchange it for drugs orsex. In fact, the possibility should be examined thatnon-injectors may use the NSEs as a source for paraphernalia thatmay used in transactions with injectors. The rate at which NSE users (versus NSE non-users) initiatenew injectors and influence other IDUs to utilize or not utilizethe NSE should be examined. Moreover, questions of the influenceof the NSE on injections frequency should be examined closely.For individuals, the availability of clean paraphernalia mayremove one brake on increasing the frequency of injection. Certainly, NSE effects on the number of IDUs entering drugtreatment need to be examined. However, the fate of IDUs who haveused the NSE prior to entry into drug treatment should also beexamined. NSE participants or injections drug users whose networkincludes NSE participants may relapse to needle use and/or dropout of drug treatment at a higher rate than NSE non-users. NSE effects on social network may lead to problems. Since NSEsimply a high rate of flow of IDUs through the neighborhoodsurrounding the site, there may be a tendency for dealers,operators of shooting galleries and/or crack houses andprostitutes to relocate to the same area. If possible, theseeffects and their implications should be assessed. The potentialeffects of NSEs on setting up bridges between networks of IDUs inhigh and low HIV seroprevalence neighborhoods should be examined.If NSEs serve to create such bridges they would, especiallythrough inconsistent seropositive users, serve as conduits tofacilitate viral spread. If data are generated on local changesin seroprevcalence and/or seroincidence over time in areassurrounding NSEs, (including baseline levels prior to theestablishment of the NSE and changes during the growth of theNSE), then some of these questions may be able to be addressed.Data pertinent to the perceived effects of participation in theNSE on the sexual, social and drug-using networks of theindividuals would also be helpful in beginning to address thesehypotheses. Additional network effects may occur or existing networkeffects may be potentiated if NSE sites are located close to drugtreatment programs (methadone or drug free programs), hospitals,psychiatric facilities, homeless shelters or other facilitiesthat attract concentrations of individuals who are vulnerable toinitiating drug injections, relapsing to drug use or injections,having sex with injections users or becoming victims of crimeassociated with injections users. As is addressed in the Report, the surveyed NSEs variedgreatly in along many parameters including estimates of theproportions of injection drug users reached by the program, theamount of education offered, the degree to which injectionequipment beyond needles/syringes were distributed, emphasis ondrug treatment referrals, costs, the extent of ongoingevaluation, acceptance by the local community, legalacceptance/tolerance, etc. These are major program design andfeasibility that could determine differences between highlyeffective programs and those with a substantial negative impact.Support for grams without consideration of these issues would bethe equivalent of support for all treatment programs in any areain the absence of standards and quality assurance. Finally, the interrelationships between NSEs and the use ofbleach need to be examined. For example, we have evidence thateven IDUs who use bleach tend to not use it effectively. Does theexistence of needles from NSEs decrease the probability that IDUswill even attempt to use bleach if the share? Will they feel thatthe needles are at least relatively safer and thus real thatbleach use is not necessary? Does the distribution of bleachincrease the probability that IDUs will share NSE distributedneedles? Are NSEs attempting to intervene in terms of educationwith respect to bleach use? This, of course is not an exhaustive list of questions orissues, but is meant to represent a set of problems whoseexistence has not been addressed by the data available to theUniversity of California study. However, even in the absence of Federal Support, NSE is agrowing part of HIV prevention efforts. This Report appropriatelysuggests a substantial Federal commitment to research in thisarea. With respect to the funding of services, it appearsreasonable, as the Report suggests, that the ban on funding belifted. Nonetheless, it would appear prudent in light of theincomplete data and the aforementioned set of concerns that noservices e funded that do not included a substantial evaluationcomponent with appropriate instrumentation and methodologies toidentify adverse as well as beneficial contribution of theseprograms to HIV and other infectious disease transmission anddrug use patterns. Perhaps as a prelude to defining standards forFederal funding of NSE services, there should be funding forincorporating evaluation in existing NSEs and setting upresearch/demonstrations projects that address NSE program designissues. Beyond the issue of NSEs per se, the argument is made in thisReport in favor of immediate implementation of the entire varietyof interventions that increase the availability of sterileneedles/syringes, including pharmacy sales and the abolition ofprescription and paraphernalia laws. Given the stated priority ofthe objective, presumably this support would extend to otherforms of needle/syringe distribution, e.g., vending machines likethose used in Europe. While the objective appears reasonable, it would be helpful ifthe Report addressed more of the complexities of this issue sothat sterile needle/syringes are not viewed as a "magicbullet" that obviates the need to continue work onbehavioral interventions. For example, there have been extensiveobservations of "secondary sharing" in which addicts ingroups use frontloading and backloading to distribute"cooked" drugs to their syringes. In these situation ifan addict brings his/her own syringe, but has previously used thesyringe even once and engaged in "booting" (drawingblood back into the syringe and reinjecting after initialinjection to make sure that any residual drug in the syringe isused), blood may be distributed to others' syringes. Moreover,contaminants of "cookers', "cotton" and"rinse water" may be similarly distributed. Finally, all strategies for distributing needles/syringes maynot be equivalent. For example, it is questionable whetherpharmacies will provide other forms of injections equipment, HIVeducation, HIV testing and counseling, referral to drug treatmentprograms, on-site medical car, etc. Similarly, these servicewould presumable not be available through such distributionsources as vending machines. Sander G. Ganser, M.D., M.P.H. DEPARTMENT OF HEALTH & HUMAN SERVICES Public Health Service Memorandum Date From: Special Assistant to the Acting Administrator, SAMHSA Subject: Draft Response an Needle Exchange To: James W. Curran, M.D., M.P.H Associate Director for HIV/AIDS CDC Thank you for the opportunity to review the latest draft ozresponse to the University of California, San Francisco reportThe Public Health Impact of Needle Exchange Programs in theUnited States and Abroad." We concur in the response and appreciate the inclusion of ourprevious comments on the report-being included as an appendix. Myron L. Belfer, M.D. N0V-12-93 ~T 13.26 ADAMHA/IOA FAX N0. 3014430284 P.02 DEPARTMENT OF HEALTH AND HUMAN SERVICES PUBLIC HEALTH SERVICE Substance Abuse and Mental Health Services Administration Rockville MD TO: Associate Director HIV/AIDS CDC FROM: Special Assistant to the Acting Administrator, SAMHSA SUBJECT: Response on Needle Exchange In general we are fully supportive of the University ofCalifornia report on "The Public Health Impact of NeedleExchange Programs in the United States and Abroad." Thereport and its . recommendations are a valuable contribution toour understanding of the important role of needle exchange inaddressing the spread of HIV/AIDS. We look forward to theopportunity to develop the appropriate implementation of thereport's recommendations. Attached are specific comments on the University of Californiareport prepared by the Center for Substance Abuse Treatment.These comments reflect concerns that we believe should beacknowledged in any overall commentary on the report. Thank you for the opportunity to comment on the University ofCalifornia report. In response to your request, I Will serve as the SAMHSAcontact person regarding this report. My telephone number is(301) 443-5305 and my facsimile number is 3Q1-443-0284. Myron L. Belfer, M. D . Attachment cc: T. Stephen Jones, M.D. Center for Disease Control Prevention November 9, 1993 NOTE TO: George Lewis RE Comments on Needle Exchange Study As you may be aware, Beny asked me to review this reportduring the early of it's preparation earlier this year. While thefinal summary report does reflect many of the changes werecommended, there are several noteworthy areas which warrantsome attention. Page 4, Paragraph 4. The report indicates that, "althoughNEPs may make referral to drug treatment an important part oftheir services, they acknowledge that many IDUs, including somein drug treatment programs, continue to inject drugs and shareinjection equipment. They therefore seek to reduce the harmassociated with these practices...". While there may be someinjecting drug users in certain treatment modalities who continueto inject drugs, the reference here implies that this practicehas more significance than the evidence warrants. Moreimportantly, the statement, in a somewhat convoluted fashion,implies that referral to treatment in contrast to NEP does notoffer assurance that drug users will not inject drugs. Page 11, Paragraph 5. The report notes that. NEPs vary greatlywith respect to the emphasis they place upon making referrals todrug treatment and other public health services. This stems inpart from the desire to make the NEP "user friendly",the recognition that many active IDUs express no interest inentering drug treatment, and the related belief that an overemphasis on drug treatment could alienated potential NEPclients." This assertion for which two literature referencesare cited is a dangerously misleading generalization. First it isunclear what the authors mean by "user-friendly". Thisimplies that drug treatment is somehow not user friendly which isclearly not the case. Secondly, the references to drug treatmentare based published papers which were published before OTI/CSATcame into existence, a development which has had an enormouseffect on the nature and quality of national drug treatmentservices. We must remember that many of staff of these NEPs areonly casually familiar with the various treatment modalities, thebehavioral characteristics of drug using populations and aregenerally not qualified to make determinations about who isinterested in treatment or not. In point of fact many drug usersare not interested in treatment, enter treatment for many otherreasons, e.g. secure primary care or to take a respite from theiraddiction lifestyle, other than to address their addictions. Itdoes not follow, even from the limited evidence provided in thecited studies, that emphasizing or overemphasizing treatmentproduces alienation. finally, the determination of who should bereferred or not should never be left to so-called perceptions ofstaff regarding "readiness for treatment". Page 12, Conclusion. There are a number of reasons whyreferrals to drug treatment are limited other than the paucity ofdrug treatment slots. One important consideration which may be alimiting factor to referrals may in fact have more to do with howvarious NEPs have evolved in relation to drug treatment programsin the same area. It is abundantly clear that these programs havenot been in philosophical agreement regarding how to address theneeds of the addict. Page 13, Conclusion. I don't think there is any seriousdisagreement that the cost of NEPs are substantially cheaper thanany form of treatment including methadone. It is also true thatNEP is cheaper than coronary angioplasty, renal dialysis and arange of other health care expenditure. The reference made tomethadone seems to suggest that there is contrast, or perhapsimply that there is tacit substitution effect. The reference madeto methadone should be deleted since its incorporation in thecontext of the conclusion is largely irrelevant. Page 14, Paragraph 5. Our understanding of injecting drug useamong women is not as well developed as for men. While there isevidence which suggest that men initiate women, this is by nomeans an absolute. the fact remains that there are IDUpopulations of women which operate independently from those ofmen. Our limited knowledge of injecting behaviors among womenclearly indicates that there may be other factors involved withrespect to injecting behavior which may make it problematic toapply NEP directed at male IDUs to female IDUs. Page 16, Conclusion. The conclusion tragically fails toappreciate the full range of antipathy and fear which AfricanAmericans communities have for the "symbolicsanctioning" of drug abuse by endorsing NEP in theircommunities. After years of "Just Say No", theperception of many leaders in these communities is that NEPrepresents a step back and not forward. Irrespective of whetherthis perception is valid or not, the presence of these compellingbeliefs cannot be dismissed lightly. It is insulting to thesecommunities, also contrary to all of our Public Health platitudesaround cultural sensitivity to dismiss these visceral communityconcerns by stating that "newer African Americanorganizations established specifically to address HIV preventiongenerally support NEP as did several mayors..." Thisstatement literally indicates that the view of traditionalleaders from the African American communities and from churchleaders can and should be ignored in favor of those who supportNEP. This statement by it's intent, fosters divisiveness and isantithetical to efforts made by other segments of public healthincluding those concerned with preventing HIV disease to engageand not alienate the African American community. Page 18, Conclusion. The overall issue here is the questionwhich frames this section, "Do NEPs result in changes incommunity levels of drug use?" Clearly this is very complexquestion which could not be answered within the scope of thestudy, but one which nonetheless warrants a poignant level ofinquiry. However, the conclusion seems to go beyond the paucityof evidence to conclude that there is "no evidence that NEPsincrease the amount of drug use by NEP clients or change overallcommunity levels of non-injection and injection drug use."This convoluted logic would have us believe that if it cannot beestablished that NEP has an effect on drug use, then the absenceof correlates, irrespective of methodological limitations, istantamount to saying it has no effect. This conclusion is furthersupported by indicating that interview with NEP clients and byIDUs not using NEP, confirmed that they did not believe thatincrease needle availability would increase drug use. It is notclear how these two groups would qualify to speculate on newincidence, especially by younger members of the community. Ingeneral, this ipso facto logic is not only distressing, butraises very real questions overall scientific validity of thisreport. Page 21, Conclusion. Though the majority of studies citedindicated a decreased rate of HIV drug risk behavior, the realissue here which is not addressed are whether these behavioralchanges are sustainable overtime. While there are clearlycompelling finding of short term behavioral change, theseindications do not provide definitive conclusions regarding theeffectiveness of NEP overtime. The proper statement of thisconclusion should insert the caveat that the studies reviewed donot conclusive evidence at this time that these behaviors aresustained overtime. Warren Department of Health and Human Services Public Health Service MEMORANDUM Date: November 16, 1993 From: Associate Administrator for AIDS HRSA Subject: CDC Report on the Public Health Impact of NeedleExchange Programs To: James Curran, M.D. Associate Director for HIV/AIDS, CDC We at HRSA have reviewed this very thorough report on needleexchange programs and concur with its major finding andrecommendations. We believe that needle exchange programsdefinitely have a place in what must necessarily be acomprehensive approach to the prevention of HIV infection amongdrug users. In addition, we were pleased that the report wentbeyond needle exchange programs per se to discuss the need forchanges in current prescription and paraphernalia laws at theState level. Thank you for giving us the opportunity to review thisexcellent report. G. Stephen Bowen, M.D., M.P.H. Assistant Surgeon General Department of Health and Human Services Public Health Service MEMORANDUM Date: December 2,, 1993 From: Associate Administrator for AIDS HRSA Subject: Draft Response on Needle Exchange To: James Curran, M.D., M.P.H. Associate Director for HIV/AIDS, CDC In general we think the CDC's draft response to Jo IveyBoufford, M.D. concerning the University of California report onneedle exchange programs did an excellent job of covering thesalient issues. We do have a number of specific comments, whichfollow: page 2, paragraph 2: We suggest adding a sentence to the effect that :"Substance abuse treatment programs also require substantialfunding increases in order to accommodate the needs ofindividuals who decide they want to enter treatment as a resultof their involvement in needle exchange and other outreachefforts to IDUs. page 7, first paragraph: We think it is important to mention the fact that needleexchange remains an issue of special concern issue amongAfrican-American and other minority politicians and communityleaders. Whether or not we think this concern is justified, weneed to acknowledge that it exists. page 8, last paragraph: We think it should be acknowledged that the degree to whichnew HIV infections are reduced is strongly affected by (1) the"penetration" of needle exchange in a particular cityand (2) the complexity of the drug-using populations and networkin particular communities (i.e., the number of, and kinds ofconnections between, drug injection networks). page 9, "Impact of Needle Exchange Programs on DrugUse": Again, we think it is crucial to acknowledge and discuss thefact that many African-American and other minority politiciansand community leaders fear that needle exchange programs condonedrug use and should be opposed on those grounds. The last paragraph in this section should provide morespecific data to address this concern. page 10, last paragraph: The fifth sentence should read, "Third, NEP clientsreport decreases in their HIV drug-risk behaviors." We disagree that the relationship between NEPs and HIVinfection may be impossible to study conclusively, particularlysince "conclusiveness" depends on the criteria beingused. This issue could be studied with several replications(different cities or neighborhoods) to obtain better data thannow exist on this point. page 11, last paragraph: We suggest adding a sentence to the effect that, "The CDCshould develop and foster the use of standardized data elements,methods of data collection, and protocols forevaluation/analysis." page 12 first paragraph: In the last sentence, we suggest adding the phrase,"using standardized methodologies." page 15, first paragraph: Again, we suggest adding to the last sentence's phrase aboutthe use of standardized data collection and evaluationmethodologies. We appreciate the opportunity to review this response. G. Stephen Bowen, M.D., M.P.H. Assistant Surgeon General MEMORANDUM DEPARTMENT OF HEALTH AND HUMAN SERVICES Public Health Service Food and Drug Administration Date: Dec 2, 1993 From: Nancy L. Stisic, Health Program Coordinator Office of AIDS an special Health Issues (HF- 12) Subject: Comments on Draft CDC Response on Needle ExchangePrograms To: Associate Director for HIV/AIDS We appreciate the opportunity to review the CDC draft responseon Needle Exchange. Dr. Wykoff has requested that I review thedocument on behalf of the Office. I have no further commetnsconcerning the Needle Exchange Program other than the commentsprovided to Dr. T. Stephen Jones on November 12, 1993. November 22, 1994 From: Assistant Director for Substance Abuse and HIVPrevention, Office of the Associate Director for HIV/AIDS To: Associate Director for HIV/AIDS Re: Request for Update on Needle Exchange Studies and LawsRelated to Needle and Syringe Sale and/or Possession 1. Background The following information is provided in response to therequest of Brian Biles, Office of the Assistant Secretary forHealth, for an update on (a) studies of needle exchange programs(NEPs) since the 1993 release of the University of California(UC) three-volume, 700 page report on NEPs[1] and (b) recentdevelopments related to laws related to NEPs and possessionsand/pr sale of syringes. 2. New York City NEP evaluation reported at 1994 APHAConference * At the 1994 American Public Health Association (APHA)Conference, Dr. Don Des Jarlais presented and estimate of anapproximate 50% reduction in rates of new HIV infections amonginjecting drug users (IDUs) using NEPs in New York City (NYC). * This estimate was based on several small follow-up studiesof HIV incidence among IDUs using NEPs compared to HIV incidenceamong IDUs in a vaccine preparedness cohort and cohort studies inmethadone maintenance.[2] A manuscript based the APHA oralpresentation is being prepared. Until this study is more fullydescribed, it is difficult to assess the basis for this estimateof NEP impacting NYC. However, although the numbers are small,the estimate is plausible. 3. Legal aspects of needle exchange, possession, and sale ofsyringes * In 1993 and 1994, three states (Maryland, Massachusetts, andRhode Island) enacted laws authorizing pilot NEPs; two states(Connecticut and Hawaii) enacted laws expanding existing NEPlegislation. * In September 1994, the Mayor and City Council o Los Angelesdeclared a "local state of emergency." The declarationwas based on "... finding that an emergency in connectionwith the AIDS epidemic and the transmission of HIV throughcontaminated needles does exist, and that this emergencythreatens to cause extraordinary loss of life."[3] Thisstate of emergency was used as a basis for authorizing supportfor "responsible" NEPs. * In 1993 and 1994, similar declarations of states ofemergency have been made in nine other California cities andcounties - Alameda, Berkeley, Marin, Oakland, Salinas, SanFrancisco, Santa Clara, Sonoma, and West Hollywood. * A major reason for NEPs is the existence of several lawsthat restrict the purchase, distribution, and possession ofsyringes. These laws include "prescription laws," underwhich a prescription is required to purchase syringes and"drug paraphernalia laws," which establish felonyand/or misdemeanor criminal penalties for the possession and/ordistribution of syringes for nonmedical purposes. About ninestates have prescription laws and more than 40 states have drugparaphernalia laws. In 1993, Maine repealed its prescription law. * In 1992, Connecticut partially repealed it drugparaphernalia and prescription laws. The new laws allow purchaseof as many as 10 syringes without a prescription and possessionof as many as 10 syringes without a medical condition. A CDC andConnecticut Health Department evaluation of the impact of thesenew laws found that IDUs reported substantially less multipersonuse ("sharing") of injection equipment. Also, after thechange in the laws, more than 80% of Connecticut pharmacies sellsyringes without a prescription and, for drug injectors, therewas a dramatic shift from "black market" sources ofsyringes to purchases in pharmacies[4]. 4. Limitations of bleach disinfection and recommendation touse sterile syringes Several studies published in a special section of the July1994 "Journal of AIDS" indicate that while bleachdisinfection can reduce the HIV transmission risk of IDU reuse ofsyringes, it is not as safe as using a new, sterile syringe. Thefollowing quotation summarizes the argument: We reiterate that IDUs who cannot stop injecting drugs shoulduse sterile needles and syringes; ideally only once and thensafely dispose of them. IDUs should be told never to re-useinjection equipment that had been previously used by someoneelse.... If one re-uses injection equipment, consistent andthorough cleaning of equipment with disinfectants, such asfull-strength household bleach for longer rather than shorterperiods of time, should decrease, but may not eliminate the HIVtransmission risk[5]. The following sections present additional information on NEPsthat has become available since the release of the UC report. 5. Decreases in HIV risk behaviors among NEP clients The following data from San Francisco and New York, citieswith high volume NEPs, indicate decreases in HIV risk behaviorsreported by NEP clients: * Decrease in needle-sharing rates associated with increaseduse of the NEP among street recruited San Francisco IDUs[6]. * Reduction in needle-sharing rates among IDUs attending NEPsin New York City[7]. * Reductions in the proportions of IDUs attending drugdetoxification programs in New York City who injected with a usesyringe and who lent used syringes to others, associated with theopening of NEPs in that city. 6. No evidence of an increase in drug use in San Francisco, acity with a high-volume NEP The San Francisco NEP opened in 1987. It is a now one of thehighest volume NEPs in the United States; 343,888 syringes wereexchanged during the Spring of 1992. The following data come fromrepeated surveys (from 1988 to 1992) of IDUs in San Francisco: * The median number of injections decreased from 1.9 per dayin the Fall of 1987 to 0.7 per day in the Spring of 1992.[6] * The mean age of IDUs in the repeated surveys in SanFrancisco increased from 36 years in the Spring of 1987 to 42years in the Spring of 1992[6]. * The proportion of San Francisco IDUs reporting that theyfirst injected drugs in the previous year decreased from 3.0% inthe Spring of 1989 to 1.1% in the Spring of 1992[6]. Taken together, the last two finding suggest that significantnumbers of persons have not begun injecting drugs in a city witha high-volume NEP. 7. Increase in estimated reduction of HIV incidence among IDUsusing the New Haven NEP Earlier estimates derived from mathematical models indicatedthat the rate of HIV infection among clients of the NEP in NewHaven, CT, was reduced by 33% by their use of the NEP. Updatedestimates from that model suggest that the reduction is more than40%[9]. 8. Lower incidence of hepatitis B and C among IDUs using theTacoma NEP A study of hepatitis B and C among IDUs in Tacoma, Washington,using multivariate analysis to adjust for the demographiccharacteristics of the IDUs found that, compared with nonusers ofthe NEP, IDUs who had ever used the Tacoma NEP were seven timesless likely to become infected with hepatitis B and eight timesless likely to become infected with hepatitis C[10]. This studydemonstrates more clearly than any previous research that use ofNEPs is associated with decreases in blood -borne infections. 9. Substantial entry in to drug treatment of New Haven NEPclients Between September 1992 and July 1993, 112 of 596 NEP clients(19%) in New Haven entered drug treatment. In addition, 205 IDUswho did not exchange syringes were referred to drug treatment bythe NEP[11]. 10. Substantial IDU utilization of high-volume NEPs One issue about NEPs is how much they will be used by IDUs.Studies from tow cities with high-volume NEPs, New York City andSan Francisco, indicate that substantial proportions of IDUssurveyed report use of the NEPs. * Des Jarlais reported data indicating that in 1993 nearlyhalf (46%) of IDUs surveyed in New York City had used an NEP[2]. * Surveys of IDUs in San Francisco in the Spring of 1992 foundthat 45% "usually" obtained their syringes from the SanFrancisco NEP[6]. 11. Increasing Number of NEPs in the United States The UC report found at least 37 active NEPs in the UnitedStates as of September 1993. As of October 1994, an estimated 70NEPs were in operation in the United States[12]. 12. Support from the general public for NEPs for AIDSprevention In the first national opinion poll on NEPs, a 1994 nationaltelephone survey of 1,001 people, the majority (55%) ofrespondents favored "Implementing needle exchange programsto reduce the spread of diseases such as AIDS."[13] 13. Support for federal funding of NEPs from the NationalAcademy of Sciences A study on AIDS behavioral research published in 1994 by theInstitute of Medicine, described NEPs as "highlypromising" and called for the lifting of the ban on the useof federal funds for NEP services. "The weight of evidencesuggests that needle exchange does more good than harm,"concluded the authors[14]. 14. High HIV seroconversion among Montreal IDUs The highest levels of HIV seroprevalence among IDUs in Canadahave been reported from Montreal. Bruneau reports from the St.Luc IDU cohort that among 850 IDUs recruited 1989-1993, the half(54%) reporting use of a Montreal NEP had higher HIVseroprevalence (18.2% vs. 5.6%) compared with nonattenders. Amongthe 507 IDUs with multiple visits to the study site, theseroconversion rate was higher (11.6 vs 3.5 per 100 person-years[p<0.0001]) among IDUs using NEP[15]. A study of incarcerated IDUs found that IDUs using a MontrealNEP reported higher rates of HIV risk behaviors (vs. IDUs who didnot use a NEP). Montreal NEP attenders were more likely thannon-attenders, to have same sex partners, to work in the sexindustry, to report injecting with needles used by anHIV-infected IDU, and re-use borrowed injection equipment withoutcleaning[16]. The higher HIV seroprevalence, HIV seroconversion, and HIVrisk factors among IDUs attending the Montreal NEP requirefurthers study. 15. Comments and conclusions Since the 1993 release of the UC report: * The number of U.S. NEPs has increased, and more states andlocalities have approved NEPs by legislation or declaration ofsates of emergency; * In communities with high-volume NEPs, substantialproportions of IDUs report using the NEP; * Biological evidence suggests decreases of bloodborne virustransmission among NEP clients, with the evidence stronger forhepatitis than HIV; * There is additional evidence that in most cities with NEPs,NEP clients have lower rates of HIV risk behaviors; and * Higher HIV seroconversion rates among IDUs using theMontreal NEP were documented and must be further investigated. Appendix IV Legal Barriers to Federal Funding of Needle Exchange Programs EXCERPTED FROM March 1993 report by General Accounting Office(GAO), titled "NEEDLE EXCHANGE PROGRAMS -- Research SuggestsPromise as an AIDS Prevention Strategy. Since 1988, Congress has passed at least six laws (in additionto the Alcohol, Drug Abuse, and Mental Health Administration(ADAMHA) Reorganization Act of 1992) that contain provisionsprohibiting or restricting use of federal funding for needleexchange programs and activities. These provisions are containedin: the Comprehensive Alcohol Abuse, Drug Abuse, and Mental HealthAmendments Act of 1988; the Health Omnibus Programs Extension of1988; the Ryan White Comprehensive AIDS Resources Emergency Act of1990; and the Departments of Labor, Health and Human Services,and Education, and Related Agencies Appropriations Acts of 1990,1991, and 1993 (the Appropriations Act of 1992 did not containsuch a provision). The Comprehensive Alcohol Abuse, Drug Abuse, and Mental HealthAmendments Act of 1988 required states, as a condition forreceiving ADAMHA block grant funds under title XIX of the PHSAct, to agree that funds would not be used to carry out anyprograms of distributing sterile needles for the hypodermicinjection of any illegal drug or distributing bleach for thepurpose of cleansing needles for such hypodermic injection...." This provision was repealed by the ADAMHA Reorganization Act(1992). The Health Omnibus Programs Extension of 1988 authorizes fundsand programs aimed at combating the AIDS epidemic and preventingits transmission. Among other things, the act authorizes grantsand contracts through the Director of the National Institute ofAllergy and Infectious Diseases to assist public and nonprofitprivate entities in conducting research and training in advanceddiagnostic, prevention, and treatment methods for AIDS. Thesegrants may be used to operate demonstration projects in long-termmonitoring and outpatient treatment of HIV-infected individuals.The act also authorizes funds for AIDS education. Additionally,the Director of the National Institutes of Health is to establishprojects to promote cooperation among public health agencies andwith private entities in research concerned with the diagnosis,prevention, and treatment of A[DS. The act provides further: None of the funds provided under this Act or an amendment madeby this Act shall be used to provide individuals with hypodermicneedles or syringes so that such individuals may use illegaldrugs, unless the Surgeon General of the Public Health Servicedetermines that a demonstration needle exchange program would beeffective in reducing drug abuse and the risk that the publicwill become infected with the etiologic agent for acquired immunedeficiency syndrome." The Ryan White Comprehensive AIDS Resources Emergency Act ofl990 (42 U.S.C.  300ff et seq.) authorizes grants to localitiesdisproportionately affected by the HIV epidemic. The actprohibits use of funds made available under this Act, or anamendment made by this Act . . . to provide individuals withhypodermic needles or syringes so that such individuals may useillegal drugs." The Departments of Labor, Health and Human Services, andEducation, and Related Agencies Appropriations Acts of l990 and1991 contained identical prohibitions regarding needle exchangeprograms (section 520 of P.L. 101-166 and section 512 of P.L.101-517). The provision stated: None of the funds appropriated under this Act shall be used tocarry out any program of distributing sterile needles for thehypodermic injection of any illegal drug unless the President ofthe United States certifies that such programs are effective instopping the spread of HIV and do not encourage the use ofillegal drugs." In contrast, the Departments of Labor, Health and HumanServices, and Education, and Related Agencies Appropriation Actof 1993, states in section 514 of the General Provisions": Notwithstanding any other provision of this Act, no fundsappropriated under this Act shall be used to carry out anyprogram of distributing sterile needles for the hypodermicinjection of any illegal drug unless the Surgeon General of theUnited States determines that such programs are effective inpreventing the spread of HIV and do not encourage the use ofillegal drugs, except that such funds may be used for suchpurposes in furtherance of demonstrations or studies authorizedin the ADAMHA Reorganization Act (P L. 102-321)." CliffSchaffer's Home Page Contents | Feedback | Search DRCNet Library | Schaffer Library | Government Publications WT01-B27-2IA031-000651-B017-90http://206.61.184.43:80/schaffer/GOVPUBS/selcom89.htm 206.61.184.43 19970122121647 text/html 91587HTTP/1.0 200 OKDate: Wednesday, 22-Jan-97 12:16:26 GMTServer: WebSitePro/1.1f (S/N wpo-0deb)Allow-ranges: bytesContent-type: text/htmlLast-modified: Saturday, 28-Dec-96 06:11:05 GMTContent-length: 91369 LEGALIZATION OF ILLICIT DRUGS : IMPACT AND FEASIBILITY 101st Congress COMMITTEE PRINT Ist Session I LEGALIZATION OF ILLICIT DRUGS: IMPACT AND FEASIBILITY (A Review of Recent Hearings) REPORT OF THE SELECT COMMITTEE ON NARCOTICS ABUSE AND CONTROL ONE HUNDRED FIRST CONGRESS FIRST SESSION together with ADDITIONAL VIEWS SCNAC-101-1-2 Printed for the use of the Select Committee on Narcotics Abuse and Control U.S. GOVERNMENT PRINTING OFFICE 96 475 WASHINGTON: 1989 For sale by the Superintendent of Documents, Congressional Sales Office U.S. Government Printing Office, Washington, DC 20402 JACK BROOKS, Texas FORTNEY H. (PETE) STARK, California JAMES H. SCHEUER, New York CARDISS COLLINS, Illinois DANIEL K. AKAKA, Hawaii FRANK J. GUARINI, New Jersey DANTE B. FASCELL, Florida WALTER E. FAUNTROY, District of Columbia WILLIAM J. HUGHES. New Jersey MEL LEVINE, California SOLOMON P. ORTIZ, Texas LAWRENCE J. SMITH, Florida EDOLPHUS "ED" TOWNS, New York JAMES A. TRAFICANT, JR., Ohio KWEISI MFUME, Maryland JOSEPH E. BRENNAN, Maine NITA M. LOWEY, New York SELECT COMMITTEE ON NARCOTICS ABUSE AND CONTROL (101st Congress) CHARLES B. RANGEL, New York, Chairman LAWRENCE COUGHLIN, Pennsylvania BENJAMIN A. GILMAN, New York MICHAEL G. OXLEY, Ohio STAN PARRIS. Virginia F. JAMES SENSENBRENNER, JR., Wisconsin ROBERT K. DORNAN, California TOM LEWIS, Florida JAMES M. INIIOFE, Oklahoma WALLY HERGER, California CHRISTOPT4FR L,HAYS, Connecticut BILL PAXON, New York BILL GRANT, Florida Committee Staff EDWARD H. JURITH, Staff Director ELLioTT A. BROWN, Minority Staff Director (11) Introduction The Select Committee on Narcotics Abuse and Control held a 2day hearing in the 2d session of the 100th Congress to examine the legalization of all illicit narcotics. These informational hearings, entitled "Legalization of Illicit Drugs: Impact and Feasibility," were held in response to public debate that began in early 1988, after the mayor of Baltimore told a Washington, DC meeting of the U.S. Conference of Mayors that existing U.S. drug policy had failed. The mayor suggested legalization and decriminalization as possible approaches to solving the problem. The hearings were designed to consider the seriousness of a variety of legalization proposals that had been offered by drug policy observers who, after the Baltimore mayor's call for a look at legalization, stepped up their own criticisms of U.S. antidrug policy. In effect, they pronounced the symbolic war on drugs lost. Now that the hearings have been completed, and testimony has been studied and restudied, the committee, led by Chairman Charles B. Rangel and Ranking Member Benjamin Gilman, has produced a list of findings resulting from the many hours of testimony. The findings are not for any specific legislative purpose. Instead, they are intended solely as an advisory to any Members of the U.S. Congress and the public as to what the committee believes was established by the proceedings. How the Hearings Evolved In the spring of 1988, Baltimore Mayor Kurt L. Schmoke was speaking to his colleagues at the U.S. Conference of Mayors annual meeting on crime and drugs. During the speech, Mayor Schmoke surprised the gathering when he suggested that elected officials should consider the legalization or the decriminalization of illicit drugs in response to America's escalating drug crisis. In his speech, Mayor Schmoke criticized America's current antidrug approach as a wasteful proposition bent too far toward law enforcement and not far enough toward treatment and rehabilitation of drug addicts. Recalling his days as a prosecuting attorney, Mayor Schmoke cited what he viewed as the miniscule impact of arrests and convictions of drug traffickers and drug users on the overall drug problem. Schmoke's comments were the proverbial "shots heardaround the world," as few, if any, public officials had treaded into such politically explosive waters before on the sensitive narcotics issue. Select Committee Chairman Rangel (D-NY) responded almost immediately to Mayor Schmoke's legalization calls. Chairman Rangel decried the notion as stemming from frustration and exhasperation with the Nation's mushrooming drug crisis. Chairman Rangel contended in interviews and opinion articles that legalization would be a tactical error in the war on drugs that would quite possibly lead to a nation full of drug addicts. Throughout the ensuing months after the hearing was announced, people on both sides of the issue began tangling publicly over the question. An informal national debate had begun, and many looked toward the hearings scheduled by Chairman Rangel as a final commentary on the subject at least for the time being. in calling for the hearings, Chairman Rangel expressed a desire to get to the heart of suggestions being proposed by legalization proponents. Although pro-legalization advocates claimed they were simply calling for a debate on the issue, Chairman Rangel impressed upon them that they should come forward with specific plans and proposals, rather than just debate the subject. Chairman Rangel made a special plea with public officials suggesting legalization or decriminalization to come forward with specifics to satisfy the burden of their responsibility to the American public. Throughout the debate, Chairman Rangel asked legalization advocates a series of questions in order that they might clarify their positions. Among them: (1) has anybody ever considered which narcotic and psychotropic drugs might be legalized? (2) would we allow all drugs to become legally sold and used, or would we select the most abused few, such as cocaine, heroin, and marijuana? (3) who would administer the dosages-the State or the individual? (4) what quantity of drugs would each individual be allowed to get? (5) what about addicts, would we not have to give them more in order to satisfy their craving, or would we give them enough just to whet their appetites? (6) what do we do about those who are experimenting? Do we sell them drugs, too, and encourage them to pick up the habit? (7) furthermore, will the government establish tax- supported facilities to sell these drugs? (8) would we get the supply from the same foreign countries that support our habit now, or would we create our own internal sources? (9) would there be an age limit on purchases, as is the case with alcohol? (10) how many people are projected to become addicts as a result of legalization? (11) what about pilots, railroad engineers, surgeons, police, cross-country truckers and nuclear plant employees who want to use marijuana and cocaine during off-duty hours? (12) what about crack cocaine as a legalized drug? Would we want to legalize something as harmful and as destructive to our youth as this? Legalization: A Recurring Theme The legalization debate seems to rise to the surface when the drug crisis reaches alarming levels, as it has recently. The drug issue eventually moved to the top of the list of Americans' concerns during 1988, given the spate of news stories on the growing influence of the narcotics trade in everyday lives. Throughout the year, there were revelations from the Select Committee on Narcotics and other congressional committees about the suspected involvement of some foreign leaders in the drug trade. Americans were also bombarded by reports of the increased prevalence of deadly, addictive crack cocaine; growing gang involvement in the narcotics trade; a tripling of cocaine imports to the United States in the 1980's; a significant rise in drug- related violence sparked by tension between warring traffickers and by street dealers bent on attention- getting retaliatory tactics. At the time of the hearing, one major news poll revealed that the American public was more concerned about the crisis of illegal drugs than about any other issue- including the budget deficit. The ABC News polling data also indicated that Americans were wary of legalization, Nine out of ten opposed legalizing all drugs and about 50 percent of the respondents feared drug use would rise under legalization. In a Gallup survey released 2 months prior to the hearing, about 75 percent of those surveyed were opposed and nearly 70 percent felt that legalization would aggravate the Nation's drug problem. Through the years, advocates of legalization have favored an end to existing drug laws, often using the end of Prohibition in the 1930's and the end of organized crime's involvement in the illegal liquor trade as an example in making their case. Chairman Rangel, on the other hand, asked of legalization advocates in 1988: What drugs would we legalize? Who would manufacture and distribute them? In what neighborhoods would they be sold and marketed? Would crack cocaine be legalized in a legalization scheme? Would there be age and quantity limits on purchases? How much would we give addicts, enough to satisfy their craving? Other opponents of the legalization theory suggested that in addition to a potential meteoric rise in addictions, there is no guarantee that the black market for drugs would close down, especially if restrictions are placed on purchase quantity and on the quality of various narcotic substances. Overview of the Proceedings Thursday and Friday, September 29 and 30, 1988, were 2 significant days in the 100th Congress regarding the drug issue. In those 2 days, a total of 34 witnesses representing Congress, law enforcement, government, academia, and various drug-related interest groups testified before the Select Committee on Narcotics on legalization. By the time the hearing commenced, the legalization issue had gained such national exposure that the proceedings were carried live over public television and public radio, and was covered by a large contingent of print media. At this point and time in 1988, legalization was a very important topic to many Americans concerned about the worsening drug crisis. In addition to the announced lineup of witnesses, several Members of Congress who do not serve on the Select Committee on Narcotics offered testimony on the subject. Representative Carroll Hubbard (D-KY) and Representative Roy Dyson (D-MD) both told the panel that the Nation's drug crisis had become more than just a problem in urban America. In rural areas served by both those Members, there has been a noticeable increase in narcotics-related problems. Representative Benjamin Cardin (D-MD) warned about the confused messages that would be sent to the youth if drugs were legalized. Representative Kwesi Mfume (D-MD) also outlined his opposition, but said that more attention should be given to demand reduction. Following is a summary of the statement of each witness. The summary is intended to capture the essence of what the witness presented to the panel in his or her opening statement, and is not a verbatim translation of the actual testimony. Findings 1. The ideas and recommendations of pro-legalization forces remain varied and wide ranging. There is no commonly agreed upon approach that should be taken to legalize illicit narcotics. 2. The American public remains largely opposed to the notion of legalizing illicit drugs. 3. There is no data to support the theory that legalizing illicit drugs would result in less crime, more affordable narcotics or decreased drug experimentation, abuse or addiction. 4. There is no agreement on the types of currently illicit drugs that should be considered for legalization. 5. No definitive information exists that would show how America's youth would be affected by legalization, whether positively or negatively. 6. There should be a stepped up effort to look at the expansion of treatment and rehabilitation resources around the country. 7. The Federal war on drugs must devote more resources to curbing drug trafficking and abuse in major U.S. cities. 8. Narcotics law enforcement efforts need to be improved, especially in major U.S. cities) 9. Training for the staff of drug abuse treatment centers needs to be expanded and improved. 10. Federal drug abuse policies need more input from residents of major American cities and not just from governmental leaders,police chiefs, and substance abuse professionals. 11. The burden of proof regarding the benefits of drug legalization must be placed on the advocates of such a policy. Until the proponents of drug legalization can demonstrate that the benefits of such a policy outweigh the risks to health and drug-related violeiiee, drug legalization should be rejected. 12. American schools should continue to convey the message that drug abuse is against the law, harmful to health, and a detriment to optimal academic performance. 13. Employee assistance programs [EAP's] in government and industry must be strengthened to help employees and their families deal effectively with drug abuse, 14. We have not yet begun to fight the war. Consequently, legalization should not be considered an alternative. Summary of Statements by Members of Congress CHAIRMAN CHARLES B. RANGEL (D-NY), SELECT COMMITTEE ON NARCOTICS ABUSE AND CONTROT. Legalization has been widely discussed in academic settings, and on radio and TV talk shows. But this is the first time in a long time the issue has made its way to the Congress. Most of those who have been advocating legalization have been calling for either a debate, a discussion or a consideration. But after an advance reading of some of the testimony, it does not appear that any of the witnesses are truly'advocating legalization. Some are saying legalization ought to be discussed because the war on drugs is being lost with law enforcement. But the Nation has yet to declare a real war on drugs. For 8 years, the Congress has met resistance to antidrug efforts. The Reagan administration has shied away from providing funds to State and local governments so that they can fight the war on drugs. How can we say we have a war on drugs when a total of 2,800 DEA men and women are dedicated to fighting the war on drugs at the Federal level? Some legalization proponents are calling for a greater educational and rehabilitative commitment, but we do not even have a single federally run rehabilitation program. Some say we must do more with drug education, but so far we have only had slogans like "Just Say No" and"Zero Tolerance." No opium or coca leaves are grown in this country, yet the Secretary of State never utters his contempt for the nations where these poisons are grown. Legalization proponents must be prepared to discuss their ideas and recommendations in detail. HON. LAWRENCE COUGHLIN (R-PA), RANKING MINORITY MEMBER, SELECT COMMITTEE: ON NARCOTICS ABUSE AND CONTROL Having a hearing on legalization could send a wrong message to America's young people that drugs are OK. Having a discussion could be a copout in the war on drugs. The hope is that the hearing will not be interpreted as an indication that legalization is being suggested. To quote the attorney general of Pennsylvania, Leroy Zimmerman, "In Philadelphia, over 50 percent of thechild abuse fatalities involved parents who heavily used cocaine. Cheaper, legal cocaine would result in more children dying and more babies being born addicted." HoN. BENJAMIN A. GILMAN (R-NY), SELECT COMMITTEE ON NARCOTICS ABUSE AND CONTROL Drug kingpins are Continuing to cash in on America's insatiable appetite for illicit drugs. These multinational criminal syndicates have built evil empires from the drug trade. The power of the drug trade threatens the authority of governments worldwide. Colombia, for example, is virtually under siege from the traffickers, When the narcotics trade recently offered the Colombian people the money to pay off the nation's foreign debt, the people refused, resisting the financial temptation and opting to take the moral high ground. Those calling for legalization in America are seeking to compromise the same values and morals that remain at stake in Colombia. They are looking to cut a deal with the drug trade. Legalization would not put an end to the international cartels, who would figure out ways to adapt and penetrate the U.S. market. It would not end drug-related crime, as many addicts on the street would continue to commit criminal acts because of impaired judgment and instability from illicit drug use. It is hoped that fresh, new ideas will emerge from the hearings that will make the Nation more effective in the war on drugs. HON. FORTNEY H. (PETE) STARK (D-CA), SELECT COMMITTEE ON NARCOTICS ABUSE AND CONTROL In New York and Oakland, only about 10 percent of the cocaine and heroin addicts are able to be treated for their addictions. In both cities, people seeking drug treatment are required to wait at least 6 months for treatment. Drug-related crime has skyrocketed as a result of a lack of treatment slots. Legalization is not the answer. We must find a way to treat the drug abuser. I am introducing a bill to provide treatment for addicts seeking help. The bill would be financed through the Social Security Programs' disability insurance provisions and utilize a Medicare-like payment principal for outpatient and inpatient services. HoN. JAMES H. SCHEUER(D-NY), SELECT COMMITTEE ON NARCOTICS ABUSE AND CONTROL The ultimate copout in the war on drugs is to stand pat with the current ineffective drug control policy. Pumping more resources into a transparently failed system would be an admission of defeat in the war on drugs. Our system has totally failed. If seizures, arrests, and convictions are going up, then so is violence and addiction. We must end the preoccupation with the criminal justice aspect of the problem and focus more on education and treatment. A new system and a new strategy would involve changing people's behavior. We have successfully changed attitudes and behavior on alcohol and tobacco consumption. The question is, How do we reduce the demand for drugs? We need to examine the costs and benefits of police crackdowns. We have to address a broad spectrum of options and put substantially more resources into those programs that really work. HON. CARDISS COLLINS (D-IL), SELECT COMMITTEE ON NARCOTICS ABUSE AND CONTROL Drugs have been a problem for many years. It is one of the greatest public evils in the United States. The present administration has demonstrated a profound lack of understanding on the drug issue. The First Lady has told us to "Just Say No," while the Presidenthas said no to an effective policy to rapidly eradicate drug crops from society. It seems incontrovertible that the immediate effect of legalization would be rampant drug use. This would occur for at least a short period, as the lion that has been held captive for many years would be let out of the den. Even if legalization were to have the desired effect, it would not work until the lion became accustomed to the new liberties. That could be a very long time, and the Nation could not afford to wait. Legalization could lead to a legal and constitutional quagmire, in which the newly legal rights of individuals must be merged with the obligation to protect society. HON. DANIEL K. AKAKA (D-HI), SELECT COMMITTEE ON NARCOTICS ABUSE AND CONTROL The issue is not whether we ought to sanction the use of drugs, but whether legalization can break the stranglehold that drugs have had on our communities. We have contended that drugs affect all of us, not just users and pushers. That has never been more apparent than it is today. HON. FRANK J. GUARINI (D-NJ), SELECT COMMITTEE ON NARCOTICS ABUSE AND CONTROL Legalization is not the cure for the Nation's drug problems. It is the wrong policy, and it sends the wrong signal. It sends the signal to the drug lords that the Nation has lost, and they have won. It tells America's youth that the U.S. Government says yes to drugs. People should be motivated so that they don't need drugs. They need to be given something to believe in. A sense of purpose and a spirit of idealism need to be renewed in America. Hope and dreams should replace despair and hunger. There should be a dialog on the issue, as it may in the long run contribute to bringing an end to the drug crisis. HoN. DANTE B. FASCELL (D-FL), SELECT COMMITTEE ON NARCOTICS ABUSE AND CONTROL The fight against drugs must focus on interdiction, education, and rehabilitation. We just passed an oninibus drug bill in the House, but no matter how vigorously we attack the problem, we must key on reducing demand. The issue should be discussed, and all views should get a fair hearing. But legalization and decriminalization are not the solutions to the drug problem. A clear connection has been established between crime and drugs. While many individuals commit crimes to get drugs, others who commit crimes are found to have used illicit drugs just prior to the commission of the crime. Legalization will compound the situation because drugs will be easier to obtain. It sends a misguided and contradictory signal. If drugs were legalized, how would we be able to tell our kids to stay off drugs? How can we urge other countries to work with us in interdiction and eradication efforts? We must increase aid to State and local law agencies. Efforts must be concentrated on interdiction, demand reduction, and on rehabilitation and education. HON. WILLIAM J. HUGHES (D-NJ), SELECT COMMITTEE ON NARCOTICS ABUSE AND CONTROL I am very much opposed to legalization. This view comes after reflecting on 24 years as either a prosecutor or a Member of Congress. Where in the entire world has legalization worked? Witnesses would do well to indicate this to the committee in testimony. Also, indicate to the committee how the profits are going to be removed from the drug trade under legalization. The black market will not be eliminated. Policies of recent years are workable if they are followed with the proper commitment. To date, the commitment has not been made in terms of effort and resources. The Nation's strategy is good. Many of the provisions in the omnibus drug bill advance us in the right direction. Once the Nation gets serious about the problem, we will begin to turn the corner. HoN. SOLOMON P. ORTIZ (D-TX), SELECT COMMITTEE ON NARCOTICS ABUSE AND CONTROL Drugs take away the God-given gift of human potential that we all have. Illegal drugs are damaging our children, our communities and our Nation as a whole. None of this would change under legalization. The question of legalization is not one of economics or money or the black market. The position of those who advocate legalization is recognized. But when reasonable people discuss unreasonable proposals, it is a sad commentary on the impact that illegal drugs have had on society. HoN. KWEISI MFUMF (D-MD), SELECT COMMITTEE ON NARCOTICS ABUSE AND CONTROL I am extremely opposed to the concept of legalization. However, it is important that the debate take place. Both sides in the debate agree on one thing: Illicit drugs are tearing our Nation apart. It is estimated that some 23 million Americans use illicit drugs once monthly. A total of 6 million of these people use cocaine. Young people in the United States use illicit drugs more than their counterparts in any other nation of the world. Proponents argue that legalization would remove the profit motive. That may very well be, but drug use is driven by demand and that's where more attention needs to be focused nationally. History shows that drugs made legal for adult consumption cannot be kept out of the hands of children. Under legalization, more children and young people would experiment with drugs, as is the case with alcohol. It has been estimated that about 75 percent of all drug users become addicted. Proponents often point to England and Holland as models for a legalization proposal. But the concept has not worked in either of those two countries. The policy of legalized heroin had to be discontinued in England as the number of heroin users increased and the black market continued to thrive. In Amsterdam, Holland, where marijuana is legal, crime and hard drug use remains a problem. An additional consideration is the threat of babies born to drugaddicted mothers. That probably would be exacerbated under legalization. So would other problems, such as car and train accidents and corruption. The U.S. focus on eliminating the drug problem should expand beyond the one-dimensional effort to stop the supply. More focus should be placed on demand reduction, specifically treatment and rehabilitation. If the United States is fighting a war on drugs, the battlefields are not in Colombia and Bolivia, but rather in our schools and our communities. HON. MICHAEL OXLEY (R-OH), SELECT COMMITTEE ON NARCOTICS ABUSE AND CONTROL The idea of legalization should not even be dignified with a 2-day hearing by the committee. Consideration of the notion of legalization sends a bad message to the rest of the Nation and to the rest of the world. America's teenagers who may be considering experimenting with drugs may see that legalization is being considered and think that it is now OK to use drugs. Legalization is unacceptable in a civilized society. My hope for an outcome to the hearings is that the book on legalization will be closed once and for all. HON. Tom LEWIS (R-FL), SELECT COMMITTEE ON NARCOTICS ABUSE AND CONTROL It is contradictory that those committed to fighting drugs have agreed to give a hearing to the legalization issue. Making drugs more affordable and more available could be detrimental to society. Particularly objectionable is the view of legalization advocates that the government itself can make a profit from the drug trade. Legalizing drug profits and making dealers out of the government and private citizens is appalling. HON. CARROLL HUBBARD, JR. (D-KY) The urban drug problem is well known. But the war on drugs needs to be fought in rural America, as well. The drug problem is acute and serious in outlying areas. In my own congressional district, in western Kentucky, the U.S. Customs Service is aware of the severity of the drug problem. They and the Drug Enforcement Administration know of contraband-carrying flights from Colombia and Mexico that arrive at our rural airports. These small airports are safer for drug dealers than flying into places like New Orleans and Miami. I hope that the Congress will be able to lead the public and our government away from legalization. I hope that those who are proposing legalization would realize that more people would experiment with drugs under Such a plan. In my district, even the schools are not immune to the drug trade. At a grand jury hearing last December in Bowling Green, I testified that there were individuals selling drugs to Western Kentucky University students. My wife and I received death threats as a result of my testimony, in which names were revealed. Like others, I wonder what we can do to increase education about drug abuse, and move as a nation toward a spiritual, rather than chemical, dependence. HON. ROBERT GARCIA (D-NY) Legalization poses dangerous repercussions for the Nation. It cannot be risked. It could not be sustained. The legalization proposal comes at a time when public opinion toward drug abuse is beginning to take a turn for the positive, and after the House has just passed major antidrug legislation to improve on the 1986 antidrug bill. Given the problems we continue to experience with tobacco and alcohol, the risks of legalization are just too great. The biggest concern about legalization is the effect that it would have on America's youth. Legalization would result in the widespread use of drugs, especially among youth. The greatest impact would be felt in minority communities and in the inner city. As long as there are drug users who cannot afford drugs legally, there will be a black market. Unless we legalize all drugs-including crack, PCP, LSD-and unless we make them universally available, there will be crime. Legalization fails to take into account whether special restrictions would have to be placed on pilots, law officers, truck drivers and others in hazardous occupations. It also fails to consider the spread of AIDS through intravenous drug use. HON. Roy DYSON (D-MD) Legalization is a foolhardy and reckless proposal that would have a negative impact on the family. The drug problem has filtered down to rural America. In one of the counties located in my district, the number of drug offenses rose 114 percent from 1986 to 1987. Activists like Timothy Leary, Alan Ginsberg and Jerry Rubin 20 years ago advocated that drug use was okay and should be accepted as a form of escapism from the rough times of the real world. But over the past 20 years, we have seen the personal and financial ruin that drug use brings about. Under legalization, America would become enslaved to drugs. Decriminalization is simply a backdoor way of legalizing narcotics. Legalization would send a bad message. It would increase drug use and addiction. It would result in the expenditure of billions of additional dollars in health care costs and in lost productivity. We must begin teaching our children at an early age about the dangers of harmful drugs. Though education must play a vital role in our antidrug efforts, we must still initiate stiff sanctions against those who grow, use and sell illicit narcotics. HoN. BENJAMIN L. CARDIN (D-MD) In a survey of my Third Congressional District (portions of Baltimore City, Baltimore County and Howard County), 69 percent of the respondents oppose legalization and decriminalization. A war on drugs cannot be won unless the profit is taken out of the drug trade. But decriminalization is not the way to accomplish that. Constituents are saying that our discussions on the national drug debate should also take into account the damage from other harmful substances, such as alcohol and cigarettes. More money should be focused on establishing effective treatment and education programs if a real war on drugs is going to be waged. What is needed is a comprehensive approach combining foreign and domestic policy sensitive to the urgency of interdiction efforts, stricter enforcement, more resources to educate our youth to the dangers of drugs and treatment programs without waiting lists. Summary of Testimony From Thursday, September 29, 1988 MAYOR KURT L, SCHMOKE, BALTIMORE America needs to reexamine its current drug policy. The Nation is spending about $10 billion annually to enforce drug laws that are catching only a fraction of the violators. The drug problem in America is defined in two components: addiction and crime. Law enforcement is unable to resolve either of these two problems and actually has worsened the crime problem. The black market is a result of the manufacture and sale of cocaine being criminalized and profits from drug sale-, are enormous because the substances cannot be obtained legally. Nationwide, there were 750,000 drug arrests in 1987 and Baltimore had 12,000 drug arrests, yet both represent only a fraction of the drug violators. Prisons and jails are packed with drug offenders, One-third of all Federal prisoners are incarcerated on drug offenses. Cigarettes kill hundreds of thousands, but no move has been made to make them illegal. Antismoking campaigns and other Neither PCP nor LSD should be legalized. But a maintenance system involving designated hospitals should be implemented for cocaine and heroin abusers, with the opportunity for abusers to enroll in a treatment program aimed at reducing the intake of either of these drugs down to zero. MAYOR EDWARD I. KOCH OF NEW YORK CITY Mayor Schmoke's proposal to maintain heroin and cocaine addicts is not new. The concept has been tried in Great Britain, and it has failed. Addiction and crime both rose as a result of doctorprescribed drug maintenance in that country. Legally received cocaine could be turned into the derivative crack by mixing in baking soda or some other base in the heating process. This would be a surreptitious way for crack addicts to obtain their fix if cocaine and heroin were legalized and prescribed. Organized crime still, would play a role in drug production and distribution for those who are either underage or cannot get the amount and quality they desire. In Great Britain, 84 percent of the government-registered addicts during that country's heroin maintenance program were discovered to be using other drugs illicitly. With a population of 240 million people and about 6 million regular drug users in that group, drugs still remain unacceptable and drug users remain a sizable minority in the Nation. If legalization were to go into effect, there would be a gradual acceptability that would lead to an increase in users. There is little distinction between decriminalization and legalization, and both are bad ideas that should be opposed. MAYOR DENNIS CALLAHAN OF ANNAPOLIS, MD The most compelling argument for not supporting the notion of legalization comes from the problems our society currently experiences with alcohol. According to the Research Triangle Institute in North Carolina, alcohol abuse costs America about $117 billion annually in medical, property, productivity and other losses. Of this amount, only about $2,5 billion related to law enforcement costs while the rest concerned accidents and other problems associated with the abuse of alcohol. Even marijuana should not be legalized. Advocates for legalizing only this drug claim an overdose of it would only put the user to sleep, but they could be asleep while at the controls of a locomotive or another vehicle. In Alaska, marijuana can be grown legally on private plots and it can be consumed on the premises. A survey of 250,000 high school students done by the Atlanta-based organization, Parents' Resource Institute, indicates that about one in five of those surveyed admitted to smoking marijuana. About one in two of those surveyed in Alaska admitted to smoking marijuana. It appears that the sanctioning of marijuana use has contributed significantly to the much higher usage figure in this State compared to the rest of the Nation. HoN. JACK LAWN, ADMINISTRATOR, U.S. DRUG ENFORCEMENT ADMINISTRATION Drugs are not bad because they are illegal. Instead, drugs are illegal because they are bad, and legalization advocates are missing the point in blaming drug laws for the crime and violence that has resulted from the Nation's drug crisis. The problems that we continue to experience with legalized alcohol use provide strong evidence that legalization would be a bad idea. Greater availability results in greater use and greater abuse. The National Council on Alcoholism reports that one of every three American adults contends that alcohol has brought them family trouble. About 100,000 10- and 11- year-olds reported getting drunk once weekly in 1985, and about 100,000 deaths a year in the United States can be attributed to alcoholism. Of that number, 23,000 are killed on highways and cirrhosis of the liver is the sixthleading cause of death in America. The United States is signatory to the Single Convention on Drugs of 1961, and to the Convention of Psychotropic Drugs of 1971. Both these treaties require the country to establish and maintain effective controls on illicit substances. The sanctity of these treaties and U.S. credibility in the international right against drug abuse would be severely damaged if these substances were legalized. Legalization would adversely affect.young people and the crime rate. The American public has said in recent opinion polls that it opposes legalization. Legalization is a simple answer to a complex problem. The answer in fighting the drug crisis comes from focusing more on demand reduction efforts. ARTHUR C. "CAPPY" EADS, CHAIRMAN OF THE BOARD,NATIONAL DISTRICT ATTORNEYS ASSOCIATION, DISTRICT ATTORNEY, 27TH JUDICIAL CIRCUIT, BELTON, TX The whole notion of legalizing drugs ignores the reason why drugs were made illegal in the first place. They are bad for the user, the community and society as a whole. Drug use often translates into child neglect and abuse, runaways, molestation and other crimes and maladies that result from individuals being under the influence of drugs. It is wrong to assume that funding for enforcement versus funding for treatment and rehabilitation are distinctly different, and that they are competing categories, as both areas must be adequately funded for an effective antidrug strategy. Effective treatment programs are essential in sentencing drug offenders, while sanctions against drug use are critical components of a treatment and prevention strategy. We have yet to implement in the United States, a full- scale attack on the drug problem combining law enforcement, treatment and prevention efforts into an effective strategy. HON. STERLING JOHNSON, JR., SPECIAL NARCOTICS PROSECUTOR, NEW YORK CITY Calls for legalization are borne from frustration with an inadequate response from the executive branch of the government. Unfortunately, not one single piece of antidrug legislation has come from the executive branch of the government. The only major antidrug legislation has come from Congress. It is improbable that heroin addicts could be maintained, as Mayor Schmoke contends. If an addict's habit is maintained at a certain level, over time the level of that addict's habit will rise. The black market would remain in existence under legalization. Further, the matter of whether doctors, pilots and other people in sensitive occupations would be allowed to use legal drugs must be examined closely. Legalized drugs will not stop crime, and the experience with prescribed heroin in Great Britain provides evidence that a downward trend in crime is not necessarily the case of lessened restrictions on drug use. Finally, the concept of free needles, which is supported by Mayor Schmoke and also New York Citv Mayor Koch, is a bad idea. It sends out erroneous signals that conflict with any and all efforts to put an end to the use of harmful illicit drugs. JERALD VAUGHN, EXECUTIVE DIRECTOR, INTERNATIONAL ASSOCIATION OF CHIEFS OF POLICE The IACP represents more than 15,000 top-level law enforcement executives in the United States. The group is unequivocally opposed to drug legalization. Overcrowded jails and prisons and loaded court dockets indicate success, rather than failure, of law enforcement in the battle against illicit drugs. Money is not being wasted on law enforcement, as only 3 percent of all expenditures at the Federal, State and local level involve the civil and criminal justice system. A total of 1.4 percent of Government spending goes toward the provision of law enforcement services, and less than 1 percent of the Federal budget is earmarked for law enforcement. Less than 500,000 law enforcement officers are assigned to protect more than 245 million American citizens, and the lead antidrug agency has just 3,000 officers. The IACP, in conjunction with the Justice Department, the Bureau of Justice Assistance and DEA, called together law enforcement authorities from all levels for five drug strategy sessions in 1987. A major finding from those sessions was that crime could be reduced through cooperative community strategies. This information was produced in manual form. The United States has seen fit to protect Americans from substances that may be harmful through the regulation of the sale and distribution of these products. There has lieen little complaint about the infringement on individual rights in the process. It is understood that these products-meats, milk, prescription drugs, serums and vaccines-are regulated because the manufacturer alone cannot be depended upon to put the interests of the consumer ahead of the interests of profit. Legalization is not a realistic option. At best, it is a last resort when all else has truly failed. WILLIAM CHAMBLISS, PH.D., PROFESSOR, GEORGE WASHINGTON UNIVERSITY The drug trade was estimated at about $1 billion a year 50 years ago in 1938. Today, it is valued at somewhere around $130 billion, which is larger than the gross national product of most nations in the world and many multinational corporations, Drug profits remain essential to the survival of organized crime. Churning out these profits and protecting them involves engendering corruption of law enforcement authorities, and this remains an ongoing goal of organized crime, which remains a hazard of trying to stop the flow and use of drugs by criminalizing it. Because of the level of poverty and other factors, it is impossible to expect a complete end to the drug trade even if police were able to arrest each and every drug pusher tomorrow. The costs of enforcing drug laws outweighs the benefits, A new drug policy should first take into account that marijuana should be considered separately from such substances as cocaine and heroin. States that have decriminalized marijuana have had positive experiences as a result. Although the experiment with prescribed heroin in Great Britain has not been totally successful, it is more successful than what the United States has experienced with criminalized heroin. Both heroin and cocaine should be legalized and dispensed by medical professionals. DR. CHARLES R. SCHUSTER, PH.D., DIRECTOR, NATIONAL INSTITUTE ON DRUG ABUSE NIDA is strongly opposed to the legalization of illicit narcotics. First, there are a series of questions-including the many posed by Chairman Rangel-that must be answered before we can even begin to consider something as complicated as legalization. For example, the pharmacological effects of cocaine differ so that it is impossible to consider how much would be considered enough, or a legal limit. Second, there appears to be an attitude readjustment occurring regarding drug abuse. According to the latest national high school survey on drug abuse, drugs are being seen by this group as more dangerous and there is a reporting of more self-abstention from illicit drug use than in other recent high school surveys. In the 1980 survey, 11 percent of the respondents reported daily marijuana use. The 1986-87 survey indicated that figure had dropped to 3.3 percent. As attitudes among adults and teenagers change, so will behavior. What is also needed are more good treatment programs, since we know that effective treatment works. DR. ARNOLD TREBACH, PH.D., FOUNDER, DRUG POLICY INSTITUTE America would be better off if all drug laws were removed today. Americans are at their best when they negotiate settlements, and at their worst when arguments are pushed to the wall. It is absolutely essential that we remove laws restricting use of marijuana and heroin for medicinal purposes. It is also important to begin viewing drug addicts from a different perspective. We should be more concerned about getting them treatment rather than branding them criminals. This would include some form of maintenance, which is admittedly controversial. There should be limited experimentation with recreational drugs. The 1973 Nixon Commission on Marijuana and Drug Abuse as well as the 1982 report of the National Academy of Sciences suggest an attempt at limited decriminalization or legalization. ADM. JAMES WATKINS, U.S. NAVV (RET.), CHAIRMAN, PRESIDENT'S AIDS COMMISSION An emerging problem stemming from rampant drug abuse is that of AIDS. One of the conduits of the deadly HIV virus that leads to AIDS is contact with an individual who is an abuser of drugs intravenously. The IV drug abusers make up only 25 percent of all AIDS victims, but about 70 percent of heterosexual native citizens have contracted the disease from contact with an intravenous drug abuser. About 70 percent of perinatal AIDS cases involve a parent who is either an IV drug abuser or who has a sexual partner who abuses drugs intravenously. More treatment is needed for IV drug abusers. There are some 1.2 million IV drug abusers in the United States, but only about 148,000 are in some form of treatment at any given time. What is needed is a full-scale effort that addresses both supply and demand. During its time as functioning body, the President's AIDS Commission heard testimony regarding the use of needle exchange programs. The overriding opinion of many black leaders who testified at an inquiry held in New York City is that IV drug abuse is killing the black community. However, these same leaders were opposed to needle exchange programs, and view them as a copout answer to a very serious problem. They are considered the first step to full-fledged legalization. The most important thing that can be done to lick the drug problem is to help young people avoid using drugs in the first place. DR. TOD MIKURIYA, M.D., PSYCHIATRIST, BERKELEY, CA It is good to see an increase in public awareness about the dangers of alcohol and tobacco and about the increasing tendency to classify them as drugs of abuse. While we focus heavily on the problems of drugs like cocaine and crack, very little attention has been paid to the problems caused by poisoning from alcohol and tobacco. We need to move closer to acceptance of these substances as dangerous drugs. A comprehensive proposal regarding drug use in America would encompass the following six points: (1) The removal of product liability exemptions for alcohol. (2) The removal of price supports for tobacco. (3) The establishment of a drug users' cooperative. (4) The legalization of home cultivation of cannabis. (5) The disallowance of searches of citizens' homes without a warrant. (6) A testing of those who test others for drug use. JOHN GUSTAFSON, DEPUTY DIRECTOR, NEW YORK DIVISION OF SUBSTANCE ABUSE SERVICES Our agency oversees about 400 local treatment and prevention programs, with a capacity to treat 46,000 people and to provide counseling services to another 17,000. About 22 percent of New York's population has abused some type of substance within the last 6 months. Half of this number abuses drugs on a regular basis. More than 600,000 people art- considered non-narcotic substance abusers and about 260,000 are narcotics addicts. The social and health consequences of legalization would be too great. Legalization advocates are ignoring the seductive properties of drugs like cocaine, which laboratory tests show leave the user craving for more. While alcohol Prohibition may have been a law enforcement failure, it was a success healthwise. During the 1920's, alcohol-related mental illness declined significantly, but shot back up after the repeal of Prohibition in 1933. From 1917 until 1921, New York State made narcotics available through clinics. But that practice was discontinued after it was discovered that many people were supplementing their legal supply with drugs purchased from the black market. This is a lesson for those considering legalization today. We cannot overlook the impact that legalization would have on health and health care systems. Many illicit drugs lead to chronic health problems for users, and this problem would be pronounced under legalization. STEVEN WISOTSKY, PROFESSOR OF LAW, NOVA UNIVERSITY An independent national commission should be set up to take a fresh look at U.S. drug policy. Such a commission should have two fundamental goals: To reduce drug abuse, and to reduce the social problems stemming from the existence of the black market illicit drug trade. A clear definition should be reached and agreed upon in terms of what "the drug problem" in America is. Isit drug use in general? Is it drug use by children and teenagers? Is it drug use that proves to be injurious to others or to the drug users themselves? Is it the black market and the events associated with that market in terms of crime and violence? Detailed studies and polls should be conducted to determine how drugs should be legalized. This should be along the lines of marketing surveys done to prepare for the sale and distribution of other products. For example, focus groups can be set up, and groups of individuals-such as prison volunteers serving life sentences-can be used for tracking the effects of certain drugs and also for gauging the addictive qualities of narcotics. Among the priorities of drug control should be the protection of children, the protection of the safety and health of the public and the preservation of individual liberties in the process. The real moral high ground in finding a Solution to the drug crisis is one that will allow responsible, competent adults to have the freedom of choice so long as they do not intrude on the rights and privileges of others. No drug control policy should affront the Constitution. DR. MITCHELL ROSENTHAL, M.D., PRESIDENT, PHOENIX HOUSE, NEW YORK, NY Drug legalization would increase drug use and would further aggravate all the destabilizing influences that plague societv today. Addiction to illicit drugs has an enormous impact on the character, behavior and values of the abuser. While just as many cigarette smokers have become dependent on that product, the number of cocaine users, the power of cocaine addiction and the amounts that addicts would use if it were readily available and less expensive is ignored by those pushing legalization. Illicit drug use rapidly diminishes one's ability to lead a normal, productive life. Drug abuse causes self- destructive behavior, lowering the self-esteem and creating the potential for violent, antisocial behavior. Projections that drug use would double or even triple under legalization should be taken seriously. The greatest increase would come from those between the ages of 12 and 21 years old. Projections of drug-related deaths post-legalization range from 100,000 to 500,000. The social order will suffer. Drug users are generally irresponsible people whose deviant behavior ranges from destroying relationships to inability to lead productive work lives to crime. All of these possibilities will be raised with legalized drugs. We can realistically expect to overcome the drug crisis with a shifting public attitude and a stronger effort to enforce drug laws on the street. ETHAN NADELMANN, PH.D., ASSISTANT PROFESSOR, PRINCETON UNIVERSITY Neither legalization nor decriminalization should be considered a surrender. They are the policies that drug dealers fear most. What is legalization? It is a model of analysis. It is a cost benefit analysis of current policies. We have to look at our policy and costs and compare to other systems and figure out which has the most benefits for the money- What is the drug problem? This must be defined before going further. In the 1920's, people did not talk of"the alcohol problem." Instead, they separated the probleminto one of crime--the Al Capone types and their influence on the consumption of alcoholand into another category of alcohol abuse. It was decided that Prohibition was not worth the costs, even if it reduced abuse to a degree. Nevertheless, today the drug problem is not separated as such and "the drug problem" is defined as bothcrime and abuse. We will not be able to move forward until we make the distinction as was made with alcohol in the 1920's. Nearly 20 percent of all State and local resources go to fighting drugs, In Washington, DC, more than half the people in jail are there on drug-related charges, and the figure in New York City is about 40 percent. SUE RUSCHE, NATIONAL DRUG INFORMATION CENTER, FAMILIES IN ACTION It is important that the perspective of families be included in the national debate on legalization. In looking at both the alcohol and cigarette industries they spent more on advertising in the previous year than Congress appropriated to fight the drug crisis. We do not need any more legal industries of this sort amassing large profits in selling their products to our children and to ourselves. Some legalization proponents make the argument that alcohol is legal and is not sold to young people. But alcohol sales to minors are routine as sales clerks fail to ask for identification or look the other way when obviously underage young people make an alcohol purchase. If we cannot expect the alcohol and tobacco industry to prevent sales to minors, then how can we expect a cocaine or opiate industry from doing the same? At the very least, illicit drugs are as harmful as alcohol and tobacco. Fewer people die from them than from alcohol and tobacco because fewer people use them, and fewer people use them because they are illegal. There are 18 million marijuana users compared to 116 million alcohol users; and there are 6 million cocaine users compared to 60 million tobacco users. Alcohol and tobacco are leading killers in the United States. We do not live with alcohol and tobacco, we die with them. It would take two walls like the Vietnam Memorial shrine in Washington, DC to memorialize all those killed by alcohol in a year. It would take 7 to 10 walls to cover all those who die from tobacco. Some say taxes from drugs sales could go toward treatment and education, but no money from the sale of alcohol and tobacco ever goes toward education and treatment for those problems. Legalization would not eliminate profits- They would simply be shifted from the drug traffickers on the street to the people who run legitimate businesses. It is unreasonable to think that drug use would not increase under legalization. A total of 11 States have decriminalized marijuana. From 1972 to 1978, in those States, marijuana use, as a result of the decriminalization, rose 125 percent among young adults, 130 percent among high school seniors, 200 percent among older adults and 240 percent among teenagers. We are beginning to see drug use drop off in this country. We would like to see the Congress create a National Drug Corps similar to the Peace Corps, where parents and children could be trained to give I or 2 years of service fighting drug abuse in their communities. Summary of Testimony From Friday, September 30,1988 DR. DAVID F. MUSTO, M.D., DRUG HISTORIAN, YALE UNIVERSiry Around the turn of the century, drugs such as cocaine, heroin and morphine were legally sold and consumed in the United States, Consumption of these drugs reached a peak around 1890 to 1900. Because of the high rate of consumption and the effects these then-legal narcotics were having on individuals and families, America moved toward enacting laws and controls that have led to today's drug laws. We are currently experiencing our second epidemic with cocaine. The first occurred around the mid 1880's, when this drug was made available in 14 different forms. One could smoke it, rub it on in a salve, inject it, or even sniff it. Cocaine's image as the "All-American tonic" endedaround 1900, when it came to be known as the most dangerous drug in the country. The first congressionally passed legislation regulating cocaine was in 1914, and was called the Harrison Narcotics Act. A key to reducing the demand for drugs will be a changing of the public's attitudes. Those supporting a look-see at legalization must be reminded that there are many things in our society that we do not attempt a look-see because we know in advance it is bad and would lead to worse problems. One of them, for example, is racial discrimination. We ask for laws restricting it because we know it is bad. Ending the drug crisis will be a very gradual thing. It cannot be done in just 2 or 3 years. Drug use in America peaked around 1979, and at that time there was a call for legalization. The argument for legalizing cocaine in the 1970's was that cocaine was a harmless drug unless misused. Today, the argument is that legalizing it will remove the criminal influence. We now see cocaine as bad in itself, and this is a tremendous attitude turnaround that can be used as a foundation for a further decline in cocaine usage. DR. DALE MASI, PROFESSOR, SCHOOL OF SOCIAL WORK AND COMMUNITY PLANNING, UNIVERSITY OF MARYLAND The workplace cannot afford the legalization of illicit drugs. In previous testimony before the Select Committee on Narcotics Abuse and Control, my position was that there was a dramatic need for an increase in industry drug programs in this country. That need is greater today: (1) A majority of illicit drug users are in the workplace. (2) Alcohol is the primary drug of abuse in the workplace. (3) Prescription drugs are the second largest drug of abuse in the workplace. (4) The most recent surveys indicate that 19- to 25-year- olds are the biggest abusers of cocaine, with 25- to 30- year-olds being the second largest group. If cocaine is legalized, it would outdistance both alcohol and prescription drugs as the most abused drug in the workplace. Drug abuse in the workplace translates into escalating health insurance bills. In addition, it contributes to the problems of absenteeism, sick leave, accidents, other rising health costs and more worker compensation claims. More emphasis will have to be placed on companies educating workers about the dangers of drug abuse, as has been the case with tobacco. Few companies, a study by Cook and Harrell shows, have drug education promotion programs. The IBM Corp. stands out as a model for the rest of the industry in the country. Schools of medicine, social work and psychology today rarely require that students take a course in alcohol or drug addiction. Fewer schools of psychology require a course in drug addiction than was the case in 1950. The council on social work education, the accrediting arm for such schools, does not even require that such courses be taught for master's and social work candidates. We need employee assistance programs that concentrate on reaching employees early. New funds are needed for meaningful programs, especially outpatient services. DR. LAWRENCE BROWN, M.D., CLINICAL INSTRUCTOR, DEPARTMENT OF MEDICINE, HARLEM HOSPITAL CENTER AND THE COLLEGE OF PHYSICIANS AND SURGEONS Legalization advocates seem to be motivated by two arguments, One is that current response to the drug crisis has been shamefully inadequate. Number two, legalization appears to represent a reasonable alternative to the current response. Our current policy on drug abuse can be addressed from two angles. We can look at it either from the perspective of those who use drugs, or from the perspective of the consequences of drug use. A most common problem of those admitted to Harlem Hospital for treatment of kidney failure and in need of dialysis is prior drug abuse. Our approach to drug abuse as a nation is that we continue to view it as a stigma, rather than the public health problem that it truly is. It is ridiculous that so little of the educational training involves the study of drug abuse, Professional and health professional schools should be encouraged to try to include drug abuse studies in their curriculums. Existing drug treatment facilities must be improved as well. The least attractive facilities are often allocated for outpatient drug treatment services. An expansion of treatment capability must focus on both quality and quantity. The legalization debate provides the country with an excellent opportunity to reassess Federal drug policy. These discussions will far exceed their potential if they are used to chart a bold new course in responding to America's drug crisis. DAVID BOAZ, VICE PRESIDENT FOR PUBLIC POLICY AFFAIRS, CATO INSTITUTE, WASHINGTON, DC Alcohol did not cause high crime rates in the 1920's. Prohibition of alcohol was the problem. With today's drug crisis, it is not the drugs, but rather the prohibition of these drugs that are causing problems with crime and violence. There are six ways in which drug laws impact negatively on society: (1) Drug laws drive up the price. Users are forced to commit crimes to support their habits. Prohibition pushes some prices as much as 100 times higher than normal. Some experts say half the crime in major cities results from drug prohibition and many policemen will say the same thing if they were free to express themselves honestly. (2) Drug laws cause corruption. The extraordinary profits become an irresistible temptation to policemen. (3) Buyers are forced to come in contact with criminals, unlike those who purchase alcohol without the help of criminal,q because it is no longer illegal. (4) Intense law enforcement forces the creation of stronger, more potent drugs. Crack, for example, is a result of drug prohibition. (5) Civil liberties are abused under drug prohibition. (6) A final negative result of drug prohibition is that it leads to futility. In the case of today's drug crisis, the drug war simply is not working. GLORIA WHITFIELD (RECOVERED DRUG ADDICT), VOCATIONAL REHARILITATION SPECIALIST, REHABILITATION SERVICES ADMINISTRATION) DISTRICT OF COLUMBIA GOVERNMENT, WASHINGTON, DC As a rehabilitation specialist in drug and alcohol abuse, it is frightening to consider what the caseload would be if drugs were legalized. How can anyone with any insight or perception believe that legalizing drugs would be the answer to the drug crisis? If the main reason to legalize drugs is to remove the profit from the criminals and drug traffickers, then it is also saying that the U.S. Government "wants a piece ofthe action." Uncle Sam would become the biggest dope pusherof all time. Generations of young Americans are dying from drug abuse. Minds and motivation are being destroyed. Families are being destroyed. America is being weakened. Legalization could not be accomplished without having to rely on imports. Small, drug-producing countries would soon become superpowers and nations with gross national products inflated by cocaine and heroin production would have access to nuclear warheads. Fraudulent prescriptions are already a big business in the United States. The future for America would be very dim under legalization. Medical schools, laws schools and other institutions of higher learning would not touch students who use drugs, even if they were legal, because it is known that drug users are a detriment to themselves. Under legalization, there would not be enough hospitals to take care of everybody. Doctors and nurses would be in demand like never before. Long lines of dope fiends waiting for a fix or a hit would replace the winos in the streets. Those favoring legalization are being insensitive. Legalization is a further step toward the perpetuation of evil influence over society, rather than a positive step toward resolving some of the criminal problems in society like poverty, insufficient health care, and insufficient education. America should wage a real war against drugs, using any means necessary to prevent it from entering our ports and coming across our borders. RICHARD KAREL, JOURNALIST Across the board legalization is not the answer to the drug crisis that plagues the country today. More dangerous drugs should continue to be prohibited, while less dangerous narcotics be made legally available. During the time that America was under alcohol Prohibition, Great Britain was attacking the alcohol problem through a combination of higher taxes, rationing and limited hours of distribution. When the Volstead Act was repealed, alcohol abuse rose in the United States while Great Britain had already began experiencing a leveling off of alcohol use. Alcohol abuse has remained relatively low since. Recent Studies indicate a decrease in cirrhosis of the liver in the United States despite alcohol being a legal substance. With tobacco, limited restrictions and education have cut sales of this product to minors. Prohibition is neither necessary nor advisable for either of these products. The focus should be on keeping dangerous drugs like crack and PCP away from children, and on preventing clinically controlled drugs from being diverted. This would provide a moral justification for the antidrug activities of law enforcement. PAUL MOORE, DEVELOPMENT DIRECTOR, THE SCOTT NEWMAN CENTER, Los ANGELES, CA The Newman Center unequivocally opposes drug legalization. The more time spent debating the issue, the more credibility it receives. Time should be spent developing more sound policies regarding treatment, rehabilitation and prevention. Society seems to be hooked on hyped miracle solutions that look good but would not work. Drugs, drug abuse and the associated crime are all symptoms of deeply rooted problems in our society. Drugs did not invent poverty, broken homes, latchkey children, greed or the human desire for a quick- 'ix. Drugs did not contribute to the general breakdown of moral and ethical values. Without drugs, these problems would not disappear and with drugs they are pronounced. There is a perception that the drug problem can be sanitized through legalization, giving residents of ghettos and barrios all they want so long as they refrain from committing crimes against the rest of society. The threat of legalization is that it stands to send a whole new set of mixed messages to America's youth. Drugs already have a glamorous image. If drugs were legalized, the gains from national efforts of the past decade-such as a decrease in consumption and a change in attitude of the Nation's youth-would be lost. MARVIN MILLER, MEMBER, BOARD OF DIRECTORS, NORML, WASHINGTON, DC Drugs are a problem and they create a tremendous strain on the Nation's financial resources. It is commonly known that there are no funds available for desperately needed educational and training programs. The underground narcotics trade is being allowed to run rampant and control the marketplace. It controls purity as well. All iirugs are, being treated as if they are the same. A combined total of $10 billion is spent annually on State and Federal antidrug efforts. Most of this expenditure goes for enforcing marijuana possession laws. About 40 percent of all drug arrests relate to marijuana. Of the 40-percent figure, 9 of 10 cases involve simple possession. There are some 50 million marijuana smokers in the United States. They are otherwise law-abiding citizens who pay taxes and are productive. The Nation's $10 billion antidrug budget allots only about 5 percent for education programs. No money exists for national education or treatment programs. NORML has put together a bill to make marijuana available legally as a controlled and regulated substance. An administrative law judge has ruled that marijuana is the most benign substance known to man. It is not addictive. It does not generate violence. The Nation should look at new ways to battle the drug crisis. Not every drug can be legalized, yet at the same time, 50 million marijuana using Americans should not be branded criminals. RAY WHITFIELD (RECOVERED DRUG ADDICT), DRUG ABUSE CONSULTANT, WASHINGTON, DC Legalization is not a positive proposal. It is based on what may be a false assumption, that legalization is a proposal intended to reduce drug abuse. Drug-related murders would not necessarily decrease as a result of legalization. Drug-related murder should take into account drug related death, which is less glamorous, but also a tragic consequence of drug abuse. Many in our society have turned to drug abuse simply because they are hopeless and helpless. Drugs ease the pain of their reality. Many people have lived lives much worse than what the criminal justice system can mete out. The Nation's Government has been duplicitous in dealing with the drug crisis. While Government does not officially sanction drug use, it has pushed policies that contribute to it-such as the lack of antidrug education and treatment centers in ghettos during the 1940's, 1950's and 1960's, and the closing of the only two Federal treatment centers in Lexington, KY and Texas. Drugs generally have not been considered a national problem so long as there was the perception that it was a problem of minoritics and poor whites. Middle and upper income individuals, meanwhile, generally have looked at cocaine as a suitable, nonaddictive drug. Now that cocaine and its negative consequences have reached suburbia, it is a national problem. This is duplicity. Drug abuse is not the root problem. It is a very destructive symptom of other maladies. SENAT0R JOSEPH GALIBER, NEW YORK STATE ASSEMBLY In the last 20 years or so, little or nothing has happened in terms of solving the Nation's drug crisis. I introduced a bill in the State assembly earlier this year to set up a commission to study legalization and decriminalization in the State of New York. America has always been the noble experiment on freedom that other nations around the world have looked to as an example. But now, out of frustration, Americans are beginning to espouse violations of freedoms and civil liberties as the answer to this frustration. Drug trafficking must be eliminated through the legalization of narcotics. Responsible officials are suggesting arming our police with more powerful weapons. They have suggested shooting down suspicious planes. They have called for a doubling of agents and resources, martial law and the death penalty for drug traffickers. We fail to realize the coexistence of two separate problems regarding the Nation's drug crisis. There is drug abuse and there is drug trafficking. It is the trafficking that causes shootouts, raids, deaths and injuries. If all drugs were legalized right now and given away free, then the traffickers would cease coming in immediately. The profit would be gone. Drug abuse would not be eliminated under legalization, but the horrible problems associated with the drug trade would be gone. The questions posed by Chairman Rangel can be answered in the context of the alcohol industry: Question. What narcotics and drugs would be legalized? Answer. All. Question. Who would be allowed to buy these narcotics? Would there be an age limit? Answer. The same limitations as those for purchasing alcohol. Question. Would we sell drugs to people who just want to experiment and encourage them to pick up the habit? Answer. We would sell drugs in the same fashion and with the same restrictions as the selling of alcohol. Question. Where would these drugs be sold? Answer. In the same places and under the same controls as alcohol, Question. Where would we obtain our supply of these legal drugs? Answer. In the same way that there are manufacturers of alcohol. Do you for one minute think the tobacco industry has not put together long ago contingency plans to produce marijuana cigarettes when legalization becomes a reality? Question. Would private industry be allowed to participate in this market? Answer. Of course. In the same way as in alcohol. Question. If drugs would become legal, would we allow pilots, railroad workers and nuclear plant employees to use them? Answer. Do we permit them to use alcohol? Question. If drugs were legalized, how would we back up our argument with our children and youth that drugs are harmful? Answer. In the same way that we do with alcohol. The Volstead Act, which made liquor illegal, created violence, warfare, bloodshed, corruption, illicit dealers and sellers on a sale that was unprecedented until now. Let us not repeat the mistakes of the past by continuing to escalate a war which is totally unnecessary. ADDITIONAL VIEWS OF HON. LARRY SMITH OF FLORIDA Legalization will not alleviate the drug problem. Drugs such as heroin and cocaine destroy both the mind and the body. The new form of cocaine known as crack or rock is highly addictive. Legalizing drugs would be the same as admitting that we, as a people and society, cannot control our actions and prefer self-destruction. Who among us wants the U.S. Government to be in the business of distributing cocaine, heroin, PCP or any other killing, brutalizing substance? Very few people believe that legalized drugs would reduce the impact of drug abuse on society. Such a proposal might eliminate some of the existing criminal element involved in drug trafficking, but it would not stop somebo4y (whether the government, tobacco companies, or pharmaceutical companies) from profiting from the human misery associated with drug use and abuse. If we would not legalize drugs for juveniles (and we would not), a flourishing market would still exist to sell to them illegally. What about crime? If we distribute or make legal drugs that cloud the mind or remove inhibitions, does anyone believe that there will be less crime? Does anyone believe that people who are on only a fixed ration of free or legal drugs will not want more and that someone will sell it to them illegally? And that to pay for those extra" drugs the drug users will notcommit crimes? Congress should do everything it can to eliminate drug trafficking and drug abuse. The task will not be easy, but that does not mean that we cannot try to alleviate this devastating problem. Legalization would be the easy way out, but it would not solve the underlying problem. LARRY SMITH. CliffSchaffer's Home Page WT01-B27-3IA031-000651-B017-121http://206.61.184.43:80/schaffer/GOVPUBS/anahord.htm 206.61.184.43 19970122121706 text/html 2380HTTP/1.0 200 OKDate: Wednesday, 22-Jan-97 12:16:56 GMTServer: WebSitePro/1.1f (S/N wpo-0deb)Allow-ranges: bytesContent-type: text/htmlLast-modified: Saturday, 28-Dec-96 06:16:23 GMTContent-length: 2163 The Anaheim Park Ordinance on drugs The Anaheim Park Ordinance In our continuing effort to bring to you the news on thisissue, we ran across the following item. It seems that the cityof Anaheim, California (Disneyland, USA) decided to pass anordinance banning anyone who had ever been convicted of a drugoffense from visiting a public park. I could go on for hoursdescribing all the reasons this is a really dumb idea, but let itsuffice to say that the ordinance was repealed after the localprobation officers complained that their office was right acrossfrom a park and the ordinance would mean that many of the peoplethey had to deal with would have no place to sit while waitingfor their appointments. Just another outstandingly dumb approach to the drug problem. Excerpts of AN ORDINANCE OF THE CITY OF ANAHEIM 13.08.100 EXCLUSION FROM RUSTIC PARKS .010 No person shall enter or remain in any public park whohas been convicted of unlawful sale, or possession for sale, of any controlled substance (as defined in Health andSafety Code Section 11007), regardless of whether the offenseoccurred in the City of Anaheim or in another jurisdiction. ... .020 No person shall enter or remain in any public park whohas been convicted of unlawful use, possession or being under theinfluence, of any controlled substance (as defined in health andSafety Code Section 11007), if the conviction was based onconduct which occurred, wholly or partly, in any public park,regardless of whether such park is in the City of Anaheim ... CliffSchaffer's Home Page WT01-B27-4IA088-000636-B013-243http://206.61.184.43:80/schaffer/GOVPUBS/solom1.htm 206.61.184.43 19970122101457 text/html 5025HTTP/1.0 200 OKDate: Wednesday, 22-Jan-97 10:14:50 GMTServer: WebSitePro/1.1f (S/N wpo-0deb)Allow-ranges: bytesContent-type: text/htmlLast-modified: Saturday, 28-Dec-96 06:16:48 GMTContent-length: 4808 Drugs and the Internet Contents | Feedback | Search DRCNet Library | Schaffer Library | Miscellaneous Statementson Drug Policy DRUGS AND THE INFORMATION SUPERHIGHWAY [Page: E2111] HON. GERALD B.H. SOLOMON OF NEW YORK in the House of Representatives Thursday, October 6, 1994 Mr. SOLOMON. Mr. Speaker, it was recently brought to myattention that drug legalization advocates are using theelectronic information superhighway to organize the legalizationmovement and share information on drug use. The informationsuperhighway was certainly not created to propagate suchmisinformation and the criminal activity associated with it. Thisuse was brought to my attention by drug legalization opponentswho use the information superhighway everyday in their vocations. Apparently, the National Organization for the Reform ofMarijuana Laws recently entered remarks which I personally madein opposition to drug legalization on this House floor as anexample of `rabid, right-wing prohibitionist propaganda.' BecauseI believe, along with 95 percent of America, that the use ofillicit drugs is wrong, I was singled out as an enemy of drugusers. Well, Mr. Speaker, I am honored. The use of illegal drugs inan anathema to the social and moral fabric of our Nation.President Reagan's and President Bush's `War on Drugs ' waspremised on the belief that society was better served andprotected if our Nation universally and actively opposed druguse. This program worked as planned. The use of cocaine,marijuana, heroin, and most other illegal drugs declined. OurNation's young children and teenagers who grew up during the1980's were told and made aware of the evils and the hardshipsassociated with drug use. I fear for the kind of message thechildren growing up in the 1990's are receiving. Pro-drug use andlegalization messages on the information superhighway throughInternet are wrong. I was appalled to learn that this information even includessuch things as tips on growing marijuana and ways to evade lawenforcement. As more and more Americans jump onto this latesttechnological advancement, more and more citizens will haveaccess to this ill-advised information. For example, theinformation superhighway is now available in most elementary andsecondary schools and in many American homes. Now elementarystudents like my own grandson can obtain valuable informationabout an obscure nation in the South Pacific during a socialstudies class and then flip a screen to discover the glories ofdrug use and criminal activity. Drug legalization advocates from all over the country areusing this universal technology to further their movement anddeceive more Americans. As Congress reviews this very importanttechnology during the 104th Congress, the use of this service bypro-drug organizations and individuals for the propagation ofthis ilk must be addressed. As a nation founded on the freedomsof speech and press, the rights of life, liberty, and the pursuitof happiness must not be trampled by the disease of illegal drugs. Contents | Feedback | Search DRCNet Library | Schaffer Library | Miscellaneous Statementson Drug PolicyWT01-B27-5IA088-000636-B014-18http://206.61.184.43:80/schaffer/GOVPUBS/solom2.htm 206.61.184.43 19970122101508 text/html 7879HTTP/1.0 200 OKDate: Wednesday, 22-Jan-97 10:14:58 GMTServer: WebSitePro/1.1f (S/N wpo-0deb)Allow-ranges: bytesContent-type: text/htmlLast-modified: Saturday, 28-Dec-96 06:16:44 GMTContent-length: 7662 Drug Decriminalization In Holland Has Increased Crime andAddiction Contents | Feedback | Search DRCNet Library | Schaffer Library | Miscellaneous Statementson Drug Policy DRUG DECRIMINALIZATION INHOLLAND HAS INCREASED CRIME AND ADDICTION [Page: E499] HON. GERALD B.H. SOLOMON OF NEW YORK in the House of Representatives Thursday, March 2, 1995 A Note to Readers: If you want some currentinformation, direct from Europe, to compare with Mr. Solomon'sstatements here, take a look at DrugText Europe. Mr. SOLOMON. Mr. Speaker, let me commend to you the followingarticle written by a distinguished doctor and chairman of theInternational Drug Strategy Institute, Eric A. Voth, M.D. Dr.Voth advocates retaining tough drug laws to guard against risingcrime and experimentation. Citing Holland as an example, thelegalization of drugs has resulted in greatly increased crime andaddiction. The only way to combat the increase of drug use inthis country is to stand firm against recent attempt by prodruggroups to mute public awareness. These groups attempt to disguisethe dangers of drug abuse and consequently jeopardize futuregenerations. REPEATING HISTORY'S MISTAKES The international drug policy debate rages regarding decisionswhether to fundamentally change drug policy toward legalizationor decriminalization of drug use, or to remain with restrictivepolicies. If we examine two examples of softening of drug policy,we will find ample reason to continue with restrictive policy. In the mid to late 1970's during the Carter administration,drug policy visibly softened. Several states decriminalizedmarijuana, and in fact Alaska legalized marijuana. Drug policy`specialists' in their infinite wisdom supported the flawedconcept called `responsible use' of drugs as a way that userscould maintain personal use of drugs and avoid the ravages ofaddiction and physical problems. Permissive drug policy originated with organizations like theNational Organization for the Reform of Marijuana Laws. PresidentCarter's drug policy advisor Peter Bourne, as well as others likeArnold Trebach, Mathea Falco, Peter Reuter, Mark Kleiman helpedto press for the lenient policy. Interestingly, during that time the use of marijuana and otherdrugs drastically increased. Use also increased in adolescentsdespite the fact that drugs never become legal or decriminalizedfor that age group. The use of marijuana among high schoolstudents in Oregon during decriminalization was double that ofthe national average. National averages of marijuana use amonghigh school seniors increased to 50% of seniors having used inthe previous year, and 10.7% used daily. Ultimately, parents began to object to the rampant use ofdrugs , especially marijuana, among their children. In the early1980's the `parents' anti-drug movement began. Because of thedrastic failure of lenient drug policies, steady pressure wasexerted at national and local levels for restrictive drugpolicies. A huge national wave of high quality research,grassroots prevention organizations, and tightening of drug lawsbegan. Predictably, the use of drugs among `recreational' usersdropped. High school seniors use of marijuana dropped to 23% ofseniors using within the last year and 2% using on a daily basis.The use among hard addicts did not drop. Strangely the cry hasbeen sounded by some that the drug war did not work. That outcry,however, was almost exclusively being sounded by individuals whofavored legalization or decriminalization back in the 1970's. Thesame individuals who called for soft policy in the earlier eraare calling for the new harm reduction policy today. Hiddenwithin such policy is the intent to gain decriminalization ofdrugs . Holland has decriminalized drugs and tried harm reduction.Since the softening of drug policy there, shootings haveincreased 40%, robberies 62%, and car thefts 62%. This experimentwhich was meant to decrease organized crime has resulted in anincrease in organized crime families from 3 in 1988 to 93 today. The number of registered marijuana addicts has risen 30% andthe number of other addicts has risen 22%. The major difference between today and the 1970's is that theprolegalization effort is more organized and better funded. Themillionaire Richard Dennis from Chicago has given millions to thedrug legalization effort. Billionaire George Soros has given $6million to the Drug Policy Foundation to help seek legalizationof drugs . He created the Open Society Fund which in turn fundsMathea Falco's Drug Strategies organization. Steadily, thesegroups put a happy and acceptable face on the idea of druglegalization or decriminalization. Their public relation campaign has softened public attitudes.Moves such as full page ads in national newspapers suggestingalternatives to drug policy are examples. Organized efforts atsuch ideas as hemp as a fiber alternative, medical marijuana,needle exchanges, therapeutic LSD, and others pervade the media.The Internet is bristling with pro-drug talk groups discussingrecent drug experiences and how and where to obtain drugs . In the face of these facts, the holdovers from the 70's drugpolicy makers are still asking for lenient drug laws. Asubstantial number of today's addicts started their use under thelenient policies of the 1970's. We have had our experience withdecriminalization, and it is time that we recognize it and putthat concept to bed. The only hope for drug policy is a concerted effort of drugprevention which upholds the notion of no drug use, druginterdiction, and drug treatment. If we soften our hold on analready vexing problem, we will lose the war. Contents | Feedback | Search DRCNet Library | Schaffer Library | Miscellaneous Statementson Drug PolicyWT01-B27-6IA086-000618-B048-215http://206.61.184.43:80/schaffer/ACTIVIST/hremail.htm 206.61.184.43 19970122031256 text/html 16623HTTP/1.0 200 OKDate: Wednesday, 22-Jan-97 03:12:49 GMTServer: WebSitePro/1.1f (S/N wpo-0deb)Allow-ranges: bytesContent-type: text/htmlLast-modified: Saturday, 28-Dec-96 07:25:33 GMTContent-length: 16405 E-mail addresses of the House of Representatives UNITED STATES HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES CONSTITUENT ELECTRONIC MAIL SYSTEM We welcome your inquiry to the House of RepresentativesConstituent Electronic Mail System. Currently, fifty Members ofthe U.S. House of Representatives have been assigned publicelectronic mailboxes that may be accessed by their constituents.The nature and character of the incoming electronic mail hasdemonstrated that this capability will be an invaluable source ofinformation on constituent opinion. We are now in the process ofexpanding the project to other Members of Congress, as technical,budgetary and staffing constraints allow. Because this program is intended to provide an additionalvehicle for Members to communicate with their constitutents, itis critical that you include your name and address in your mailmessage, preferably at the top of the message. Most Congressionaloffices have adequate staff resources to respond only to theirconstituents and your inclusion of your full name and mailingaddress will insure that your Member can identify your residencewithin his or her Congressional District. A number of Housecommittees and leadership offices have also been assigned publicelectronic mailboxes. The names and electronic mailbox addressesof these offices are listed below after the information aboutparticipating Representatives. The Document Room of the U.S. House of Representatives hasalso been assigned an electronic public mailbox. The name andelectronic mailbox address of the House Document Room is listedbelow after the information about participating committees. TheHouse Document room distributes House Bills, Resolutions,Reports, Documents, and Public Laws for the 104th Congress. HouseReports, Documents, and Public Laws for the 103rd Congress arealso maintained. The public can obtain 2 copies of up to 12different House documents per day. Customers should include theirtelephone number with their mailing address. All document orderswill be filled and mailed the same day they are received. Formore detailed information or questions, call the Document Room at(202) 225-3456, Monday through Friday, 9 a.m. to 6 p.m. Pleasereview the list of participating Representatives below, and ifthe Congressional District in which you reside is listed, followthe instructions to begin communicating by electronic mail withyour epresentative. If your Representative is not yet on-line,please be patient. U.S. REPRESENTATIVES PARTICIPATING IN THE CONSTITUENTELECTRONIC MAIL SYSTEM. Hon. Joe Barton 6th Congressional District, Texas Rm. 2264 Rayburn House Office Building Washington, DC 20515 BARTON06@HR.HOUSE.GOV Hon. Sherwood Boehlert 23rd Congressional District, New York Rm. 2246 Rayburn House Office Building Washington, DC 20515 BOEHLERT@HR.HOUSE.GOV Hon. Dave Camp 4th Congressional District, Michigan Rm. 137 Cannon House Office Building Washington, DC 20515 DAVECAMP@HR.HOUSE.GOV Hon. Ben Cardin 3rd Congressional District, Maryland Rm. 104 Cannon House Office Building Washington, DC 20515 CARDIN@HR.HOUSE.GOV Hon. John Conyers, Jr. 14th Congressional District, Michigan Rm. 2426 Rayburn House Office Building Washington, DC 20515 JCONYERS@HR.HOUSE.GOV Hon. Peter Defazio 4th Congressional District, Oregon Rm. 2134 Rayburn House Office Building Washington, DC 20515 PDEFAZIO@HR.HOUSE.GOV Hon. Peter Deutsch 20th Congressional District, Florida Rm. 204 Cannon House Office Building Washington, DC 20515 PDEUTSCH@HR.HOUSE.GOV Hon. Jay Dickey 4th Congressional District, Arkansas Rm. 230 Cannon House Office Building Washington, DC 20515 JDICKEY@HR.HOUSE.GOV Hon. Vernon Ehlers 3rd Congressional District, Michigan Rm. 1717 Longworth House Office Building Washington, DC 20515 CONGEHLR@HR.HOUSE.GOV Hon. Eliot Engel 17th Congressional District, New York Rm.1433 Longworth House Office Building Washington, D.C. 20515 ENGELINE@HR.HOUSE.GOV Hon. Anna Eshoo 14th Congressional District, California Rm. 308 Cannon House Office Building Washington, DC 20515 ANNAGRAM@HR.HOUSE.GOV Hon. Harris Fawell 13th Congressional District, Illinois Rm. 2159 Rayburn House Office Building Washington, DC 20515 HFAWELL@HR.HOUSE.GOV Hon. Michael Forbes 1st Congressional District, New York Rm. 502 Cannon House Office Building Washington, DC 20515 MPFORBES@HR.HOUSE.GOV Hon. Bob Franks 7th Congressional District, New Jersey Rm. 429 Cannon House Office Building Washington, DC 20515 FRANKSNJ@HR.HOUSE.GOV Hon. Elizabeth Furse 1st Congressional District, Oregon Rm. 316 Cannon House Office Building Washington, DC 20515 FURSEOR1@HR.HOUSE.GOV Hon. Sam Gejdenson 2nd Congressional District, Connecticut Rm. 2416 Rayburn House Office Building Washington, DC 20515 BOZRAH@HR.HOUSE.GOV Hon. Newt Gingrich 6th Congressional District, Georgia Rm. 2428 Rayburn House Office Building Washington, DC 20515 GEORGIA6@HR.HOUSE.GOV Hon. Bob Goodlatte 6th Congressional District, Virginia Rm. 123 Cannon House Office Building Washington, DC 20515 TALK2BOB@HR.HOUSE.GOV Hon. Jane Harman 36th Congressional District, California Rm. 325 Cannon House Office Building Washington, D.C. 20515 JHARMAN@HR.HOUSE.GOV Hon. Dennis Hastert 14th Congressional District, Illinois Rm. 2453 Rayburn House Office Building Washington, DC 20515 DHASTERT@HR.HOUSE.GOV Hon. Alcee Hastings 23rd Congressional District, Florida Rm. 1039 Longworth House Office Building Washington, D.C. 20515 HASTINGS@HR.HOUSE.GOV Hon. Martin Hoke 10th Congressional District, Ohio Rm. 212 Cannon House Office Building Washington, DC 20515 HOKEMAIL@HR.HOUSE.GOV Hon. Ernest J. Istook, Jr. 5th Congressional District, Oklahoma Rm. 119 Cannon House Office Building Washington, DC 20515 ISTOOK@HR.HOUSE.GOV Hon. Sam Johnson 3rd Congressional District, Texas Rm. 1030 Longworth House Office Building Washington, DC 20515 SAMTX03@HR.HOUSE.GOV Hon. Tom Lantos 12th Congressional District, California Rm. 2217 Rayburn House Office Building Washington, DC 20515 TALK2TOM@HR.HOUSE.GOV Hon. Rick Lazio 2nd Congressional District, New York Rm. 314 Cannon House Office Building Washington, D.C. 20515 LAZIO@HR.HOUSE.GOV Hon. John Linder 4th Congressional District, Georgia Rm. 1318 Longworth House Office Building Washington, D.C. 20515 JLINDER@HR.HOUSE.GOV Hon. Thomas Manton 7th Congressional District, New York Rm. 2235 Rayburn House Office Building Washington, DC 20515 TMANTON@HR.HOUSE.GOV Hon. George Miller 7th Congressional District, California Rm. 2205 Rayburn House Office Building Washington, DC 20515 GMILLER@HR.HOUSE.GOV Hon. Norman Y. Mineta 15th Congressional District, California Rm. 2221 Rayburn House Office Building Washington, D.C. 20515 TELLNORM@HR.HOUSE.GOV Hon. David Minge 2nd Congressional District, Minnesota 1415 Longworth House Office Building Washington, D.C. 20515 DMINGE@HR.HOUSE.GOV Hon. Ed Pastor 2nd Congressional District, Arizona Rm. 223 Cannon House Office Building Washington, DC 20515 EDPASTOR@HR.HOUSE.GOV Hon. Owen Pickett 2nd Congressional District, Virginia Rm. 2430 Rayburn House Office Building Washington, DC 20515 OPICKETT@HR.HOUSE.GOV Hon. Earl Pomeroy North Dakota, At Large Rm. 1533 Longworth House Office Building Washington, DC 20515 EPOMEROY@HR.HOUSE.GOV Hon. Rob Portman 2nd Congressional District, Ohio Rm. 238 Cannon House Office Building Washington, D.C. 20515 PORTMAIL@HR.HOUSE.GOV Hon. Jim Ramstad 3rd Congressional District, Minnesota Rm. 103 Cannon House Office Building Washington, DC 20515 MN03@HR.HOUSE.GOV Hon. Pat Roberts 1st Congressional District, Kansas Rm. 1126 Longworth House Office Building Washington, DC 20515 EMAILPAT@HR.HOUSE.GOV Hon. Charlie Rose 7th Congressional District, North Carolina Rm. 242 Cannon House Office Building Washington, DC 20515 CROSE@HR.HOUSE.GOV Hon. Dan Schaefer 6th Congressional District, Colorado Rm. 2353 Rayburn House Office Building Washington, D.C. 20515 SCHAEFER@HR.HOUSE.GOV Hon. Christopher Shays 4th Congressional District, Connecticut Rm. 1502 Longworth House Office Building Washington, DC 20515 CSHAYS@HR.HOUSE.GOV Hon. David Skaggs 2nd Congressional District, Colorado Rm. 1124 Longworth House Office Building Washington, DC 20515 SKAGGS@HR.HOUSE.GOV Hon. 'Pete' Stark 13th Congressional District, California Rm. 239 Cannon House Office Building Washington, DC 20515 PETEMAIL@HR.HOUSE.GOV Hon. Cliff Stearns 6th Congressional District, Florida Rm. 2352 Rayburn House Office Building Washington, DC 20515 CSTEARNS@HR.HOUSE.GOV Hon. Charles Taylor 11th Congressional District, North Carolina Rm. 231 Cannon House Office Building Washington, DC 20515 CHTAYLOR@HR.HOUSE.GOV Hon. Walter R. Tucker, III 37th Congressional District, California Rm. 419 Cannon House Office Building Washington, DC 20515 TUCKER96@HR.HOUSE.GOV Hon. Robert Walker 16th Congressional District, Pennsylvania Rm. 2369 Rayburn House Office Building Washington, DC 20515 PA16@HR.HOUSE.GOV Hon. Mel Watt 12th Congressional District, North Carolina Rm. 1230 Longworth House Office Building Washington, DC 20515 MELMAIL@HR.HOUSE.GOV Hon. Charles Wilson 2nd Congressional District, Texas Rm. 2256 Rayburn House Office Building Washington, D.C. 20515 CWILSON@HR.HOUSE.GOV Hon. Lynn C. Woolsey 6th Congressional District, California Rm. 439 Cannon House Office Building Washington, D.C. 20515 WOOLSEY@HR.HOUSE.GOV Hon. Dick Zimmer 12th Congressional District, New Jersey Rm. 228 Cannon House Office Building Washington, DC 20515 DZIMMER@HR.HOUSE.GOV INSTRUCTIONS FOR CONSTITUENTS The list above includes the electronic mail addresses ofMembers who are participating in the program. The primary goal ofthis program is to allow Members to better serve their CONSTITUENTS. Inaddition, constituents who communicate with their Representative byelectronic mail should be aware that Members will sometimes respond totheir messages by way of the U.S. Postal Service. This method ofreply will help to insure confidentiality, a concern that is ofutmost importance to the House of Representatives. COMMITTEES OF THE U.S. HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES PARTICIPATING IN THE ELECTRONIC MAIL SYSTEM. Subcommittee on Employer-Employee Relations Committee on Economic and Educational Opportunities Rm. 320 Cannon House Office Building Washington, DC 20515 SLABMGNT@HR.HOUSE.GOV Committee on Resources 1329 Longworth House Office Building Washington, DC 20515 RESOURCE@HR.HOUSE.GOV LEADERSHIP OFFICES OF THE U.S. HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES PARTICIPATING IN THE ELECTRONIC MAIL SYSTEM Democratic Leader's Office H204 U.S. Capitol Washington, D.C. 20515 DEMLDR@HR.HOUSE.GOV ADMINISTRATIVE OFFICES OF THE U.S. HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES PARTICIPATING IN THE ELECTRONIC MAIL SYSTEM House Document Room Rm. B18 Ford House Office Building Washington, D.C. 20515 HDOCS@HR.HOUSE.GOV COMMENTS AND SUGGESTIONS You can send comments about our service to the Constituent Electronic Mail System Comment mailbox, at COMMENTS@HR.HOUSE.GOV We will make every effort to integrate suggestions into forthcoming updates of our system. Please note, that theintended purpose of this mailbox is to support public inquiry aboutthe House Constituent Electronic Mail System. Messages intendedfor Members of Congress should be sent directly to theappropriate Member of Congress at their electronic mail or postaladdress. UPDATES AND ADDITIONAL INFORMATION From time to time, you may want to send another e-mailmessage to CONGRESS@HR.HOUSE.GOV to see the most recent version ofthe list of Members and Committees using Constituent Electronic Mail. The information is also available on the U.S. House ofRepresentatives' Gopher server at GOPHER.HOUSE.GOV from the main menu by selecting House Email Addresses. Theinformation is also available on the U.S. House of Representative's WorldWide Web server at WWW.HOUSE.GOV To learn more about information available electronically fromthe House, send an e-mail message to HOUSEHLP@HR.HOUSE.GOV Thank you again for contacting the House of Representatives' Constituent Electronic Mail System. We are excited about the possibilities that e-mail has to offer, and will be workinghard to bring more Members on-line and to expand our services. *** Last updated on February 14, 1995 (hgs) *** . CliffSchaffer's Home Page WT01-B27-7IA031-000651-B017-143http://206.61.184.43:80/schaffer/GOVPUBS/amhab/ahmenu.htm 206.61.184.43 19970122121727 text/html 3786HTTP/1.0 200 OKDate: Wednesday, 22-Jan-97 12:17:15 GMTServer: WebSitePro/1.1f (S/N wpo-0deb)Allow-ranges: bytesContent-type: text/htmlLast-modified: Saturday, 28-Dec-96 06:28:39 GMTContent-length: 3569 America's Habit Drug Abuse, Drug Trafficking, &Organized Crime Contents | Feedback | Search DRCNet Library | Schaffer Library | Government Publications America's Habit Drug Abuse, Drug Trafficking, & Organized Crime President's Commission on Organized Crime, 1986 Overview of America's Habit Chapter I - The Impact of the DrugTrade Chapter II Portrait of DrugProduction and Use Chapter III Part 1: Drug Trafficking andOrganized Crime Part 2: Marijuana Trafficking Chapter IV Part 1: Federal Drug Strategy:Origins, Evolution, and Current Status Part 2: Federal Drug Abuse Policy:1981-Present Chapter V Drug Enforcement, Policy,and Reducing Drug Demand Chapter VI Part 1: Current Supply Strategies:Analysis and Recommendations Part 2: Interdiction Chapter VII Reducing the Demand forDrugs Chapter VIII Summary ofRecommendations Consultant Paper: Data and AnalysisRequirements for Policy Toward Drug Enforcement and OrganizedCrime Consultant Paper: Recommendationsfor the Regulation of Selected Chemicals and Controlled SubstanceAnalogs Consultant Paper: Part 1: DrugPolicy and Organized Crime Consultant Paper: Part 2: TheImpact of the Legitimate Drug System Consultant Paper: Winning the WarAgainst Drugs Consultant Paper: Preventing DrugAbuse: What Can We Do? Contents | Feedback | Search DRCNet Library | Schaffer Library | Government Publications WT01-B27-8IA088-000636-B012-214http://206.61.184.43:80/schaffer/MISC/sciurin.htm 206.61.184.43 19970122101157 text/html 24270HTTP/1.0 200 OKDate: Wednesday, 22-Jan-97 10:11:44 GMTServer: WebSitePro/1.1f (S/N wpo-0deb)Allow-ranges: bytesContent-type: text/htmlLast-modified: Saturday, 28-Dec-96 05:15:57 GMTContent-length: 24052 Scientific Justification for Urine Testing Contents | Feedback | Search DRCNet Library | Schaffer Library | Miscellaneous Statements on DrugPolicy THE "SCIENTIFIC" JUSTIFICATION FORURINE DRUG TESTING John Morgan, Medical professor and actingChairman of Pharmacology, City University of New York MedicalSchool KANSAS LAW REVIEW, 1988, Vol. 36, pp. 683-697 INTRODUCTION Just as drug use is often ceremonial andritualistic, discussions about those problems have a communal,worshipful character. Individuals have to speak out of strongconviction, and congregational beliefs are strengthened in aconfirmation of faith and shared attitudes. In recent years, theexperiences described above have been characterized by animportant cohesive element, a shared litany. Since 1984, when urine testing of unimpairedcivilian workers began to expand rapidly, its public supportershave used a common set of statements, ideas, and statistics tojustify the imposition of the forced detection and testing ofurine for illegal drugs. The use of this religious language isnot without a purpose. Litany is seldom questioned, nor is thespeaker of litany often called upon to prove the truth of hisstatements, even when they involve things material and notspiritual. I believe this common set of statements used by thosejustifying and selling urine tests is repeated, polished, andaccepted with a minimal offering of proof. In this article, Iwill identify these statements, search for their sources, andexamine their accuracy. II. THE FIRESTONE "STUDY" Obviously, statements concerning the jobperformance of drug users have an impact on their employers. Fromthe earliest days of the debate, a series of statistics aboutdrug-using workers, their poor productivity, and high cost tother company have been presented. In one of the first proceedingsof a meeting directed to the issues of drug abuse in theworkplace, Robert Angarola and Judith Brunton stated: A recent study....suggests that drug users werealmost four times as likely to be involved in a plant accidentand were two and one-half times as likely to be absent from workfor more than a week than employees who did not use drugs. Drugusers were five times as likely to file workers' compensationclaims and they received three times the average level of sickbenefits. (1) Further, the drug users were "repeatedlyinvolved in grievance procedures." The Angarola-Bruntondocument was published in 1984 but they and others had begunmaking the remarks frequently by then In 1987 testimony before the U.S. House ofRepresentatives, by Mark de Bernardo of the United States Chamberof Commerce: 'recreational' drug users are -----2.2 times more likely to request earlydismissal or time off... --3.6 times more likely to injure themselves oranother person in a workplace accident --5.0 times more likely to file a worker'scompensation claim. (3) For at least five years, these statistics andothers like them have been voiced and published by testingadvocates, although seldom with de Bernardo's decimal-pointprecision. Those whom I have quoted seem to be referring to anyuser of illegal drugs and de Bernardo specifically speaks ofrecreational drug user. Yet, one might wonder how these data weregathered, particularly since drug testing in the workplace isproposed to uncover the secret user. How were these usersdescribed by Angarola and de Bernardo (and many others) found andanalyzed? The answer, as is often the case is simple. They werenot. The most important source for dissemination ofthese statistics seems to be the Drug Abuse and AlcoholismNewsletter of Dr. Sidney Cohen. (4) This monthly newsletter iswidely distributed and has been collected and published. In theAugust 1983 newsletter, Cohen discussed a study by the FirestoneTire and Rubber Company and constructed the quotable statementswhich have appeared and reappeared: "Drug users were fivetimes as likely to file a Workers' Compensation claim, and theyreceived three times the average level of sick benefits."(5) The Firestone "Study" has never beenpublished. Thus, Cohen's newsletter seems to be the source of allsuch statements. Yet, Cohen gave no attribution nor sources, andwhen I wrote to him in 1985 he answered that he did not have acopy of the study and suggested I write Firestone. After a numberof calls and queries I received a two page document fromFirestone's Medical Director, E. Gates Morgan. The report apearsto be an in-house newsletter. (6) In it, a Mr. Ed Johnson isinterviewed about the Employer Assistance Program("EAP") at Firestone. There are some statementspertaining to absenteeism, but these are not documented, and moreimportantly, refer only to a few alcoholics who have been servedby the Firestone EAP. The statistics generated (if thesecalculations based on alcoholics were actually made) have nothingto do with drug users, recreational or otherwise. The statistics cited about absenteeism andworkers' compensation claims may have been derived frominterviews with alcoholic workers enrolled in the EAP atFirestone. These people were not identified by urine testing foralcohol, but were referred because they or others perceived thattheir lives were falling apart. They, unlike workers randomlytested for drug use, were dysfunctional. To use them as ajustification for testing unimpaired workers is like demandingthat all workers have mandatory periodic rectal temperaturestaken because a case of tuberculosis was found in the workplace. III. THE RTI STUDY FOR DIMINISHED PRODUCTIVITY The Research Triangle Institute("RTI") of North Carolina issued a report in 1984 thatattempted to calculate the economic cost to society of alcoholand drug abuse and mental illness. (7) It appears to be thesource of the claim that drug abuse costs the United Statesthirty-four billion dollars a year in lost productivity. (8) This claim seems to indicate that somehowindividual worker productivity was assessed by some quantitativemeasure and was noted to be seriously diminished. I often ask mystudents how they would design a study which might quantify theeffect of drug use or abuse on productivity and they generateinteresting ideas and designs. None, however, have ever come upwith anything as creative as the RTI report. The National Institute on Drug Abuse("NIDA") Household Survey is the actual source of theRTI statistics. (9) The RTI analysis itself does not include anystudies about productivity, dor does it document that drug usewas associated with any diminished productivity. The RTI reportrelied on the 1982 version of the Household Survey, whichincluded a question to the adult (older than eighteen years ofage) respondents about daily marijuana use. If the respondentstated that he or she had ever used marijuana daily for twenty orthirty days in one month, this respondent's household income wascompared to another household without a daily user. The userhouseholds were estimated to have a household incomeapproximately twenty-eight percent less than those householdsthat did not have such an interviewee. According to the RTIreport: "These result have been used to calculate thereduced productivity due to daily marijuana use. Once again, theprevalence rates of ever using marijuana daily in the labor forceby age and sex groups....were applied to the number of persons inthe labor force from those groups that experiencedreducedproductivity. This number was multiplied by the expectedproductivity in the workplace and in the household and then bythe impairment rate (27.9 percent) to produce the final value:The loss due to marijuana abuse was estimated at $34.2 billionfor 1980." (10) This somewhat opaque quotation means that the$34 billion "lost" to drug-induced diminishedproductivity and the one-third reduction is productivity of thedrug user come from a very unusual calculation. The homes withdaily users had a reduced household income. Because the dailyusers all were between eighteen and thirty-four years of age, theproportion of the work force represented by them was multipliedby total income expected and this was multiplied by the reductionfigure to generate the $34 billion guess. I have never seen apublished analysis of the RTI study. It is a complex and detaileddocument of one hundred thirty-seven pages whose appendicesnumber nearly one hundred thirty more. Although many of itsassumptions regarding the cost of alcohol and drug abuse arequestionable, I have focused only on the loss of productivityformulation. The reduced income figure itself may beincorrect. It relies upon reports from interviewees that theyused drugs and relies upon their estimates of household income.The income data were grouped in seven broad categories withintervals as broad as $10,000. (11) To generate the reductionfigure with categories like this amounts to measuring centimetersusing a device graduated in meters. The control households weregenerated by selecting a household whose respondent resembled themarijuana use respondent. This meant that the two respondentsresembled each other in regard to age, education, marital status,and occupation. (12) The similarities did not include race,location, or nonchildren resident(s) in the household. Therefore,a twenty-four year-old single black, high school graduatebrick-layer who smokes marijuana and lives with his grandmotherand uncle in Harlem, could have his family income compared to atwenty-four year-old single white, high school graduate,brick-layer living with his parents in an affluent New Jerseysuburb. If the household in Harlem had a lower income, it wouldbe attributed to diminished productivity caused by marijuana use. As the RTI authors noted, however, theassociation between marijuana use and reduced income is notnecessarily causal. (13) Although age and occupation weresimilar, the user may not have concerned himself with income andmay have made other job choices. (14) Moreover, the heavy use ofmarijuana could have been secondary to job loss in a pooreconomy. This manipulation, which assigned lostproductivity to sometime past heavy use of marijuana, did notshow any association with current use of marijuana (or any otherdrug), nor could it show any productivity decrease due to pastuse of any other drug. It also could not show any effect of anydrug use in any person greater than age thirty-five. (15) Thus,according to the study, regular use of marijuana in the past onthe part of females aged twenty-five to thirty-four cost thenation $2,396,000,000. (16) However, marijuana use by femalesgreater than thirty-four, cost the nation nothing. (17) In malesaged twenty to twenty-four, regular marijuana use in the pastwould have cost the economy $6,723,000,000. (18) On this basis,however, any use of cocaine, prescription drugs, or phencyclidine(PCP) by this group cost the nation nothing. Of course, the studyreally does not indicate this because its inadequacy preventedany such calculations. Its inadequacy regarding the marijuanacalculations should be viewed in the same fashion. To stand infront of an audience and say that drug use cost the nation $34billion dollars in decreased productivity is foolish andimproper. Readers may have noted that the past paragraphsfollowed the mode of the RTI report and used income andproductivity as equivalents. I do not believe they areequivalents. Are those who choose to work in positions where theyearn less than the maximum possible less productive? If so, ajudge is less productive than a practicing lawyer, a medicalschool professor is less productive than a practicing physician,a farmer is less productive than a florist, and an elementaryschool teacher is less productive than an owner of a day-carecenter. IV ILLEGAL DRUG USE IS DECLINING In an affidavit filed in support of the federalgovernment's attempt to promote urine testing of certain federalemployees under the President's executive order, J. Michael Walshcharacterized the drug problems in America as pervasive:"Overall, 70.4 million Americans age 12 and over 37% of thepopulation have used marijuana, cocaine or other illicit drugs atleast once in their lifetime. Nineteen percent of the populationage 12 and over 36.8 million have used illicit drugs at leastonce in the past year, and 12 % at least once during the monthprior to being surveyed." (19) Walsh himself later notes that of the 70.4million Americans who have tried an illicit drug at least once intheir lives, for most (sixty two million) that drug wasmarijuana. (20) Many of the proponents of testing use such data.Proponents, however, do not often seem to notice that this samedata reveals that almost fifty percent of those who have everused an illegal drug at least once have not used an illegal drugin the past year and perhaps never will again. (21) The sources of these data are important andinteresting and merit careful attention. There are two importantsurveys funded by the National Institute on Drug Abuse from whichmost of our knowledge about the use of illegal drugs in theUnited States is derived. These surveys are the NationalHousehold Survey and the annual High School Senior Survey. (22)Both surveys, however, were not constructed to signal seriousheavy drug use: "The unique contribution of serveys of thegeneral population lies in their ability to furnish prevalenceestimates that include many forms of drug use that never come tothe attention of medical and legal authorities.....Surveyresponses permit classification of drug-using behavior along acontinuum of involvement, substituting empirical for arbitrarydefinitions of medically or socially pathologic conditions, andemphasizing the typical nature of the phenomenon rather than itsmost dramatic manifestations." (23) These words from the forward to the NationalHousehold Survey published in 1983 seem particularly calm in thelight of the frequent repetition of its glaring numbers to induceemployers and others to join in the zealot's game. The NationalHousehold Survey is a general population survey of householdmembers aged twelve and above and has been conducted every two tothree years since 1971. It excludes individuals ininstitutionalized settings (colleges, prisons, military bases)and, therefore, as conservative. Because each respondent givesgeneral data, it can monitor trends by age and sex and otherdemographic variables. The annual High School Senior Survey obtainsself-reported information from approximately 130 high schools inthe continental United States. Between 16,000 and 18,000 seniorsare surveyed. In addition, the investigators construct a subsample of individuals from each class who are followed, yieldinga longitudinal study. These two surveys do not yield a horriblestory of an American decline into profligate drug use, butexactly the opposite. Table I depicts data from the HouseholdSurvy regarding marijuana use over time. (24) Since 1979, thedata indicate a significant decline in use among the twoimportant youth groups. In the eighteen to twenty-five group, thepercentage of the population that had ever used marijuanadeclined from 68.2% to 60.5% Those who had used marijuana in theyear preceeding the survey declined from 46.9% to 37% and in thelast month preceeding the survey, from 35.4% to 21.9%. (Unable to duplicate Tables, charts, and graphswhich follow in original text) These national trends also are reflected in theHigh School Senior Survey (Table II). (25) The apex of marijuanause in this group also was noted in 1979 and has steadilydeclined. Marijuana use in the month preceeding the survey fellfrom 33.7% to 23.4%. Daily use has steadily declined from 10.3%to 4.0% During the growing clamor to test workingAmericans, interest in marijuana, the most widely-acceptedillegal drug, has declined, and declined significantly. This factis not stressed by those frequently quoting the two surveyinstruments. The use of cocaine shows a different but stillhopeful pattern. Between 1974 and 1985, the lifetime prevalenceof cocaine use increased from 5.4 million users to 22.2 millionusers. (26) However, the trend in the High School Senior Survyshowed a distinct leveling off between 1982 and 1985 with aslight decrease. (27) In 1987, cocaine use by high schoolstudents and young adults dropped twenty percent. (28) Again, aquarter of those reporting cocaine use had not used the drug inthe last year. The decline noted for marijuana has occurred inmost drug categories in the High School Survey including adecline in current and daily use of alcohol. (29) FOOTNOTES 1 Angarola & Brunton, "Substance Abusein the Workplace: Legal Implications for Corporate Actions,"in SUBSTANCE ABUSE IN THE WORKPLACE 35-36 (1984) (hereinafterAngarola & Brunton). 2 id. at 36. 3 "Proficiency Standards for Drug TestingLaboratories: Hearings Before a Subcomm. of the House Comm. onGovernment Operations, 100th Cong., 1stt Sess. 91-92 (1987)(statement of Mark de Bernardo, Special Counsel for DomesticPolicy and Manager of Labor Law. U.S. Chamber of Commerce)[hereinafter Statement of de Bernardo]. 4 See Angarola & Brunton, supra note 1, at35. 5 Cohen, "Drugs in the Workplace," 12DRUG ABUSE & ALCOHOLISM NEWSL. I. I (Aug. 1983). 6 Photocopy sent from E. Gates Morgan to Dr.John Morgan (Nov. 1986) (discussing Firestone "Study")(copy on file at the Kansas Law Review). 7. RESEARCH TRIANGLE INSTITUTE, ECONOMIC COSTSTO SOCIETY OF ALCOHOL AND DRUG ABUSE AND MENTAL ILLNESS: 1980(1984) [hereinafter RTI STUDY]. 8. See Statement of de Bernardo, supra note 3,at 89. "$60 billion is the annual cost to the businesscommunity for drug abuse, a 30 percent increase in only threeyears. One half of that cost is in lost productivity." Id.(emphasis in original). de Bernardo did not cite any source forthis statement. See also Church, "Thinking theUnthinkable," TIMEm May 3, 1988, at 14 (chart). 9. See RTI STUDY, supra note 7, at 67-68(citing NATIONAL INSTITUTE ON DRUG ABUSE HIGHLIGHTS OF THE 1982HOUSEHOLD SURVEY ON DRUG ABUSE (1983) [hereinafter 1982 NATIONALHOUSEHOLD SURVEY]. 10. RTI STUDY, supra note 7, at A-22.Interestingly, the data relied upon showed that adultsthirty-five and older effectively had a zero prevalence rate ofever using marijuana on a daily basis. Id. at A-20. 11. Id. at A-20. 12. Id. at A-9. 13. See id. at A-24. 14. Id. 15. See supra note 10. 16. See RTI STUDY, supra note 7, at 68. 17. Id. 18. Id. 19. Declaration of J. Michael Walsh, Ph.D.,Director of Workplace Initiatives, National Institute on DrugAbuse, at 2, submitted with Department of Justice Memorandum ofSupport for Summary Judgment, American Fed'n of Gov't Employees,Civ.No. 87-1797, 87-2350 (D.D.C. March 1, 1988) [hereinafterDeclaration of J. Michael Walsh, Ph.D.]. 21. id. 22. NATIONAL HOUSEHOLD SURVEY, supra note 9;NATIONAL INSTITUTE ON DRUG ABUSE US DEPT OF HEALTHE AND HUMANSERVICES, NATIONAL TRENDS IN DRUG USE AND RELATED FACTORS AMONGAMERICAN HIGH SCHOOL STUDENTS AND YOUNG ADULTS, 1975-1986[hereinafter HIGH SCHOOL SENIOR SURVEY]. 23. 1982 NATIONAL HOUSEHOLD SURVEY, supra note9, at 1. 24. Kozel & Adams, "Epidemiology ofDrug Abuse: An Overview," 234 SCIENCE 970, (1986)[hereinafter Kozel & Adams] (citing NATIONAL INSTITUTE ONDRUG ABUSE, HIGHLIGHT OF THE 1985 HOUSEHOLD SURVEY ON DRUG ABUSE(Nov. 1986). 25. HIGH SCHOOL SENIOR SURVEY, supra note 22,at 47-50. 26. Kozel & Adams, supra note 24, at 973. 27. HIGH SCHOOL SENIOR SURVEY, supra note 22,at 47-50 28. Statement by Dr. Lloyd D. Johnstone, U.S.Dept. of Health and Human Services News Conference (Jan. 13,1988) (copy on file at the KANSAS LAW REVIEW). Dr. Johnston isone of the principal authors of the High School Senior Survey. 29. Id. Contents | Feedback | Search DRCNet Library | Schaffer Library | Miscellaneous Statements on DrugPolicyWT01-B27-9IA088-000636-B012-248http://206.61.184.43:80/schaffer/MISC/sciurin2.htm 206.61.184.43 19970122101210 text/html 17936HTTP/1.0 200 OKDate: Wednesday, 22-Jan-97 10:11:59 GMTServer: WebSitePro/1.1f (S/N wpo-0deb)Allow-ranges: bytesContent-type: text/htmlLast-modified: Saturday, 28-Dec-96 05:15:50 GMTContent-length: 17718 Scientific Justification for Urine Testing - Part 2 Contents | Feedback | Search DRCNet Library | Schaffer Library | Miscellaneous Statements on DrugPolicy THE 'SCIENTIFIC' JUSTIFICATION FOR URINE DRUGSCREENING Dr. John Morgan KANSAS LAW REVIEW, VOL. 36, 1988, PP. 683-697(PART II) V. INDUSTRIAL ACCIDENTS AND RAILROAD EMPLOYEES Among the fears fueling the drive to test isthe specter of industrial accidents and the likelihood ofintoxicated workers harming other workers and the public. Thelack of data that drug use in industry is harmful or an importantcause of accidents does not deter the frequent attribution ofaccidents to drug use. Nowhere is this discussion more focusedthan on transportation. It is impossible to raise arguments abouttesting without provoking commentary on intoxicated airplanepilots and locomotive engineers. Perhaps the strongest impetus totesting occurred on January 4, 1987, when a Conrail engineer, wholater tested positive for marijuana, ignored a number of warningdevices and pulled his train into the path of an AmtrakMetroliner. (30) Sixteen people were killed. (31) From February 10, 1986 to January 15, 1987,under the auspices of the Federal Railroad Administration("FRA"), most American rail carriers conducted anincident-based testing program. Any train accident or incidentassociated with a fatality, injury, or nontrivial property damageresulted in the testing of all operating personnel--- includingthe train crews, dispatcher, and policemen. One hundredseventy-five events in the year led to the testing of 759employees. (32) Of the 759 employees sampled, 43 tested positivefor controlled substances including alcohol. (33) Of theforty-three positives, the drugs identified were as follows:Alcohol = 9 (1.2%) Illicit drugs = 29 (3.8%) Other controlledsubstances = 14 (1.8%). (34) The FRA made public the specific results onlyfor the alcohol and illicit drug positives, so it was notpossible to know which licit drugs (one assumes obtained byprescription) were identified in the fourteen workers. Of thetwenty-nine (3.8%)positives for illicit drugs, eighteen had onlyTHC carboxylic acid (marijuana metabolite). five had onlybenzoylecgonine (cocaine metabolite) and six had both. (35) Oneindividual who tested positive for methamphetamine also hadtested positive for marijuana and is included in the eighteen.Despite its listing as illicit, methamphetamine is stillavailable in the United States as a licit appetite depressant. The FRA document correctly noted that these"data are not conclusive of alcohol/drug role in industrialaccidents." (36) Indeed, of the twenty-nine, at least sevenhad job classifications which would seem to place them at adistance from operating decisions (track patrolman, ticket taker,conductor, road master). (37) This costly program is not citedfor what appears to be significant evidence that illicit drugs donot play an obvious role in industrial rail accidents.Furthermore, there is no reason to believe that an investigationof other industrial accidents would yield a different picture.VI. MARIJUANA ISSUES Because most workplace positives are due tomarijuana metabolite and most arguments revolve around theputative dangers of off-the-job marijuana use, the details ofcannabinoid testing are important. A review of these details is,however, beyond the scope of this article. (38) However, threepoints involving marijuana that are commonly used to provoketestingt merit some discussion. First, the fat storage andcarry-over effect of marijuana. Second, the airplane simuatortesting study. Finally, the growing potency of domesticallyavailable marijuana. A. Fat Storage and Effect The persistence and storage of THC and othercannainoids after use is subject to much discussion andmisunderstanding. Figure 1 depicts the length of time THC remainsin the plasma after an individual smokes marijuana containingdelta-9-THC (the intoxicating ingredient in marijuana). (39) Thepattern of distribution follows, with some simplification, whatpharmacologists refer to as a two-compartment model. The druginitially enters the blood stream (compartment I) and then israpidly distributed to the deep compartment II, which is most ofthe body. The initial rapidly declining concentration curverepresents the disappearance from the blood stream throughdistribution. (Unable to show Figure 1) Three to four hours after the initialingestion, the concentration of delta-9-THC has fallen below 2-5ng. ml in the blood. (40) This concentration represents theminimal effective concentration. (41) Below this concentration inthe blood, the drug exerts no demonstrable effect. We assume thatlike other drugs, the concentration has fallen so that thecomplementary concentration in the brain and other receptortissue is below the threshold which will produce an effect.However, delta-9-THC remains in the body. The second phase of the disapearance curve isnearly level because its decline is so gradual. This phaserepresents to some degree the drug's redistribution fromcompartment II to compartment I. This slow decline is used tocalculate the terminal half-life (T 1/2) of THC. A lowconcentration, say 1.0 ng ml, will take more than twenty-fourhours to fall to .05 ng / ml. (42) Actually, it probably takeseven more time, but an accurate calculation is difficult becauseof the inability to measure extremely low concentrations. This slow decline is the source of thepopularly-held concept that THC persists in the body's fat. Fromthis another speculation usually follows. The speculation is thatthe THC still is exerting some effect. Current evidence simplysays this is not so. There are many speculations about thelong-lasting effects of THC, but in the nearly thirty years sincedelta-9-THC was discovered, nothing has been verified. The brainactually contains little fat and there is no evidence to supportthe idea that the drug particularly persists there. Frequentusers will carry the drug and its metabolites with them--even tothe workplace--but they also will carry some amount oforganochlorine pesticide, lead, and the hydrocarbon solvent usedat work. We might better and more profitably examine the longterm effects of these substances. B. Airplane Simulator Testing In Private Pilots To justify the intrusion of testing, studiespurporting to show a lasting effect of marijuana have been widelycited. Marijuana users and their defenders frequently state thatmarijuana use-off-the-job is no different than alcohol useoff-the -job. The effects of marijuana and the selectiveimpairment generated by its use dissipate within three to fourhours and generally correlate with the decline in serumtetrahydrocannabinol (THC) to levels of less than 5 ng / ml. (43)The studies of Herbert Moskowitz and Robert Petersen thatindicate impairment of some psychomotor function for up to eighthours (44) are puzzling and not entirely scientificallyacceptable. However, assuming they are correct, they still do notindicate that off-the-job drug use causes on-the-job impairment.A study by Dr. Jerome Yesavage is another matter. (45) This studyusing flight simulators has been widely discussed and previouslyused as a strategic justification for urine testing. (46) Thestudy identifies significant impairment twenty-four hours aftersmoking marijuana in a group of volunteer pilots who performed ona flight simulator. (47) These conclusions are striking and havenot yet been replicated or confirmed. After careful analysis of the article, I thinkthat the experimental methodology was so flawed that the studydoes not prove impairment at twenty-four hours. (48) Briefly, thestudy was uncontrolled and, therefore, scientifically unreliable.The subjects were studied with no placebos or attempts to concealthe active treatment. Subject efforts at a control run werecompared to their efforts after they, and the investigators, knewthat they had consumed an active drug. This violates elementaryrules of study design and constitutes a serious flaw in thestudy. The study also fails to deal with the characteristics andprior drug experience of the volunteers, the issues of repeatedtesting and training upon the simulator, and the generation of alarge number of simulator-generated measures some of which mayhave varied by chance. (49) C. THC Content (Potency) of DomesticallyAvailable Marijuana A commonly stated and widely accepted belief isthat marijuana's past record of causing minimal harm to users wasbased on the use of low-grade material. Many plants, particularlythose growing wild, have a low content of delta-9-THC. (50) It isoften stated that the THC content has increased greatly. In fact,critics and proponents of testing sound like dealers extollingthe power of Hawaiian and California grown material. "Aglance at the percentages of THC in confiscated marijuanawould....[indicate] that marijuana is now as strong as hashish inTHC content," (51) This particular claim also has beendifficult to document. However, NIDA has funded a THC analysisprogram at the University of Mississippi since 1980. Under theprogram, the University analyzes plants received chiefly by lawenforcement agents, both federal (Drug Enforcement Agency) and avariety of city and state criminal agencies. The accompanyingtable lists the findings since 1980. (52) Year # of samples Mean THC% 1980 35 4.64 1981129 2.92 1982 148 2.57 1983 387 1.98 1984 330 2.55 1985 842 2.211986 800 1.86 1987 (Sept 100 2.5 The sampling is irregular but chiefly reflectsmaterial seized by these agencies from the back yards, frms, andeven indoor hydroponic systems of growers. The most suspect year,1980, of course, is the only one in which the mean percentageexceeded three percent. There has been no real change andcertainly no real increase in marijuana potency in the 1980's. Interestingly, significant variation in THCcontent of marijuana does not necessarily result in greaterdelivery. In a study of the delivery of THC into smoke understandard conditions, 16-19% of the THC content of a cigaretteactually appeared in the smoke. (53) Increasing the THC contentunder some circumstances did not influence delivery. For example,cigarettes carefully prepared to contain 1.6% THC and 3.1% THCdelivered the same amount of THC in smoke. (54) VII. CONCLUSIONS This article has examined a series ofrationales for the imposition of urine testing onto unimpairedAmerican workers. I have tried in good faith to examine thearguments from the perspective of empirical studies andappropriate analysis. I have accused, not subtly, the proponentsof testing of zealotry and improper use of statistics and data tosupport a moral stance. To some degree my bias as a civillibertarian has affected my evaluation. In the long run, however,the truth about this conflict will depend upon ideas and data andnot biography. Urine testing is a wrong-headed intervention intothe lives of some by those with power over them. It is not asearch for illness but a search for deviance conducted in anun-American manner. Drug abuse is a specter of the 1980'sresembling the specter of domestic communism of the 1950's. Underthe guise of helping, the proponents of testing are creatingenormous harm. Urine testing is simply drug abuse abuse. FOOTNOTES 30. Se N.Y. Times, Jan. 5, 1987, at 1, col. 2. 31. Id. 32. Federal Railroad Administration, U.S. Dep'tof Transp., Summary of Post-Accident Testing Events Feb. 10, 1986through Jan. 15, 1987 (summarized in 53 Fed. Reg. 46,641 (summaryincludes data through Dec. 31 1987). 33. Id. 34. Id. 35. Id. 36. Id. 37. Id. 38. See generally Morgan, "MarijuanaMetabolism in the Context of Urine Testing for CannabinoidMetabolite, 20 J. PSYCHOACTIVE DRUGS 107 (1988). [Editor's Note:See Miike & Hewitt, "Accuracy and Reliability of UrineDrug Tests. 36 KAN. L. REV. 641 (1988). 39. Id. at 109 (reprinted with permission). 40. Augerell, Lindgren, Ohlsson, Gillespie,& Hollister, "Recent Studies on the Pharmacokinetics ofDelta-1-Tetrahydrocannabinol in Man," in THE CANNABINOIDS:CHEMICAL, PHARMACOLOGIC, AND THERAPEUTIC ASPECTS 167 (1984). 41. See id. at 179. 42. Cf. E. Johansson, Prolonged EliminationHalf-life in Plasma of delta-9-Tetrahydrocannabinol in ChronicMarihuana Users 41 (abstract of presentation given Sept 4, 1987 (copy on file at the Kansas Law Review). 43. See supra notes 40-42 and accompanyingtest. 44. H. Moskowitz & R. Petersen, MARIJUANAAND DRIVING -- A REVIEW (1980). 45. Yesavage, Leirer, Denari & Hollister,"Carry-Over Effects of Marijuana Intoxication on AircraftPilot Performance: A Preliminary Report," 142 AM. J.PSYCHIATRY 1325 (1985) [hereinafter Yesavage]. 46. See, e.g., Declaration of Dr. Marian W.Fischman Associate Professor, Department of Psychiatry andBehavioral Sciences, Johns Hopkins University School of Medicine,at 2, submitted with Department of Justice Memorandum of Law inSupport of Motion for Summary Judgment, American Fed'n of Gov'tEmployees v. Dole, Civ. No. 87-1815 GAG (D.D.C. Sept. 30, 1987);Declaration of J. Michael Walsh, Ph.D., supra note 19, at 6. 47. Yesavage, supra note 45, at 1328. 48. See Morgan, "Carry-Over Effects ofMarijuana," 144 AM. J. PSYCHIATRY 259, 259-60 (1987) (letterto the editor); see also Greenblatt, "Marijuana Test Failsin Scientific Design," N.Y. Times, Apr. 30, 1986 at A-30col. 4 (letter to the editor). 49. Whenever one measures many variables usinga five percent level of significance, one in twenty will vary bychance. 50. See Mikurya & Aldrich, "Cannabis1988 Old Drug, New Dangers, The Potency Question," 20 J.PSYCHOACTIVE DRUGS 47, 52 (1988). 51. S. Cohen, THE SUBSTANCE ABUSEPROBLEMS,VOLUME TWO, NEW ISSUES FOR THE 1980's 65 (1985) (citingNATIONAL RESEARCH COUNCIL, AN ANALYSIS OF MARIJUANA POLICY(1982). 52. Telephone interview with Carol Abel,University of Mississippi Research Institute (Feb. 4, 1988). 53. Davis, McDaniel, Cadwell & Moody,"Some Smoking Characteristics of Marijuana Cigarettes,"in THE CANNABINOIDS: CHEMICAL, PHARMACOLOGIC, AND THERAPEUTICASPECTS 102 (1984). 54. Id. Contents | Feedback | Search DRCNet Library | Schaffer Library | Miscellaneous Statements on DrugPolicyWT01-B27-10IA088-000636-B012-292http://206.61.184.43:80/schaffer/MISC/testneg.htm 206.61.184.43 19970122101236 text/html 11548HTTP/1.0 200 OKDate: Wednesday, 22-Jan-97 10:12:23 GMTServer: WebSitePro/1.1f (S/N wpo-0deb)Allow-ranges: bytesContent-type: text/htmlLast-modified: Saturday, 28-Dec-96 05:15:36 GMTContent-length: 11330 Test Negative A look at the "evidence"justifying illicit-drug tests Contents | Feedback | Search DRCNet Library | Schaffer Library | Miscellaneous Statements on DrugPolicy Test Negative A look at the"evidence" justifying illicit-drug tests SCIENCE and the CITIZEN SCIENTIFIC AMERICAN March 1990, p. 18 John Morgan More than eight million working Americans hadtheir urine tested for illegal drugs in 1989, and as many as 15million will undergo such testing this year, according to theNational Institute on Drug Abuse (NIDA). The fraction ofcompanies that subject employees or job applicants to testing hasjumped from 21 percent in 1986 to more than 50 percent last year,according to the American Management Association. The trend seemslikely to continue: a majority of the respondents to a recentGallup poll favored random drug testing of all workers. What underlies the broad acceptance of apractice that conservative Supreme Court Justice Antonin Scaliahas called a "needless indignity?" One factor may bethe alarming statistics cited by testing advocates to demonstratethe high costs of drug abuse. Examination of some of these claimssuggests that they do not always accurately reflect the researchon which they are based. In fact, some of the data could be usedto "prove" that drug use has negligible or evenbeneficial effects. Consider these examples. Last year President George Bush declared that"drug abuse among American workers costs businesses anywherefrom $60 billion to $100 billion a year in lost productivity,absenteeism, drug-related accidents, medical claims andtheft." Variants of this statistic abound in discussionsabout drug abuse and are commonly repeated without qualificationby the media. Yet all such claims derive from a single study, onethat "was based upon assumptions which need additionalvalidation," according to an assessment last year by NIDA,the chief federal agency sponsoring research on substance abuse. The study grew out of a survey of some 3,700households by the Research Triangle Institute (RTI) in 1982. TheRTI group found that the average reported income of householdswith at least one person who admitted to having ever usedmarijuana daily (20 days or more in a 30-day period) was 28percent lower than the average reported income of otherwisesimilar households. The RTI researchers defined that differencein income as "loss due to marijuana use"; the totalloss, when extrapolated to the general population, came to $26billion. The researchers then added on the estimated costs ofdrug-related crime, health problems and accidents to arrive at agrand total of $47 billion for "costs to society of drugabuse." This figure-- "adjusted" to account forinflation and population increase -- represents the basis ofBush's statement, according to Henrick J. Harwood, who headed theRTI study and is now in the White House drug-policy office. The RTI survey included questions on currentdrug use (at least once within the past month). Yet according toHarwood there was no significant difference between the income ofhouseholds with current users of any illegal drug -- includingmarijuana, cocaine and heroin -- and the income of otherwisesimilar households. Does this mean that current use of even harddrugs -- as opposed to perhaps a single marijuana binge in thedistant past -- does not lead to any "loss"? "Youwould be on safe ground saying that," Harwood replies. Officials of the U.S. Chamber of Commerce havetestified before Congress and at national conferences on drugabuse that employees who use drugs are "3.6 times morelikely to injure themselves or another person in a workplaceaccident....[and] five times more likely to file a workers'compensation claim." The pharmaceutical giant Hoffmann-LaRoche, which is leading an antidrug campaign among businesses(and has a big share of the drug-testing market), alsopromulgates this claim in "educational" literature. In fact, the study on which the claim is basedhas "nothing to do with [illegal] drug users,"according to a 1988 article in the University of Kansas LawReview by John P. Morgan of the City University of New YorkMedical School. Morgan, an authority on drug testing, has tracedthe Chamber of Commerce claim to an informal study by theFirestone Tire and Rubber Company of employees undergoingtreatment for alcholism. In an interview with SCIENTIFIC AMERICAN, J.Michael Walsh, who heads NIDA's applied research division and isa strong supporter of workplace testing, singled out two studiesthat he said showed drug users are more likely to causeaccidents, miss work and use health benefits. The studies weredone at two utilities: the Utah Power and Light Company and theGeorgia Power Company. The 12 workers in Utah and the 116 inGeorgia who served as the primary research subjects were tested"for cause": they had either been involved inaccidents, exhibited other "problem" behavior(commonly, high absenteeism) or submitted to treatment foralcoholism or drug abuse. Critics point out that it should not beterribly surprising if these subjects exhibited the cited traitsat a higher-than-average rate. What may be surprising is that, according to areport published by NIDA last year, Utah Power and Light actually"spent $215 per employee per year less on the drug abusersin health insurance benefits than on the control group."Those who tested positive at Georgia Power had a higher promotionrate than the company average. Moreover, Georgia workers testingpositive only for marijuana (about 35 percent of all thepositives) exhibited absenteeism some 30 percent lower thanaverage. Nationwide, Morgan says, marijuana accounts for up to 90percent of all positive findings, both because it is by far themost widely used illegal drug and because it persists in urinefor up to a month (compared with two days for most other drugs). Perhaps the study most publicized of late bytesting proponents involves employees of the U.S. Postal Service.The service tested 4,396 new hirees in 1987 and 1988 and --keeping the test results confidential -- tracked the performanceof positives (9 percent of the total) and negatives. By lastSeptember, the service reported, 15.4 percent of the positivesand 10.5 of the negatives had been fired: the positives had alsotaken an average of six more sick days a year. This study may be distorted by more subtlebiases --related to race, age or gender --than those displayed bythe utility studies, according to Theodore H. Rosen, apsychologist and a consultant on drug testing. Indeed, Jacques L.Normand, who headed the study, acknowledges that minority postalworkers tested positive at a much higher rate than nonminorityworkers and that previous studies have shown minorities to havehigher absenteeism. Morgan points out, moreover, that the PostalService study (like all those cited above) has not been publishedin a peer-reviewed journal. In fact, he says, only one studycomparing the work of drug-test positives and negatives haspassed peer review. Last year, in the JOURNAL OF GENERAL INTERNALMEDICINE, David C. Parish of the Mercer University School ofMedicine in Georgia reported on a study of 180 hospitalemployees, 22 of whom had tested positive after being hired.Parish examined supervisor evaluations and other indexes andfound "no difference between drug-positive and drug-negativeemployees" at the end of one year. He noted, however, that11 of the negatives had been fired during that period and none ofthe positives. Proponents of testing often imply that drug useamong workers is growing. A Hoffman-La Roche brochure, forexample, quotes Walsh pronouncing that "the problem of drugabuse has become so widespread in America that every company mustassume that its employees will eventually be faced with asubstance abuse problem." Yet in 1989 NIDA reported thatillegal drug use has been decreasing for 10 years and that thedecline has accelerated over the last five years. From 1985 to1988 the number of current users (at least once in the lastmonth) of marijuana and cocaine dropped by 33 and 50 percent,respectively. To be sure, a subset of this group of currentusers is increasing: NIDA estimated that from 1985 to 1988 thenumber of people using cocaine at least once a week rose from647,000 to 862,000 and daily users increased from 246,000 to292,000. NIDA found that addiction to cocaine (including"crack") is particularly severe among the unemployed --who are beyond the reach of workplace testing. Clearly, the U.S. has a drug-abuse problem.Could it be that neither indiscriminate testing of workers --which could cost upward of $500 million this year -- nor thedissemination of alarmist information by testing advocates ishelping to resolve that problem? Contents | Feedback | Search DRCNet Library | Schaffer Library | Miscellaneous Statements on DrugPolicyWT01-B27-11IA088-000636-B012-319http://206.61.184.43:80/schaffer/MISC/forensic.htm 206.61.184.43 19970122101249 text/html 5820HTTP/1.0 200 OKDate: Wednesday, 22-Jan-97 10:12:42 GMTServer: WebSitePro/1.1f (S/N wpo-0deb)Allow-ranges: bytesContent-type: text/htmlLast-modified: Saturday, 28-Dec-96 05:15:26 GMTContent-length: 5603 Federal Panel Says Value of Workplace Drug TestingUnproven Contents | Feedback | Search DRCNet Library | Schaffer Library | Miscellaneous Statements on DrugPolicy FED PANEL SAYS VALUE OF WORKPLACE DRUG TESTINGUNPROVEN Forensic Drug Abuse Advisor Vo. 7 (1) January1995, p.6 Subcommittees of the National Research Counciland the Institute of Medicine have completed a study assessingthe extent of drug use in the workplace, and the impact of drugabuse on job performance. Drug testers may be a little upset bysome of its conclusions, since the study raises importantquestions about the scientific rationale for workplace drugtesting. Workplace drug testing is a very big business.The study group estimates that the United States is spending atleast 1.2 billion dollars per year on drug testing (24 milliontests per year at an estimated total cost of $50 each), notcounting any money spent on time lost from work attributable tothe testing process. Statistical evidence from a variety ofsources suggest that, except for alcohol, drug use in theworkplace has been steadily decreasing for the last 15 years (thepercentage of heavy drinkers in the population appears to beunchanged). In 1990, the overall rate for workers admitting tohaving used an illicit drug some time during the preceding monthwas 7%. However, today in some areas, such as the air transportand nuclear industry, the rate is well below 1%. No study has ever demonstrated that thisdecrease is due to the work testing program, nor has it beendemonstrated with any certainty that, in commonly used doses, anyof the widely abused drugs significantly impacts on jobperformance. There is, however, good evidence that drug users aremore likely to be absent from work, and there is also goodevidence that alcohol abuse is associated with increasedoccupational injuries. The committee felt that much of the datareviewed for its report was flawed, or at least of dubiousstatistical power, and they concluded that "the preventiveeffects of drug-testing programs have never been adequatelydemonstrated." As Craig Zwerling pointed out in a recentissue of JAMA, Journal of the American Medical Association (272[18] 1467-1468), the conclusion reached by the study group wasthe same as that reached in a 1992 study, namely that there was"almost no credible warrant of effectiveness." Zwerling also went on to note that "alarge industry of drug testers has arisen with a financial stakein expanding the market for workplace drug tests. The industryincludes the companies that manufacture the equipment andchemicals used in drug testing, the laboratories that carry outthe test, the companies that collect the urine specimens, themedical review officers (MRO's) who review the test results, andthe consultants who advise companies on drug testing." The study was sponsored by NIDA (NationalInstitute on Drug Abuse) and the results have been published inbook form by the National Academy Press. The full title is"Under the Influence? Drugs and the American WorkForce," Normand, J, Lempert, R, and O'Brien, C eds.(Committee on Drug Use in the Workplace, National ResearchCouncil / Institute of Medicine). 321 pp $39.95, ISBN0-309-04885-0 COMMENT: This book should be required reading.Somebody has to do the studies to prove that the whole processworks. But who is going to put up the money to do the studies?NIDA has just as big a vested interest in maintaining the statusquo as the drug testing companies, and the reagent manufacturers.In fact, it may be too late to ever do the studies that wouldjustify the money and effort being spent on these programs. Contents | Feedback | Search DRCNet Library | Schaffer Library | Miscellaneous Statements on DrugPolicyWT01-B27-12IA088-000636-B012-352http://206.61.184.43:80/schaffer/MISC/testscam.htm 206.61.184.43 19970122101301 text/html 13279HTTP/1.0 200 OKDate: Wednesday, 22-Jan-97 10:12:51 GMTServer: WebSitePro/1.1f (S/N wpo-0deb)Allow-ranges: bytesContent-type: text/htmlLast-modified: Saturday, 28-Dec-96 05:15:41 GMTContent-length: 13061 The Drug Test Scam Contents | Feedback | Search DRCNet Library | Schaffer Library | Miscellaneous Statements on DrugPolicy THE DRUG - TEST SCAM by Ian Williams Goddard Alas, the sorry sound of a Big Lie crashing: The stereotype of the lazy, illicit-drug usingbum promotes an acceptance of claims that il- licit drug useimposes heavy economic burdens upon businesses and society, andconsequently that universal drug testing is the most cost-effective reaction to this unprofitable burden. But how true are these claims, which seem toenjoy the support of reputable scientific re- search?Underexamination these claims are proven to be nothing more than agreedy scam designed to expand the bureaucratic empires andprofits of a few by sacrificing the most fundamental liberties ofthe many. ILLICIT DRUG USERS WORK MORE Contradicting the "unproductive druguser" stereotype, while the National Household Sur- vey onDrug Abuse [1] finds that 71% of il- licit-drug users areemployed, U.S. Depart- ment of Labor statistics [2] show thatonly 65% of those 20 and over are employed. From the data we canextrapolate that the aver- age illicit-drug user is more likelyto be employed than the average person [3]. The evidence suggests that, while not favor-able to police-state mega profits, the most true-to-lifestereotype could be: "The pro- ductive and motivated druguser." Why might this be so? It's possible that thedesire for the reward of drug intoxication acts as astrongerincentive to work more (in an effort to earn the money necessaryto purchase the drug-reward) than non-drug rewards act as anincentive for nonusers to work more. Such is Economics 101: thehigher the reward, the higher the output to acquire it; or, thesweeter the carrot on the stick, the faster the horse will runafter it. ILLICIT DRUG USERS COST LESS & WORK HARDER The journal SCIENTIFIC AMERICAN [4] cited astudy of workers at two utility companies: Utah Power & Lightand Georgia Power Company. The workers who tested positive forillicit drugs were found to (a) cost employers $215 less perworker per year in health insurance, and (b) have a higher rateof promotion. Work- ers testing positive for cannabis only had anabsentee rate 30% lower than average. The logical conclusion:illicit users were less costly to employers while at the sametime being more productive and reliable. More for less! -- nowthere's a deal. The JOURNAL OF GENERAL INTERNAL MEDICINE [5]published a study that found "no difference betweendrug-positive and drug-negative em- ployees."However, thestudy's author ob- served that during the study, 11 of the non-users were fired while none of the users were fired. Ironically,once the study end- ed, all of the users could have been firedfor using the "wrong" drugs, regardless of theirproductivity and professionalism. The claim that illicit-drug use costs busi-nesses X billion dollars per year, is der- ived from a 1982 studyby the Research Tri- angle Institute. The study found that house-holds with at least one member who used can- nabis daily at somepoint in their life had a 28% lower income than the averagehouse- hold income. Yet the study also showed that thosecurrently using any illicit drug had an income equivalent to theaverage [4]. If we conclude that because cannabis use pre-ceded a lower income, therefore, cannabis use caused a lowerincome(a post hoc ergo prop- ter hoc fallacy), then we must alsoconclude based on the data that if you used cannabis in the past,you should start using it again to increase your income tocurrent-user rates. Interesting to note:if current drug users earnmore than former users, this supports the theory that drugrewards are a more powerful incentive for work than nondrugrewards. THE RIGGING OF RESEARCH In an effort to push Congress to pass manda-tory illicit-drug-testing legislation, U.S. Chamber of Commerceofficials, in testimony before Congress, claimed that researchshowed illicit-drug users were "3.6 times more like- ly toinjure themselves or another person in a workplaceaccident...[and] five times more likely to file a workers'compensation claim." However, as SCIENTIFIC AMERICAN [4]observed: In fact, the study on which the claim is basedhas "nothing to do with [illicit] drug users,"according to a 1988 article in the University of Kansas Law Re-view by John P. Morgan of the City University of New York Med-ical School. Morgan, an author- ity on drug testing, has tracedthe Chamber of Commerce claim to an informal study by the Fire-stone Tire and Rubber Company of employees undergoing treatmentfor alcoholism. ^^^^^^^^^^ Using the devastating effects of thegovern- ment subsidized drug alcohol to initiate a leg- islativepogrom against safer, albeit, illicit drugs -- an obvious andshameless scam. This scam is promoted not only by governmentalinterests in an effort to expand bureaucratic empires,but also byprivate interests in an effort to maximize profits, as theSCIENTIFIC AMERICAN observed: "The pharmaceutical giantHoffman-La Roche, which is leading an anti- drug campaign amongbusinesses (and has a big share of the drug-testing market), alsopromul- gates this claim in 'educational' literature." SCIENTIFIC AMERICAN observed other errors inthe research promoted by the GovtMedia that purports to show thatdrug users are bad for business. For example, a study that founda higher absentee rate among users failed to note that most usersin the study were minor- ities, and minorities have an absenteerate, regardless of drug use, identical to the rate observed inthe study.Logic therefore dic- tates, contrary to the GovtMedia'sconclusion, that NO statistically significant correlation betweendrug use and absenteeism was found. CONCLUSIONARY OVERVIEW Ultimately, the drug-testing and drug-rehab-ilitation program is a massive cannabis-user- identification andreeducation pogrom. This is because 90% of drug-positive urinetests are for cannabis, which is due to the fact that inactivemetabolites of THC remain in the urine for up to 30 days after asingle use, whereas most other drugs are out of the system in aday or even less. But why sacri- fice primary liberties forcannabis control? Not only is cannabis one of the safest knowndrugs [6], and, as we have just observed, is correlated to betteremployee performance, but there is no established correlationbet- ween cannabis and motor-skill impairment; thus, unlike legalalcohol, it cannot even be said to impair driving skills, whichis a major drug testing pretext. Observing the safety of cannabisuse, the National High- way Traffic Safety Administration [7]said: No clear relationship has ever beendemonstrated between mari- juana smoking and either serious- lyimpaired driving performance or the risk of accident involve-ment... [T]here is little if any evidence to indicate thatdrivers who have used marijuana alone are any more likely tocause serious accidents than drug free drivers. The most exhaustive review of the researchclearly confirms that there is simply no compelling case for theintrusive Orwellian surveillance of private activity that is im-posed by drug testing.As Dr. John Morgan, director ofpharmacology at City University of New York Medical School,wisely observed: Urine testing is ... a method for surveillance,not a tool for safety. Indeed, drug testing is not about safety or jobperformance; drug testing is a necessary feature of theSurveillance State that is now being built around us to ensuretotal cradle- to-grave surveillance and control of workers. While it's been said that those who are will-ing to give up liberty for safety will soon have neither,in thecase of illicit-drug testing -- which cannot even promise improv-ed safety -- we can say that those who are willing to give upliberty for nothing will soon have only that for which theysurrend- ered their priceless liberty: nothing. ________________________________________________________________________ [1] National Household Survey on Drug Abuse,1995. http://www.health.org/pubs/95hhs/any.htm [2] U.S. Department of Labor statistics, 1996. ftp://stats.bls.gov/pub/news.release/History/empsit.100496.news ftp://stats.bls.gov/pub/news.release/empsit.txt [3] The USDL statistics [2] indicate that theEmployment Population Ratio (EPR) for all men and women ages 20and above is 65%. However, the NHSDA study [1], showing a 71% EPRfor il- licit-users, includes all users ages 18 and above. Wouldthis give the illicit users an unfair advantage in this analysis?No, because the EPR for ages 18-19 is roughly 1 to 3% lower thanfor ages 20 and above (likely due to being in school);this lowerrate of employment for ages 18-19 would serve only to lower theil- licit-user EPR results.Therefore, the inclu- sion of ages18-19 in the NHSCA study must lo- wer, NOT inflate, the higherrate of employ- ment measured among illicit users. [4] SCIENTIFIC AMERICAN: Testing Negative, alook at the "evidence" justifying illicit-drug testing,3/90. http://www.pantless.com/%7Epdxnorml/test.html [5] JOURNAL OF GENERAL INTERNAL MEDICINE: Rela-tion of the Pre-employment Drug Testing Result to EmploymentStatus, A One-year Follow-up. Parish, David C.Jan/Feb, 1989.pp.44-47. [6] http://www.erols.com/igoddard/hempsafe.htm [7] NATIONAL HIGHWAY AND TRAFFIC SAFETYADMINIS- TRATION. "Marijuana and Actual DrivingPerformance," Robbe, H., O'Hanlon, J., National HighwayTraffic Safety Administration, Nov. 1993. Special thanks to Eric Skidmore for hisassistance. Contents | Feedback | Search DRCNet Library | Schaffer Library | Miscellaneous Statements on DrugPolicyWT01-B27-13IA088-000636-B013-33http://206.61.184.43:80/schaffer/MISC/uromancy.htm 206.61.184.43 19970122101320 text/html 48669HTTP/1.0 200 OKDate: Wednesday, 22-Jan-97 10:13:05 GMTServer: WebSitePro/1.1f (S/N wpo-0deb)Allow-ranges: bytesContent-type: text/htmlLast-modified: Saturday, 28-Dec-96 05:15:16 GMTContent-length: 48451 Urinalysis or Uromancy? The Untold Costs of Drug TestingAbuse Contents | Feedback | Search DRCNet Library | Schaffer Library | Miscellaneous Statements on DrugPolicy URINALYSIS OR UROMANCY? THE UNTOLD COSTS OFDRUG TESTING ABUSE Dale Gieringer, Ph.D., A paper for the Drug Policy FoundationPublished in "Strategies for Change: New Directions in DrugPolicy (1992) Among the impositions on personal privacyintroduced in the Reagan-Bush era, few are more intrusive butless questioned than drug urinalysis. Relatively unknown at thestart of the eighties, urinalysis has now become a condition foremployment in over half of America's major companies, as well asfor insurance, child custody, security clearance, and freedomfrom jail on probation or parole. While urinalysis has beenchallenged by civil libertarians, courts have generally upheld itin the face of strong public support. Opponents have objectedthat drug testing is an unwarranted violation of privacy and asearch without probable cause, bu supporters have successfullycountered that the supposed hazards of drug abuse necessitateurine testing. What is all too rarely challenged in this debateis the scientific rationale of urinalysis as a means of detectingdrug abuse in the first place. The facts that urinalysis does notdetect whether someone is impaired or under the influence ofdrugs; rather it detects the presence of non-psychoactive drugmetabolites that may linger in the system days or weeks afteruse. In this respect urinalysis differs from the familiar alcoholbreathalyzer and blood tests, which detect whether one isactually under the influence (as it turns out, alcohol is uniquein this regard: for other drugs, there is no simple relationbetween impairment and concentration in bodily fluids). Thus itis not only possible, but entirely likely that someone whoseurine tests positive for drugs is altogether competent andunimpaired. As it happens, urinalysis is particularlysensitive to marijuana, a single use of which can registerpositive for as long as a week, long after any effects havevanished; heavy users may register positive for as long as 4-6weeks. Thus, urinalysis precludes even the most innocent, weekendsmoking of marijuana as "drug abuse." Ironically,urinalysis is considerably more tolerant of harder drugs such ascocaine and heroin, which generally wash out in 2-3 days at most.Other commonly used psychoactive drugs, including nicotine,tranquilizers, and psychedelic drugs such as LSD are generallynot tested for. Above all, urinalysis doesn't detect America'snumber one drug of abuse, alcohol. Thus urinalysis in no wayassures a drug-free workplace. Instead, it encouragessubstitution of alcohol and other non-tested drugs for marijuana,cocaine, opiates and amphetamine. Drug urinalysis is therefore an inherentlyflawed technology. On one hand, it arbitrarily treats even themost occasional marijuana users as "drug abuse,"despite the substantial evidence that moderate marijuana use isharmless. On the other hand, it ignores flagrant alcoholism. Theupshot is that urinalysis disqualifies many productive, competentworkers who enjoy non-traditional drugs in their free time, whilecompletely ignoring the majority of drug abusers, who arealcoholics. All of this raises obvious questions about the valueof drug urinalylsis. Morally, urinalysis can be compared to randomlysearching workers' homes and garbage cans and branding themalcohol abusers if empty liquor bottles are found. Though itmight seem that Americans would strenuously object to suchwarrantless searches of their homes, polls have shown strongpublic support for searching their bladder contents, especiallyin jobs deemed safety-critical. URINALYSIS: AN UNPROVEN TECHNOLOGY Despite the public support for drug testing,urinalysis is a remarkably unproven technology. Were urinalysis alife-saving new drug, it would have had to undergo years ofpainstaking premarket testing in order to meet FDA regulations,requiring it to be proven fully "safe and effective" inrigorous, double-blind studies. Yet the fact is that urinalysishas been imposed on millions of American workers involuntarilywithout so much as a single scientifically controlled study toshow that it is a safe or effective means of promoting workplacesafety. Moreover, unlike drug consumers, urinalysis subjectsreceive no warning labels informing them of what they are beingtested for, nor of the risks, accepted usage or implications ofthe tests. A close inspection of the evidence for drugtesting shows that it rests largely on exaggerated, distorted andunfounded claims, as shown in critical reviews in ScientificAmerican and elsewhere. (1) For instance, testing advocates havecited a Research Triangle Institute survey purporting to showthat the income loss due to marijuana use was some $26 billion;yet the same data showed no difference at all in income betweennon-users and current users of marijuana or other drugs. Other,non-peer-reviewed studies by employers have likewise beenmisinterpreted to support urinalysis: for instance, a pair ofstudies at Utah Power and Light Co. and Georgia Power Co.purporting to show that drug users pose a high risk of accidentsand absenteeism only looked at users who had exhibited problembehavior on lthe job. Not surprisingly, this population had worsethan average work records. Nonetheless, Utah Power found thaltdrug users cost $215 less in health insurance benefits, whileGeorgia Power found lower rates of absenteeism in workers whotested positive only for marijuana! Only a handful of published studies havecompared the performance of drug-positive workers with others,with similar, mixed results. A one-year follow-up study of 180new employeees at a Georgia hospital found no relationshipbetween drug screen results and subsequent job performance. Itconcluded, "The data presently available do not support thethesis that positive drug screening predicts poor jobperformance." (2) Nonetheless, the U.S. government hasrecently ordered random testing of its VA hospital employees. Themost extensive and widely cited research on workplace drugtesting comes from the U.S. Postal Service, which tracked the jobperformance of new employees according to prior drug screenresults. Test results were not used in hiring decisions, but wereevaluated to determine their relation to job performance one yearlater. The first study, which tracked the performance of 2533postal workers in Boston, reported that drug-positive workers hada statistically 50% higher rate of dismissals, reprimands,injuries, accidents and absenteeism. (3) However, the authorsnoted that this difference was "much less than previouslyestimated." Looked at another way, the Boston data actuallyshowed that the great majority of drug-positive users werereliable: fully 86% of marijuana-positive workers werediscipline-free after one year, versus 91% for non-users; 74%were accident-free, versus 81% for non-users; and 71% were stillon the job, versus 81% for non-users. Thus, on the average,marijuana-positive workers were 90% as reliable as clean-urineones. Surprisingly, cocaine-positive workers fared even better,being over 95% as reliable in most categories. The Bostonfindings regarding accidents and injuries were subsequentlycontradicted by a second, larger, study of 4,396 postal workersnationwide, which found no relation at all between drug testresults and injuries or accidents. (4) The Boston accidentfindings had previously been criticized on methodologicalgrounds. The second Postal Service study did find that those whotested positive for illicit drugs had a 50% higher rate ofabsenteeism and dismissals. Yet once again, they showed thatdrug-using workers were largely reliable: drug users had a 93.4%attendance record, versus 95.8% for others, and 85% of users kepttheir jobs, versus 89.5% of non-users. The Boston data were later analyzed in acost-benefit study, which found that drug screening would bemarginally economical, to the tune of about $162 perdrug-positive worker rejected. (5) However, the authors cautionedthat these results were highly sensitive to variations in theextent of drug use and cost of urine testing, and that there werelikely to be many situations where drug testing was notcost-effective. They concluded that companies "shouldcarefully weigh the costs and benefits" in their particularindustry. Had the authors examined the second Post Service study,they would presumably have found even slimmer benefits from urinetesting, since there would have been no savings from accidents orinjuries. Furthermore, their analysis undoubtedly overstated thepotential value of drug urine testing, since they assumed thatall drug-positive workers would be screened out. In practice,however, drug-using workers are apt to avoid detection, either bydiscontinuing use temporarily beforehand or by other evasiontechniques described below. VICTIMS OF URINALYSIS While the benefits of drug testing to employersappear dubious and unproven, the costs to the workforce havescarcely been examined at all. Nonetheless, it is clear thaturinalysis imposes significant costs on workers. To begin with,it forces millions of innocent employees to submit to scrutiny ofintimate bodily fluids in a way that many regard as degrading andobnoxious. This is especially trying for the unfortunate minoritysufering "blushing kidneys," who are unable to produceurine on demand. At least one urinalysis victim has even beenhospitalized for water poisoning after being required to drinkthree liters of water in order to make her give urine. (6) Urinalysis is especially burdensome andoffensive to those otherwise responsible, productive workers whodo not abuse drugs on the job but enjoy indulging them in theirfree time at home. Principal among these are the nation's 20 or30 million marijuana users, the great majority of whom areoccasional users. (7) Due to the oversensitivity of urine teststo marijuana, pot smokers constitute the great majority ofurinalysis victims: up to 90% of drug-positive test results arefor marijuana. (8) Urinalysis forces these workers either to giveup a valued pleasure, or to risk losing employment, insurance, orother benefits and rights. California NORML (National Organization for theReform of Marijuana Laws) is one of several organizationsoffering drug testing advice via a telephone hotline, over whichwe have received scores of complaints from victims of drugtesting abuse. Included are truck drivers, airline attendants,office workers, mechanics, nurses and other employees withimpeccable work records, who have lost long-held jobs on accountof their urine chemistry, often against the wishes of their ownsupervisors and co-workers. One urinalysis victim, Mike Beatty, says helost $500,000 in Air Force retirement benefits after dischargedfor using marijuana solely on the evidence of one bad urine test.Beatty says that he used to smoke pot regularly, but like mostfellow servicemen gave it up when urine testing was instituted.Nonetheless, he relates, he continued to socialize with potsmokers, and had the misfortune of accidentally consuming amarijuana brownie at a party shortly before a drug test. Beattysays that before his discharge he was "humiliated" byAir Force personnel with sexual aspersions and investigationsinto his wife's private sex life. Another urinalysis victim named Don was firedfrom an ARCO truck driving job after 19 years on the job."It didn't even occur to me that I had a problem." hesaid. "I thought they were looking for coke." Don, whohad an excellent work record and seniority, complains that ARCOnever explained the implications of its drug testing policy.After losing his job and pension benefits, he was forced to sellhis house and settlle for a much lower-paying job. "You cancount me as a victim of drug testing," he says. "Jim is outstanding at what he does,"reads the employee evaluation file of another urinalysis victim,a tractor trailer driver who was fired under Department ofTransportation drug testing regulations. "Excellent safedriving awareness," "great initiative,""demonstrated dedication and consistency," read othertestimonials in Jim's file. Jim, who admits t being a weekendmarijuana smoker, was fired after five lyears on the job despitehaving the highest possible job safety rating with his company."My employer couldn't believe it," says another womanwho was fired from a job with a major retail store after failinga surprise drug test. Like many other drug testing victims, thewoman was tested after being "promoted" to a higherposition. "Drug testing has destroyed my attitudetowards my job and my government," says another utilityworker, who was forced into an "employee assistanceprogram" for a positive urine test. "They treat me likea drug addict," he says, echoing the complaint of many potsmokers, "and they go home and get drunk every night." DEALING WITH DRUG TESTS The most common question received on theCalifornia NORML hotline is how to deal with a urine test formarijuana. The most obvious advice is to abstain from suspectsubstances before the test. Many callers are surprised to learnthat occasional, weekend use typically washes out in as few as2-5 days. Most regular smokers commonly pass within a couple ofweeks, though very heavy use can be detected for as long as sixweeks. However, exceptions can occur. NORML has heard fromcallers who have reported flunking as long as 10 days after asingle, isolated use, while other, regular smokers have beenknown to pass within hours of last use. Such reports onlyemphasize the essential capriciousness and unreliability of drugurinalysis. For pot smokers facing drug tests on shortnotice, the simplest and most effective advice is to drink largevolumes of liquids immediately before the test. The purpose ofthis is to dilute the concentration of drug metabolites in theurine below the threshold of detection (usually 100 nanograms permilliliter for the commonly used EMIT test). Test subjects arealso advised to avoid giving urine that has accumulated in thebladder overnight, since this tends to be high in metabolites. Although reliable information on urinalysisevasion is hard to come by, reports from undergroundinvestigators agree that urine dilution can be quite effective.Most regular smokers are able to pass within a week or two, andsometimes much sooner, though exceptions occur. (9) Dilution canbe boosted by taking diuretics, which stimulate urination;however, the most effective of these are available only onprescription. A number of diets and wash-out regimes have beenproposed for persons who have several days to prepare; however,none of these have been scientifically validated. It is possiblefor laboratories to detect dilute urine by special tests forspecific gravity, creatanin content, etc.; however, such testsare expensive and rarely used. On rare occasion, subjects areasked to take a second test after submitting a sample that hasbeen found to be too watery. Of course, this gives them more timeto clear up. Becuase urine dilution is far from 100%reliable, especially for regular users caught unawares, there isa natural demand for surer methods. Many users experiment withoral "drug screens" that are rumored to avert positiveurine tests. Included are certain vitamins, vinegar, zincsulfate, and goldenseal root, as well as some overpriced specialformulas and herb teas sold on the underground market. Despiteglowing testimonials from some lucky users, these nostrums haveno good scientific foundation and have been found to beunreliable in underground investigations. A more reliable, if ethically dubious, way tofoil urine tests is to furtively tamper with the sample. Onepopular trick is to adulterate the sample with one of a number ofhousehold products that are known to interfere with the commonEMIT test so as to produce a false negative for marijuana. (10)Popular adulterants include detergent, salt, bleach and Dranocrystals, which can be concealed under the fingernails. However,such substances may be detectable by sight or smell by diligentlab technicians. A more sophisticated, less easily detectedadulterant is currently sold on lthe underground market. (11) andhas been proven to be quite reliable at producing false negativesfor marijuana (the manufacturer was compelled to move operationswhen the Texas legislature passed a bill outlawing sale of urineadulterants) (12) Another, more cumbersome trick is to substituteclean urine for one's own when delivering the sample. Asurprising number of American workers appear to have riggedthemselves up with substitute urine samples by methods elaboratedin Abby Hoffman's book, "Steal This Urine Test." (13)In order to discourage such cheating, many labs now measure thetemperature of each sample. Another, surer safeguard against tampering isto require that subjects be carefully observed during urination.However, aside from the armed forces and criminal justice system,few testers resort to such extreme measures. Most testsaccordingly provide leeway for evasive sleights of hand. Oneregrettable side-effect of drug testing is thus to favor thosemore unscrupulous drug users who are willing to resort totampering and similar evasion techniques, whereas honest usersmust either give up or face the risk of being fired. In a similarway, dishonesty is favored on questionnaires asking about illicitdrug use: those drug users who are honest about their use areroutinely turned down, with the result that only dishonest usersare hired. PRE-EMPLOYMENT TESTS In general, the common pre-employment urinescreen is by far the easiest kind of test to deal with, insofaras prospective employees need only avoid incriminating substancesfor the time they are on the job market. However, a surprisingnumber of ignorant job applicants are unaware that they should beprepared for urine tests in the first place. Most pot smokersappear to have little problem abstaining for job tests, given thelow addictiveness of marijuana. Only rarely has California NORMLencountered long-term heavy users who complain of difficulty ingiving up pot for a while. Nonetheless, pre-employment tests can still bea problem even for moderate users if they happen to encounter asurprise job opportunity. In addition, many companies requiredrug screens of employees when they are promoted. As a result,many workers whose efforts have won them a promotion end up beingfired instead on account of bad urine chemistry. Employees mayalso face urine tests unexpectedly when their company is sold tonew management. In such cases, the new owners may demand a suddenspot urine check of the entire workforce, effectively purging itof anyone who has had the bad luck to indulge a suspect substancetoo recently. Victims of such abuses generally have no legalrecourse against dismissal, and can also expect to loseunemployment benefits. NORML has heard from many otherwise blamelesspot smokers who have lost jobs thanks to drug testing. Few casesbetter illustrate the absurd lengths to which urinalysis iscarried than that of a newly "promoted" radioprogrammer who found himself fired for a positive marijuana test.The employee, who admitted to being a weekend pot smoker, hadbeen working for a San Francisco "60's golden oldies"FM station! Many NORML callers complain of having beencoerced into drug testing programs they don't understand orapprove of, with little explanation of how the policy will beadministered. "It was very manipulative," recounts onewoman concerning her employer's efforts to make her sign a formconsenting to urinalysis. "They told us of course wewouldn't be randomly tested; we would only be tested oncause," she relates, "But the form specifically statedwe would agree to random testing." Many employees receive nodisclosure statements at all, leaving them vulnerable toarbitrary decisions. Some workers complain of being fired for asingle bad test, after being given the impression that they wouldbe eligible for a rehabilitation program instead. Many employeescomplain about being "singled out" for drug testsbecause they are unpopular with their supervisor or manager.Others report being told by their managers that they will beprotected from urine tests because they are valued employees.Some employees receive advance warning about impending tests,giving them time to prepare; others are taken by surprise. Because blood and urine samples are used formany other medical tests, subjects do not necessarily know whenthey are being drug tested. A Nevada mother told the NORMLhotline that she had been unwittingly blood-tested for marijuanain a maternity ward, in what she had been told was a blood testfor AIDS. She said her family was subsequently visited byplainclothes police demanding that they refer their newborn to ahospital ward for drug-addicted babies, or else give up custody.Another woman relates giving a urine specimen for what she wastold was a pre-employment drug test, and losing the job when theemployer inspected it to find out that whe was pregnant instead! (Continued) URINALYSIS OR UROMANCY PART II RANDOM URINALYSIS By far the most dreaded and intrusive form ofdrug testing is the random test, which is specifically designedto take workers by surprise. Under random testing, workers may becalled on to provide a urine sample at any time, typically on nomore than an hour or two's notice (however, in some shops,workers have been known to receive as much as a weeks' advancealert). A corollary of random urinalysis is to prevent workersfrom using any marijuana, even at home on weekends, at the riskof losing their jobs. While private employers have tended to shy wawyfrom random testing on grounds of expense, government drugwarriors have successfully campaigned to impose random testingthrough federal regulations. Random urinalysis is now requiredfor the military, many public employees and contractors, and thenation's entire interstate transportation workforce -- includingnot only airline pilots, train engineers and truck drivers, butalso flight attendants, mechanics, and gas pipeline workers. The NORML hotline receives many complaintsabout random testing from transportation workers. Most not onlyresent the intrusion on their private lives, but also insist thatillicit drug abuse is not a safety problem. "Alcohol is theworst abused drug, especially pilots," says one angry flightattendant, a view repeatedly expressed by others in the industry. According to air industry spokesmen, not asingle passenger airline crash had been attributed to alcohol ordrug abuse. (14) Administration officials lamely pointed to a1988 plane crash in Durango, Colorado, in which the pilot's bloodshowed evidence of cocaine use. Yet investigators determined thatthe pilot was not high at the time of the crash, and it was theco-pilot who was controlling the plane at the time of the crash!(15) The fact that drug testing is widely opposed by the veryairline workers whose lives are most at stake would seem to raiseobvious questions about the supposed dangers of drug abuse in theair industry. Drug testing of transportation workers wasmandated by Congress in response to a highly publicized 1987train collision in which 16 passengers were killed. (16) Theaccident was blamed on the negligence of an engineer andbrakeman, who were determined to have been smoking marijuanashortly before the crash. A subsequent investigation revealedthat both men had an extensive record of drunken driving offensesand were known to be problem drinkers. Furthermore, some of thetrain's safety equipment had been disabled. The engineer admittedto culpability for ignoring warning signals, but denied thatmarijuana had anything to do with the accident. An investigationby the National Transportation Safety Board concluded that therailroad should undertake management reforms and equipmentimprovements, but did not recommend drug testing. Nonetheless,Transportation Secretary James Burnley argued for drug testing,pointing to evidence that a significant percentage ofaccident-involved rail personnel tested positive for drugs. (17)In fact, however, Federal Railroad Administration statisticsshowed that only 4-6% of "reasonable cause" urine testswere positive for drugs or alcohol, (18) half of what might havebeen expected for a normal cross-section of the workforce! (19) The ultimate impact of random testingregulations remains to be seen, as testing is still being phasedin within the transportation industry. Many workers haveresponded by adjusting their drug use, however grudgingly. Otherspersist in risking a urine positive, relying on one or anotherevasion techniques to minimize their risks. Relatively few areactually caught: airlines report fewer than 1% of employees testurine positive. (20) Included are an unfortunate number of veryoccasional users: NORML has heard from more than one flightattendant dismissed for indulging a rare joint with an oldfriend. Many workers report turning to alcohol as asubstitute for marijuana. "I'm drinking a lot morenow," says one trucker, echoing a common complaint of manydrug-tested workers who say they use pot to control alcoholism.Other drug-tested workers report widespread alcohol abuse amongtheir fellows: "You see guys stumbling in here drunk fromthe management on down," says a Customs employee,"There are guys drinking alcohol first thing in themorning." Another employee told NORML that workers at hisjob had started smoking heroin instead of pot. Meanwhile, in themilitary, LSD is said to have become the illicit drug of choicedue to its relative undetectability. (21) It is tempting tospeculated that recent reports of a parallel upsurge in alcoholand LSD use among young persons reflect a broader social trendcreated by the incentives of drug urinalysis. (22) URINALYSIS: "ON-CAUSE" OR NO CAUSE? In many workplaces, employees are subject to"on-cause" testing whenever they have an accident.While such testing might seem unobjectionable, it is often abusedso as to inculpate innocent workers. For instance, a dieselmechanic told NORML that he had been ordered to take a urine testfollowing a minor workplace accident on a Friday, and that hisdrug test was scheduled for Monday, three days after theaccident. The worker was rightly concerned that he might be firedbecause he had recently smoked marijuana at home. Ironically,however, three days would have been ample time to pass the testhad he actually been under the influence of any otherdrug--cocaine, heroin, alcohol or speed--at the time of theaccident! In another case, a woman reported that herhusband, a print shop worker with eight years' seniority, hadflunked a drug test for marijuana after receiving a minor fingercut in an accident caused by another worker. Not only was herhusband fired for an accident that wasn't his fault, but thefamily also lost health insurance coverage for their son, who hadserious medical problems costing $1200 per month. Like otherurine testing victims, the woman charged that the company hadfinancial motivations to fire her husband, namely the family'sinsurance costs. Urinalysis abuse is a phenomenon that extendsbeyond the job market. For instance, some insurance companiesrequire drug urinalysis as part of their physical exams.Applicants are routinely denied insurance if they are found touse marijuana, despite the fact that there is not an iota ofactuarial evidence showing marijuana adversely affects lifeexpectancy. Urinalysis has also come to figure in custodybattles between estranged couples. One husband told CaliforniaNORML that he had been directed by a court to submit tourinalysis after his wife had accused him of being a marijuanasmoker, a condition widely presumed to compromise parentalfitness. He complained that he was given no time to prepare forthe test, despite the fact that his wife, who had demanded thetest, had three weeks to prepare a clean sample of her own. Another arena where urinalysis is widely abusedis the prison system, where it is often imposed indiscriminatelyas a condition of probation or parole. As a result, manynon-violent offenders face substantial prison time for simplysmoking a joint. For instance, a California woman with a longhistory of medical marijuana use for migraines was sentenced to 8months in jail on charges of marijuana transportation. The judgeexplained that he could not give her a suspended sentence becausein that case she would be subject to drug testing, which shewould almost certainly fail, thereby ending up with a substantialsentence. Drug use violations have been reported to constitute45% of all parole violations in California, which in turn accountfor nearly half of all prison admissions. (23) The use ofmarijuana screening appears especially dubious in light of thefact that marijuana tends to suppress violence, whereas thenearest substitute, alcohol, tends to aggravate it. California NORML has heard from several medicalmarijuana patients with drug testing problems. "Pot makes mefeel better," complains a government worker with psoriaticarthritis, "I can't take alcohol." Other patients arethreatened with drug testing programs following convictions formarijuana offenses. Although marijuana is not an approvedmedication, patients may be able to pass urinalysis by obtaininga prescription for Marinol, the government-approved syntheticmarijuana substitute. Since Marinol reacts exactly likemarijuana, patients could presumably obtain a medical exemptionfor a positive urine test. Unfortunately, however, prescriptionsfor Marinol are not easy to come by and federal regulationsforbid its use outside of cancer chemotherapy. One common concern about drug testing is thedanger of "false positives," in which subjects areerroneously accused of drug use. Contrary to rumor, neitherpassive smoking nor drug interactions are likely to cause falsemarijuana positives. Only in the most unlikely conditions, suchas sitting for hours on end in a closet full of heavy potsmokers, has passive smoking been shown to produce a level ofurine metabolites high enough to be detected on the standart EMITtest. (24) Likewise, no drug is known to cause a false positivefor marijuana, but certain over-the-counter medicines can triggerthe test for amphetamines and poppy seeds can be confused withopiates (it used to be that ibuprofen interfered somewhat withmarijuana tests, but this problem has been fixed). (25) Suchproblems are supposed to be sorted out by medical reviewofficers, the reliability of whom can only be speculated on.However, NORML has not heard any complaints about false positivesfrom drug interactions. The important question remains whether falsepositives may be caused by lab error. Early surveys of drugtesting labs reported remarkably high error rates. However,industry and government have taken steps to insure against falsepositives for the sake of public credibility and liability. Byrequiring accurate gas chromatograph confirmation tests ofpositive samples and regulating the chain of custody, selectedlabs have demonstrated false positive rates as low as zero in10,000 -- 48,000 samples in proficiency tests (false negatives,in which drug use is not detected, run around 3%) (26)Nonetheless, given the profusion of unregulated labs, highererror rates may well be common. It should be noted that even iffalse positives occur in as few as one in 100,000 tests, hundredsof Americans per year can expect to be falsely branded as illicitdrug users. California NORML has heard from three or fourpersons claiming to be victims of "false positives" formarijuana. Claims of this kind are by nature suspicious anddifficult to verify. On one occasion, however, I personallyobserved what appeared to be a serious lapse of security in alocal clinic that administers drug tests to probationers forlocal corrections authorities. I had come there to have someexperimental specimens tested, and was told to place them on ashelf. While I waited for an attendant to record and label thesamples, a nurse came in and deposited another unlabeled specimenjar on the shelf next to mine. Had I not brought the situation tothe attendant's attention, it would have been child's play toswitch and mislabel the samples by error or mischief. UROMANCY: AN OBSOLESCENT TECHNOLOGY? The full toll of drug urine victims has yet tobe scientifically investigated. Nothing is known about the numberof false positives, nor the number of responsible workersdisqualified for urine positives, nor the costs to theirfamilies, the economy, and welfare roles, nor the extent to whichdrug urinalysis has aggravated abuse of alcohol, tobacco andother untested drugs. As for the purported benefits of testing,these too are unclear. Given the potential for drug substitution,however, it may be doubted whether they will prove significant.Indeed, a pair of recent studies suggest that the recent declinein marijuana use has led to an increase in drug-abuse emergenciesand auto fatalities due to alcohol and other drugs. (27)Meanwhile, the Bureau of Labor Statistics lhas reported a jump injob-related sickness and injuries to a record 6.8 million in1990, or 8.8 out of 100 workers, the highest rate since 1979,before drug testing began! All of this raises obvious questionsabout the purported benefits of drug urinalysis. Insofar as theevidence for drug testing rests more on faith than science, itmight aptly be called "uromancy." The case for drug urinalysis is furtherundermined by the fact that there exist alternative means fordetecting impairment. Most promising of these are performancetests, which measure reaction time, alertness, and agility atvarious tasks. Computer-based performance tests are now on themarket and have started to be used in some workplaces. (28)Performance tests have the obvious advantage of measuring actualimpairment, regardless of the cause. Unlike urinalysis, they candetect problems caused by alcohol and other, untested drugs, aswell as stress, fatigue, and emotional distress. In addition,they have the important advantage of disregarding privatebehavior that is irrelevant to job performance. Another, often ignored alternative tourinalysis is blood testing. Although blood tests are even morephysically invasive than urine tests, they provide a much betterindication of current impairment, since they detect the activepresence of psychoactive drugs in the system rather than inactiveurinemetabolites. Because blood tests are less sensitive tobehaviorally irrelevant, past drug use than urine tests, they arecommonly used in forensic studies of accident victimes todetermine whether the subject was under the influence of drugs.Unfortunately, blood tests are at best an imperfect indicator ofintoxication for drugs other than alcohol, and it is impossibleto determine fixed thresholds for impairment. In the case ofmarijuana, THC blood levels decline quite rapidly to negligiblelevels in as little as two hours for occasional lusers, althoughchronic users can manifest detectable levels for a couple ofdays. Blood tests may therefore offer a useful way for occasionaldrug users to establish their innocence of being under theinfluence. The case can be made that any worker accused ofon-the-job drug abuse should have the option of taking a blood orimpairment test to prove his or her competence (in California,motorists accused of driving under the influence of drugs havethe option of blood or urine tests; unfortunately, few if anydrivers understand the dramatic differences in sensitivit;ybetween the two). Another, more sinister alternative tourinalysis is hair testing, which is even more sensitive to pastdrug use than urinalysis. Promoters claim to detect drug use formonths and even years, far longer than any pharmacological impacton health. Despite the fact that hair testing has unresolvedtechnical problems and is considered to be an unproven technologyby the scientific community, (29) it is already being marketedand used by some private employers and has been boosted byfederal officials like Drug Czars William Bennett and BobMartinez. The one advantage of hair testing is that is is lessinvasive of bodily privacy than blood or urine testing, althoughsome persons, such as those of the Sikh religion, object tohaving their hair disturbed. However, because hair testing isalso much more indiscriminate than other technologies indistinguishing harmless drug use from abuse, it poses enengreater potential costs to society, the economy, and civilliberties. The choice betwee hair testing and performancetesting marks a crucial crossroads for the nation's drug policy.While the outcome remains to be seen, there are good reasons tothink that urine and hair testing will eventually be rejected forall but forensic purposes, given their basic inability to measurecompetence. Drug urine testing is perhaps best understood as atool for imposing social conformity that has aptly been describedas "chemical McCarthyism." (30) Like the loyalty oathof the fifties, urinalysis seeks to impose "politicallycorrect" attitudes in the workforce. As drugs have replacedCommunism as domestic enemy number one, so the question,"Are you now or have you ever been a member of the Communistparty?" has been replaced by, "Are you now or have youbeen the user of a controlled substance?" When the currentanti-drug hysteria subsides, the absurdity of this question willbecome apparent. Technologically, drug urine testing can best becompared to that other tool of McCarthyism, the polygraph. Likethe polygraph, drug testing rests on the spurious premise thatthe human mind can be read via crude physiological measures. Likethe polygraph, drug testing is inherently misleading andendangers innocent parties. Time has revealed the polygraph to bean essentially flawed technology, and it has now been outlawedfor most purposes (ironically, by the very same Congress thateagerly embraced random urinalysis). In the fullness of time, itcan be expected that the same will happen to drug urinalysis. Asthe costs of drug testing are examined more closely, it is apt tobe seen that human beings are best judged by their perormance,not the chemicals in their urine. FOOTNOTES 1 John Horgan, "Test Negative: A look atthe 'evidence'justifying illicit-drug tests," ScientificAmerican, March 1990, pp. 18-22; John Horgan, "PostalMortem," Scientific American, February 1991, pp. 22-3; Dr.John Morgan, "Impaired Statistics and the UnimpairedWorker," The Drug Policy Letter 1 (2): May/June 1989. 2 Dr. David Charles Parish, "Relation ofthe Pre-employment Drug Testing Result to Employment Status: AOne-year Follow-up," Journal of General Internal Medicine 4:44-7 (1989). 3. Zwerling, Ryan and Orav, "The Efficacyof Preemployment Drug Screening for Marijuana and Cocaine inPredicting Employment Outcome," JAMA 264 (20): 2639-43(1990). 4. Normand, Salyards and Mahoney,, "AnEvaluation of Preemployment Drug Testing," Journal ofApplied Psychology, 75 (6): 629-39 (1990). 5. Zwerling, Ryan and Orav, "Costs andBenefits of Preemployment Drug Screening," JAMA 267 (1):91-3 (1992). 6. Klonoff, "Acute Water Intoxication as acomplication of urine drug testing," JAMA 265: 84-5 (1991). 7. One in four current marijuana users say theyare daily users, while one in seven report smoking at least twojoints a day, according to NIDA's 1982 National Survey of DrugAbuse. 8. Dr. John Morgan, cited in Horgan, "TestNegative," loc. cit. 9. "Lab Experiments: How to Piss andPass," The Urine Nation News #7, Jan. 1992 (available fromDigit Press, PO Box 920066, Norcross GA 30092); Robert Freeman,"How to Beat A Urine Test," High Times, August 1988. 10 John Morgan, "Marijuana Metabolism inthe Context of Urine Testing for Cannabinoid Metabolite,"Journal of Psychoactive Drugs 20 (1): 107-15 (Jan-Mar 1988). 11 UrinAid, available from Byrd Labs: PO Box1441, Topanga CA 90290. 12 Urine Nation News, loc. cit.; "UrineTrouble," Austin Chronicle, June 21, 1991. 13 A. Hoffman, Steal This Urine Test, PenguinBooks, 1987. 14 Washington Post, "Signs of Drug Use inFatal Air Crash," printed in San Francisco Chronicle, March12 1988.; R.B. Stone, testimony in Hearings on lthe Airline andRail Service Protection Act of 1987, Senate Committee onCommerce, Science and Transportation, 100th Congress, Feb. 201987. 15. Associated Press, "Cocaine Called aFactor in Colorado Air Crash," San Francisco Chronicle, Feb.2, 1989. 16. D. Gieringer, "Marijuana, Driving, andAccident Safety," Jopurnal of Psychoactive Drugs 20 (1):93-101 (Jan-Mar, 1988). 17 "Drug-Test Rules for Rail WorkersProposed by U.S.," Wall Street Journal, May 6, 1988. 18 Federal Register Vol. 53 #224, Nov. 21,1988, p. 47104. 19 A roadside survey of truckers found 14%urine positive on the job; A.K. Lund et al, "Drug use bytractor-trailer drivers," Washington DC, Insurance Institutefor Highway Safety, 1987. 20 "Airlines Seek Cutback in DrugTesting," Wall Street Journal, May 12, 1992. 21 "By the Way," Reason, August/Sept.1989, p. 14. 22 "The New Age Of Aquarius,"Newsweek, Feb. 3, 1992"; "Binge Drinking More Common OnCampus," San Francisco Chronicle, June 5, 1992. 23 "California Prisoners andParolees," California Department of Corrections, 1989. 24 E. Cone and R. Johnson, "Contact highsand urinary cannabinoid excretion after passive exposure tomarijuana smoke," Clinical Pharmacology and Therapeutics 40(3): 247-56 (Sept. 1986). 25 David W. Fretthold, "Drug TestingMethods and Reliability," Journal of Psychoactive Drugs, 22:419-28 (Oct-Dec 1990). 26 ibid. 27 Peter Passell, "Less Marijuana, MoreAlcohol?" New York Times, June 17, 1992 28 Manufactured by Performance Factors, 980Atlantic Ave #104, Alameda, CA 94501. 29 "Hairy Problems for New Drug TestingMethod," Science, Sept. 7, 1990 p. 1099f.; The Forensic DrugAbuse Advisor, Vol. 2 # 10, Nov/Dec 1990 30 Dr. George Lundberg, "The Rush to TestUrine," Washington Post Health, Dec 9, 1986; see also JAMADec. 5, 1986 p. 3003. Contents | Feedback | Search DRCNet Library | Schaffer Library | Miscellaneous Statements on DrugPolicyWT01-B27-14IA088-000636-B013-66http://206.61.184.43:80/schaffer/MISC/metanal.htm 206.61.184.43 19970122101345 text/html 18833HTTP/1.0 200 OKDate: Wednesday, 22-Jan-97 10:13:30 GMTServer: WebSitePro/1.1f (S/N wpo-0deb)Allow-ranges: bytesContent-type: text/htmlLast-modified: Saturday, 28-Dec-96 05:15:22 GMTContent-length: 18615 Meta-Analysis of Adolescent Crime and Substance Use,1981-1995 Contents | Feedback | Search DRCNet Library | Schaffer Library | Miscellaneous Statements on DrugPolicy Meta-Analysis of Adolescent Crime andSubstance Use, 1981-1995 Gordon E. Kenney, Ph.D. The University ofMemphis Memphis, Tennessee, USA 38152 gkenney@memphis.edu December, 1996 INTRODUCTION The use of psychoactive substances has beencited by drug enforcement officials as a cause of criminalbehavior. Apart from the manufacture, sale, and/or delivery ofillicit substances, substance *use* has been regarded as aprimary precipitant of criminal behavior, especially violentbehavior (e.g., Drug Enforcement Administration, 1994). To date,however, it seems that such assertions have been based onanecdotal evidence, with little, if any, empirical support. Evendata from the federal government fails to support such a link.For example, during 9 contemporaneous reporting periods between1972 and 1990, the correlations between adolescent (ages 17 andyounger) violent, property, and overall crime rates and meanadolescent (ages 12-17) usage rates for 10 substances (both licitand illicit) were .09, .27, and .20, respectively (Federal Bureauof Investigation, 1972-90; National Institute on Drug Abuse,1991). These correlations can hardly be viewed as suggestive ofany meaningful relationships between crime and substance use.Such evidence, however, is circumstantial. Other indicators areneeded to establish any real relationship, whether large orsmall, between crime and drug use. The purpose of this study was to excavate thebody of recent scholarly research in this domain for any evidenceconcerning the role of substance use in criminal acts perpetuatedby adolescents and to summarize these findings usingmeta-analysis (Wolf, 1986). METHOD & PROCEDURES Scholarly research products of a primary naturewere gleaned from social science databases (includingDissertation Abstracts International, Educational ResourcesInformation Clearinghouse, PsycLit, and metropolitan Memphis,Tennessee, book holdings). The search was limited to studiesconcerning adolescent criminology reported between 1981 and 1995. Resultant inferential statistics from eachstudy pertaining to general delinquency, reoffense, and/orviolence as each related to substance use were converted toeffect sizes in the form of r using Wolf's (1986) formulae. The rstatistic, here used as an effect size, remains essentially acorrelation coefficient which ranges from -1.0 to +1.0, where-1.0 constitutes a perfect negative relationship, +1.0constitutes a perfect positive relationship, and 0.0 constitutesabsolutely no relationship. A squared correlation coefficient(r^2) represents the percentage of shared variance among thevariables in question. RESULTS Fifteen (15) primary research studies werefound which met the aforementioned criteria (see Table 1). Ofthese, 13 were conducted in 10 states in the United States, and 2were conducted in Canada. There were 6 research articles fromrefereed journals, 6 dissertations/theses, 2 unpublishedconference research presentations, and 1 unpublished researchreport. A total of 3,583 adolescent offenders were involved inthese 15 studies. The mean unweighted r for the relationshipbetween adolescent crime and substance use was .22 (df = 13, notsignificant), with a median of .17, and a range of .00 to .68.The amount of shared variance between overall adolescent crimeand substance use was about 5%. The strength of these effect sizeestimates was considered low. Only 4 of the studies investigated therelationship between adolescent violent crime and substance use(total number of offenders studied was 834). The mean unweightedr for these studies was .10 (df = 13, not significant), with amedian of .08, and a range of .07 to .15. The amount of sharedvariance between violent adolescent crime and substance use was1%. These effect size estimates were considered very low. Table 1 Research Studies Includedin the Meta-Analysis of Adolescent Crime and Substance Use Study N Outcome Locale r Vincent (1981) 64 reoffense MD .00 Dawkins & Dawkins (1983) 342 delinquency MD .30 Andrews et al. (1986) 192 reoffense Canada .33 Lindgren et al. (1986) 84 reoffense IA .25 Cornell (1987) 72 violence VA .07 Veletza (1990) 64 delinquency MA .55 Watts & Wright (1990) 437 delinquency TX .68 Anderson (1991) 514 reoffense Canada .29 Dembo et al. (1991) 398 violence FL .09 Kahn & Chambers (1991) 221 violence WA .07 Archibald et al. (1992) 779 reoffense MA .00 Carter (1992) 48 reoffense ID .14 Duncan (1992/93) 130 reoffense FL .17 Wierson (1992/93) 95 reoffense GA .26 Kenney (1995) 143 violence TN .15 Note. Studies listedchronologically. Two-letter locale codes refer to states in theUSA. No discernible temporal pattern was observed.Overall, the correlation between year of study and effect sizeestimate was .02 (df = 13, not significant), which was consideredvery low. Among 7 studies conducted in the"north" (i.e., Canada, Idaho, Iowa, Massachusetts, andWashington) the mean unweighted effect size was .23 (df = 5, notsignificant), with a median of .25, and a range of .00 to 55.This effect size was considered low. Among 8 studies conducted inthe "south" (i.e., Florida, Georgia, Maryland,Tennessee, Texas, and Virginia) the mean unweighted effect sizewas .22 (df = 6, not significant), with a median of .16, and arange of .00 to .68. This effect size was considered low. Theeffect sizes based on geography were not considered to besubstantially different. Gender, ethnocultural heritage, propertycrimes, and particular substances used were not evaluated becausethese variables were seldom noted in more than a few of theselected studies. CONCLUSIONS The relationship between adolescentcrime and substance use was found to be small. Overall, substanceuse accounted for only about 5% of the variance associated withoverall adolescent criminal behavior, and less than 1% of thevariance associated with adolescent violent behavior. Thesefindings were remarkably similar to those involving federalgovernment data noted earlier. Neither temporal nor geographicpatterns were observed concerning the effect size estimatesreported in the 15 studies. Therefore, assertions about the precipitousrole of substance use in adolescent crime do not appear to besupported by the body of recent scholarly research in this area.Similar investigations concerning adult crime and substance useare warranted before any definite conclusions may be reachedabout this controversial issue. It is clear, however, thatadolescent substance use, though a crime in and of itself, is notfundamentally related to broader indices of adolescent crime. REFERENCES Anderson, D. G. (1991). Recidivism rates ofspecial needs youth under the Youth Offenders Act in the provinceof Manitoba: Clinical and policy implications (Doctoraldissertation, United States International University, 1991).Dissertation Abstracts International, 52, B3282. Andrews, D. A., Kiessling, J. J., Mickus, S.,& Robinson, D. (1986). The construct validity ofinterview-based risk assessment in corrections. Canadian Journalof Behavioural Science, 18, 460-470. Archibald, M. E., Brown, M. E., &Cicchetti, C. A. (1992). Juvenile delinquency: A study ofMassachusetts juvenile probationers. Boston: Massachusetts TrialCourt, Office of Commissioner of Probation. (ERIC DRS No. ED 348594) Carter, K. L. (1992). An evaluation ofintensive and regular probation supervision for serious, habitualjuvenile offenders (Doctoral dissertation, University of Idaho,1992). Dissertation Abstracts International, 53, A1764. Cornell, D. G. (1987, March). Clinicalassessment of the violent adolescent. Paper presented at themeeting of the National Association of School Psychologists, NewOrleans. (ERIC DRS No. ED 289 154) Dawkins, R. L., & Dawkins, M. P. (1983).Alcohol use and delinquency among Black, White, and Hispanicadolescent offenders. Adolescence, 18, 799-809. Dembo, R., Williams, L., Getreu, A., &Genung, L. (1991). Recidivism among high-risk youths: Study of acohort of juvenile detainees. International Journal of theAddictions, 26, 121-177. Drug Enforcement Administration. (1994,August). Anti-legalization debate guide. Formulated at theAnti-Legalization Forum, DEA Training Academy. Duncan, R. D. (1993). Psychometric andbehavioral indices of personal adjustment, antisociality, anddrug involvement as predictors of recidivism in juveniledelinquents (Doctoral dissertation, Florida State University,1992). Dissertation Abstracts International, 53, B5443. Federal Bureau of Investigation. (1972-1990).Uniform crime reports for the United States. Washington:Department of Justice, Author. Kahn, T. J., & Chambers, H. J. (1991).Assessing reoffense risk with juvenile sexual offenders. ChildWelfare, 70, 333-345. Kenney, G. E. (1995). Predicting violentreoffense among adolescent offenders following shockincarceration (Doctotal dissertation, The University of Memphis).Dissertatin Abstracts International. Lindgren, S. D., Harper, D. C., Richman, L. C.,& Stehbens, J. A. (1986). "Mental imbalance" andthe prediction of recurrent delinquent behavior. Journal ofClinical Psychology, 42, 821-825. National Institute on Drug Abuse. (1991).National household survey on drug abuse: Main findings 1990 (DHHSPublications No. ADM-91-1788). Washington: Department of Healthand Human Services, Public Health Service, Author Veletza, L. (1990). Academic failure in thedevelopment of at-risk behavior (Doctoral dissertation, BostonUniversity, 1990). Dissertation Abstracts International, 51,A1176. Vincent, T. (1981, August). Predicting successor failure in a juvenile diversion program. Paper presented atthe meeting of the American Psychological Association, LosAngeles. (ERIC DRS No. ED 210 619) Watts, W. D., & Wright, L. S. (1990). Therelationship of alcohol, tobacco, marijuana, and other illegaldrug use to delinquency among Mexican American, Black, and Whiteadolescent boys. Adolescence, 25, 171-181. Wierson, M. H. (1993). Predicting recidivism inincarcerated juvenile delinquents: The role of mental healthdiagnoses (Doctoral dissertation, University of Georgia, 1992).Dissertation Abstracts International, 53, B3801. Wolf, F. M. (1986). Meta-analysis: Quantitativemethods for research synthesis (Sage University Paper Series onQuantitative Applications in the Social Sciences, No. 07-059).Beverly Hills, CA: Sage. Contents | Feedback | Search DRCNet Library | Schaffer Library | Miscellaneous Statements on DrugPolicyWT01-B27-15IA088-000636-B013-97http://206.61.184.43:80/schaffer/MISC/amtest.htm 206.61.184.43 19970122101400 text/html 6535HTTP/1.0 200 OKDate: Wednesday, 22-Jan-97 10:13:52 GMTServer: WebSitePro/1.1f (S/N wpo-0deb)Allow-ranges: bytesContent-type: text/htmlLast-modified: Saturday, 28-Dec-96 05:15:30 GMTContent-length: 6318 1994 American Management Survey on workplace drug testing. Contents | Feedback | Search DRCNet Library | Schaffer Library | Miscellaneous Statements on DrugPolicy 1994 American Management Survey on workplacedrug testing. The following is taken from the 1994 AmericanManagement Survey on workplace drug testing. (Unpublished) The survey responses are for January 1994 andrepresent the American Management Association (AMA's) corporatemembership of 7000 U.S. organizations, which employ in total aquarter of the American workforce. According to the survey. . . . The percentage of companies that drug testemployees rose from 84.8 % (January 1993) to 87.2% (January 1994)This represents an increase of over 300% since 1987. Business category is the most important factorin the occurrence of testing programs. The two categories mostlikely to test are manufacturing firms (93%) and transportationcompanies (92%). Size also plays a role -- 91% of organizationswith more than 1000 employees test, though smaller ones aren'tfar behind (81%). Geographically, there are fairly substantialvariations too: companies in the desert and mountain states ofthe West are the most likely to test (91%), while companies inNew England are the least likely (68%). 53% of companies that test do so undergovernment mandate. The test-positive rate, which had fallensteadily since 1989, levelled in 1993, at 2.5%. The AMAattributes this not to lesser use, but to the fact thattest-positives rates fell consistently only as the testing poolincreased -- the levelling in 1993 and 1994 reflects thelevelling in the growth of testing programs. There is a direct correlation between theincrease in testing and the decrease in test-positive rates.According to the AMA, this is not because testing acts as adeterrent to drug use, but rather because as more employees arebeing tested for reasons other than suspicion of use, thetest-positive rate would naturally fall. Among companies that perform random testing,the 1993 test-positive rate was 2.1%. Among those companies thattest only for cause, the rate was 11.1%. Companies that offer drug education programs aswell as testing have lower test-positive rates than those thatprovide only testing. Only 5% of companies neither test employees noroffer drug education programs. Action on test-positive employees: 31% ofcompanies dismiss test-positives, and more than half of theseoffer no other alternative. The rest regard firing as a lastresort, after counselling and disciplinary actions have beentrlied. 68% of companies test new hires. Tests arerarely given as part of the application process per se; insteadtesting occurs when the applicant has already been offered thejob. The offer is then conditional on the applicant passing thetest. 1% of companies that test new hires will hiretest-positives on a probationary basis; 95% specifically statethat test-positives will not be hired, the rest take otheractions, such as retesting at a later date. METHODS -- 82.1% use urine testing. 12.9% useblood testing. 1.1% use hair testing. 0.9% use performancetesting. Of those who use urine testing, only 70% retestan initial positive with a more rigorous, confirmatory test. 13%repeat the same procedure on the same sample. 5% take and test anew sample. 7% perform no validation. Only 79% of those that urine test useNIDA-certified labs. Only 48% use a medical review officer (MRO)to analyze test findings, judge them against the testee's medicalhistory, and render a verdict. Only 6% of firms that test pay lower insurancepremiums because of their programs. "It may seem reasonable to assume thatdrug testing has a deterrent effect on drug use. . . . However,no finding of this eight-year AMA survey effort can confirm as astatistical certainty that testing does in fact deter use. . . .Testing cannot and should not be expected to take the place ofgood supervision. The American Management Association hasconsistently advised that. . . . Actions regarding employeediscipline be performance-based." Contents | Feedback | Search DRCNet Library | Schaffer Library | Miscellaneous Statements on DrugPolicyWT01-B27-16IA088-000636-B013-130http://206.61.184.43:80/schaffer/MISC/drinkwater.htm 206.61.184.43 19970122101420 text/html 6738HTTP/1.0 200 OKDate: Wednesday, 22-Jan-97 10:14:08 GMTServer: WebSitePro/1.1f (S/N wpo-0deb)Allow-ranges: bytesContent-type: text/htmlLast-modified: Saturday, 28-Dec-96 05:15:05 GMTContent-length: 6521 Simple Way to Beat Urine Tests - Just Drink Water Contents | Feedback | Search DRCNet Library | Schaffer Library | Miscellaneous Statements on DrugPolicy SIMPLE WAY TO BEAT URINE TESTS -- JUST DRINKWATER Report from American Academy of ForensicSciences Forensic Drug Abuse Advisor, Vol. 6, Issue 3,March 1994 Workplace drug testing programs can be foiledby adulterating the specimen, and the adulterants can be addedinside or outside of the body. Last summer it became apparentthat many peole were cheating by adding solutions of concentratedglutaraldehyde (Urinaid) to their voided sample. New data,presented in February at the annual meeting of the AmericanAcademy of Forensic Sciences (AAFS), suggests that there is asimpler way to foil urine screening tests: drink lots of water. Dr. Edward Cone of the Addiction ResearchCenter (ARC) in Baltimore, described the results of a study hehad undertaken at the request of Donna Smith, Acting Director ofthe Department of Transportation's (DOT) Office of DrugEnforcement. Smith was concerned that advertising claims for someherbal teas and "internal cleansing" agents mightactually be true. Cone was at first skeptical, but, as hereported at the AAFS meeting, the study was a"sleeper." Cone set up a series of experiments designed toassess the effect of various measures on "in vivoadulteration." Two of the most popular "teas" werechosen for study; Naturally Klean Herbal Tea" and"Golden Seal" root capsules. Healthy drug-freevolunteers with a history of recent drug use were recruited forthe study. They were housed in a closed ward for six weeks. Theparticipants were tested under a number of different protocolsduring that six week period. At 9:00 AM on the morning of Day One the studysubjects smoked a standardized marijuana cigarette (3.58% THC).On Day Three they snorted 40 mg of cocaine. Twenty three hoursafter each drug was given, they drank one of the followingcombinations: (1) "Naturally Klean Herbal Tea" in onegallon of water, (2) one gallon of water without any"cleansing agent" (3) one gallon of water with 50 mg ofhydrochlorothiadize (a diuretic), (4) four "GoldenSeal" capsules and one gallon of water, or (5) twelve ouncesof water. Each participant was tested under each protocol and allof the urine was collected. The urine specimens were then tested by EMIT IIassay for cannabinoids at a 50 ng / ml cutoff, and cocaine at a300 ng / ml cutoff. Specific gravity and creatinine content wasmeasured for each sample, and the two indicators were found toco-vary almost identically. Just drinking 12 ounces of water wasenough to cause a significant decrease in both specific gravityand creatinine, but not enough to cause a negative test response.For example, urine cannabinoids levels which were higher than10,000 ng / ml dropped to the low 100's after drinking 12 ouncesof water. After drinking a gallon of water, with or without oneof the "cleansing agents" added, it only took an hourfor the specific gravity to drop to less than 1.005. When one gallon of water was drunk, not onlydid specific gravity fall to very low levels (creatinine<20,and specific gravity <1.003), but the marijuana assay turnednegative and stayed that way, even after specific gravity levelshad returned to normal! The cocaine tests turned negative for afew hours, but then turned positive again. The same results wereobserved whether or not tea was used, however, when diureticswere given, the test for both cannabinoids and cocaine turnednegative and stayed that way. Cone concluded that "drug test outcome ishighly susceptible to water dilution; and the effects of dilutionare reflected concurrently in creatinine and specific gravitymeasures." COMMENT: This observation will cause someconsternation in the drug testing community, and create moreproblems than glutaraldehyde and Urinaid adulteration did. It isnot that difficult to develop detection strategies for chemicalslike glutaraldehyde. That may explain why the practice is alreadystarting to disappear, but setting standards for dilution will bemuch more difficult. Eventually, it may be necessary to measuredrug / creatinine ratios to rule out dilution. Since tests mayremain negative even after the specific gravity returns towardnormal, it appears that low specific gravities cannot be reliedupn to reveal "adulterated" specimens. Contents | Feedback | Search DRCNet Library | Schaffer Library | Miscellaneous Statements on DrugPolicyWT01-B27-17IA087-000625-B008-241http://206.61.184.43:80/schaffer/LIBRARY/testmny.htm 206.61.184.43 19970122040212 text/html 48804HTTP/1.0 200 OKDate: Wednesday, 22-Jan-97 04:02:00 GMTServer: WebSitePro/1.1f (S/N wpo-0deb)Allow-ranges: bytesContent-type: text/htmlLast-modified: Saturday, 28-Dec-96 06:41:48 GMTContent-length: 48586 Testimony of Marc Mauer of the Sentencing Project Contents | Feedback | Search DRCNet Library | Schaffer Library | Miscellaneous Statementson Drug Policy THE SENTENCING PROJECT TESTIMONY OF MARC MAUER , ASSISTANT DIRECTOR, THESENTENCING PROJECT Before the SUBCOMMITTEE ON LEGISLATION AND NATIONAL SECURITYand the SUBCOMMITTEE ON GOVERNMENT INFORMATION, JUSTICE ANDAGRICULTURE of the HOUSE GOVERNMENT OPERATIONS COMMITTEE May 2, 1990 Washington, D.C. 918 F St., N.W. * Suite 501 * Washington, D.C. 20004 * (202)628-0871 * FAX (202) 628-1091 Mr. Chairman, thank you for the opportunity to speak beforethe Subcommittee today on these important issues. The drug problem in our society is clearly one which is veryserious and which concerns all Americans. Although substanceabuse cuts across, all class and racial lines, the impact of thedrug problem has probably been greatest among low-income andminority communities. In my testimony today, I would like tofocus in particular on the impact of the war on drugs as itaffects Black and Hispanic communities. YOUNG BLACK MEN AND THE CRIMINAL JUSTICE SYSTEM In February of this year, my organization released a report onrace and the criminal justice system. The report, "YoungBlack Men and the Criminal Justice System: A Growing NationalProblem," received extensive attention and shocked much ofthe nation. The report documented that almost one out of fourBlack men in the age group 20-29 is under the control of thecriminal justice system -- prison, jail, probation or parole.This contrasts with one in sixteen white males and one in tenHispanic males. These figures for Black males, shocking as they are, actuallyunderstate the extent of the problem since our study only did aone-day count of the criminal justice system. If we were able tocalculate the rates for an entire year, or ten-year period, thenumber of Black males under criminal justice control would beconsiderably higher than one in four. There is also strong reason to believe that the figures forHispanics represent an undercount. There has been a great deal ofinconsistency in the way in which Hispanics are counted incriminal justice populations, and for many categories, thereexist a large number of offenders for whom no data exist onethnicity. Because of this, it is reasonable to conclude that therate of criminal justice control for young Hispanic males ishigher than one in ten. Also, since Hispanics are counted in thewhite criminal justice populations, the rate of criminal justicecontrol for non-Hispanic whites is therefore less than the one insixteen which we were able to document. Our report further found that the number of young Black men inthe criminal justice system -- 609,690 -- far exceeded the numberof Black men of all ages enrolled in higher education -- 436,000.These two figures taken together paint a very disturbing picture. As we noted in our report: For the Black community in general, nearly one-fourth of itsyoung men are under the control of the criminal justice system ata time when their peers are beginning families, learningconstructive life skills, and starting careers .... Unless thecriminal justice system can be used to assist more young Blackmales in pursuing these objectives, any potential positivecontributions they can make to the community will be delayed, orlost forever. Our report estimated that the direct costs to the criminaljustice system for the control of the 609,000 Black men in theirtwenties was $2.5 billion. Each offender who is incarcerated in astate prison costs the taxpayers at least $16,000 a year. l/Corrections costs have now reached the point where they arehaving a serious impact on state funding for necessary socialservices. In Michigan, for example, state spending forcorrections increased from 2.8 percent of the budget in 1984 to7.2 percent in 1988.2/ The National Conference of StateLegislators reports that state spending on corrections increasedby an average of 14.2 percent last year, contributing to"serious budget problems" that more than half thestates will face in 1990.3/ 1 The Corrections Yearbook, George M. and CamilleGraham Camp, Criminal Justice Institute, 1989. 2 "Drug Cases Clog the Courts," Debra Cassens Moss, ABAJournal, April 1990. 3 The State Fiscal Outlook: 1990 and the Coming Decade,National Conference of State Legislators, February 1990. WHY ARE SO MANY YOUNG BLACK MALES UNDER THE CONTROL OF THE CRIMINAL JUSTICE SYSTEM? It is important to analyze the factors which have led us tothis distressing situation. The reasons behind this are complex.Many are long-standing problems; others are a result of morerecent criminal justice policies. I would like to outline some ofthe primary causes of this problem, and then to discuss theimpact which the war on drugs has had. 1. "Get Tough" Sentencing Policies The U.S. Sentencing Commission and legislatures in almost allfifty states have adopted a variety of increasingly harshsentencing laws in the past decade. In addition, parole releasepolicies have become more restrictive in many states. Thecombined impact of these policies is that our prison and jailpopulations have doubled in the past decade, to the point wherethere are now more than one million Americans behind bars.Prisons in 41 states are under court order regarding overcrowdingand conditions of confinement. Record numbers of offenders arenow also straining our probation and parole systems. Mandatory minimum drug sentencing laws have played asignificant role in leading to these higher rates of criminaljustice control, particularly in regard to prison populations.Two recent highly publicized cases illustrate this: The American Lawyer reported on the case of SusanaSanchez-Robles, a migrant worker and mother of five whose husbandhad left her, leaving the family on welfare. Ms. Sanchez-Roblesdrove a drug-laden van across the border from Mexico, andreceived a mandatory ten-year prison term. Her five-year oldcries every evening. Says Ms. Sanchez-Robles: "I try to feelstrong, but my strength is just totally defeated when I remembermy children.4/ Richard Winrow is a 22-year old Los Angeles man who wasabandoned by his father as a boy. He and his seven siblings grewup poor, and Winrow ended up dropping out of high school andworking at low-wage jobs. A recent conviction for possession of 51/2 ounces of cocaine, a relatively small amount, was his thirddrug offense. Under new federal drug laws, Winrow was sentencedto life without the possibility of parole.5/ The dramatic increases in incarceration, parole and probationrates resulting from our "get tough" policies haveaffected all segments of society. The increase, however, has beenmost significant for Blacks and other minorities, who werealready disproportionately represented in the system. The rise in criminal justice populations has occurred withoutany clear-cut relationship to the crime rate. FBI reports for thepast decade indicate that crime rates have had periods of bothdecline and increase during these years, but that overall therewas only a 2 percent increase in crime rates between 1979-88.Crime rates rose again in 1989, even though the nation recordedthe highest increase ever in its prison population. 4 "Scott Wallace, "Mandatory Minimums, MandatoryMess," The Champion, May 1990. 5 Henry Weinstein and Charisse Jones " 'Guinea Pig' forDrug War or a Hardened Criminal?" The Los AngelesTimes, March 11, 1990. 2. Criminal Justice Focus on Crimes of the Poor The criminal justice system has historically been focused muchmore on "crime in the streets" than "crime in thesuites." Although we have seen some change in recent yearsin the prosecution of white collar offenses, crimes of the poorhave always received greater attention from the criminal justicesystem. Since Blacks and Hispanics are disproportionatelyrepresented among low-income people, this has contributed totheir over-representation in the criminal justice system. Thisdoes not imply that crimes of the poor are necessarily eithermore or less serious than crimes of the wealthy, but rather, thatwe have a system that functions at least in part in a verydiscretionary manner. 3. Race and the Criminal Justice System There has been a good deal of debate about the extent to whichrace influences criminal justice decision making. A recent studyby the RAND Corporation concludes that race was not a factor insentencing decisions in California.6/ It is important tonote, though, that California has a relatively rigid determinatesentencing system, which allows for less variability insentencing outcomes than in many other states. 6 "Race and Imprisonment Decisions in California,"Stephen Klein, Joan Petersilia, Susan Turner, Science,February 16, 1990. Our report found evidence that the criminal justice system maybe treating Black offenders differently than white offenders. Thenumber of young white males who are incarcerated, 247,000,slightly exceeds the number of incarcerated Black males, 212,000.The number of white males receiving probation, though, 697,000,vastly exceeds the figure for Black males, 305,000. While thenature of the offense or prior criminal history may explain thesefigures, a close examination of this disparity should beundertaken to determine to what extent racial bias is a factor. As the authors of the RAND study point out, as well as manyothers, race may play a more prominent role at the level ofarrest and prosecution, where greater discretion may be exercisedby police and prosecutors. This discretion may not always beracially motivated, but it may have a racial impact. To theextent that this is the case, a task for the courts is to attemptto offset any disparity that may have occurred throughappropriate sentencing. 4. Declining Social and Economic Support in BlackCommunities The relationship between social and economic conditions andindividual crime rates is a complex one. Not all poor people orunemployed people commit crimes, nor do all wealthy or employedpersons refrain from committing crimes. Personality traits,family support, community constraints, and other factors allinfluence individual behavior and the propensity to commit crime. Yet, as criminologist Elliott Currie has noted, "Theevidence for a strong association, between inequality and crimeis overwhelming ... It isn't, accidental, then, that amongdeveloped countries, the United States is afflictedsimultaneously with the worst rates of violent crime, the widestspread of income inequality, and the most severe public policiestoward the disadvantaged."7/ The stresses, strains, and lack of opportunity present in somany minority communities increase the likelihood, thatindividuals within that community will engage in criminalactivities, whether as a means of obtaining money, to support adrug habit, for a challenge, or for other reasons. Given these factors, we need to look at the deterioratingsocial and economic support in the Black community. Essentially,we find that on a broad range of variables, the situation ofBlacks in our society has declined over the past decade. TheCenter on Budget and Policy Priorities reports that totalappropriations for low income programs that are not entitlementsfell by 54 percent from FY 81 to FY 88, when adjusted forinflation. This included support for job training, health andsocial services, and housing programs. Also, although the numberof Americans living below the poverty line increased by 3.2million during this period, spending for food stamps decreased by15 percent when adjusted for inflation. Black households make up36 percent of all households receiving food stamps. Overall,these cuts affect Blacks and other minorities disproportionately,since they are disproportionately poor.8/ 5. Lack of Opportunity and Sense of Hopelessness An additional factor contributing to this situation is themost difficult to quantify, yet in some ways the mostsignificant. In many communities today, young people growing uphave little hope for the future. It is one thing for a collegestudent to work at a fast food restaurant as a summer job. It isentirely different for a young person to take on this kind of jobwhen there is little, expectation of rising above this entrylevel. The numbers in our report were not as shocking to most peoplein the Black community. Instead they confirmed what many haverecognized for years: for Black males, the criminal justicesystem has become almost an inevitable aspect of growing up. Thisis not to say that it is a "rite of passage," or anevent that is welcomed, but merely, that it is viewed as a partof the life cycle which is almost unavoidable. This is a very sadcommentary on our society. 7 Elliott Currie, Confronting Crime, Pantheon, NY,1985, pp. 146, 171. 8 Still Far from the Dream: Recent Developments in BlackIncome, Employment, and Poverty. Center on Budget and PolicyPriorities, Washington, D.C., October 1988. THE "WAR ON DRUGS" AND THE CRIMINAL JUSTICESYSTEM A final factor contributing to increased involvement in thecriminal justice system, particularly, among Black Americans, isthe war on drugs, and the means by which this war is being waged.This has been the result of two factors. First, the drug problem has been defined basically as a lawenforcement problem, and not a social problem. In terms of ourpolitical rhetoric, our funding priorities, and our policydiscussions, we have primarily chosen an approach whichemphasizes police and prisons over prevention and treatment. Thisis not a new approach, or one which Mr. Bennett's office hasinitiated unilaterally. Most states and localities have takenthis approach for many years, with unfortunately, little impacton either drug use, availability or drug-related crime. Second, although drug use and abuse occurs among all groups insociety, drug law enforcement is disproportionately weightedtoward inner city, low-income drug use, again primarily affectingBlacks and Hispanics. A few statistics, illustrate this problem.FBI data indicate that Blacks make-up an increasing percentage ofdrug arrests, having increased from 30 to 38 percent of the totalbetween 1984 and 1988. According to the National Institute onDrug Abuse, Blacks make up only 12 percent of those who useillegal drugs.9/ In Florida, Blacks now make up 73.3 percent of all prisonadmissions for drug offenses, compared to 53.6 percent for allother offenses.10/ If the war on drugs continues in its present fashion, ourprisons will become increasingly filled with Black youth. Theplight of young Black men and the Black community which wedescribed in our report will only worsen. POLICY RECOMMENDATIONS I do not believe that, the large number of Black males withinthe criminal justice system necessarily represents an intendedconsequence of our crime control policies. Unfortunately,however, as an unintended consequence of scores ofindividual sentencing laws, use of discretion in the criminaljustice system, and funding priorities, we have created a truecrisis for the Black community, for the criminal justice system,and for a nation that hopes to provide freedom and opportunityfor all citizens. A continuation of the war on drugs in themanner in which it has been fought, no matter how well-intended,will only exacerbate this situation. If we wish to address this problem in a serious manner,policymakers and criminal justice leaders need to respond in acomprehensive manner. Elements of such a strategy include: 9 Sam Meddis, "Drug arrest rate is higher for blacks; USAToday, December 20, 1989. 10 Austin, James and Aaron David McVey, "The Impact ofthe War on Drugs," National Council on Crime andDelinquency, San Francisco, 1989. 1. Increase Diversion from the Criminal Justice System Many young and minor offenders are only stigmatized by theircontact with the criminal justice system, without necessarilyreceiving either appropriate supervision or support.Opportunities exist to divert many of these offenders toorganizations and individuals who can better focus on theproblems of Black, Hispanic, and poor youth. *As a result of our report, for example, Black communityleaders in Memphis have formed a chapter of the 100 Black MenIncorporated. The group's goal is to reduce the number of Blackmen going into the criminal justice system. Its activities willinclude establishing mentor programs, developing mechanisms forkeeping Black youth in school, and working with young offendersin the juvenile justice system. Policymakers can encourage development of programs such asthese, and court officials can divert more defendants into them,thereby beginning to reduce the extent of criminal justicecontrol in many communities. 2. Sentencing to Ameliorate Racial Disparities Judges, prosecutors, defense attorneys, and probation officersall have a unique and important opportunity to lessen the drasticimpact which the justice system has had on Blacks and Hispanics.That opportunity comes at the time of sentencing. The courtroomsentencing process should include a full examination of thecircumstances of both victim and offender, and an analysis ofcommunity support and supervision mechanisms which may be able tocontribute to appropriate sentencing options. The goals of thisprocess should be several: to assess public safety concerns; torestore victims to the extent possible; to order appropriate andconstructive sanctions in the community; and, to reduce thechances that offenders will return to the system. As anorganization familiar with sentencing programs and sentencingreform efforts throughout the country, our staff knows that theseare attainable goals. Court officials should also establish mechanisms to monitorwhether minority offenders are appropriately represented innon-incarcerate sentencing alternatives, such as communitycorrections programs, house arrest and electronic monitoring. Ifdisparities exist, an analysis of the reasons for this should beundertaken. In the juvenile justice area, The National Council ofJuvenile and Family Court Judges is currently developing policyrecommendations to respond to the disproportionate incarcerationof minority youth. These may serve as a model which could beadopted for the criminal justice system. 3. Restore Appropriate Judicial Discretion White collar offenders such as Ivan Boesky and Oliver Northreceive a full consideration of appropriate sentencing options.For many of the indigent defendants filling up our nation'sprisons, mandatory and guideline sentencing virtually prohibitany consideration of alternative sentencing options. Abuse ofjudicial discretion needs to be carefully monitored, but use ofjudicial discretion to respond to individual and community needsat sentencing should be encouraged. 4. Encourage Courts to Make Greater Use of Alternatives toIncarceration Incarceration is by far the most costly component of thecriminal justice system. It has also not proved to be veryproductive as a means of reducing crime. A variety ofcommunity-based sanctions exist which have been demonstrated tobe appropriate punishments for a wide range of offenders. Theseinclude restitution to victims, community service work, intensiveprobation supervision, and provisions for treatment programs,education, and employment. My organization, The Sentencing Project, has helped developmany programs that offer courts alternatives to prison in a rangeof cases, and we have seen courts accept these alternatives inwell over half the cases presented. We know that judges can andwill make more use of alternatives, if given the opportunity todo so at sentencing. 5. Reduce Lengthy and Inefficient Prison Terms Mandatory sentencing laws and lengthier prison terms haveresulted in high costs, with only relatively modest gains incrime control. Prisoners are prevented from committing crimes inthe community while they are locked up but this represents only asmall fraction of all crimes. A 1978 report by the NationalAcademy of Sciences concluded that to achieve a 10 percentreduction in crime, New York would have had to increase itsprison population by 263 percent and Massachusetts by 310percent.11/ The massive increase in incarceration and lengthening ofprison terms provides almost no long-term benefits in reductionof recidivism. The most recent Justice Department study of thisissue shows that recidivism rates, while very high, are virtuallyidentical for prisoners who serve anywhere from one to fiveyears.12/ Therefore, "getting tough" results inhigh corrections costs, but leaves us with offenders who are noless likely to commit future crimes. Reducing lengthy prison terms by itself is not the answer tocrime. What it would accomplish though, is to relieve the burdenon an overcrowded system to reduce the impact of the system onminorities, and to free up tax dollars to be used for prevention,a more effective means of crime control. 11 National Research Council, Deterrence andIncapacitation: Estimating the Effects of Criminal Sanctions onCrime Rates, National Academy of Sciences, Washington, 1978. 12 Bureau of Justice Statistics, "Recidivism of PrisonersReleased in 1983," Washington, D.C., April 1989. 6. Require Racial/Ethnic Impact Statements from the Officeof National Drug Control Policy Given the serious impact of drugs and the drug war on minoritycommunities, I would suggest that the Office of National DrugControl Policy be required to submit an annual report on theimpact of its policies and funding priorities on racial andethnic communities. Such a report might include the degree towhich funding is made available to minority communities andorganizations, the impact of prosecution and incarceration onthese communities, and the number of persons receiving drugtreatment services. This type of analysis would help to provide afocus for policy considerations regarding minority communities. 7. Develop More Accurate Reporting Methods for Hispanics As noted above, there is reason to believe that Hispanics areundercounted in the criminal justice system due toinconsistencies in reporting methods and lack of data. It isimportant to develop policies and procedures that are consistentnationwide in order to assess the impact of criminal justicepolicies on Hispanic communities, and to enable the criminaljustice system to respond more appropriately to its variedpopulations. 8. Restore a Balanced Perspective on the Relative Role ofCriminal Justice Sanctions and Social and Economic Supports The criminal justice system does not necessarily provide thebest forum for reducing crime. As the American Bar AssociationCriminal Justice Section's Special Committee on Criminal Justicein a Free Society reported, of approximately 34 million seriouscrimes committed against persons or property in 1986, 31 millionnever resulted in arrest and only several hundred thousandresulted in felony convictions and imprisonment. Simply put, lawenforcement and court officials could, under the best ofconditions, effectively prosecute and punish only a small portionof overall criminal activity.13/ Our continued excessive emphasis on a law enforcement strategyto fight drugs fails to address the root causes of the drugproblem. Our emphasis on punitive criminal justice remediesdistracts us from more fundamental and potentially far-reachingquestions: why is it that citizens of one of the wealthiestnations and of all social classes use illegal substances to theextent that Americans do today? For inner city and low-income communities, these root causesare certainly more closely tied to poverty, lack of opportunity,poor education and health care, and lack of hope for the future,than to any lack of jail and prison cells. At the same time we have been waging a law enforcement war,with its own negative effects upon young Black males, conditionsfor Black communities have worsened on other fronts as well. Anew study by the National Center for Children in Poverty ofColumbia University documents that half of Black children and 40percent of Hispanic children under the age of six now live inpoverty.14/ It should be clear to those of us within thecriminal justice system as well as others, that unless weeffectively address issues of poverty immediately, we are likelyto see the next generation of Black males enter the criminaljustice system at a rate even higher than one in four. We have a choice. We can spend money on prisons, and onpolicies that are guaranteed to fill them with people who don'tneed to be in them, including many young Black men, or wecan spend more time, energy, creativity and money to keep morepeople out of the system entirely. Funding for poverty-fighting,crime-preventing programs should be viewed from the long-termperspective, as a preventive measure which will reduce criminaljustice costs in the future. 13 Criminal Justice in Crisis, American Bar Association(Chicago 1988) pp. 4,5. 14 Spencer Rich, "Report Says Children Under 6 HaveHighest Poverty Rate," The Washington Post, April 15,1990. CONCLUSION Of the scores of editorials which appeared in response to ourreport (see Appendix) almost all uniformly endorsed the range ofpolicy recommendations I have suggested here. This reaction showsthat the public may be much more ready for change than manypolicymakers have led us to believe. The funding and policy decisions we make today regarding ourapproach to the drug problem will have a direct impact on thenext generation of Black men. As an editorial in the Charleston(S.C.) Post/Courier noted, "If the festering cycle ofpoverty, violence and hate is not broken, more black men will bedoomed to lives of crime and years behind bars." APPENDIX : SELECTED NEWSCLIPPINGS "YOUNG BLACK MEN AND THE CRIMINAL JUSTICE SYSTEM: AGROWING NATIONAL PROBLEM" BEHINDBARS The numbers point to a need for preventive programs DETROIT FREE PRESS/THURSDAY, MARCH 1, 1990 It is a haunting snapshot: One million persons in U.S. jails and prisons, a number matched only by the Soviet Union. Almost one in four black men between 20 and 29 in prison or jail, on probation or parole on a single day in, 1989. (Over the course of the year, the number of individuals under the criminal justice system's control would be a good bit higher.) Comparable figures for white men are one in 16 and for Hispanic males one in 10. The number of young black men under the control of the criminal justice system - 609,690 - exceeds the total number of black men enrolled in college in 1986 - 436,000. For white males, the figures are 4.6 million in higher education and just more than one million in the criminal justice system. Those and other facts are contained in a new report by theSentencing Project, which argues persuasively that it's time fora look at hard goals and means in the criminal justice system.Even if the cost of incarcerating or otherwise controlling youngblack males weren't an astronomical 2.5 billion, even if prisonovercrowding weren't a national scandal, even if the prisonbuildup in Michigan and elsewhere weren't diverting attentionfrom other problems that would be true. The need for areassessment is made more compelling by the nationwide phenomenonthat more and longer sentences have come at a time of decliningcrime rates. The importance that the report by the Washington-based,nonprofit organization places on the racial and ethnicdisparities that exist is appropriate. In assessing the impact ofthe present system on the black community, though, it seems toignore that the vast majority of the victims of these youthfulblack offenders were black as well. The current, "gettough" stance of the system is popular among blacks, wholong saw crime in their communities ignored. The report, however, reasonably suggests a look atalternatives to incarceration, as well as more treatment programsand greater use of victim restitution programs. For some time - including 1986 when our year-long emphasis wasa "generation worth saving" - we've written about theneed for a long term strategy for intervening early to helpsalvage the lives of young people. Ten or 20 years from now, we'll be decrying similar - or worse- findings if prevention, rather than reaction, doesn't emerge asour top priority. BLACKSIN PRISON THE BIRMINGHAM NEWS, BIRMINGHAM, ALA., D. 169,060, AL-144, FEB28, 1990 It would be easy to jump to conclusions about a new study thatindicates one in four black men between the ages of 20 and 29 iseither in prison or jail on probation or parole. See, some willsay, I told you blacks were more likely to be criminals. That's not what the study says. What it does say is that youngblack men make up a much higher percentage of the prisonpopulation than they should. Lack of education, lack of job opportunities, a welfare systemthat has weakened families without curing poverty and a drugculture that has taken root in poor neighborhoods all have moreto do with why people become criminals than skin color. The statistics in The Sentencing Project report raise anumber of questions. For example, in 1989 there were 247,930whites in state prisons, jails and federal prisons, compared to212,252 blacks. With blacks comprising only about 12 percent of the entireU.S. population, those numbers should not be so close to equal.But they are. Why then, given a nearly equal number of blacks andwhites in prison, are there more than twice as many whites onprobation or parole (806,578) than blacks (397,438)? Crime rates nationally rose only 2 percent between 1979 and1988, yet the number of prison inmates doubled during that time.In other words, there hasn't been more crime, but there has beena tougher attitude toward criminals. More of them are being sentto jail and more of those being sent are black. As a result, 23 percent of all young black men (609,690) areto some degree under the control of the criminal justicesystem, compared to 6 percent of young white men (1,054,508).More young black men are getting their higher education in thecriminal justice system than in college (436,000). The Sentencing Project said the cost of incarcerating ormonitoring convicted young black men has reached $2.5 billion ayear. Then it pointed out that although the prison population hastripled since 1973, victimization rates have only dropped 5percent. The Project suggests more alternative sentencing - victimsrestitution, community service, etc. - as a cost-effective way tokeep young blacks out of prison. We agree. But those actions onlyaddress the problem after it has become a problem, which is theshortcoming of the U.S. criminal justice system. This nation needs a more effective system that interacts withpublic education and social services to reach young people, blackand white, before they become criminals. Locking them up is a belated and costly answer. ALOST GENERATION The San Diego Union, San Diego, Calif., D. 252,686, March 1,1990, BURRELLE'S It is a national tragedy that one of every four black Americanmen in their 20's has been convicted of a crime. This disturbingstatistic has complex roots in a drug-ridden society whereincentives to work for a better life have been steadilyundermined. According to a study released by the Sentencing Project, aWashington-based nonprofit group, 25 percent of black men intheir 20s are in jail, in prison or on probation or parole. Thisnumber refers only to those actually convicted of does notinclude suspects who are arrested and released. By contrast onlyabout 6 percent of white men in their 20s are being held orsupervised by criminal courts. Marc Mauer, author of the re port, rightly points out thatAmerica now faces the frightening prospect of "writing offan entire generation of black men, from leading productivelives.'' The implications of the report are ominous. From almost everystandpoint - education, health, income, mortality and familyunity - black men are one of the nation's most troubled groups.Health and Human Services Secretary Louis W. Sullivan , who isknown for alarmist statements, puts it aptly: " Not sinceslavery has so much calamity and ongoing catastrophe been visitedon black males." The causes of the crisis are many and varied. Drug abuseobviously is a prime factor. Poverty and lack of employment addto the problem. Well-intentioned welfare programs have erodedtraditional values and helped create a permanent underclass.Despite the best efforts of legislators, discrimination stillexists. Most of these causes are exacerbated by inadequateeducation, poor self-esteem and resultant feelings of despair. Herb Cawthorne, chairman of San Diego's Black Federation,agrees that better education and more job opportunities wouldreduce the crime rate among young black men. But he alsoperceives the need to address what he calls " this serious,systemic problem" in a practical way by urging blacks tostand up and help themselves. "They must not think their situation is hopeless,"he says. "When that happens, anger and resentment build uptoward society and irresponsible behavior results." The Sentencing Project report makes no attempt to explain whyso many black men run afoul of the law but contends that it iscounterproductive merely to lock them up. Mr. Mauer recommendsalternatives such as forcing criminals to repay their victims orwork on community projects. The report's main contribution is to spur national debate on asubject that has become too critical to neglect. We as a nationmust recognize that far too many young black men are in deeptrouble. A battle must be waged to break the festering cycle ofviolence and hate that dooms so many to lives of crime and yearsbehind bars. GENERATIONOF BLACK MALES NOW AT RISK Rockford Register Star, Rockford, Il, Saturday March 3, 1990 There are truly shocking implications in a new study reportshowing that nearly one in every four American black males intheir 20s is behind bars or on probation or parole. This terriblestatistic suggests, as one of the authors of the study puts it,that the nation now risks " the possibility of writing offan entire generation of black men from leading productivelives." The causes of this frightening situation are of both recentand long-standing issue. Obviously, the familiar factor ofgrinding poverty in the black underclass is involved. Widespreaddisintegration of black families, for a number of reasons, isanother cause. The growth of the crack-cocaine culture in urbanghettos is yet another. On top of all that, there has been in recent years the spreadof get-tough policies in dealing with street crime - moreprisons, longer sentences, more mandatory sentences. If theproduct of this popular strategy is the loss of a wholegeneration of black men, it would seem to merit rethinking. That's also the attitude of The Sentencing Project, thenonprofit organization that sponsored the study report. It callsfor reforms in the criminal justice system calculated to makefirst-time lawbreakers less likely to become repeat offenders. The point is well made. For 20 years, the popular approach tocrime has been to hire more police, build more prisons, appointtougher judges, hand down sterner sentences - and for all of thatwe find that crime rates have only increased. Alternatives alongthe lines suggested by the Sentencing Project merit exploration. These would include alternative punishments (restitution tovictims, community service) and programs of drug treatment,employment training and education for first-time offenders.Prison should be last resort after alternatives have failed, asthe study report recommends. In recent decades, this nation has spent hundreds of billions,even trillions, of dollars to defend itself against the menace ofinternational communism. With that threat now on the wane,perhaps it is time that we devote more of our resources to savingthe country from the awful consequences that are sure to accruefrom the moral and economic incapacitation of an entiregeneration of black men by lives of crime. AGENERATION IS UNDER ARREST DURHAM MORNING HERALD, DURHAM, NC, DAILY 46,324, TUESDAY MAR6, 1990, BURRELLE'S One black man behind bars, on probation or on parole is anindividual; two-thirds of a million is a statistic. That's howwe've looked at the growing plight of young black males, asstatistics rather than individuals. A study released a few days ago by the Sentencing Project, anon-profit organization that promotes alternative punishments andsentencing reform, helps put the problems of black males instunning perspective. Analyzing figures obtained from the U.S. Justice Department,researchers concluded that one in four black males between theages of 20 and 29 is in trouble with the law. He is either injail, on probation or on parole. If these figures are accurate - the Justice Department didn'tdispute them - they reveal the outline of a social disaster whoserepercussions will be with us for a long time. Consider: 609,690 young blacks were under control of the criminal justice system in mid 1989. That's 23 percent of the entire black male population aged 20-29. Although 1,054,058 white men in the same age category were under control of the criminal justice system, they represented only 6.2 percent of the 20-29 age group. The number of black men in college was roughly 436,000. In other words, more young black men face officers of the lawthan face professors of English. It's hard not to agree with MarcMauer, author of The Sentencing Project study, when he says,"We now risk the possibility of writing off an entiregeneration of black men from leading productive lives." Indeed, that already may be happening. Young black men are 10times more likely to be murdered than their white counterparts.Murder is the primary cause of death among black males aged 15 to44 - a death rate so high it has become the major factor in thefalling life expectancy of American blacks as a whole. Mr. Mauer argues against building more prison cells, theapproach generally favored in North Carolina, and putting morestress on counseling, dispute resolution and other alternativesto prison. He would also give judges broad sentencing guidelinesthat would allow them to tailor a criminal's punishment to hissituation. Mr. Mauer's recommendations address only the surface tensionof a much deeper pool of problems. The driving forces behind thefailure of so many young black men to thrive in today's societycan be traced to an environment of crime, drugs and familydisintegration. There is no simple answer to what is happening to them, butone place to start looking for it is in jobs. The federalgovernment's Job Corps program now takes about 65,000 youngstersa year, a figure that could be doubled by Congress at the cost oftwo B-2 bombers. Congress should also consider some form ofvoluntary national service, perhaps along the lines of theDepression-era Civilian Corps, to teach job skills and foster asense of self- achievement. Business can help through innovative hiring practices and bysupporting school reform. Professionals and other well-educatedpeople can give a few hours a month to tutoring programs. Onlywhen the young black male emerges as a whole person rather than astatistic in such endeavors will we see not only the measure ofhis problems, but also the opportunities to help him. WASTINGA GENERATION OF YOUNG BLACKS IN PRISONS CALIFORNIAN, EL CAJON, CA, DAILY 22,337, SATURDAY MAR 3, 1990 More depressing news is difficult to imagine: One in everyfour black men in their 20s is in jail, in prison, on probationor parole. At a time when they should be graduating from collegesand universities, settling into good jobs, getting married andraising families, many of them sit in fetid prison cells, doingnothing constructive for themselves or for society. Martin Luther King chanted the refrain "Free atlast," but loosing the shackles of bondage caused bydiscriminatory practices unfortunately did not improve by muchthe status of what has been called the vast"underclass" of blacks with no jobs, little education,and no future. "We now risk the possibility of writing off an entiregeneration of black men from leading productive lives," saidMarc Mauer, author of a report by The Sentencing Project,a Washington based group lobbying for alternatives toincarceration. "This has ominous implications for the blackcommunity. We really don't know what it will mean for the futurebecause we have never had a situation like this before." A quarter of a century, more or less, has passed since thecivil rights marches of the 1960s, the burning of Watts and therage of probably a dozen cities in this country. How far have wecome? Not far at all. Although blacks make up only about 12 percent of the nation'spopulation, there are more black inmates in state prisons thanwhites. Among the young males, 23 percent of the blacks end up inprison or on probation or parole; 6 percent of the whites in thesame age category are in that predicament. At the beginning of the conservative era with the inaugurationof Ronald Reagan, there was much talk of establishing"enterprise zones" in the ghettos of large cities. Thiswas to be the Republican answer to "throwing money atproblems." If there are any models of "enterprise zones" thathave brought economic vitality to the most depressed areas oflarge cities, they must be the best-kept secrets of theReagan-Bush and Bush-Quayle administrations. With unemployment athigh levels, black youths turn to drug trade for theirlivelihood. A completely separate report prepared for the University ofCalifornia reveals that the number of blacks entering the UCsystem is low - only 4.5 percent of black high school graduatesin California are eligible compared to 14.1 percent of the whitegraduates. One more door is closed that, if opened, would change thepicture for the future of young blacks. It should come as no surprise that the cost of incarceratingthe large numbers of blacks in prison, and supervising them whilethey are on probation or parole, is staggering. It's put at $2.5billion. What a colossal waste when so much could be done with thatmoney to teach young blacks the skills necessary for good-payingjobs or improve their educational levels so they could go on tocollege and be rewarded with positions that offer prestige andcompensation equal to what their white counterparts receive. We are preparing for a blighted future when so many youngblacks view entry into the drug trade as their only way out ofpoverty and squalor. It will require a national administrationwith a more realistic grasp of what is needed to reverse thisominous trend than the platitudes and empty symbolism offered bythe Bushes and the Qualyes. (dch) Contents | Feedback | Search DRCNet Library | Schaffer Library | Miscellaneous Statementson Drug PolicyWT01-B27-18IA087-000625-B008-265http://206.61.184.43:80/schaffer/GovPubs/CJSREFRM.HTM 206.61.184.43 19970122040221 text/html 19043HTTP/1.0 200 OKDate: Wednesday, 22-Jan-97 04:02:16 GMTServer: WebSitePro/1.1f (S/N wpo-0deb)Allow-ranges: bytesContent-type: text/htmlLast-modified: Saturday, 28-Dec-96 06:17:11 GMTContent-length: 18825 Criminal Justice System Reform by Judge Thomas M. Stark Contents | Feedback | Search DRCNet Library | Schaffer Library | Miscellaneous Statementson Drug Policy Appellate Term Supreme Court of the State of New York 9th and 10th Judicial Districts THOMAS M. STARK ASSOCIATE JUSTICE SUPREME COURT CHAMBERS CRIMINAL COURTSBUILDING RIVERHEAD, N.Y, 11901-9007 (516) 852-2157 August l0, 1993 The New York Times Executive and Editorial Offices 229 West 43rd Street New York, N.Y. Re: Criminal Justice System reforms Gentlemen: From time to time you have published articles concerning theCriminal Justice System of New York State, and have commented onvarious proposals to reform the system. In this regard, theCorrectional Association of New York is probably the mostknowledgeable state-wide group which studies the problems andrecommends legislation to amend various sections of the New YorkState Penal Law and Criminal Procedure Law. Over the past several years, I have studied and suggestedvarious reforms, which, if enacted, would reduce the number ofinmates serving indeterminate sentences of imprisonment in theState prison system. The second felony offender law (Penal Law70.06) mandatesprison sentences of defendants convicted of any felony (whetherviolent or not) during the ten years period following the firstfelony offense (again whether violent or not). Because of thislaw, there are thousands of prisoners serving time incorrectional facilities for low grade non-violent felonyconvictions, and who must serve one-half of their maximumsentences before parole consideration (as compared to firstfelony offenders which must serve only one-third of their maximumsentences). Judges have no discretion in sentencing second felonyoffenders. The Correctional Association, Governor Cuomo, and many others,have annually urged the Legislature to repeal the second felonyoffender law and authorize judges to impose prison sentences, oralternative non-prison sentences, depending on mitigating oraggravating factors in each case. I believe this has never comeabout because the legislators fear being perceived as "softon crime." Other reforms are badly needed. Under the Rockefeller druglaws (Penal Law Article 220-Controlled Substance Offenses),offenders must be sentenced to prison regardless of whether theoffender is a "street seller" (probably an addictselling to support his own addiction), or a higher level seller.Most offenders convicted of these crimes receive no treatment fortheir addiction. The Penal Law should be amended to authorizejudges to impose alternate sentences coupled with drug treatmentin the community. Here again, legislators fear being labeled"soft on crime". The third area where reform is badly needed is the granting ofgood behavior time to imprisoned convicts to reduce theirsentences. When the new Penal Law was enacted in the mid-sixties,it provided that an inmates' good behavior time could only beapplied to one-third of the maximum sentence (Penal Law 70.30(4) Corrections Law 703-b) . The former Penal Law-applied thegood time to the minimum sentence. Under that earlier law,Inmates had an incentive to reduce their minimum sentence bycomplying with all the rules and regulations governing goodbehavior. There is no longer such incentive available to today'sconvict. The Correctional Association has championed the repeal of themandatory second felony offender law, and giving discretion tojudges to impose an alternate sentence. The Association alsorecommends legislation to apply good behavior time to the minimumsentence. In this regard, I am enclosing a copy of theCorrectional Association Newsletter published this past March,which sets forth the position of the Association and its reasons.I am also enclosing a copy of a pessimistic CorrectionalAssociation letter to me dated June 8, 1993. These reforms have been included in the Governor's criminaljustice proposals for several years. I am enclosing a copy of aletter to me dated June 17, 1993, from Counsel to the New YorkState Director of Criminal Justice, with a frank conclusion thatthe Governor's proposals are not likely to be enacted. In addition to the Correctional Association position, the NewYork State Commissioner of Correctional Services, Thomas A.Coughlin III, has spoken out strongly in favor of the proposedreforms. I am enclosing a copy of his testimony given at ameeting of the Assembly Codes Committee on June 8, 1993. Hecomments as to several reforms in the system, and the reasons whythe law should be modified or changed, including the harshRockefeller drug laws, and the rigidity of the second felonyoffender law. Mr. Coughlin's views are shared by Governor Cuomo,but no action has been taken by the Legislature because of thefear of being labeled "soft on crime." I believe thatif the members of the Legislature would consider these reforms onthe merits, and explain the reasons to their constituents, thiswould eliminate the "soft on crime" aspect of thereforms. On March 23, 1993, you published an extensive article writtenby Francis X. Clines, beginning on page B-1, concerning theharshness of the drug laws, and told the story of inmate LawrenceV. Cipollone, who is serving a lengthy drug sentence and isseeking executive clemency from the Governor later this year. I,and many others, are actively supporting Mr. Cipollone's request.On July 27, 1993, you published an article concerning theGovernor's December 29, 113,12, grant of executive clemency toLawrence Snider, an inmate serving time for drug offenses. Thearticle was written by Peter Marks, and started on page A-1. Itreviews the harshness of the Rockefeller drug laws as they punisha low-level street drug seller. While on the subject of executive clemency, there is aremarkable story concerning Mr. Thomas E. Ventura of 278 NorthCountry Road, Miller Place, Long Island, which might be ofinterest to you in subsequent articles on this subject. In thefall of 1974, Mr. Ventura, age 23 at that time, was charged inSuffolk County with sale and possession of more than one ounce ofmarijuana on November 4, 1974. He was also charged with sale andpossession of more than one ounce of cocaine on December 4, 1974.He was convicted as charged, after a jury trial on October5,1978. On November 2, 1978, he was sentenced to lifeimprisonment, with a minimum of fifteen years. His conviction wasaffirmed by the Appellate Division on November 10, 1980, andLeave to Appeal to the Court of Appeals was denied on December15, 1980. While in prison, Mr. Ventura began an extensive educationaleffort. It included: (1) 1980-Osborn School, Auburn CorrectionalFacility-Mechanical Drafting. (2) 1983-Ulster County CommunityCollege- an Associate Degree in Liberal Arts, maintaining a gradepoint average of 4.0. (3) 1985-State University of New York atNew Paltz, a Bachelor of Arts Degree, majoring in psychology andsociology. His grade point average was 3.96, and he graduated summacum laude, and was Valedictorian of his class. Mr. Venturaapplied for Executive Clemency in 1986, after serving seven andone-half years, (one-half of his minimum sentence). I hadextensive correspondence with Mr. Ventura in the fall of 1986concerning his application. After reviewing the situation onNovember 13, 1986, I recommended that Governor Cuomo grantclemency to Mr. Ventura. There were compelling reasons for theGovernor's action. Mr. Ventura's application was also supportedby the then District Attorney of Suffolk County, Patrick Henry,and many other persons within the correctional system, who werefamiliar with Mr. Ventura's accomplishments while in prison. On Christmas Eve, December 24, 1986, Governor Cuomo grantedclemency, and Mr. Ventura was conditionally released on paroleseveral days later. After his release, Mr. Ventura began thestudy of law at Touro Law School in Huntington. He received hisJuris Doctor Degree on May 30, 1993. Mr. Ventura received theAmerican Jurisprudence Award For Excellence. He also served asEditor-in-Chief of the Law Journal. While attending law school,Mr. Ventura served as: (1) student library assistant; (2) anintern with the Touro Criminal Law Clinic; and (3) law internjudicial clerk with Hon. Alfred E. Lama of the New York StateSupreme Court. He is presently serving as a law intern in theoffice of Scott Zamek, Esq., of Melville. I believe that Mr. Ventura's outstanding rehabilitation whilein prison and his activities after release could be the subjectof a New York Times article at an appropriate time. Hisstory demonstrates the harshness of the Rockefeller drug laws.After being found guilty of sale and possession of a small amountof narcotic drugs, Mr. Ventura's life sentence was mandated. In an interesting recent development, a Long Termers (thoseserving sentences of more than ten years) Committee at WoodbournePrison has begun publication of a Newsletter containing theirhopes for criminal justice reforms, including the proposal tochange the application of good behavior time to the minimumsentence. These Newsletters are excellently written, and theCommittee is attempting to promulgate the Newsletter to a widespectrum of individuals and organizations concerned with reformsof the Criminal Justice System. I am enclosing copies of theMarch, April-May, June and July Newsletters, and a copy of theinmates' letter to me. The work of this Committee should bepublicized as much as possible, especially to legislators andappropriate state officials. One might ask why I am so concerned with Criminal JusticeSystem reform. I have acquired knowledge and experience during mymany years service in the State judiciary. I have been a trialjudge in the County Court of Suffolk County and subsequently inthe Criminal Term of the New York State Supreme Court for overthirty years. I have presided over hundreds of criminal trials,pre-trial and post-trial hearings, sentencing proceedings andmiscellaneous criminal court matters. Since 1985, In addition tomy other duties, I serve as an Associate Justice of the AppellateTerm of the Supreme Court in the Ninth and Tenth JudicialDistricts. Over one-half of the appeals are from convictions inthe local criminal courts (District Courts of Nassau and Suffolk,City Courts in the Ninth Judicial District, and Town and VillageCourts in both judicial districts). When I first came on the bench, I had wide discretion toimpose sentences, both of imprisonment, and alternate sentenceswithin the community, mainly sentences of probation. Over theensuing years, the Penal Law has been amended so as to mandatesentences of imprisonment for a large number of crimes. No longerhave judges authority to choose an appropriate sentence basedupon the facts of the crime, the criminals background and otherfactors. In recent years, judges have become "rubberstamps", imposing bargained-for sentences between theDistrict Attorney and the offender. A judge generally takes nopart in the sentence bargaining, which is first presented to himat the guilty plea proceeding. The only right reserved by thejudge is to permit a defendant to withdraw his guilty plea if thejudge has decided, after reviewing the written presentenceinvestigation, to impose a stiffer sentence than the onebargained-for. A defendant in this situation may either acceptthe judge's intended sentence, or withdraw his guilty plea, andeither be tried or to attempt to negotiate another sentence. There is little chance of the present Legislature amending thePenal Law to give judges discretion in determining appropriatesentences. Here again, the legislators perception of the votersbeing against them as being "soft on crime", preventsserious legislative consideration of these needed reforms in theCriminal Justice System. In this letter, I have attempted to set forth what many of usbelieve should be done to reform the New York State's CriminalJustice System. In an effort to obtain greater coverage of thissubject, I have written several times to the Long Islandnewspaper Newsday, and I am enclosing copies of my lettersof March 25, 1993, and April 12, 1993, and a copy of my April 12,1993 letter to the New York State Director of Criminal Justice. My present effort is to obtain wide promulgation of theseimportant issues. I am confident that The New York Times,as the quintessential leader of newspapers published in New YorkState, will, at an appropriate time, add its voice to theseefforts. Very truly yours, THOMAS M. STARK TMS/ml Encs. Appellate Term Supreme Court of the State of New York 9th and 10th Judicial Districts THOMAS M. STARK SUPREME COURT CHAMBERS ASSOCIATE JUSTICE CRIMINAL. COURTS BUILDING RIVERHEAD, N.Y. 11901-9007 (516) 8S2-2157 August 11, 1993 Hon. Ralph J. Marino Majority Leader New York State Senate 68 West Main Street Oyster Bay, New York 11771 Re: Criminal Justice System reforms Dear Senator Marino: For the past several years, I have become quite concerned overproblems in the State Criminal Justice System, and believe thatcertain legislative reforms are necessary to modify or amend thePenal Law and Criminal Procedure Law to accomplish these reforms. The Correctional Association of New York is probably the mostknowledgeable state-wide group which studies these problems, andrecommends appropriate legislation. I have summarized my views of the entire situation, and I amenclosing a copy of my recent letter to the New York Timeson these subjects, together with various appendices. I have long supported the Governor's Criminal Justiceproposals and have been disappointed each year when theLegislature, for various reasons, fails to act. I believe that this inaction is predicated on their beliefthat supporting these reforms would lead to a perception by thevoters that they were "soft on crime". This is mostunfortunate. I am attempting to promulgate my views and those ofothers to as many persons, organizations, and news media as ispossible. I sincerely hope that the Governor's proposals receive abetter reception in the 1994 session. Very truly yours, THOMAS M. STARK TMS/ml Enc. Appellate Term Supreme Court of the State of New York 9th and 10th Judicial Districts THOMAS M. STARK SUPREME COURT CHAMBERS ASSOCIATE JUSTICE CRIMINAL COURTS BUILDING RIVERHEAD. N.Y. 11901-9007 (516) 852-2157 August 11, 1993 Hon. Saul Weprin Speaker, New York State Assembly 61-08A- 224th Street Bayside, New York 11346 Re: Criminal Justice System reforms Dear Speaker Weprin: For the past several years, I have become quite concerned overproblems in the State Criminal Justice System, and believe thatcertain legislative reforms are necessary to modify or amend thePenal Law and Criminal Procedure Law, to accomplish thesereforms. The Correctional Association of New York is probably the mostknowledgeable state-wide group which studies these problems, andrecommends appropriate legislation. I have summarized my views of the entire situation, and I amenclosing a copy of my recent letter to the New York Timeson these subjects, together with various appendices. I have long supported the Governor's Criminal Justiceproposals and have been disappointed each year when theLegislature, for various reasons, fails to act. I believe that this inaction is predicated on their beliefthat supporting these reforms would lead to a perception by thevoters that they were "soft an crime." This is mostunfortunate. I am attempting to promulgate my views and those ofothers to as many persons, organizations, and news media as ispossible. I believe your view of the Governor's annual crime proposalsare similar to mine, and I sincerely hope that the Governor'sproposals receive a better reception in the 1994 session. Very truly yours, TMS/ml THOMAS M. STARK Enc. Contents | Feedback | Search DRCNet Library | Schaffer Library | Miscellaneous Statementson Drug Policy WT01-B27-19IA088-000636-B013-150http://206.61.184.43:80/schaffer/MISC/downshow.htm 206.61.184.43 19970122101427 text/html 13114HTTP/1.0 200 OKDate: Wednesday, 22-Jan-97 10:14:19 GMTServer: WebSitePro/1.1f (S/N wpo-0deb)Allow-ranges: bytesContent-type: text/htmlLast-modified: Saturday, 28-Dec-96 05:17:02 GMTContent-length: 12896 America Held Prisoner by Hugh Downs Contents | Feedback | Search DRCNet Library | Schaffer Library | Miscellaneous Statements on DrugPolicy AMERICA HELD PRISONER by Hugh Downs Recorded: April 14, 1994 I received a letter from Mr. Clifford A. Schaffer recently.Clifford Schaffer is the co-author of the Resolution for aFederal Commission on Drug Policy, the now famous HooverResolution that seeks to end the violence caused by the infamouswar on drugs. I long ago realized that a shooting war waged against amedical condition is inappropriate. I have never reallyunderstood why it is that so many individuals in the governmentcould have chosen such an ill-advised and disastrous course, andperhaps I never will understand. But Mr. Schaffer tells me thatthe situation is worse than I had imagined. I should say at the outset that I learned that CliffordSchaffer is the man who coined that most quotable of quotes,"More Colombians die from American tobacco than the numberof Americans who die from Colombian cocaine." I have foundthis particular fact a sobering notion to ponder and haverepeated it, even on this program. Now that I know the source, heshould get credit. His letter contained many such startling factsabout the bloody and unjust "war against drugs" --facts that made me stop and wonder why we continue to fight it.Mr. Schaffer tells me that in six short years, in the year 2000,the United States of America will have a prison population biggerthan all the Nazi concentration camps put together. Let's put this projection into perspective. Mr. Schaffer says,"Right now we have about 1.3 million people in prison. Morethan 600,000 of them are there for non-violent drug offenses. Forevery person who died from illegal drugs last year, 150 peoplewent to prison. Most of them were black men." The expense of maintaining a prison population is staggering.If nearly half of them don't belong there, then something isterribly wrong. As the drug war escalates, more prisoners will be taken andmore dead and wounded will litter our streets. Remember, by theyear 2000 we will have more prisoners than all the Naziconcentration camps combined. Mr. Schaffer's prediction seemsalmost incredible, but one look down the street will convincealmost anybody that America is a dangerous place. Many foreigngovernments routinely issue warnings to their traveling citizensthat America is a dangerous place. We are, after all, at war. Drug warriors justify their war against the American people byclaiming that certain illegal drugs are killing our children,killing adults, and generally ruining our society. But look atthe figures on drugs and death. In a typical year, theapproximate number of people who die from taking cocaine hoversaround 2,500 people. Heroin deaths are less than that, at about2,000. To give some perspective to these numbers, it's useful tobear in mind that 2,000 people die every year from takingaspirin, too. Aspirin can cause catastrophic intestinal bleedingand death. And can be easily used to that effect, legally, bysuicides. Tobacco which, so far, is still a legal drug, kills around400,000 people every year. The government supports tobaccoproduction, and helps to sell American tobacco products aroundthe world. Another 50,000 people die from sidestream tobaccosmoke. These deaths occur in people who don't smoke at all; theyjust happen to inhale other people's smoke. Ironically, tobaccois considered such an acceptable drug that, according to PeterMcWilliams, four major tobacco companies (in other words, drugdealers) became "partners" in the anti-drug groupPartnership for a Drug-Free America. Every year, approximately 10,000 people die from prescriptiondrugs. Some of these deaths are due to miscalculatedself-medication; others are due to interaction with existingmedical conditions (or with other drugs) that were unforeseen orignored by the prescribing physician; and I'd guess that some ofthese deaths were intentional suicides too. The total number of deaths due to all the illegal drugscombined is about 4,500 people. Now compare 4,500 deaths with thenumber of deaths due to prescription drugs, alcohol (which isabout 80,000 people), tobacco, over-the-counter aspirin, andsidestream smoke. The total number of deaths due to these legaldrugs is well over 500,000 people -- every year. Themulti-billion dollar drug war ignores the half-a-million deathsdue to legal drugs and instead makes the illogical claim that4,500 deaths due to illegal drugs justifies a multi-billiondollar shooting war. So far, I have not mentioned marijuana. Marijuana is illegaland tens of thousands of non-violent people are in prison becauseof it. There are no deaths attributed to marijuana use. Nobodydies. In fact, Mr. Schaffer tells us that "Even the DEAitself says that there has not been a recorded death due tomarijuana in the history of the United States." Apparently, millions of Americans continue to smoke marijuanaregardless of the law and regardless of the war waged againstthem. Neither prohibitive law nor official brutality seems tohave it's intended effect. There is something else about marijuana which grabs ourattention. Marijuana is also a pharmaceutical drug that hasestablished therapeutic use in a variety of medical conditions.But, since it is caught up in the hysteria of the drug war,doctors are prohibited from conducting research on marijuana andpatients are deprived of its benefits. A recently published book called Marihuana, the ForbiddenMedicine tells all. The authors of this book are Lester Grinspoonand James Bakalar. Dr. Grinspoon is a medical doctor and anassociate professor of psychiatry at the Harvard Medical School.Mr. Bakalar is an associate editor of the Harvard Mental HealthLetter and a lecturer in law in the Department of Psychiatry atHarvard. The authors record a surprising number of therapeutic uses formarijuana -- the list considers more than twenty years ofresearch. Marijuana counteracts the violent effects ofchemotherapy used in cancer treatment --- and to those who saythat marijuana must be bad because it is smoked and smoking isbad, Dr. Grinspoon points out that the more powerful strains ofmarijuana found today actually require less smoking to obtaintherapeutic levels. Patients consistently report that syntheticversions do not work. The pressure on the eyes resulting from glaucoma is relievedwith marihuana use. The amelioration of other conditions, too,are on record; and conditions that include epilepsy, multiplesclerosis, paraplegia and quadriplegia; AIDS; chronic pain;migraine; pruritis; menstrual cramps and labor pain; and evendepression and other mood disorders. It makes you stop and think. Here is a weed, growing wild thatmillions use whether there is a law against it or not. It killsno one. It has been in continuous use for about 5,000 years thatwe know of, and it has recognized medical applications. And yetthe government is waging a deadly and expensive war against it. This mystery deepens considerably when we learn that thegovernment sits on an impressive pile of studies that recommendthe decriminalization of, not only marijuana, but of severalother drugs as well. In 1944, there was the LaGuardia Committee Report; in 1967there was the Baroness Wootton Report published by the governmentof Great Britain. In 1969, the Canadian government published theReport of the Canadian Government Commission of Inquiry into theNon-Medical Use of Drugs. In 1972, there was Dealing with DrugAbuse: A Report to the Ford Foundation. Also in 1972 theConsumers Union Report on Licit and Illicit Drugs came out. In 1973, the US Federal Government itself published the Reportof the National Commission on Marihuana and Drug Abuse. In 1980,the United States Drug Abuse Council published The Facts AboutDrug Abuse. In 9182 there was An Analysis of Marijuana Policy andmost recently, the state of California's study titled, The Reportof the California State Research Advisory Panel. All of these official studies urge decriminalization. The alsoadd the sensible caution that all drugs are dangerous drugs. Manydrug war proponents are aware of these studies but mysteriously,they continue a reign of bloodshed in spite of the evidence. Theycontinue to panic the nation with myths and half truths aboutdrug use. Based on fictions, and fallacies, the drug warriorsextract billions of dollars from the public treasury and ruin thelives of people who, in many cases, are already in ruinouscondition and need medical attention. At the beginning of their book, Dr. Grinspoon and Mr. Bakalarquote another, earlier Harvard professor, Alfred North Whitehead.Whitehead said, "The rejection of any source of evidence isalways treason to that ultimate rationalism which urges forwardscience and philosophy alike." Many Americans are in step with this sentiment and condemnthose people who champion violence and drug hysteria ascommitting precisely this kind of treason. The evidence thaturges use to decriminalize drugs and stop the violence isplentiful. I find it hard to imagine that the drug warriors are really sodull-witted that they cannot grasp this evidence or that theycannot grasp the findings of their peers. In fact, it is entirelypossible that some of them actually do grasp the facts anddishonestly argue against them. But why would anyone do that? Dr. Grinspoon and Mr. Bakalar make a fascinating suggestion asto why this could be true. They say, "Attitudes towardminorities, work, worldly success and failure, sex and familylife may be the real issues in the controversy about drugs. Drugsare symbols charged with cultural tension. Repressed anxietiesmay be displaced onto drug users as a form of scapegoating." The authors point out that "We do not fine or jail thepatients of someone who practices medicine without a license, orthe customers of a manufacturer who disobeys consumer protectionlaws, yet mere possession of cannabis and other illicitpsychoactive drugs is a Federal crime. The metaphor of war israrely invoked in the name of consumer protection but constantlyused in the assault on psychoactive drugs. The reason is thatlaws controlling these drugs are ultimately aimed not at consumerprotection but at containing what is believed to be a threat tothe social fabric and moral order." But, in light of all the government studies, and the growingnumber of Americans who have signed the Hoover Institution'sResolution for a Federal Commission on Drug Policy, it is rightto wonder if the drug soldiers themselves might not have fallenover on the wrong side of the moral fence. Contents | Feedback | Search DRCNet Library | Schaffer Library | Miscellaneous Statements on DrugPolicyWT01-B27-20IA088-000636-B013-179http://206.61.184.43:80/schaffer/MISC/pcpviol.htm 206.61.184.43 19970122101435 text/html 3828HTTP/1.0 200 OKDate: Wednesday, 22-Jan-97 10:14:27 GMTServer: WebSitePro/1.1f (S/N wpo-0deb)Allow-ranges: bytesContent-type: text/htmlLast-modified: Saturday, 28-Dec-96 05:16:11 GMTContent-length: 3611 PCP and Violence Contents | Feedback | Search DRCNet Library | Schaffer Library | Miscellaneous Statements on DrugPolicy PCP and Violence excerpted from : Drug Abuse and Drug Abuse Research, anannual report to congress by the U.S. Dept. of Health and HumanServices, pg. 153. (1991) "There are two aspects to phencyclidine (PCP)intoxication that have warranted particular attention by thegeneral public, as well as by law-enforcement and clinicalpersonnel. Both aspects concern the relationship betweenphencyclidine abuse and aggressive behavior. There are reports ofincreased aggressiveness and 'super-human' strength that developin some people who take phencyclidine. Recent studies, including those of men arrested for criminalactivity in Washington D.C. and New York City (Wish 1986) andevaluations of published clinical reports of phencyclidineintoxication (Brecher et al. 1988), indicate that ifphencyclidine induces violent, criminal behavior, it does so onlyextremely infrequently. Although Wish (1986) noted that most men who had urinespositive for phencyclidine were younger than those who had takenno drugs or other drugs, their crimes were likely to be lessaggressive than the crimes of those who had not takenphencyclidine. Khajawall et al. (1982) found no difference in the behavior ofclients admitted for phencyclidine detoxification and thoseadmitted for opioid detoxification. Thus, phencylidine-inducedaggression appears to be a rare phenomenon, if it occurs atall." cited references: Wish, E.D. PCP and crime: just another illicit drug? _NatlInst Drug Abuse Res Monogr Ser_ 64:174-189, 1986. Brecher, M.; Wang, B.W.; Wong, H.; and Morgan, J.P.Phencyclidine and violence: clinical and legal issues. _JClinical Psychopharmacology_ 8:397-401, 1988. Khajawall, A.M.; Erickson, T.B.; and Simpson, G.M. Chronicphencyclidine abuse and physical assault. _Am J Psychiat_139:1604-1606, 1982. Contents | Feedback | Search DRCNet Library | Schaffer Library | Miscellaneous Statements on DrugPolicyWT01-B27-21IA088-000636-B013-212http://206.61.184.43:80/schaffer/MISC/mariju1.htm 206.61.184.43 19970122101445 text/html 14095HTTP/1.0 200 OKDate: Wednesday, 22-Jan-97 10:14:37 GMTServer: WebSitePro/1.1f (S/N wpo-0deb)Allow-ranges: bytesContent-type: text/htmlLast-modified: Saturday, 28-Dec-96 05:17:29 GMTContent-length: 13877 Marijuana -- The Insidious Drug Contents | Feedback | Search DRCNet Library | Schaffer Library | Miscellaneous Statements on DrugPolicy MARIJUANA...THE INSIDIOUS DRUG (Books Pot Safari and Marijuana Alert, Peggy Mann, McGrawHill) THC Known >300 years for its psychoactivity delta-nine tetrahydrocannabinol a) regular grade b) Sensimilla c) Hashish d) Hash oil Needs heat activation (smoking, tea or brownies) Currently, plain marijuana up to 9x stronger than in 1973. 1973 1983 reg 0.5% THC 3.5% THC sensi 6% 10-12% hashish 8% 15% oil 15-30% 20-60% Regular grade...seeds etc. Backyard variety Sensimilla "preferred" mature seedless female plantsgrown away from male. The largest cash crop of California, Oregon andHawaii and second nationally behind corn. One plant costs $200 togrow, worth up to $2500. 25% is grown in US national forests, often booby-trapped. In 1975 worth $400 per pound, now $3500 perpound. In Ohio in 1987 25% of plants confiscated, about 255000 plants left or $540 million. Hashish...made in Pakistan/Afganistan and imported.Deteriorates at about 10% per month. Hash Oil is the concentrated form which is put on a cigaretteto double the potency. PHARMACOLOGY More carcinogens than tobacco. More lung irritation thantobacco. More number of carcinogens than tobacco. If ingested has erratic absorption and is deactivated in the liver like narcotics are...thus less potent but longer high. If smoked, about 100% of the THC is absorbed into the pulmonary system and then into the fatty system ie. brain, testicles and ovaries, heart. See reddened eyes and increased heart rate due to THC. ANIMAL STUDIES THC attaches to the cerebellum, spinal cord and hippocampus. Hippocampus is responsible for short term memory. If removed-- global amnesia. THC in rats causes brain cell death. Monkey studies...smoke 5 days/week x 1 year then free x 1 year caused profound lack of interest in learning and nomemory. Same experiment smoking weekend only caused moderade damageand loss of memory. These were permanent changes. Does it do this in humans? Our current users will be the guinea pigs for this experiment. Scientists expect the answerto be yes. EFFECTS IN HUMANS Affects behavioural mood and memory functions. Decreasescerebral blood flow while smoking. Of students failing or leaving school, 1/25 were not pot users, 3/5 of students regularly smoking pot failed. Flight simulator and pilors after 1 cigarette...each pilot did significantly worse with one pilot missing the runway. Significantly, all pilots thought they were doing very well. The single greatest risk factor for cocaine abuse is marijuana use before age 15. AMOTIVATIONAL SYNDROME 1. Loss of interest, apathy, desire to work 2. Fatigue, loss of energy/tiredness 3. Depression/attacks of rage when provoked 4. Slovenliness in habits and appearance For chronic users, clearly has been shown that memory testsand auditory and visual retention tests were poorly done evenafter 6 weeks of sobriety. In a study of alcohol/pot related accidents, suggested pot maybe responsible for more accidents than alcohol (due to impaired judgement etc) In a number of cases, heavy use 4-5x a week up to 15cigarettes per cay caused amnesia for the first 7-8 days of sobriety. Amnesia was not recognized by the user. Sheba=PCP added. Smells like embalming fluid Few drops of vinegar in urine will give negative marijuanatest Drug screen 50-75 level CANNOT BE PASSIVE. No false positives.It is like a fingerprint. In a job screen should always do a confirmation titer if a screen is positive. CHEMICALS IN MARIJUANA 421 chemicals. 65 are different cannabinols which are psychoactive (delta-nine most) Others include non-cannabinols such as toxins, carcinogens (such as tar, just like the tar onthe road) and inactive or potentiating agents Alcohol takes 6-8 hours to get out of body THC is fat-soluble, and 50% will be in the body 1-2 weekslater. May take up to 4 months to get all out. Heavy use for 6-12months will give positive drug screen 4-6 weeks later. A chronic pot user is raraly sober. Subclinical intoxication. 2-3 times a week sufficient for this. Level released from fat as acute level drops. Stored in all fat and also in the basic building cells of the body. Damage is DOSE RELATED. Depends on frequency and on concentration. The more mature the person the less permanent damage. Symptoms are insidious and subtle and can parallel adolescent adjustment symptoms. THC exaggerates thesesymptoms, makes them more profound and often permanent. Saturation inthe brain causes memory impairment, concentration impairment and motivation impairment. Can be a major personality change. Asthe brain level decreased THC moves from other body fat to thebrain to keep the brain saturated. Can actually prevent thecognitive changes needed for an adolescent to change to an adult,leaving him/her with poor social judgement, poor attention span,confusion and anxiety and loss of train of thought. Occasionallyproduces hyperactive/aggressive/agitated person instead of apathy. This damage can occur in MONTHS rather than years. ALL USERS REGARDLESS OF AGE AND ABILITY HAVE DECREASED ABILITY INCOMPARISON TO THEIR POTENTIAL ABILITY. Regression to immaturity can occur and can be irreversible. A teenager can develop, for example,a mental age of 11 and thus not be able to complete school work causing a dropout from school. Pot more potent than in past years, age of onset much earlier and thus the profile of a marijuana user is changing. a) much higher suicidal ideation and depression b) 1/3 show borderline schizophrenia traits with disorganized thought patterns. c) Paranoia increasing d) Lots of similarities to a senile adult. Difference in time perception (10 minutes seems like 1 hour). Erratic junk foods. Poor judgement. Cannot self-correct. Much like Altzheimer's disease. e) As use continues with subacute intoxication, decreasing cognitive ability, decline in emotional life, much increase in stubbornness. More fatigue, decreased ability to do complex tasks, no self-insight, no idea of time and dates, impairedshort- term meory and occasionally long-term as well. With Moderatedose get profound gross impairment of motor skills. (See how muchlike brain-damaged adult?) With high dose can get hallucinations. Feel that THC may be the cause of massive adolescentpsychiatric problems. MUCH PROOF HERE and much refusal of the user to take this information seriously...still relying on the informationfrom the 1960s that THC was not harmful. User does not wish to look the data straight in the eyes. Major driving impairments..."behavioural toxicity".The stoned person does not perceive the dangers. He can brieflyhide the influence and pay attention but easily loses focus. Coming down from a high may be the worst for motor skills.Occasionally get a triggered unexpected after-high. 39% more likely to have a driving accident if smoke THC and drive. Reckless driving, failure to yield, failure to stop. How to tell if the memory/behavior is THC? STOP for two months and see if symptoms go away. MARIJUANA ADDICT 1. First stage is exposure. 2. Second stage...the person learns the mood swing, starts touse it as a drug and seek it and plan for its use = second stageof addiction. 3. Third stage..user becomes preoccupied with the mood swing. Develops tolerance. May use 3-4 x per day up to 15 per day =much increased tolerance. Develops a preoccupied with chemical dependence life style. 4. In the fourth stage the addict is using the drug to beNORMAL. Uses first in the AM, last at night, using it just tofunction. *Stages three and four...the patient usually cannot stop onhis own but needs a formal treatment program. For those who have smoked more than 1000x in three or fouryears: 70-80% have tried cocaine 1/3 have tried heroin Only 0-1% of heroin users never smoked pot. The percentage of use of cocaine is directly related to the frequency of use of pot. In stage four with increased tolerance the addict uses more of the higher grade THC, starts mixing drugs, seeks out moreheavy using friends. The addict is very seriously disabled withsocial and psychological disabilities, panic attacks, nausea et.c Ego deterioration develops (with the denial that the drug causesthe problem, it follows that the person himself must be causingthe problem. This brings out guilt and shame which recycles to useof more drugs). See social and school deterioration, dropping off team, dropping hobbies. Finally psychotic-like fog in thinking. **This can last as long as two or more years after drugcessation. SYMPTOMS CHECKLIST FOR LEVEL OF ADDICTION Three predominant symptoms are a) progressive chemical use b) chemically oriented lifestyle c) increasing tolerance Parents should be aware...addicted teenager will use avoidance techniques, visine in eyes, frequently changes the room (moredrug oriented pictures etc) dropping grades. Often a strong family history of chemical dependency oralcohol dependency. Usage of THC not hereditary but the addiction development probably is. TREATMENT Marijuana is an isolator. Questions asked are "Where didyou get it" and "How can I get some". NOT a drugthat explores feelings. Feelings (mad glad sad) tend to be suppressed. Treatment must explore feelings and teach its vocabulary.Group therapy can help. Treatment must teach alternative ways to cope...how to handle a headache (user does not handle pain well...has avoided the feeling of pain in the past). Must set rules and limits. Must address the amotivational syndrome in the treatment program. Avoid the assignment to "read a book and write how totalk with people" but give the assignment to DO the behavior.Remember the immaturity and the age level caused by the drug whenmaking assignments. Treat the denial. "No big thing" is not true. Youhave school failures, family dysfunctions etc. Work with the twenty harmfuls to get to deal in reality. encourage that what is real within the group can occur outsideof the group as well. Contents | Feedback | Search DRCNet Library | Schaffer Library | Miscellaneous Statements on DrugPolicyWT01-B27-22IA087-000625-B009-5http://206.61.184.43:80/schaffer/LIBRARY/dolrcost.htm 206.61.184.43 19970122040315 text/html 7224HTTP/1.0 200 OKDate: Wednesday, 22-Jan-97 04:03:07 GMTServer: WebSitePro/1.1f (S/N wpo-0deb)Allow-ranges: bytesContent-type: text/htmlLast-modified: Saturday, 28-Dec-96 06:42:56 GMTContent-length: 7007 The Dollar Cost of Punishment Contents | Feedback | Search DRCNet Library | Schaffer Library | Miscellaneous Statementson Drug Policy The Dollar Cost of Punishment In 1990 an estimated $74.2 billion was spent onpolice, the courts and corrections. In 1991 state and federal governments planned $6.8 billion in new prison construction,at an average cost of $53,100 per cell. (National Council on Crime & Delinquency, CrimeReduction Policy, 1992) It costs $32,000 a year to jail juvenile offenders,but $4,200 to educate a student in K-12 schools. (Jerome Miller, National Center for Institutions andAlternatives) The collective operating expenditure of local policedepartments during fiscal year 1990 was $20.6 billion (employing 460,000 full-time people). This was 20 percent morethan in 1987, when local police expenditures were $17.2 billion. (LEMASprogram, Bureau of Justice Statistics, Department of Justice,1992) Law Enforcement Expenditures increased from $80million in 1938, to more than $3 billion in 1982, and to morethan $41.5 billion by 1990. Police share of total city budgetsincreased from 8 percent (1940) to 14 percent (1980). (UnequalJustice) The Human Cost of Punishment: People of Color Bear the Brunt If incarceration trends continue, we will have 7.5million people in prison before the turn of the century. Ofthose, four million will be Black. There are only 5.5 millionBlack men between 18 and 39 in the nation. (National Council on Crime and Delinquency, Crime ReductionPolicy, 1992) 23 percent of all Black men are caught up in thecriminal justice system: in prison, on probation or on parole.There are more Black men in prison today than in college. Forevery Latino male with a college degree, there are 24 behindbars. 60 percent of inmates are either Black or Latino. (WashingtonPost, 11/23/93) Where mandatory minimums apply, Black offenders were21 percent more likely and Latinos 28 percent more likely thanwhites to receive at least the mandatory minimum prison term. (FederalJudicial Center, 1992) 47 percent of state prisoners in 1990 were Black and12 percent were Latino; 61 percent of state prison inmates in1986 had not completed high school; 35 percent of jail inmates in1989 were unemployed prior to entering jail; 39 percent of jailinmates in 1989 free for at least one year prior to their arresthad incomes under $5,000. (Facts About Prisons and Prisoners,Bureau of Justice Statistics, June 1992) In analyzing police brutality cases from January 1990to May 1992, In These Times found out that 97 percent of victimswere African Americans or Latinos, and that white police officerswere centrally involved in 93 percent of these assaults. SocialNet vs. Dragnet: Punishment Strategy Fails to Reduce Crime Imprisonment and Crime The states with the lowest crime rates have thelowest imprisonment rates, and states with the highest crimerates have the highest imprisonment rates There is no evidencethat imprisonment reduces crime. (James Austin and Marc Mauer,USA Today, January 27, 1994) San Diego and Dallas have about the same rate ofpolice-to-population ratio, yet Dallas has twice as much crimereported to the police. Cleveland and San Diego, meanwhile, havecomparable crime rates even though Cleveland has twice as manypolice per capita. Moreover, Washington, D.C., has both thehighest murder rate and the most police per square foot of anycity in the Western world. There doesnt seem to be any directrelationship between the amount of police and the crime rate. Even if the nation's police forces were doubled from 1 to 2million, we could still expect, at best, only a modest decreasein crimes. My conclusion is that there is no law enforcementsolution to the crime problem. The factors that affect crime age,sex, race, social class, poverty, unemployment rates,illegitimacy, AFDC all those kinds of things are really beyondthe reach of a law enforcement community. And, therefore, crimecannot really be materially affected by the use of lawenforcement, or even correctional strategies. (Richard Moran,Professor of Criminology, Mount Holyoke College, in an interviewwith NPR) Contents | Feedback | Search DRCNet Library | Schaffer Library | Miscellaneous Statementson Drug PolicyWT01-B27-23IA087-000625-B009-31http://206.61.184.43:80/schaffer/LIBRARY/southam1.htm 206.61.184.43 19970122040328 text/html 3150HTTP/1.0 200 OKDate: Wednesday, 22-Jan-97 04:03:22 GMTServer: WebSitePro/1.1f (S/N wpo-0deb)Allow-ranges: bytesContent-type: text/htmlLast-modified: Saturday, 28-Dec-96 06:41:51 GMTContent-length: 2933 Drug Laws in South America Contents | Feedback | Search DRCNet Library | Schaffer Library | Miscellaneous Statementson Drug Policy Drug Laws in South America Laws on possessing marijuana for personal use in SouthAmerica: ARGENTINA: No jail or fine for possession; usersusually must undergo court-supervised rehabilitation. BOLIVIA: Possession illegal. No move to decriminalize. BRAZIL: Possession illegal. Attorney general proposesto end jail and fines, substituting mandatory rehabilitation forusers. CHILE: Possession illegal. Weak support fordecriminalizing, but no formal proposal to change law. COLOMBIA: Possession of small quantities of all drugslegal; permitted ``personal dose'' for marijuana is 20 grams. ECUADOR: Possession illegal. No move to decriminalize. PARAGUAY: Possession illegal. No move to decriminalize. PERU: Possession of small amounts legal; judges decidewhat constitutes ``personal'' amount. URUGUAY: Possession for personal use not penalized; lawdoes not specify quantity for ``personal'' amount. VENEZUELA: Possession of up to 20 grams not punished;users must go through drug treatment program. Contents | Feedback | Search DRCNet Library | Schaffer Library | Miscellaneous Statementson Drug PolicyWT01-B27-24IA088-000636-B014-77http://206.61.184.43:80/schaffer/MISC/lionsmj1.htm 206.61.184.43 19970122101534 text/html 7014HTTP/1.0 200 OKDate: Wednesday, 22-Jan-97 10:15:24 GMTServer: WebSitePro/1.1f (S/N wpo-0deb)Allow-ranges: bytesContent-type: text/htmlLast-modified: Saturday, 28-Dec-96 05:17:37 GMTContent-length: 6797 Marijuana: Drug of Deception Contents | Feedback | Search DRCNet Library | Schaffer Library | Miscellaneous Statements on DrugPolicy FACTS ABOUT MARIJUANA Marijuana: Drug of Deception A publication of the Lions Club This is the full text - unedited -- of a brochure on marijuanaput out by the Lions Club International. The statements made about marijuana range from laughable toridiculous. None of them, that I can find, are supported by anykind of scientific evidence, except maybe for that stuff aboutthe red eyes. They even say that marijuana use causes weightloss! Curiously, they do not mention "the munchies." Readers are encouraged to write to the Lions Club at theaddress below and correct their misinformation by pointing tothese web pages. Marijuana is made from the leaves, small stems, and floweringtops of the Cannabis sativa plant. Marijuana, also called pot,grass, weed, is usually smoked in a loosely- rolled joint or in apipe. It has a sweet, lingering odor. Marijuana causes the user to experience a feeling ofwell-being---of detachment from ordinary circumstances. This"high" is usually followed by feelings of depression. Marijuana is not just one substance; it contains more than 400chemicals. The most widely known compund in this group iscommonly called THC (delta- 9-tetra-hydro-cannabinol). THC is the primary mind-altering ingredient in marijuana. Aportion of THC is absorbed into fatty tissue in the brain andreproductive organs, and in most other organs as well. It takesthe body at least 30 days to eliminate all effects of smoking onemarijuana joint. Marijuana is up to ten times more potent today than that whichwas produced in the 1960s. Some experts previously thought Marijuana to be harmless. Itis now known that the reasons users can stop smoking withoutfeeling severe withdrawal symptoms is because of the body'sstorage of THC. Effects of Marijuana on the body * Marijuana reduces brain energy, impairing the users' abilityto remember, feel, think, anticipate, and predict. * Because THC is stored in fatty tissues and works like atime-release capsule, regular marijuana smoking produces aconstant state of sedation. * Since THC remains in the center of motivation of the brain,it weakens the users' ability to live drug-free. * The lungs of marijuana smokers are highly susceptible toemphysema and bronchitis. * Research shows that marijuana contains cancer-causingagents. * Marijuana impairs normal sexual development in both malesand females. * Heartbeat rate increses by as much as 50% through marijuanause. Results are chest pains, and possible heart disease. * Regular use causes a decrease in the blood supply to theheart, and diminishes white cell production. * The body adjusts to regular use, making it essential toincrease the amount used in order to achieve a "high". * Continual marijuana use deteriorates the body's immunesystem. Symptoms of Marijuana use * Marked change in behavior patterns * Carelessness about personal appearance * Lack of motivation * Reduction of short-term memory * Excessive irritability * Red eyes and fatigue * Abrupt mood changes/outbursts of anger * Less concern for the feelings of others * Bouts of depression/paranoia * Inability to react quickly/decreased coordination * Inability to get along with family/co-workers/peers * Loss of weight * Sleeplessness [to go with the fatigue I suppose] * Short concentration-span * Highly susceptible to common infections * Expressionless speech/blank stares * Faulty perception (cannot accurately judge distances, speedor time) * Decreased academic or work performance Marijuana connection Some researchers have found a direct link between increasedmarijuana use, and --juvenile and young adult crime such as theft --truancy and school drop-out rate --psychiatric referrals of adolescents and young adults --cases of teenage chronic organic brain syndrome (burnout) Lions Drug Awareness Program Since its inception in 1984, the Lions Drug Awareness Programhas emphasized prevention through education. Lions are workingtogether to join families, educators, and other key leaders in aconcentrated effort to create drug-free communities. Lions' primary focus is Lions-Quest "Skills forAdolescence," and Lions-Quest "Skills forGrowing." These positive prevention curricula spanKindergarten through eighth grade, and are helping young peoplechoose healthy lifestyles. For full details contact: Lions Club International Special Research and Development Department 300 22nd Street Oak Brook, IL 60521-8842 Telephone: 708/571-5466 Contents | Feedback | Search DRCNet Library | Schaffer Library | Miscellaneous Statements on DrugPolicyWT01-B27-25IA088-000636-B014-110http://206.61.184.43:80/schaffer/MISC/beergood.htm 206.61.184.43 19970122101559 text/html 5414HTTP/1.0 200 OKDate: Wednesday, 22-Jan-97 10:15:43 GMTServer: WebSitePro/1.1f (S/N wpo-0deb)Allow-ranges: bytesContent-type: text/htmlLast-modified: Saturday, 28-Dec-96 05:17:13 GMTContent-length: 5197 Why beer is good and the illegal drugs are bad - fromAnheuser B Contents | Feedback | Search DRCNet Library | Schaffer Library | Miscellaneous Statements on DrugPolicy Beer Versus Drugs Why beer is good and the illegal drugs are bad - from AnheuserBusch. YES, THERE IS A DIFFERENCE! BEER vs. ILLEGAL DRUGS ============================================================================== Beer is a legal beverage, which, |consumed in moderation, is consistent with a healthy lifestyle. In fact, a number of scientific studies have associated moderate beer consumption with healthy benefits, including a reduction in the risk of cardiovascular disease - an issue that deserves further study. On the other hand, marijuana, crack, cocaine, and heroin are illegal ubstances that are destructive to the user's health regardless of the frequency of use. Beer is produced by a legal, strictly regulated industry that employs hundreds of thousands of Americans, provides billions of dollars annually in state and federal taxes and directly contributes $44 billion to the American economy each year. Crack, cocaine and heroin are produced by a totally-unregulated industry that pays no taxes and makes no positive contribution to society or our economy. Beer is almost always consumed as a refreshment. Marijuana, crack, cocaine and heroin are used to radically alter the normal physical and emotional state. The vast majority of beer drinkers consume beer responsibly and moderately. There is no such thing as responsible or moderate use of marijuana, crack, cocaine amd heroin. Brewers spend literally millions of dollars annually sponsoring a variety of public education programs that promote responsible consumption of alcoholic beverages. These programs are working. On the other hand, the marijuana, crack, cocaine and heroin industry does everything in its power to promote illegal use, abuse, and addiction, particularly among our youth. The brewing industry continually funds educational programs designed to prevent underage persons from drinking and to teach them about the proper role of alcohol in our society. The illegal drug industry recruits children from schoolyards to be users children from schoolyards to be users and sellers. High school-age children are a primary target of drug dealers, whose objective is addiction. There is nothing inherently wrong with our product. Beer is awholesome beverage that can add to the quality of life whenconsumed in moderation, as intended. No one in the brewingindustry promotes abuse. We do everything in our power to ensurethat beer plays a positive role in our society and it is usedresponsibly. Beer: A Good Part of the Good Life. Contents | Feedback | Search DRCNet Library | Schaffer Library | Miscellaneous Statements on DrugPolicyWT01-B27-26IA088-000636-B014-139http://206.61.184.43:80/schaffer/MISC/econ1.htm 206.61.184.43 19970122101614 text/html 33381HTTP/1.0 200 OKDate: Wednesday, 22-Jan-97 10:16:05 GMTServer: WebSitePro/1.1f (S/N wpo-0deb)Allow-ranges: bytesContent-type: text/htmlLast-modified: Saturday, 28-Dec-96 05:15:01 GMTContent-length: 33163 Three articles on the Drug Problem from The Economist Contents | Feedback | Search DRCNet Library | Schaffer Library | Miscellaneous Statements on DrugPolicy Three articles on the Drug Problem From the Economist May 15 -21, 1993 In 1883, Benjamin Ward Richardson, a distinguished Britishdoctor, denounced the evils of drinking tea. He said it caused an"extremely nervous semi-hysterical condition". In 1936,an article in the American Journal of Nursing claimed that amarijuana taker "will suddenly turn with murderous violenceupon whomever is nearest to him". Tea and marijuana havethree things in common: they alter the moods of those who takethem, they are regarded as tolerable safe, and they areaddictive. Attitudes to addiction are complicated and oftencontradictory. Tea and marijuana are in themselves fairlyharmless, yet tea is generally legal and marijuana is not.Tobacco and cocaine are harmful but, again, tobacco is almostuniversally allowed, whereas most readers of The Economist livein countries which may imprison you for possessing cocaine. Throw in the joker of addictions which come not in syringes orcigarettes, but in casinos and computer cartridges, and you havea fine arena for combat between libertarians and puritans. This battle, always lively, has just become hotter. On April28th Bill Clinton appointed Lee Brown, a former policeman, asAmerica's new "drug tsar", and thus leader of theworlds toughest prohibition programme. Ten days before, Italianshad voted to move in the other direction by scrapping theharshest measures of their drug laws. Such boldness is rare. The attitude of most electorates andgovernments is to deplore the problems that the illegal drugtrade brings, view the whole matter with distaste, and sit on thestatus quo--a policy of sweeping prohibition. Yet the problemscannot be ignored. The crime to which some addicts resort tofinance their habits, and in which the suppliers of illegal drugshabitually engage, exacts its price in victims' lives, not justmoney. The illegal trade in drugs supports organised crime theworld over. It pulls drug-takers into a world of filthy needles,poisoned doses and pushers bent upon selling them more addictiveand dangerous fixes. Yet most people still balk at exploring ways in which a legalregime might undermine such effects. Their refusal owes somethingto a distaste for addiction in itself. This is an argument shotthrough with inconsistency. The strongest disapproval often comesfrom those who scream about liberties if their own particularindulgences--for assault rifles, say--are attacked. Addiction tocigarettes is reckoned to be the chief avoidable cause of deathin the world. Alcohol deprives boozers of their livers and theirmemories, and ends the lives of all too many innocents who getsmashed on the roads by the inebriated. Yet here the idea ofdissuasion within the law is broadly accepted. A much sounder basis for doubt is the worry that legalisationwould increase drug-taking, and that rising consumption andaddiction would overwhelm the gains to be had from getting drugswithin the law. Yet legalisation should not be taken to mean alawless free-for-all, with no restraint on the supply or use ofdrugs. Done properly, it would allow governments to take controlof the distribution and quality of these substances away from thecriminals. Quality control is decisive, because much of thedamage done by drugs bought on street corners is caused byadulterated products; in much the same way, carelessly distilledhooch can cause blindness. Supply would be regulated by a system of government licencesanalogous to those already in force for tobacco and alcohol (andwhich would serve, among other things, to keep drugs out of thehands of children), backed by strict policing and heavypenalties. The toughness of the regime would rise with theaddictiveness of the drug in question--a light touch formarijuana, an extremely dissuasive one for heroin.Suchlegalisation would not magically dispense with the need forpolicemen, but it would make the needed policing more manageable. Particularly in the business of softer drugs, where the taxescan be lower and the restrictions less onerous, and where thefirst trial steps towards legalisation should take place, itwould undermine the "risk premium" that provides drugcartels with their profits. Taxes raised on what is reckoned tobe the world's largest untaxed industry would help governmentsspend money on treatment and education, which would do more goodthan the billions currently spent on attempting to throttle thecriminal supply of drugs of all sorts. The Quest for Soma There is another consideration, one for the future. Theillegality of drugs, coupled with distaste for pleasurableaddiction, is skewing research. Progress is being made byscientists in understanding both what causes the pleasure ofdrugs and what makes the pleasure so hard to give up. Currentlysuch research is obliged to have only one aim--unhooking existingaddicts. It might have another. In many areas of pharmacology,researchers are exploring the idea of "designer drugs",chemicals tailored to fit harmlessly into human biochemistry.Addiction research should be encouraged to do the same: to movebeyond devising better therapies for those who wish to kick thedrug habit, into the invention of safer, more effective and lesshabit-forming highs. At the moment it cannot, for a safe drugequals a "substance abuse" equals a crime. The fact remains that any legal regime which lowers theeconomic incentive for drugs-crime will surely boost drugconsumption. The question is by how much. One possible pointer isthat, when asked, people say it will not rise a lot. In opinionpolls, Americans generally insist that they would not bepersuaded by legalisation to try drugs they are not taking now.There is some reason to believe them, despite the first instinctto be sceptical, since they already have access to plenty ofmindbending substances, from alcohol and tobacco to diet pills. Then there is reassurance from experiments. The Americanstates that decriminalised marijuana during the 1970s saw nodivergence in the consumption of the drug from that inneighbouring states which continued to prohibit it. Extensiveexperience with decriminalisation in Holland shows that not onlyis there no accompanying surge in consumption--allowing for theinrush of addicts from more restrictive countries--but relatedcrime falls when drugs are legalised. One further argument is used by defenders of the status quo.They say that, even if the case for exploring legalisation wereconceded by governments, public resistance would doom the idea.This is hardly surprising, given the way governments the wouldover have for decades hammered home the dogma of prohibition. Amore rational discussion could do much to change public opinion.Only a few years before alcohol prohibition was repealed in theUnited States in 1933, public sentiment was similarly dominatedby the opinions of the country's prohibitionist leaders. There are signs that public instincts are changing. In recentmonths a growing number of federal judges and lawyers have voicedtheir exasperation with America's approach to drugs. Theirobjections led politicians in Washington to hold a meetingearlier this month to rethink the country's failed drugspolicies. Janet Reno, the attorney-general, started the day bedescribing her doubts about America's current approach. It ended,significantly, with a discussion of the merits of legalisation.Neither Mr. Brown nor Ms. Reno, and certainly not their boss Mr.Clinton, has so far supported legalisation. But they have donewhat no American administration has dared do in livingmemory--set the scene for a proper debate. Drugs policy: The enemy within A quiet revolt has been taking place in courtrooms acrossAmerica. It has been led by judges disillusioned with thecountry's war on drugs. On April 29th Harold Greene, a prominentfederal judge in Washington, ruled that important elements of themandatory sentencing laws for drugs offenders wereunconstitutional. Less than two weeks earlier, two senior federaljudges, Jack Weinstein, and Whitman Knapp, of New York, hadannounced that they would no longer preside over drugs cases. Inrecent months, a number of federal judges have taken such astance. It might be a sign, much further down the road, of achange in policy. Lee Brown, the former New York police chief whowas appointed as "drug tsar" by Bill Clinton on April28th, is thought to be a good appointment. Apart from that, MrClinton has not done much with drugs policy. Granted, he has beenin office a short while, and has had much to occupy him. But hisdrug-policy staff has been cut, and the budget request he hassent to Congress looks just like the one sent by George Bush. Hehas asked for much the same amount of money, divided up in thesame way: two-thirds of the money to criminal-enforcementefforts, one-third to treatment. Some had hoped for a change of emphasis. Although the"war on drugs" was first promoted by Richard Nixon in1972, it was not until George Bush's term that the war began inearnest. Mr Bush appointed though-talking drug tsars and spent$40 billion to attack traffickers abroad and punish pushers andusers at home. The result has been disappointing. cocaine isavailable about as freely and cheaply today as in 1989.Drug-related violence in the cities is still high.The mostpraiseworthy part of the Bush policy was a drop in overallcocaine-taking. But hard-core addicts, who account forfour-fifths of all consumption, are taking as much as ever. MarkKleiman, of Harvard University, argues that Mr Bush's policies,put in place soon after the peak in cocaine's popularity, didlittle to affect a decline already under way. Changing fashion(including the recent surge in heroin-taking) probably deservesthe credit for that. If casual consumption of cocaine is down, it may well be theresult of education and treatment programmes rather than criminalenforcement. But enforcement has been, and remains, the core ofAmerican policy. Presidents, naturally, do not want to be seen tocondone the taking of drugs; the public temper is for stiffpenalties and the locking up of offenders, not tender care. Butthe effect of the policy, as the American Bar Association pointedout in a recent report, is that the country's prisons are fillednot only with drug-handlers but also with drug-takers, and cannotcope with the numbers. Neal Sonnett, the head of the ABA'scriminal-justice section, notes with particular alarm the sharprise in incarceration of low-level drug offenders, which hashindered efforts to fight more serious, and violent, crime. Hethinks the criminal-justice system may be "on the point ofcollapse". If it is, it will be for reasons to do withoverall levels of sentencing for many sorts of crimes, not merelythose related to drugs. But such arguments livened up a drugsmeeting held in Washington on May 7th to rethink America'spolicies. At the start of the day Janet Reno, theattorney-general, admitted dissatisfaction with the presentemphasis on enforcement efforts, and suggested the mandatorysentencing guidelines might be reviewed. The speech confirmedhints from Mr. Clinton that, despite his status-quo budget, heplants to cut back on enforcement efforts, especially overseas,in favour of trying to reduce demand at home. Another significantaspect of the meeting was the openness of debate. Prohibition wasnot unquestioningly supported. Ethan Nadelmann, a drugs expertwho heads the Princeton Working Group, which is developingalternative ideas to prohibition, notes that legalisation ofdrugs was given a serious hearing. The way forward, he believes,is towards "harm reduction". Such efforts, like the onesupported by Kurt Schmoke, the mayor of Baltimore, build onprogrammes from parts of Europe and Australia which treatdrug-taking not as a criminal matter, but more as an issue ofpersonal choice and public health. A small chorus has applauded such a shift in resources,arguing that prohibition of drugs will always fail so long asAmericans remain so determined to get hold of them. Mr. Clinton,who got himself in plenty of trouble during the campaign for notinhaling marijuana, is unlikely to go that far. High and hooked A better understanding of how addictions work could providebenefits for science, for medicine and for recreation In 1964 Aryeh Routtenberg stuck electrodes into the brains ofhis experimental rats. The electrodes were so positioned thatcurrent flowing though them caused a particular pleasure. For onehour a day, each rat could control this current by means of alever in its cage. Another lever, which also worked for just thatone hour, controlled the food supply. There was no contestbetween the levers. The rats, too busy mainlining current to stopfor food, wasted away to ecstatic death. The link between pleasure and addiction is not always soextreme, but more mundane addictions have brought about millionsof less dramatic deaths outside the laboratory, and caused untoldmisery and pain. The substances to which people get addicted,though, also bring great pleasure to billions--some addicted,some not. They are the basis of several multi-billion dollarindustries around the world. Some 60m Americans smoke tobacco;three-quarters of West European adults drink alcohol; no oneknows how many people around the world consume caffeine in tea,coffee or cola. Figures for illegal drugs are harder to come by,but around 2m Americans are thought to take cocaine, and manymore than that have smokes marijuana. Not all the people who indulge in these tastes areaddicts--that is, they do not depend on their habit in a way thatseems clearly abnormal to the bulk of people who do not sharetheir tastes. Though almost everyone who smokes tobacco ishooked, drinkers are not necessarily alcoholics and not allheroin users are hopeless junkies. Pleasure and the addictionneed not come together--either can be present without the other.yet the two are obviously connected. Neuroscientists are nowusing the tools of molecular biology to find the links betweenthem, deep in the recesses of the brain. The kick from cocaine The cerebral nooks and crannies of interest are those betweennerve cells--synapses. To jump over the gap between two cells, anerve impulse has to be translated from electricity to chemicalsand back. The first cell releases a chemical called aneurotransmitter into the synaptic gap. These molecules are thenpicked up by receptor proteins on the surface of the second cell.The neurotransmitter fits the receptor as a key fits a lock. Theunlocking of the receptor leads to the creation or suppression ofa nerve impulse in the second cell. There are many different types of neurotransmitter, and thusof synapse; different pathways in the brain need their differentproperties. It is by subverting some of these synapses, and thussome of the brain's pathways, that drugs produce pleasure. it isthrough changing them in a more fundamental way that the drugscause addiction. The first evidence for this is almost 20 years old. Recentlyit has started to pile up quite quickly. In 1975 Solomon Snyder,at Johns Hopkins University in Baltimore, Hans Kosterlitz of theUniversity of Aberdeen in Scotland and John Hughes ofParke-Davis, and English pharmaceuticals company, found out howheroin, then drug-du-jour for worried policy-makers, works. Dr.Snyder discovered there was a receptor protein in mammalianbrains which heroin would stick to. Dr. Kosterlitz and Dr. Hughesreasoned that nature was unlikely to have produced such a lockwithout also evolving a key. Working independently, they found a chemical in the body thatfitted into the same receptor as heroin; Dr. Kosterlitz named it"endorphin". This type of neurotransmitter (there are,it turns out, at least three different endorphins) damps downpain by suppressing the signals which transmit it; it alsoprovides feelings of well-being. heroin acts as an ill-fittingkey which can open the lock but cannot then be withdrawn. Thesynapse is over-stimulated. Unusually pleasurable sensationsresult. If you replace heroin and endorphins with nicotine and theneurotransmitter acetylcholine, or with caffeine and adenosine,or Valium and gamma-amino butyric acid, or marijuana andanadamide, the same story can be told. Other drugs work inslightly more subtle ways. Alcohol does not mimic aneurotransmitter, but at least some of its effects come frommessing up the same synapses that heroin works on. Cocaine, whichhas replaced heroin as the drug of concern in America, and hasthus been extensively researched, works on nerves that use theneurotransmitter dopamine. These nerves are found in, among otherplaces, the mesolimbic system--the part of the brain which seemsto generate emotion. Cocaine subverts the pathway not by bindingto dopamine receptors, but by sticking to a molecule called,inelegantly, the dopamine re-uptake transporter. Nerve cells, canny little things, recycle theirneurtransmitters. Receptor molecules spit out theirneurotransmitters once they have served their purpose, and thecell whence they came mops them up for reuse. Block thisre-uptake, and the transmitters will just sit in the synapticgap, stimulating the receptors again and again and again. Anotherstrategy is to jam the re-uptake system open, so that dopamineflows though it the wrong way all the time, keeping the gapsuffused with the neurotransmitter. That is what amphetamines do. The fact that amphetamines and cocaine work in similar wayswill come as no surprise to anyone who has tried both. The natureof the high a drug provides depends on the type ofneurotransmitter it interferes with. but the brain is a complexplace; the separate systems within it that use differentneurotransmitters all interact. A drug acting on one set ofsynapses can have secondary and tertiary effects all over theplace. That is why drug experiences are so varied. The range ofthings that can be addictive, though, is wider even than therange of available drugs. Foreign bodies in the synapses are notan absolute prerequisite for an addiction. Something asstraightforward as healthy exercise can, in the extreme, hook. Inthe case of exercise it appears that the body becomes addicted tothe endorphins it produces to ameliorate the pain and stress. Other behaviours that carry an intensity with them--and thuspresumable overstimulate some parts of the brain's wiring--canproduce similar effects, though the synapses involved have yet tobe charted. Gambling has many of the characteristics of drugtaking--a euphoric high, and a craving in the addict. Some peoplebelieve themselves addicted to sex; lawyers in England recentlyconvinced a jury that a teenage hacker was addicted to computing. It is easy to see some such "addictions" as excuses,especially as the term resists strict definition. But addictionto chemicals is clearly real, and there seems no reason tobelieve that compulsive chemical-taking is necessarily in adifferent class from other acquired compulsive habits. Anyway,chemical dependency is easier to study than other sorts. That iswhy it has been possible to locate the roots of pleasure in thesynapses--and why it has been possible to find the roots ofwithdrawal there, too. Cold turkey Clinically, addiction can be characterised by two things:craving and withdrawal. Craving is still the subject of a certainamount of scientific handwaving. The best the psychologists cando is describe the process as one of positivereinforcement--which means that if you like something, you willtend to do it again. Having their receptors overstimulated issomething people tend to like a lot. How this "liking"translates into neural circuitry is not yet clear. Withdrawal, the physical and mental turmoil that follows whenan addiction is interrupted, is proving more tractable toexperimental analysis. A suggestive picture of how it works canbe pieced together, as long as you do not mind taking the piecesfrom different studies of different drugs: work on cocaine byNora Volcow at Brookhaven National Laboratory, among others; oncocaine and amphetamines by Bruce Cohen of McLean Hospital inBoston; on heroin by Zvi Vogel at the Weizmann Institute inRehovot in Israel and Antol Shofelmeer at the Free University inAmsterdam; an on benzodiazepines (such as Valium) by Erick Sigelat the University of Berne. Again, the synapse is the scene of the action. Most biologicalsystems have feedback mechanisms that help smooth out the littlefluctuations that life throws at them. Synapses are no exception.The receiving cell can adjust itself to changes in the behaviourof the transmitting cell in two ways. It can finetune the signalthe receptors pass on, and it can change the number of receptors.The receptor molecules are conduits for information, with one endoutside the cell and the other inside. When a neurotransmitterattaches itself outside, the part on the inside changes itsshape. In this new shape, it can accommodate molecules calledG-proteins, which hang around inside the cell. These G-proteinsare, themselves, also shape-changers. Interacting with thereceptor activates the G-proteins; these then head off to spreadthe word via yet more molecules, called second messengers. the second messengers tell the cell about the signal from theneurotransmitters. One part of the cell that listens is thesystem which sends out and suppresses nerve impulses. Anotheravid audience is made up of the enzymes which add phosphategroups to proteins, some of which help in the production ofimpulses. More messages make them more active, and more likely toadd phosphate to receptor molecules. A phosphorylated receptor isan unhappy receptor. It is reluctant to accommodate G-proteinsand thus to bring information in from the outside. The nucleus,which controls the production of proteins, and also listens tothe second messengers. Lots of chatter from them suggests to thenucleus that there are too many receptors at the synapse, so itbrings their manufacture to a halt. Insert an addictive drug intothe system and the din from the second messengers becomesdeafening. The result is fewer receptor molecules. Both thephosphorylation of receptors and their absence means that ittakes more of the drug to obtain the same effect. Those highdoses, in turn, lead to even less sensitive synapses. And theyalso lead to synapses that can no longer function without thedrug. The cell gets used to damming the flood of drug-inducednoise in order to be able to deal with the faint whispers ofreality that float on top of it. Remove the drug, and the normalsignals can no longer get over the barrier that has been erected.The system goes from getting too much of the neurotransmitter'seffects to not enough; heaven turns to hell. Put this way, the molecular picture seems obvious. It fitswith a common experience of addiction, that of needing to do moreand more of the drug just to keep from feeling bad. Of course, itcannot be that simple--after all drugs that work on the sameneurotransmitter may vary in their addictiveness. And peoplevary, too, in their susceptibility to addiction. Then again,addictions to substances that affect different types of synapsecan be quite similar--and some people seem to be prone toaddiction per se, rather than just to have a weakness for aparticular substance. And the fact that addiction remains afterwithdrawal has ended--a fact attested to at Alcoholics Anonymousevery day--suggests there is a more general problem to look at. Dopamine heads For more evidence that addictions have something in common inthe way they act on the brain as a whole, no matter whichpathways they stimulate, look at the pictures on this page. Edythe London, who works at America's National Institute onDrug Abuse, studies glucose metabolism in the brains of peoplewith addictions. Glucose is the body's principal fuel, so its useis a good index of how active an area is. Dr London's picturesshow that, in certain parts of the brain, addicts use lessglucose than non-addicts do. The difference applies regardless ofwhat drug is being used, and it is still visible when they arenot under the influence. Other clues to a general theory of addiction have ledresearchers to focus on the dopamine system--even when looking atdrugs which do not affect dopamine receptors. There is evidencethat many, and possibly all, addictions affect the dopamine cellsin the brain's mesolimbic system. In the case of cocaine thiseffect is direct, which may account for the drug's peculiarpotency. for other drugs it seems to be indirect, brought aboutby connections between the dopamine system and the otherneurotransmitter systems. Inside the dopamine system, the researchers' attention haslighted on D2. it should come as no surprise by now to hear thatD2 is a protein found in synapses, one of the three differentreceptor proteins for dopamine. The detailed make-up of theseproteins can vary from person to person--variation that comesfrom differences in the gene which describes the protein. So thedifferent variants of D2 are inherited. It was inheritance that led the researchers to D2. In the1970s a series of Danish studies compared the children andstep-children of alcoholic fathers. The former proved more likelyto succumb to the same addiction. This, and the evidence thatidentical twins are more likely to share an alcoholic fate thanare non-identical twins, suggested that genes were playing arole. In 1990, to great excitement, Kenneth Blum of theUniversity of Texas at San Antonio, and Ernest Noble of theUniversity of California, Los Angeles, announced that they hadfound a gene peculiarly common among alcoholics. It described aform of the D2 receptor known as A1. This was challenged by several researchers, most notablyKenneth Kidd, of Yale. Dr. Kidd points out that different ethnicgroups have different frequencies of A1, which could confuse thestatistics. Others, convinced by Dr. Blum, Dr. Noble andsubsequent work, have suggested that A1 frequencies may actuallyexplain differences in alcoholism between ethnic groups, thoughthis is far from certain. In 1992 George Uhl, of Johns Hopkins,found that a second variant of D2, known as B1, seemed peculiarlycommon in people addicted to tobacco, cocaine, heroin,tranquillizers, marijuana and amphetamines as well asalcohol--almost the whole list of commonly addictive substances.This is at least as controversial as the original finding; itsmeaning is not clear, nor is the nature of the difference betweenthe different D2s. To link small variations in a single protein with theexistence of an all-purpose "addictive personality" isto go a long way too far. But there is evidence in one case for alink between personality and withdrawal symptoms--and to linkwithdrawal symptoms to specific molecules is not too farfetched.About 40% of people prescribed courses of benzodiazepines totreat anxiety or insomnia can suffer some withdrawalsymptoms--souped-up versions of the symptoms the drugs are usedto treat--after the course of medication is finished. PeterTyrer, who worked at St. Charles' Hospital in London, has foundthat the people who suffer withdrawal share not a specificprotein, but rather specific personality traits: insecurity,inability to make decisions, an over-reliance on the opinions ofothers. Spot them, and you can save people from withdrawal. Better living through chemistry The links between proteins, the lowly building blocks of thebrain, and personalities, the high abstractions of the mind, areundoubtedly going to be convoluted--but evidence from both endssuggests they are there to be found. What are the pharmaceuticalcompanies, to which this should be of interest, doing about it? Some work is going into drugs to treat drug addiction.Naltrexone keeps heroin from activating endorphin receptors,without activating them itself. Methadone works in the same wayas heroin, but less effectively; it thus provides a way offheroin that minimises withdrawal symptoms. Similar approaches tococaine are being tried. Drugs which act on dopamine pathways ingeneral may have widespread effects on addiction. but drugs to defeat dependence are not the only possibilities.Some of the damage that comes from drug addiction, especially thephysical damage, comes from secondary aspects of the drug. Lungcancer, for examples, is caused by the substances that accompanynicotine in tobacco smoke, not by nicotine itself. It might bepossible to get rid of some of these problems without getting ridof the pleasure, even if it is not possible to get rid of theaddictions. Another option is to develop tests which could tellpeople if they were at risk of falling under a particular spellso that they could choose their pleasures wisely. Eventually, an understanding of neurotransmitters, receptors,G-proteins, and second messengers might allow pleasure andaddiction to be decoupled--or at least allow withdrawal to besuppressed. Though, on the face of it, the effects that causepleasure in the short term are those that cause addiction in thelong term, there is a lot of variability in the system that mightbe exploited. Techniques like those used to target specificdopamine receptors in the treatment of Parkinson's disease,might, at least in principle, be used to fine tune a drug'seffects at the synapse and produce low-addiction highs. And puresubstances tailored to neurotransmitter sites would have a goodchance of being free of unpleasant side effects elsewhere in thebody. That would not create a brave new world; it might, perhaps,create a slightly happier one. Contents | Feedback | Search DRCNet Library | Schaffer Library | Miscellaneous Statements on DrugPolicyWT01-B27-27IA088-000636-B014-172http://206.61.184.43:80/schaffer/MISC/abc0406.htm 206.61.184.43 19970122101626 text/html 9974HTTP/1.0 200 OKDate: Wednesday, 22-Jan-97 10:16:19 GMTServer: WebSitePro/1.1f (S/N wpo-0deb)Allow-ranges: bytesContent-type: text/htmlLast-modified: Saturday, 28-Dec-96 05:17:18 GMTContent-length: 9757 ABC News WAR ON DRUGS: Contents | Feedback | Search DRCNet Library | Schaffer Library | Miscellaneous Statements on DrugPolicy ABC News WAR ON DRUGS: SEARCHING FOR SOLUTIONS: A Summary This is a summary of the major points of the show, as writtenby Jim Hoffman On Thursday evening (Apr 6, 1995) ABC news aired the specialreport: WAR ON DRUGS: SEARCHING FOR SOLUTIONS, which exploredharm reduction policy alternatives to the 'WAR ON DRUGS' aspracticed in the United States. Although limited in scope -- the only drugs mentioned wereheroin, cocaine, amphetamine, and marijuana, with the focus beingon heroin -- I found the quality of the show very encouraging. I encourage everyone to contact ABC News and commend them forairing this special. For those who missed it, I have provided asynopsis below. Note: quotes are not necessarily verbatim; Names may bemisspelled. ~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~ AMERICA'S WAR ON DRUGS: SEARCHING FOR SOLUTIONS: A SUMMARY ~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~ STATED PURPOSE: The claimed purpose of the show was 'not to advocate specificpolicy' but to 'open up the discussion' and consider newapproaches, as this issue 'deserves debate'. It advised viewersnot to dismiss approaches just because they seem too radical. TOPIC: The show focused on those approaches to the drug problem knownas 'harm reduction'. Although marijuana was touched on severaltimes, the focus was on 'hard drugs' such as heroin. FORMAT: The show was composed primarily of excerpts of interviews withvarious people, primarily advocates of harm reduction, stitchedtogether with narrative by Catherine Cryer and footage of policeraids, prisons, people shooting drugs, etc. It is sprinkled with assertions by drug war zealotextraordinaire William Bennet, which are in most cases followed by refutations which lookmuch more reasoned. SUMMARY: The show opened with some observations: * We are losing the 'War on Drugs'. * There is a striking lack of public debate about alternativesto current policies. * The crime problem cannot be addressed without addressing thedrug problem. and some facts: * The 'War on Drugs' is the longest running war in US history. * Over 300,000 people are in prison for drug law violations. * There are as many illegal drugs on the streets today asever. It then interviewed Jim Montgomery, a paraplegic who wassentenced to life imprisonment for 2 ounces of cannabis (laterreduced to 10 years) in Oklahoma. (He had no prior criminalrecord.) He smokes marijuana to relieve the pain of his brokenback. It quotes his attorney pointing out that violent offenders arereleased from jail to make room for people like Jim Montgomery. Next, three influential advocates of harm reduction in the USAare introduced: Conservative California Judge James Gray: * declares the War on Drugs has turned into a war on ourpeople. * points out nothing is accomplished by imprisoning drugusers. * favors government regulated distribution of drugs coupledwith education. Baltimore mayor Kurt Shmoke: * points out violence in the drug trade is caused by profits,not by drugs themselves. * advocates taking the profit out of drug distribution,through government distribution and a focus on education andtreatment. * points out only 20% of addicts can get treatment. New Haven police chief Nick Pastor: * is shown interacting with inner-city youth talking aboutdrugs. William Bennet summarizes the prohibitionist mindset: 'You will never persuade the citizens of this country thatdrugs should be legalized.' 'It (drug use) is a deadly andpoisonous activity.' 'We must never admit defeat in the war ondrugs.' 'People should be imprisoned for long periods of time forusing drugs.' Next it moves to Europe and looks at the experiences with harmreduction in Holland and Britain. Holland * Use of cannabis is tolerated (scenes of people smoking up incoffee shops). * Tolerance of cannabis is attributed for the prevention ofthe use of hard drugs by youth. * A large proportion of crime is caused by foreign touristscomming from countries with more repressive drug policies. * Prosecution is reserved for large distributors, not users ofeven hard drugs. * Since free needle exchanges were introduced the HIVinfection rate among IV drug users dropped from 11% to 4%, nowone of lowest in world. * Public policy seeks to keep addicts healthy, productivecitizens. * There is still a black market in hard drugs, which manybelieve will not be eliminated until complete legalization isimplemented. * Holland is pressured by the US to roll back its harmreduction policy. Britain * Heroin maintenance, which seeks to stabilize and helpaddicts by providing pharmaceutical heroin, is practiced. * The physical health of junkies is ruined by adulterants inillicit heroin. (Pharmaceutical heroin can be used lifelong without medicalconsequences.) * People on heroin maintenance are able to lead relativelynormal healthy lives. * If given a chance, most people mature out of addiction, soheroin maintenance buys time, allowing the user to build a life as an alternativeto addiction. * A 15-fold reduction in crimes by addicts on heroinmaintenance has been documented. * Many on heroin maintenance are eventually successful inkicking the addiction. Back to the USA ... treatment: * America's lack of commitment to treatment is highlighted. * The success rate of treatment (American style) is at best25%. AIDS infection * Ethen Nadelman, a harm reduction proponent, questions themorality of policies which result in IV drug users getting HIV, perhaps infectingtheir lovers and children, and producing a huge economic burdenon society. * A study of the effectiveness of needle exchange programs inNew York shows a drop in HIV infection among IV drug users from6% to 2%. Marijuana * Dr. Lester Grinspoon, (author of Marijuana ForbiddenMedicine (not mentioned)) dispels gateway theory of cannabis. He says cannabis is 'lessof a problem than tobacco or alcohol by orders of magnitude'. * US Government reports dispel gateway theory. * The 1972 Schafer Commission, appointed by Richard Nixon,recommends the legalization of the possession and sale of smallquantities of cannabis. * The partial adoption of this strategy in California savedbillions of dollars. * The nation's leaders purposely ignore findings of SchaferCommission. William Bennet again 'law enforcement is very effective prevention' 'harm reduction policies would immediately lead to 50 millionhard drug users in the USA' * These assertions are both made to look rather dubious bysubsequent rebuttals. Drugs and children * PDFA commercials initially had "great impact" indiscouraging drug use. * The lack of education has recently led to increased useamong kids. (These two points I take issue with, as I attribute theincrease to a loss of credibility brought about by exaggeration in 'drugeducation'.) * Due to prohibition there are pushers in schools - drugs arereadily available in spite of (or because of) prohibition. Memorable metaphor Kurt Shmoke describes the drug war as a 'domestic Vietnam'. Contents | Feedback | Search DRCNet Library | Schaffer Library | Miscellaneous Statements on DrugPolicyWT01-B27-28IA087-000625-B009-178http://206.61.184.43:80/schaffer/LIBRARY/urchild.htm 206.61.184.43 19970122040459 text/html 13690HTTP/1.0 200 OKDate: Wednesday, 22-Jan-97 04:04:49 GMTServer: WebSitePro/1.1f (S/N wpo-0deb)Allow-ranges: bytesContent-type: text/htmlLast-modified: Saturday, 28-Dec-96 06:41:37 GMTContent-length: 13472 Your Child and Stimulants Contents | Feedback | Search DRCNet Library | Schaffer Library | Miscellaneous Statementson Drug Policy Your Child and Stimulants Growing up and exploring limits. from "your child and stimulants, ISBN 90-71187-53-5, Netherlands Institute on Alcohol and Drugs, The Netherlands. Trying is learning Young people will try out everything: arrive home late, drinkmore alcohol than thirst dictates, challenge parents by ignoringrules and generally pay no attention to well meant advice. Onemoment they may reject any support the family may want to offer,the next moment they apparently invite it. Similarly, one momentthey may wish to be left alone, the next they may look for warmthand comfort. You as a parent are almost certain to regognise this type ofbehavior, if only because we all, at one stage, went through aphase like this. This kind of "testing" behavior doesof course have a function. Young people have to try out differentthings in order to be able to determine their own position andtheir own behavior. Anyone who is trying to discover what the limits are will havefirst have to go beyond them. There is therefore no great causefor alarm: for most adoloscents this is a normal step in theirdevelopment toward independence. Most young people are mostheavily influenced by the codes and norms that exist in theirpeer group, for instance in the way they dress. It may surpriseyou, but it is of the greatest importance to your child. It maymake the difference between belonging to the group or not, andyoung people in particular want to be part of the group. First experience of stimulants Tobacco, alcohol, drugs and certain types of medicine canendanger a person's health. Even so, they are widely used becausethey provide a certain degree of enjoyment and pleasure as doesgambling. Such stimulants are very easy to get hold of. Most children gothrough a phase in which they want to try out that which isunknown to them. It is therefore highly likely that your child,also, will at one point be confronted with the choice;"shall I use this or shall I not use this." Your childis perfectly capable to decide responsibly for him or herself. The crucial question is how this decision will be perceived bypeers. If the decision matches the norms of the peer group, thenthere is nothing to worry about. It is when the decision isrejected that problems arise. For instance, when most members ofthe peer group are used to drinking a lot of alcohol it may bedifficult for an individual child to say no to alcohol. Only veryfew children are able to resist this kind of peer pressuresuccessfully and avoid placing themselves outside the group. The freedom to choose Every person has the right to make his own choices. Those whoare growing up still have to learn to deal with that freedom, ifonly because their educators are not always present. Parents canof course offer guidance but at the end of the way young peoplehave to be responsible for their own behavior. They thereforemust explore the limits of their own freedom, includingstimulants. However,this is not all. There are a number of stimulants thatare highly addictive (see table at end). It is obvious that suchsubstances should never be offered to youngsters just to try themout. In this respect, a gambling machine can cause similaraddiction. Minimizing the risks There is always a certain risk involved in trying outstimulants. This does not necessarily mean, however, that youshould forbid their use just like that. If you do so your childwill simply try them out when you are not present thus making itimpossible for you to exert any kind of influence whatsoever.Amuch better way of trying to minimize possible risk is tomonitor and guide your child as much as possible in this processof trying out. THE STIMULANTS The importance of knowledge If you want to talk about stimulants effectively and sensiblyit is important that you have the right basic knowledge aboutthem. Knowledge can take away unfounded fear. Lots of peoplebelieve that smoking marijuana automatically leads to dependencyon hard drugs. This is absolutely not the case. The wordaddiction, used in a general sense, often leads to all kinds ofmisunderstandings. People can also be addicted to food or workfor instance. That is why the other term "dependency"is used, and there is a difference between physical dependencyand mental dependency. Physical dependency means that a person's body adjusts to asubstance that the person uses intensively. Without that substance the body no longer functions prperly.When the substance is withheld, different kinds of withdrawalsystoms bnegin to surface such as fever or nausea. The use of certain substances has to be progressive in orderto achieve the same effect. This is what is called"tolerance". Physical dependency and tolerance are bothdetermined to a large extent by the stimulant and not the user. Mental dependency is entirely different. It is determined to alarge extent by the user and not the stimulant. Mental dependencyis a simple matter of "feeling good" something tastes"good" or makes you feel "good", so much sothat you cannot do without it. The desire for the substance isvery strong and completely dominates a person's thinking. The tables below illustrate mental dependency, physicaldependency, tolerance, short-term effects and long-term effects,based on intensive use of stimulants. We warn you that this overview is necessarily concise andtherfore not entirely complete. ALCOHOL mental dependency - high risk physical dependency- yes tolerance -yes short term effect - person feels less inhibited (one or twoglasses), sedating ( more than one or two glasses) impairs sense ofjudgement, delayed response, leads to over-confidence and indiffrence long-term effects - serious damage to liver, brain, heart andstomach. important - dangerous in combination with other stimulants CAFFEINE (coffee, tea, cola) mental dependency - small chance physical dependency - small chance tolerance - yes short-term effects - enhances concentration, suppressestiredness. long-term effects - sleeplessness, restlessness important - intensive use carries risk of cardio vasculardiseases. CANNABIS (marijuana, hash) mental dependency - small chance physical dependency - no tolerance - no short-term effects - relaxing, boosts emotions, impairsconcentration and response. High dose may lead to loss of consciousness. Long-term effects - lung cancer important - in combination with alcohol increases the effectsof alcohol considerably. Risk of overdose when eaten (spacecake) COCAINE (including base & crack) mental derpendency - high risk physical dependency - no tolerance - no short-term effects - stimulating, surpresses tiredness andappetite long-terms effects - loss of weight, sleeplessness, delusions important - exhaustion, dpression after stopping. the smokableform of cocaine is called crack or base. crack causes a much greaterdegree of dependency than cocaine. TRANQUILLIZERS mental dependency - high risk physical dependency - small chance tolernace - yes short-term effects - relaxing, sedating, indifference,overconfidence long-terms effects - weight gain, inactivity, muscularweakness important - in combination with alcohol increases the effectsof alcohol considerably. OPIATES (opium, morphine, heroin, methadone) mental dependency - high risk physical dependency yes tolerance - yes short-term effects - decreased awareness of pain, euphoria,reduced awareness of fear, emotional numbness, constipation long-term effects - indifference, reduced sexual activity important - malnutrition, neglect of the body due toindiffrence AMPHETAMINES (uppers) mental dependency - high risk physical depency - no tolerance - yes short-term effects - increased ability to concentrate,tiredness and sleep are surpressed. loss of appetite, overconfidence long-term effects - restlessness, irritablity, loss of weight,fears and suspicions, delusions and agressiveness important - exhaustion o f the body. dangerous for peoplewithncardio vascular problems. BARBITURATES menatl depndency - high risk physical depndency - yes tolerance - yes short-term effects - drowsiness, judgement and responseaffected, loss of coordination and control long term effects - loss of weight, irritablity, confusedbehavior important - dangerous in combination with alcohol GLUE, PETROL, ETHER mental dependency - high risk physical dependency - no tolerance - yes short-term effects - slight drowsiness, loss of coordination,reduced sense of judgement, loss of consciousness at high dose long-term effects - brain-, liver-, kidney- andmucous-membrane damage. important - not possible to trace overdose TOBACCO mental dependency - high risk physical dependency - slight tolerance - yes short-term effects - stimulating, tremor in the hands,coughing, reduced temperature in extremities, irritation of eyes and nose long-term effects - loss of fitness, cardio vascular diseases,bronchitis, throat and lung cancer LSD, PSILOCYBINE, MESCALINE mental dependency - no physical dependency - no tolerance - no short-term effects - heightening of the emotions, visualhallucinations long-term effects - mental disturbances (long lasting) important - reduced sense of reality. increased sense of fearand can lead to temporary insanity. XTC, MDMA, ECSTASY mental dependency - small chance physical dependency - no tolerance - yes, for stimulating effect. no, for social effect short-term effects - stimulating, socially relaxing long-term effects - not known important - dangerous in combination with other stimulants.dangerous for people with cardio vascular problems GAMBLING mental dependency - high risk physical dependency - rarely applicable tolerance - not applicable effects - nervousness, tension, sleeplessness, loss ofconcentration, neglect of health. important - high risk of financial problems. from "your child and stimulants, ISBN 90-71187-53-5, Netherlands Institute on Alcohol and Drugs, The Netherlands. Contents | Feedback | Search DRCNet Library | Schaffer Library | Miscellaneous Statementson Drug PolicyWT01-B27-29IA087-000625-B009-249http://206.61.184.43:80/schaffer/Library/drugbib1.htm 206.61.184.43 19970122040551 text/html 313398HTTP/1.0 200 OKDate: Wednesday, 22-Jan-97 04:05:10 GMTServer: WebSitePro/1.1f (S/N wpo-0deb)Allow-ranges: bytesContent-type: text/htmlLast-modified: Saturday, 28-Dec-96 06:40:33 GMTContent-length: 313179 Drug Bibliography -- Citations no later than 1990 Schaffer Library of Drug Policy DRUG BIBLIOGRAPHY (CITATIONS NO LATER THAN 1990) NOTE: This bibliography was compiled by Donald J. Mabry, Professor of History and Senior Fellow, Center forInternational Security and Strategic Studies, Mississippi StateUniversity, Mississippi State, MS 39762 (Telephone:601-325-7095). E-Mail: djm1@ra.msstate.edu. The article summariescame from UnCover of the CARL, Inc. online public access catalog.Pages cited are often just the first page of an article. Abbott, Michael H. "The Army and the Drug War: Politicsor National Security?" Parameters. December, 1989, 99-. Abend, Jules. "Narcotics Cited as Key Threat."Stores (June 1989), pp. 56-. Abrams, Elliott. Drug Wars: the New Alliances AgainstTraffickers and Terrorists. Washington, D.C.: U.S. Dept. ofState, Bureau of Public Affairs, Office of Public Communication,Editorial Division, 1986. (Current Policy; no. 792). (February10, 1986 speech to Council on Foreign Relations. Abruzzese, R. Coca-leaf Production in the Countries of theAndean Subregion. Bulletin on Narcotics, 41:1-2 (1989), pp. 95-. Adelekan, M.L. Self-reported drug use among secondary schoolstudents in the Nigerian State of Ogun. Bulletin on Narcotics,41:1-2 (1989), pp. 109-. Ahmed, Mahmoud S., Zhou, De-He, and Maulik, Dev.Characterization of a Cocaine Binding Protein in Human Placenta.Life Sciences, 46:8 (1990), pp. 553-. Akimoto, K., Hamamura, T. and Otsuki, S. Subchronic cocainetreatment enhances cocaine-induced dopamine efflux, studied by invivo intracerebral dialysis. Brain Research, 490:2 (June 261989), pp. 339. Akimoto, K., Hamamura, T., Kazahaya, Y. Tetraethylammoniumstimulates adrenomedullary secretion by causing fluctuations in acytosolic free Ca concentration. Enhanced extracellular dopaminelevel may be the fundamental neuropharmacological basis ofcross-behavioral sensitization between methamphetamine andcocaine- an in vivo dialysis study in freely moving rats. BrainResearch, 507:2 (January 22 1990), pp. 344-. Alberti, Giorgio and Enrique (Mayer, eds. Reciprocidad einteal use and abuse of cocaine has a great influence on theoutcome of pregnancy. Anglin, M. D., Booth, M. W., and Ryan, T. M. EthnicDifferences in Narcotics Addiction. II. Chicano and AngloAddiction Career Patterns. The International Journal of theAddictions, 23:10 (1988), pp. 1011-. Anglin, M. D. The Efficacy of Civil Commitment in TreatingNarcotics Addiction. Journal of Drug Issues, 18:4 (Fall 1988),pp. 527-. Anglin, M.D., Weisman, C.P., and Fisher, D.G. The MMPIProfiles of Narcotics Addicts: I. A Review of the Literature. TheInternational Journal of the Addictions, 24:9 (1989), pp. 867-. Anon. (Mayor Barry is busted on cocaine charges. Newsweek,115:5 (January 29, 1990), p 5. Anon. Addicts In The Workplace. Director, 43:2 (September 1,1989), pp. 66-. Summary: Addiction to alcohol and other Drugs,Narcotics, tranquilizers, even nicotine is a growing socialproblem that has major implications for business. Tom Nash looksat the action companies are starting to take. Anon. Agreement on Cooperation in Combating NarcoticsTrafficking and Drug Dependency. International Legal Materials:Current Documents, 29:1 (January 1, 1990), pp. 58-. Anon. America's War On Panama. Maclean's, 103:1 (January 1,1990), 52-. Summary: After Panamanian dictator Manuel Noriegadeclared war on the United States and his troops fatally shot anoff-duty American officer, President George Bush last weekordered an invasion of the Central American nation. Oneobjective: to capture Noriega, wanted on drug-trafficking chargesin Florida. Anon. Another Deadly Danger of Cocaine. Emergency Medicine.(March 30 1989) v 21 n 6 pp. 100. Summary: It kicks may strikenot only the cardiovascular and nervous systems but skeletalmuscle as well, triggering a cascade of problems that can end indeath. Anon. Asia: Drugs. Far Eastern Economic Review, 146:47(November 23 1989), pp. 44-. Summary: From the Golden Triangle toManila, more drugs than ever are being produced in Asia.Correspondents in Manila, Seoul and Bangkok report on a dualconcern for narcotics agencies: The emergence of super-charged speed and a record opiumharvest. Anon. Ballots and Bullets. Presstime, 12:4 (April 1, 1990),pp. 8-. Summary: The election of journalists as public officals,all-out media wars and drug lords' bombing newspapers they're thenorm in Latin America. Anon. BCCI and the laundering of cocaine cash. The Economist.(October 15 1988) v 309 n 7572. pp. 96-. Anon. BCCI on the record-exclusively to The Banker. Thebanker. December 1 1988) v 138 n 754. pp. 40. Anon. Was This Bank A Laundry? A drug-money trail leads toBCCI. Business week. (October 24 1988) n 3076. pp. 29. Anon. Beating back the cocaine kings. U.S. News & WorldReport. (February 19 1990) v 108 n 7 pp. 18. Anon. Belisario No Entregar a Ningn Colombianos, QuindioLibre, (October 1, 1983, 8B. Anon. Bolivia Asks U.S. for Big Loan to Make Up Lost CocaineIncome, New York Times, (July 31, 1986, A4. Anon. Bush Names drug mob capos to rule Panama. ExecutiveIntelligence Review, 17:2 (January 5, 1990), pp. 32-. Anon. Bush Taking Military Tack in Drug Battle. CongressionalQuarterly Weekly Report. (September 9 1989) v 47 n 36. pp. 2322.Summary: The president's proposal for an infusion of aid to thearmed forces in cocaine'producing Latin American countries marksa major shift toward a military response to the overseas drugtrade. Anon. Bush's threats to blockade Colombia give big boost todrug cartels. Executive Intelligence Review, 17:4 (January 191990), pp. 34-. Anon. Carriers sign pacts to halt drug smuggling. TrafficWorld. Sep 18 1989). 219:49-50. Anon. Carta Abierta de Roberto Su rez, El Diario [La Paz],(October 19, 1988). Anon. Civismo en (Marcha, Medelln Cvico, (March 1984, 2. Anon. Coast Guard uses Schweizer SA 2-37A on undercovermissions to observe suspected drug smuggling. Aviation Week &Space Technology, 130:53 (May 1 1989). Anon. Cocaine and Strokes. Medical World News. (May 23 1989)v 30 n 10 pp. 40. Summary: The rising incidence ofcocaine-related strokes means that anyone younger than 45 withcerebral ischemia or occlusion should have toxicology screen,researchers say. Anon. Cocaine Babies. Editorial Research Reports. (July 281989) v 2 n 4 pp. 419. Summary: Some activist prosecutors aretrying to bring criminal charges against women for drug-relatedinjuries to their fetuses. So far they have been unsuccessful,but this month a Florida prosecutor won a conviction by using alegal twist. Anon. Cocaine Babies. Medical World News. December 15, 1988),v 29 n 24. pp. 14. Summary: Accumulating evidence documents theadverse effects of cocaine, even in small amounts, upon thefetus. Anon. Cocaine Capitalism. The Nation. (October 2 1989) v 249n 10. pp. 341-. Anon. Cocaine, Communism and Crisis in Peru. The war on drugsdraws the U.S. into a land of terror and crackpot economics. U.S.news & world report. September 18 1989) v 107 n 11. pp. 45. Anon. Cocaine-Induced Seizures in the Young. EmergencyMedicine. (March 30 1990) v 22 n 6. pp. 101-. Summary: Passive oraccidental drug intoxication may not be your first suspicion whena child seizes, but if they come from an environment where adultsuse drugs, children may also suffer the effects. Anon. Cocaine: The Federal Express Connection. Newsweek.(August 21 1989) v 114 n 8 pp. 18. Anon. Colombia Drug War Lends Urgency to U.S. Aid.Congressional Quarterly Weekly Report. September 2 1989) v 47 n35 pp. 2264 . Anon. Colombia Drug War Lends Urgency to U.S. Aid.Congressional Quarterly Weekly Report, 47:35 (September 2, 1989),pp. 2264-. Anon. Colombia: Human Rights Implications of United StatesDrug Control Policy. Harvard Human Rights Journal (Spring 1990),pp. 186-. Anon. Colombia: The Drug Economy, The Economist (April 2,1988), 63. Anon. Colombian judge located by Detroit news flees area.Editor & Publisher, the Fourth Estate 122:11 (May 20 1989). Anon. Crack Secret Police Outfit to Combat Shining Path'sNewOffensive, The Andean Report (March 1987). Anon. Cracking Down on Crack. Editorial Research Report. (February 23 1990) v 1 n 8. pp. 112-. Summary: President Reagan, who began the latest war on drugs, was responding to a sudden increase in the use of crack cocaine in the mid-1980s. Anon. Creating Customers for Dangerous Drugs, Outlook 82 (April 7, 1906), 778-79. Anon. Crisis in the Courts. Business Week. (March 26, 1990), pp. 76. Summary: Delays caused by Narcotics cases are boosting corporate legal bills. Anon. Cutting Cocaine's Chemical Cord. Summary: The Organization of American States meets to vote on controls. Chemical Week, 146:15 (April 18 1990), pp. 10-. Anon. Daedalus: Coca-coda. Nature. (June 15 1989) v 339 n 6225. pp. 514-. Anon. Drug Legalization. Congressional Quarterly's Editorial Research Report (February 23, 1990), pp. 116-. Summary: Some believe the only way to control drug abuse is to legalize drugs like marijuana and cocaine and subject them to government regulation and taxation. Anon. Drug Legalization. Congressional Quarterly's Editorial Research Report. (February 23 1990) v 1 n 8 pp. 116. Summary: Some believe the only way to control drug abuse is to legalize drugs like marijuana and cocaine and subject them to government regulation and taxation. Anon. Drug Therapy to Treat Cocaine Withdrawal. U.S. Pharmacist. (May 1 1990) v 15 n 5. pp. 48-. Anon. Drug Wars: How the Battles Are BEing Fought Across the United States and Canada. Police Chief (June 1988), p. 48. Anon. Drugs of Choice. Science News, 136:25 (December 16 1989), pp. 392-. Summary: Most cigarette smokers are physically and psychologically dependent on their "best friends,"but some light smokers show no signs of dependence. Studies of nonaddicted smokers also known as cigarette "chippers"may shed light on the nature of nicotine addiction. Researchers are also looking at nondependent users of other drugs, such as cocaine, to understand better why some people get hooked on intoxicating substances. Anon. Drugs. Summary: Marijuana and Learning: Grass Gets an F. Current Health 2, 15:5 (January 1, 1989), pp. 20. Anon. Drugs: The Downside of Smoking Tobacco and Marijuana. Current Health 2, 16:3 (November 1, 1989), pp. 24-. Anon. E-2C aircraft are key to Coast Guard's antidrug smuggling operations. Aviation Week and Space Technology. (January 30 1989) v 130 n 5 pp. 37. Summary: Grumman early warning aircraft fitted with an APS-125 radar flying missions form Key West in search for aircraft that might be bringing narcotics into the U.S. Anon. Effects of Crack and Cocaine Upon Infants: A Brief Review of the Literature. Children's Legal Rights Journal. Fall 89 v 10 n 4. pp. 4. Anon. El Dinero Caliente Pretende Entrar en Poltica, Guin, (July 15-21, 1983, 21. Anon. El Dossier de Medelln, Semana, (January 27, 1987, 25. Anon. El tr fico de drogas es mecanismo de autodefensa, El Espectador, (July 3, 1984. Anon. Estupor por Subornos de la Mafia, El Tiempo, (January 10, 1988), 9A. Anon. Existen Mas de Dos Millones de Desempleados, Medelln Cvico, (May 1987, 6. Anon. Focus On Loss Prevention. Stores, 71:6 (June 1, 1989), pp. 56. Summary: Narcotics are cited by retailers as top threat to asset protection-both internal and external. Anon. From Coca-Cola to the Cartels. Scholastic Update. Teachers' edition. (November 17 1989) v 122 n 6. pp. 10. Summary: A look back at a century of drug abuse and drug wars in America. Anon. Getting Gangsters Out of Drugs. The Economist (April 2, 1988), pp. 11-12. Anon. Guns, Drugs, and the C.I.A., Frontline, PBS, (May 18, 1988), 34. Anon. Haiti: Coupsters and cocaine. The Economist. (April 8 1989) v 311 n 7597. pp. 46. Anon. Hay Que Hablar con los Narcos Dicen 2 Obispos, El Tiempo, (February 13, 1988), 1A. Anon. Hitting Kingpins in Their Assets, US News and World Report, December 8, 1988). Anon. In Europe, some don't want to halt the flow. Barron's. 69:33 Jun 26 1989). (Money-laundering legislation). Anon. Is Prohibition Making Drug Fiends? Literary Digest 69 (April 16, 1921), 19-20. Anon. Jacobo Arenas Discusses Lehder, Semana, (March 10, 1987, 22-25. Anon. Japan: Drugs. Far Eastern Economic Review., 147:11 (March 15 1990), pp. 12. Summary: Police face Legal obstacles in pursuit of narcotics traffickers at a time when the country is seen as the next big market for illicit drugs. Anon. La Conexin, Caretas, (September 7, 1987, 36. Anon. La Mafia Asesino a Pardo Leal, El Tiempo, (November 13, 1987, 3A. Anon. La Patria Acorralada, Quindio Libre, (October 1, 1983, 2A. Anon. La Paz es la Justicia Social, Medelln Cvico, (November 1986, 3. Anon. Libre Capo de la Mafia porque Ningn Juez Quiso Procesarlo, El Tiempo, (February 9, 1988), 24. Anon. Lo Unico que Hacemos Es el Oso, El Tiempo, (February 22, 1988). Anon. Los barrios Pobres y la Eradicacin de la Pobreza, Medelln Cvico, (October 1986, 3. Anon. Marijuana Controversy Sparks Debate Among DEA Officials. Drug Topics, 132:20 (October 17, 1988), pp. 42-. Anon. Marine OV-10Ds with Flir systems detect, track aircraft smuggling narcotics. Aviation Week and Space Technology. (July 10 1989) v 131 n 2 pp. 49. Summary: The success of OV-10D patrols along a broad stretch of the coast, from the Florida Keys to the Carolinas, has caught the attention of both the illegal drug traffickers and congressional officials. Anon. Medicine: Is there a technical fix for cocaine addiction? U.S. News & World Report. (April 17 1989) v 106 n 15 pp. 61. Anon. Memorable Moments - Overdosing a Gunman. American Druggist, 200:2 (August 1, 1989), pp. 56. Summary: The robber who waved his gun demanding Narcotics got more than he bargined for. Anon. Mexico Urged to Boost Efforts in Drug War. Congressional Quarterly Weekly Report, 47:9 (March 4, 1989), pp. 473-. Anon. Mexico Week. Mexico Journal, 3:2 (October 9, 1989), pp. 8-. Summary: Salinas vs Bush on trade issues: Attorney general gives drug-fight report.: Durazo gets six years: The south gets swamped: Zuno Arce tries to leave L.A.: Roundup: Muoz Ledo on the hot seat. Anon. Mientras el Pueblo Padece Hambre, Varias Industrias Se Enriquen, Medelln Cvico, (April 1987, 4. Anon. Military-Drug Trafficking Link Alleged, Radio Patria Libre (Clandestine) to Colombia, (November 15, 1988). Anon. Multinacional de la Droga: Quin Esta Detr s? El Tiempo, (February 17, 1986, 10. Anon. Narcotics. U.S.-Mexico report; monthly translations ..., 9:1 (January 1, 1990), pp. 14. Anon. Narcotics: A Primer. Current Health 2, 15:7 (March 1 1989), pp. 11. Anon. Narcotr fico y poltica II: Bolivia 1982-1985. Cochabamba: [s.n.], 1985. Anon. Nation: The U.S. readies emergency aid for Colombia as drug barons declare "total war" against the government. Time (September 4, 1989), 12. Summary: President Barco strikes back against assassinations and bombings by threatening extradition of cocaine kingpins to the U.S. and seizing planes, yachts and lavish mansions of the narcotrafficantes. But the leading gangsters disappear after their hit men rub out Luis Carlos Gal n, the front-running candidate in next (May's presidential election. Anon. National Menace of the Dope Traffic, Literary Digest 76 (February 24, 1923), 34-35. Anon. News. Chemistry and Industry (March 5, 1990), pp. 114. Summary: Dutch tackle Narcotics chemicals. Anon. No a la Extradicin, Medelln Cvico, (March 1984, 7. Anon. Noriega and the CIA in Costa Rica. Newsweek, 115:7 (February 12, 1990), p. 22. Anon. NTSB asserts captain's cocaine use contributed to crash of Metro 3. Aviation week and space technology. (February 6 1989) v 130 n 6 pp. 59. Summary: Both pilots, seven passengers were killed Jan. 19, 1988), when a Trans-Colorado Airlines Metro 3 crashed at night near Durango, Colo. Anon. Pakistan: Narcotics. Far Eastern Economic Review, 145:32 (August 10, 1989), pp. 25-. Summary: The government arrests a former general, now an opposition politician, on charges of International Drug trafficking. Anon. Pakistan: Narcotics. Summary: Prime Minister Bhutto cracks down on Drug syndicates in the country. Far Eastern Economic Review, 144:18 (May 4, 1989), pp. 28-. Anon. Paro armado de 72 horas, Bases Huallaga, (August 1988), 1. Anon. Patent Medicine Crusade, Nation 81 (November 9, 1905), 376. Anon. Patent Medicines and Poverty, Outlook 83 (June 2, 1906), 253-254. Anon. Peru's Failed Experiment, Dollars & Sense, 1989). Anon. Quality Watch. Hospitals, 63:15 (August 5, 1989), pp. 34-. Summary: Are you monitoring prescribed narcotics at your facility? More than 87 percent of the hospitals accredited by the Joint Commission on Accreditation of Healthcare Organizations fail to comply with JCAHO standards in the area of Drug usage. Such serious quality problems can lead to a loss of accreditation. Anon. Questions and Answers: Availability of pharmaceutical cocaine. American Journal of Hospital Pharmacy (August 1 1989) v 46 n 8 pp. 1534. Anon. Quien Esta Matando a la mafia, Semana, (April 1, 1986, 32. Anon. Quien Fue, Semana, (January 25, 1986. Anon. Radio in the War on Drugs. Communications, 26:9 (September 1, 1989), pp. 74-. Summary: The Mississippi Narcotics Bureau is using digital speech encrypting to protect agents and improve their effectiveness. Anon. Reactivacin Econmica por Dinero Caliente, El Espectador, (October 3, 1987, 1A, 7A. Anon. Rural Mexico turns to drug cultivation to put food on the table. Mexico Journal, 3:4 (October 23, 1989), pp. 16-. Anon. Street Level Narcotics Enforcement. Law and Order, 38:7 (July 1, 1990), pp. 87-. Anon. Struggling To Cut The Cocaine/Chemicals Connection: So far, the war against chemical diversion is a stalemate. Chemical Week. (January 4 1989) v 143 n 26 pp. 44. Anon. The coming cocaine plague in Europe. Demand is up, and the parallels with the American experience are frightening. U.S. News & World Report. (February 20 1989) v 106 n 7 pp. 34 Anon. The dramas of BCCI. The economist. December 17 1988) v 309 n 7581. pp. 81. Anon. The Drug Bill's 2.3 Billion Promise, New York Times, (October 25, 1988), 26y. Anon. The Drug Flames Rise Higher, New York Times, (March 3, 1988), 30. Anon. The Drug-money hunt. Narcotics warriors target laundered cash. U.S. News & World Report (August 21 1989), pp. 22. Anon. The Epidemic. Medical World News. 1989). Anon. The Helmsman. The Illustrated weekly of India. (October 8 1989) v 110 n 41. pp. 42-. Summary: S N M Abdi talks to BCCI president B K Dutt about the controversies that have rocked the criketing establishment. Anon. The Long, Losing Battle Against Drugs. The Economist (March 5, 1988), pp. 23-24. Anon. The NACLA Report: Coca The Real Green Revolution. NACLA Report on the Americas. (March 1 1989) v 22 n 6. pp. 12. Anon. The NACLA Report: Colombia Cracks Up. NACLA Report on the Americas, 23:6 (April 1, 1990), pp. 13-. Summary: The People's War; The Dirty War; The Drug War. Anon. The Superstition of Dope, Literary Digest 54 (June 30, 1917), 1990). Anon. Those stubborn coca growers. U.S. News & World Report. (February 26 1990) v 108 n 8. pp. 13. Anon. Tocache: Some Things Go Better With..., The Andean Report, December 1985. Anon. Top drug cop weighs use of marijuana as an Rx drug. Drug Topics, 132:23 (December 12 1988), pp. 50-. Anon. Turf War Over Coca-Growing Territory Leaves 34 Dead, 11 Wounded in Peru, Miami Herald, (October 14, 1987, 3A. Anon. Vereniging Happy Family v. Inspecteur Der Omzetbelasting. European Court of Justice. Common Market Law Reports, 56:736 (December 5, 1989), pp. 743-. Summary: Value added tax-illegal goods-Narcotics-no import VAT chargeable-outside commercial sector altogether (except for strictly controlled medical use)-no VAT on internal transactions either-controlled goods-amphetamines-equivalent to Narcotics for VAT purposes-hands-off policy of Dutch police regarding `soft drugs' irrelevant-not equivalent to legislation-soft drugs also outside VAT system. Anon. Virginia ROTHR system covers Caribbean drug smuggling routes. Aviation Week & Space Technology. 131:76+ Nov 27 1989). Anon. Wanted: godfather of Colombia's drug cartels. Executive Intelligence Review, 17:23 (June 1, 1990), pp. 26-. Summary: Once the President of Colombia during the heyday of the country's dope trade, Alfonso Lpez Michelsen is now at the center of the drug traffickers' empire aganist which the current government has declared total war. Now the authorities are on the tail of the godfather himself; the material assembled here is aimed at helping that process along. Anon. Was This Bank A Laundry? A drug-money trail leads to BCCI Business week. (October 24 1988) n 3076. pp. 29. Anon. Weed It And Reap.Summary: Fueled by the U.S. government's war on drugs, marijuana is now this country's largest cash crop. And it's not just California hippies who are growing it. Dollars & Sense (March 1, 1989). pp. 12-. Anon. When Coke Leads to Stroke. Emergency Medicine. (April 15 1990) v 22 n 7. pp. 35-. Summary: More and more young people today are finding out the hard way that the downside of the cocaine high can be something they expect to happen to their elders--an intracerebral or subarachnoid hemorrhage or cerebral infarction. Anon. World. Maclean's, 102:36 (September 4, 1989), p. 16-. Summary: Washington provides massive military and related aid to Colombia to help Bogota fight drug traffickers who vow to wage total war against the government. Anslinger, Harry J. and William F. Tompkins. The Traffic in Narcotics. New York: Funk and Wagnalls, 1953. Anthony, James C., Tien, Allen Y., and Petronis, Kenneth R. Epidemiologic Evidence on Cocaine Use and Panic Attacks. American Journal of Epidemiology. (March 1 1989) v 129 n 3 pp. 543. Anturiano Hurtado, Julio. La hiena: drama social sobre la droga, drogadiccion, y corrupcion. Santa Cruz, Bolivia: Empresa Editora El Pais, 1986. 159 p. Araki, H, Y. Uchiyama-Tsuyuki, and H. Aihara, H. Effects of Chronic Administration of Haloperidol, Methamphetamine or Cocaine on Wet-Dog Shakes Elicited by Stimulation of the Rat Hippocampus. Archives internationales de pharmacodynamie et de therapie. (January 1 1989) v 297 pp. 217. Arango Jaramillo, Mario, and Jorge Child. Coca-Coca: historia, manejo politico y mafia de la cocaina. Bogota: Dos Mundos, 1986. Arango Jaramillo, Mario, and Jorge Child. Los condenados de la coca: el manejo politico de la droga. Medellin, Colombia: Editorial J.M. Arango, 1985. Arango Jaramillo, Mario, and Jorge Child. Narcotrafico imperio de la cocaina. 1a ed. Medellin, Colombia: Editorial Percepcion, 1984. Arango Jaramillo, Mario. Impacto del Narcotr fico en Antioqua. Medelln: Editorial J. M. Arango, 1988). Arauz, Celestino Andres. El contrabando holandes en el Caribe durante la primera mitad del siglo XVIII / Celestino Andres Arauz Monfante. Caracas: Academia Nacional de la Historia, 1984. Biblioteca de la Academia Nacional de la Historia. Fuentes para la historia colonial de Venezuela ; 168-169. Arif, A., ed., Adverse health consequences of cocaine abuse. Geneva: World Health Organization, 1987. Ashley, Richard. Cocaine: its history, uses and effects. New York: Warner Books, 1976. Avakian, E.V., LeRoy, M., and St. John-Allan, K. Effect of Chronic Cocaine Administration and Cocaine Withdrawal on Coronary Flow Rate and Heart Rate Responses to Epinephrine and Cocaine in Isolated Perfused Rat Hearts. Life Sciences. 1990) v 46 n 22. pp. 1569-. Ayatollah, Guerrillas y Narcos, Cuentas Pendientes, El Tiempo, (November 15, 1987, 5A. Bachman, Jerald G., Johnston, Lloyd D., and O'Malley, Patrick M. Explaining the Recent Decline in Cocaine Use among Young Adults: Further Evidence That Perceived Risks and Disapproval Lead to Reduced Drug Use. Journal of Health and Social Behavior. (June 1 1990) v 31 n 2 pp. 173. Bagley, Bruce. Colombia and the War on Drugs, Foreign Affairs 67:1 (Fall 1988), 70-92. Bagley, Bruce. The Colombian Connection: The Impact of Drug Traffic on Colombia, in Coca and Cocaine: Effects on People and Policy in Latin America. edited by Deborah Pacini and Christine Franquemont. Peterborough, N.H.: Cultural Survival and Cornell University, 1986. Bailey, David N, and Richard F. Shaw. Cocaine- and Methamphetamine-Related Deaths in San Diego County (1987): Homicides and Accidental Overdoses. Journal of Forensic Sciences. (March 1 1989) v 34 n 2 pp. 407. Bailey, Susan L., and Hubbard, Robert L. Developmental Variation in the Context of Marijuana Initiation among Adolescents. Journal of Health and Social Behavior, 31:1 (March 1, 1990), pp. 58-. Bak, David J. Sant and Fournier, Robert. New weapons in the war against drugs. Journal of the American Chemical Society, 9 Aug 16 1989). Baker, J. The 'You Fly, You Die' Debate. Newsweek (October 2, 1989), 26. Bakht, Fred R., Kirshon, Brian, and Baker, Tahirih. Postpartum cardiovascular complications after bromocriptine and cocaine use. American Journal of Obstetrics and Gynecology. (April 1 1990) v 162 n 4. pp. 1065-. Summary: The potential for adverse cardiovascular effects after postpartum bromocriptine use, especially in conjunction with recent cocaine use, is discussed. Ball, Aimee Lee. White Lies: Cocaine-the Dirty Little Secret in the Age of Clean. pp. 266. (April 1 1989) v 95 n 4. Ballon, Eduardo, ed. Movimientos sociales y crisis: el caso peruano. Lima: Centro de Estudios y Promocion del Desarrollo, 1986. Bannon, Michael J., Xue, Chang-Hong, and Shibata, Kazuhiko. Expression of a Human Cocaine-Sensitive Dopamine Transporter in Xenopus laevis Oocytes. Journal of neurochemistry, 54:2 (February 1, 1990), pp. 706-. Barnes, Deborah. The Biological Tangle of Drug Addiction, Science 241 (July 22, 1988), 415-17. Barr, Cameron. Colombia's Bloodied Bench. The American Lawyer, 12:2 (March 1, 1990), pp. 94-. Summary: Being a judge in Colombia is "almost heroic," says oneyoung jurist--a struggle against the bribes and bullets of the drug cartels on the one hand and the inefficiencies of the judicial system on the other. Barrett, R. L. and J.B. Appel, Effects of stimulation and blockade of dopamine receptor subtypes on the discriminative stimulus properties of cocaine. Psychopharmacology. September 1 1989) v 99 n 1 pp. 13. Barrios, Jaime. Low-intensity Warfare: Reasons and Rationale. World Marxist Review, 32:7 (July 1989), pp. 40-. Barron, John. Castro, Cocaine and the A-Bomb Connection. The Reader's Digest. (March 1 1990) v 136 n 815 pp. 65-. Barton, Scott B., Kofoed, Bruce A., and Doleys, Daniel M. Smoking and Narcotics Use Among Chronic Pain Patients. Psychological Reports, 64:3 (June 1, 1989), pp. 1253-. Bascope Aspiazu, Rene. La veta blanca: coca y cocaina en Bolivia. La Paz: Ediciones Aqui, 1982. Bateman, David A., and Margaret C. Heagarty. Passive Freebase Cocaine (Crack) Inhalation by Infants and Toddlers. American Journal of diseases of children . (January 1 1989) v 143 n 1 pp. 25. Battjes, R. J., Leukefeld, C. G., and Pickens, R. W. The Acquired Immunodeficiency Syndrome and Intravenous Drug Abuse. Bulletin on Narcotics, 40:1 (1988), pp. 21-. Bauchner, Howard, Barry Zuckerman, and Mary McClain. Risk of sudden infant death syndrome among infants with in utero exposure to cocaine. The Journal of pediatrics. (November 1 1988) v 113 n 5 pp. 831. Summary: In a cohort of mothers with multiple risk factors for sudden infant death syndrome, the incidence of SIDS among their infants was not significantly greater in those who used cocaine. Beargie, Tony, Latin carriers ink anti-drug agreement. American Shipper, 31:59 Jan 1989). Beargie, Tony. ILA pledges boycott to stop drugs. American Shipper. 31:42 Jun 1989). Beck, Susan. The Cocaine War in America's Fruitbowl. The American Lawyer, 12:2 (March 1, 1990), pp. 82-. Summary: The once-tranquil town of Yakima, Washington, is dead set on battling drugs, even if it means turning itself inside out. Bell, R., Tayloir, E.H., and Pappas, A.A. Interpretation of Urine Quantitative 11-nor delta-9 tetrahydrocannabionol-9-Carboxylic Acid to Determine Abstinence from Marijuana Smoking. Journal of Toxicology. Clinical Toxicology, 27:1-2 (1989), pp. 109-. Bentancur, Arturo Ariel. Contrabando y contrabandistas: historias coloniales. Montevideo: Arca, 1982. Benuck, M., M.E.A. Reith, and H. Sershen. Oxidative Metabolism of Cocaine: Comparison of Brain and Liver. Proceedings of the Society for Experimental Biology. (January 1 1989) v 190 n 1 pp. 7. Bergman, Jack, and Warren, Phillip H. Effects of Kappa Opiods on Schedule-controlled Behavior of Squirrel Monkeys. The Journal of Pharmacology and Experimental Therapeutics.rapeutics . (March 1 1989) v 248 n 3. pp. 1102. Bergman, Jack, Madras, Bertha K., and Johnson, Sara E. Effects of Cocaine and Related Drugs in Nonhuman Primates. III. Self-Administration by Squirrel Monkeys. The Journal of Pharmacology and Experimental Therapeutics. (October 1 1989) v 251 n 1. pp. 150-. Billman, G. E. Mechanisms responsible for the carediotoxic effects of cocaine. The FASEB Journal. (May 1 1990) v 4 n 8. pp. 2469-. Billman, G.E, and R.S. Hoskins. Cocaine-induced ventricular fibrillation: protection afforded by the calcium antagonist verapamil. The FASEB Journal: Official Publication of the Federation of Americans Societies for Experimental Biology. (November 1 1988) v 2 n 14 pp. 2990. Blachman, Morris J., and Sharpe, Kenneth E. "The War on Drugs: American Democracy Under Assault." World Policy Journal, V. 7:1 (Winter 1990), pp. 135-. Blockstein, William L., ed. Seminar on Control Procedures in Drug Production 2d, University of Wisconsin, 1966. Control procedures in drug production; the proceedings of a seminar. Madison, University of Wisconsin, University Extension, 1966. Blue, Carolyn, L. CE: Home Care of the Epidural Analgesia Patient: The Nurse's Role. Home Healthcare Nurse, 7:4 (July 1, 1989), pp. 23-. Summary: Spinal analgesia offers a viable alternative for the patient with cancer whose pain cannot be controlled by systemic Narcotics. The success of this therapy depends largely on the effectiveness of the home health nurse in instructing the patient and caregivers, monitoring catheter care, and assessing the patient's response to treatment. Boaz, David. Let's Quit the Drug War, New York Times, (March 17, 1988), 25y. Bodor, Geza, Roggeman, Robert, and Turk, John. Variations in Abudance of the Molecular Ion of the Derivatized Cocaine Metabolite Benzoylecgonine. Clinical Chemistry. (May 1 1990) v 36 n 5. pp. 742-. Boffey, Philip. Drug Users Not Suppliers Hold Key to Problem, The New York Times, (April 12, 1988), A1, A10. Boja, J.W., and Kuhar, M.J. [3H]Cocaine binding and inhibition of [3H]dopamine uptake is similar in both the rat striatum and nucleus accumbens. European journal of pharmacology. December 7 1989) v 173 n 2 / 3 pp. 215 Bolivia. Consejo Nacional de Lucha contra el Narcotrafico. Narcotrafico: causas y soluciones. La Paz, Bolivia: Consejo Nacional de Lucha contra el Narcotrafico, 1982. Bonnie, Richard J. and Charles H. Whitehead. The Marihuana Conviction: A History of Marihuana Prohibition in the United States. Charlottesville, University Press of Virginia, 1974. Border management reorganization and drug interdiction / prepared for the Committee on Governmental Affairs, United States Senate, by the Congressional Research Service, Library of Congress. Washington: U.S. G.P.O., 1988). Bouis, P., Taccard, G., and Boelsterli, U.A. Determination of cocaine and norcocaine in plasma and cell cultures using high-performance liquid chromatography. Journal of Chromatography. (April 6 1990) v 526 n 2. pp. 447. Boyce, D. Narco-Terrorism. FBI Law Enforcement Bulletin. (October 1987), pp. 24-7. Boyer, C. Scott, and Petersen, Dennis R. Potentiation of Cocaine-Mediated Hepatotoxicity by Acute and Chronic Ethanol. Alcoholism: Clinical and Experimental Research. (February 1 1990) v 14 n 1 pp. 28-. Bracken, M.E., D.R. Bracken, and W.W. Winder. Effect of various doses of cocaine on endurance capacity in rats. Journal of Applied Physiology: Respiratory, env... (January 1 1989) v 66 n 1 pp. 377. Bradbury, S. P., Henry, T. R., and Niemi, G. J. Use of Respiratory-Cardiovascular Responses of Rainbow Trout (Salmo gairdneri) in Identifying Acute Toxicity Syndromes in Fish: Part 3. Polar Narcotics. Environmental Toxicology and Chemistry, 8:3 (1989), pp. 247-. Branigan, William. The Mexican Connection, Washington Post National Weekly Edition, (March 14-20, 1988), 7. Bridges, Tyler. Resurgence of Bolivia's Drug Trade Sparks New Prevention Push with US, Christian Science Monitor, (July 1, 1987), 6-7. Brinkley, Joel. Bolivia Asks U.S. for Big Loan to Make Up Lost Cocaine Income, New York Times, (July 31, 1986, A4. Brock, David. The World of Narcoterrorism. The American Spectator, 22:6 (June 1, 1989), pp. 24-. Summary: The growing violence of the drug wars makes it clear that it's time for the Bush Administration to name names, identifying the insidious political forces underlying the Narcotics business. Brock, David. The World of Narcoterrorism. The American Spectator. (June 1 1989) v 22 n 6 pp. 24. Summary: The growing violence of the drug wars makes it clear that it's time for the Bush Administration to name names, identifying the insidious political forces underlying the narcotics business. Brody Cocaine-Related Medical Problems.The American Journal of Medicine. (April 1 1990) v 88 n 4. pp. 325. Brook, Judith S., Grodon, Ann Scovell, and Brook, Adam. The Consequences of Marijuana Use on Intrapersonal and Interpersonal Functioning in Black and white Adolescents. Genetic, Social, and General Psychology Monograph, 115:3 (August 1, 1989), pp. 349-. Brown, Michael F. Narcotics Investigations in Smaller Agencies. The Police Chief. (October 1, 1989) v 56 n 10 pp. 103-. Brown, Roger M., Clouet, Doris H, and Friedman, DAvid P., eds., Opiate receptor subtypes and brain function. Rockville, Md.: U.S. Dept. of Health and Human Services, Public Health Service, Alcohol, Drug Abuse, and Mental Health Administration, National Institute on Drug Abuse ; Washington, DC: , U.S. G.P.O, 1986. Bruera, Eduardo, Brenneis, C., and Michaud, M. Use of the Subcutaneous Route for the Administration of Narcotics in Patients with Cancer Pain. Cancer; Diagnosis, Treatment, Research, 62:2 (July 15 1988), pp. 407-. Burke, William M., Ravi, Narsipur V., and Dhopesh, Vasant. Prolonged Presence of Metabolite in Urine After Compulsive Cocaine Use. The Journal of Clinical Psychiatry. (April 1 1990) v 51 n 4. pp. 145. Burton, Karen R. Hyperthyroidism in a Cocaine-Dependent Patient. The Journal of Clinical Psychiatry. (August 1 1989) v 50 n 8 pp. 305. Cabieses, Fernando. Etnologia, fisiologia y farmacologia de la coca y la cocaina. Lima, Peru: Museo Peruano de Ciencias de la Salud, 1985. Caceres, Baldomero. Coca y realidad: aula sin muros. Lima: Universidad Nacional (Mayor de San Marcos, Direccion de Proyeccion Social, Seminario de Historia Rural Andina, 1979. Caine, Eric D. A Review of Major Treatment Methods for Chronic Narcotics Dependence, and Suggestions for a Comprehensive Approach to Therapy. Ithaca, N. Y.: Center for Housing and Environmental Studies, Division of Urban Studies, Cornell University, 1969. Series title: Working papers in comprehensive health planning working paper no. 1. California. Bureau of Criminal Statistics. Drug diversion recidivism 1000 PC: a project conducted for the State Office of Narcotics and Drug Abuse: prepared by State of California, Department of Justice, Division of Law Enforcement, Bureau of Bureau of Criminal Statistics. Sacramento: The Bureau, 1978. California. Office of Narcotics and Drug Abuse. Training resource directory, (February 1975: prepared by the State Office of Narcotics Drug Abuse. Sacramento: State of California, Office of Narcotics and Drug Abuse, 1975. Calogero, A.E., Gallucci, W.T., and Kling, M.A. Cocaine stimulates rat hypothalamic corticotropin-releasing hormone secretion in vitro. Brain research. 505:1 (December 25, 1989), 7-. Camacho Guizado, Alvaro. Droga, corrupcion y poder: marihuana y cocaina en la sociedad colombiana. Cali, Colombia: CIDSE, Universidad del Valle, 1981. Canelas Orellana, Amado, and Juan Carlos Canelas Zannier. Bolivia, coca, cocaina: subdesarrollo y poder politico. Cochabamba ; La Paz: Editorial Los Amigos del Libro, 1983. Canna, Elizabeth, and Lida, Jim. Sea-Land fined $83.9 million. American Shipper 31:60 Feb 1989). (US Customs Service drug smuggling penalty). Canna, Elizabeth. Drug Policy considered unworkable. American Shipper. 31:40 Jun 1989). Canna, Elizabeth. Way seen to take the drug war off Customs' back. American Shipper. 31:18 (July 1989). Caplan, Yale H. Levine, Barry S. Abbott phencyclidine and barbiturates abused drug assays: Evaluation and comparison of ADx FPIA, TDx FPIA, EMIT and GC/MS methods. Journal of analytical toxicology. September 1 1989) v 13 n 5. pp. 289. Carlini, E. A. Research is Badly Needed to Improve Programmes for the Prevention and Treatment of Drug Abuse and Drug Dependence in Brazil. Drug and Alcohol Dependence, 25:2 (April 1, 1990), pp. 167. Carlisle, Johan. "Drug War Propaganda," PropagandaReview (Winter 1990). Carlson, Ken, et al. Unreported Taxable Income for Selected Illegal Activities. Cambridge, MA, Apt Associates, 1983. Carpenter, Ted Galen, and Rouse, R. Channing. Perilous Panacea: The Military in the Drug War. CATO Policy Analysis No. 128. (February 15, 1990). Carroll, M. E. Lac, S. T. Asencio, M. Fluoxetine reduces intraveonous cocaine self-administration in rats. Pharmacology, biochemistry and behavior. (January 1 1990) v 35 n 1. pp. 237-. Carroll, M.E., Lac, S.T., and Nygaard, S.L. A concurrently available nondrug reinforcer prevents the acquisition of decreases the maintenance of cocaine-reinforced behavior. Psychopharmacology. (January 1 1989) v 97 n 1 pp. 23. Casella, Nicola, Muntaner, Carles, and Kumor, Karen M. Cardiovascular Responses to Cocaine Placebo in Humans: A Preliminary Report. Biological Psychiatry. (February 1 1989) v 25 n 3 pp. 285. Casey, J. D. More Than Good Intentions Needed in War Against Drugs. Police Chief (November 1987), pp, 7. Casey, Marty Guardians of the Gold. Soldier of Fortune, 15:6 (June 1, 1990), pp. 44-. Summary: Security in Peru is complicated matter, with Shining Path guerrillas, drug barons and garden variety bandits terrorizing the country. Enter American Herb Dunn's International Security Consultants - private sector's answer to the breakdown of law and order. Castillo, Fabio. Los Jinetes de la Cocaina. Bogot : Editorial Documentos Periodistas, 1987. Centellas G., Jose Maria. La verdad sobre la coca y la cocaina. La Paz: Instituto Boliviano de Estudios de Comunicacion Social, 1981. Centro de Investigaciones Socio-Economicas. El Problema actual de la coca en la sociedad peruana: diferentes enfoques. Lima: Centro de Investigaciones Socio-Economicas, Taller de Coyuntura Agraria, Universidad Nacional Agraria, 1979. Cesesole, Norberto, comp. Peru: Sendero Luminoso, ejercito y democracia. 1a ed. Madrid: Prensa y Ediciones Iberoamericanas ; Buenos Aires: Instituto Latinoamericano de Cooperacion Tecnologica y Relaciones Internacionales, 1987. Chaiken, Marcia R., and Johnson, Bruce D.C. Characteristics of different types of drug-involved offenders. prepared for the National Institute of Justice,U.S. Department of Justice, by Abt Associates Inc., under contract number OJP-86-C-002. Washington, D.C.: U.S. Dept. of Justice, National Institute of Justice, Office of Communication and Research Utilization, 1988). Chaission, R.E., Bacchetti, P., and Osmond, D. Cocaine Use and HIV Infection in Intravenous Drug Users in San Francisco. JAMA. the Journal of the American Medical Association. (January 27 1989) v 261 n 4 pp. 561. Chait, L.D., and Pierri, L.D. Some physical charactistics of NIDA marijuana cigarettes. Addictive Behaviors, 14:1 (1989), pp. 53-. Chait, L.D. Delta-9-tetrahydrocannabinol content and human marijuana self-administration. Psychopharmacology, 98:1 (May 1, 1989), pp. 51-. Chait, L.D. Subjective and behavioral effects of marijuana the morning after smoking. Psychopharmacology, 100:3 (March 1, 1990), pp. 328-. Chase, Stuart, and F. J. Schlink. Consumers in Wonderland: What We Get For Our Money When We Buy From Quacks and Vendors for Cure-Alls, New Republic 49 (February 16, 1927), 348-51. Chasnoff, Ira J. Cocaine, Pregnancy, and the Neonate. Women & health. 1989) v 15 n 3. pp. 23-. Chasnoff, Ira J., Griffith, D. R., and MacGregor, S. Temporal Patterns of Cocaine Use in Pregnancy. JAMA: the Journal of the American Medical Association. (March 24 1989) v 261 n 12 pp. 1741. Chasnoff, Ira J., Hunt, Carl E., and Kletter, Ron. Prenatal Cocaine Exposure Is Associated With Respiratory Pattern Abnormalities. American Journal of Diseases of Children. (May 1 1989) v 143 n 5 pp. 583. Chasnoff, Ira J., Lewis, Douglas E., and Griffith, Dan R. Cocaine and Pregnancy: Clinical and Toxicological Implications for the Neonate. Clinical Chemistry. (July 1 1989) v 35 n 7 pp. 1276. Chavez, G. F., Mulinare, J., and Cordero, J. F. Maternal Cocaine Use During Early Pregnancy as a Risk Factor for Congenital Urogenital Anomalies. JAMA: the Journal of the American Medical Association. (August 11 1989) v 262 n 6 pp. 795. Chepesiuk, Ron Drug Lords vs. the Press in Latin America. The New Leader, 73:7 (April 30, 1990), pp. 9-. Chepesiuk, Ron. Fighting Anarchy in Colombia. New Leader. September 18 1989) v 72 n 14 pp. 5-. Chernick, Marc W. The Drug War. NACLA Report on the Americas. (April 1 1990) v 23 n 6. pp. 30-. Summary: The drug wars decreed periodically by the government are really skirmishes with the cocaine nouveau riche, intended not to stem the flow of drugs, but to end attacks on the traditional elite. U.S. policy, however, seems bound to raise the stakes and involve the United States in the dirty war against the Left. Chitwood, Dale D., and Comerford, Mary. Drugs, Sex, and AIDS Risk: Cocaine Users Versus Opiate Users. American Behavioral Scientist. (March 1 1990) v 33 n 4 pp. 465. Christensen, H. G. Undercover Drug Agent: Unsung Heros of Modern Law Enforcement. Police Chief (September 1988), p. 10. Chychula, Nina Maria, and Okore, Cynthia. The Cocaine Epidemic: A Comprehensive Review of Use, Abuse and Dependence. The Nurse Practitioner, 15:7 (July 1, 1990), pp. 31-. Clapp, III. James F., Keve, Tara M., and Vial, Catalina. Ovine placental perfusion balance: Effect of marijuana smoke. American Journal of Obstetrics and Gynecology, 159:6 (December 1, 1988), pp. 1430-. Clark, Norman H. Deliver Us from Evil: An Interpretation of American Prohibition. New York: W. W. Norton, 1976. Clawson, Patrick. Coping with Terrorism in the United States. ORBIS, Sumr 198 v 33 n 3-. Clayton, Richard R. Legalization of Drugs: An Idea Whose Time Has Not Come. ABS, American Behavioral Scientist. (January 1 1989) v 32 n 3 pp. 316. Clements, G., Krenner, L., and Molk, W. The use of the Transcendental Meditation programme in the prevention of Drug abuse and in the treatment of Drug-addicted persons. Bulletin on Narcotics, 40:1 (1988), pp. 51-. Cochran, John K. Beyond Hellfire: An Exploration of the Variable Effects of Religiosity on Adolescent Marijuana and Alcohol Use. Journal of Research in Crime and Delinquency, 26:3 (August 1, 1989), pp. 198-. Cockburn, Alexander. Trees, Cows and Cocaine: an Interview with Susanna Hecht. (January 1 1989) n 173 pp. 33-. Coffey, John P. The Navy's Role in Interdicting Narcotics Traffic: War on Drugs or Ambush on the Constitution? Georgetown Law Journal, V. 75, (August, 1987. Coffin, V.L., and Spealman, R.D. Psychomotor-stimulant effects of 3-isobutyl-1-methylxanthine: comparison with caffeine and 7-(2-chloroethyl) theophylline. European journal of pharmacology. (October 24 1989) v 170 n 1 / 2. pp. 35. Collett, Merill. Colombia's Drug Lords Waging War on Leftists, Washington Post, (November 14, 1987, 14A, 22A. Collett, Merill. The Cocaine Coonection: Drug Trafficking and Inter-American Relations. New York: Foreign Policy Association, 1989). Collett, Merill. The Myth of the Narcoguerrillas, The Nation (August 13-20, 1988), 132. Collins, C.D. Local Government and Urban Protest in Colombia. Public Administration and development. (October 1 1988) v 8 n 4 pp. 421 Colombia. Presidenca de la Repblica. La lucha contra el narcotr fico en Colombia (Bogot : Presidenca de la Repblica, 1988). Cone, Edward J. and Mitchell, John. Validity Testing of Commercial Urine Cocaine Metabolite Assays: II. Sensitivity, Specificity, Accuracy, and Confirmation by Gas Chromatography/Mass Spectrometry. Journal of Forensic Sciences. (January 1 1989) v 34 n 1 pp. 32. Cone, Edward J. and Weddington, William W., Jr. Prolonged Occurrence of Cocaine in Human Saliva and Urine after Chronic Use. Journal of Analytical Toxicology. (March 1 1989) v 13 n 2 pp. 65-. Cone, Edward J., Menchen, Sandra L., and Paul, Buddha D. Validity Testing of Commercial Urine Cocaine Metabolite Assays: I. Assay Detection Times, Individual Excretion Patterns and Kinetics After Cocaine Administration to Humans. Journal of Forensic Sciences. (January 1 1989) v 34 n 1 pp. 15. Connors, S., Rankin, D.R., and Gondolfi, A.J. Cocaine hepatotoxicity in cultured liver slices: a species comparison (Induced rat and mice are the most sensitive, whereas pig and man are the least sensitive). Toxicology. (April 17 1990) v 61 n 2. pp. 171. Cook, James. The paradox of antidrug enforcement. Forbes. 144:105-6+ Nov 13 1989). (Tougher enforcement makes drug trade more profitable; including interview with W J Bennett). Cooper, S.J., Rusk, I.N., and Barber, D.J. Sucrose sham-feeding in the rat after administration of the selective dopamine D2 receptor agonist N-0437, d-amphetamine or cocaine. Pharmacology, Biochemistry and Behavior. (February 1 1989) v 32 n 2 pp. 447. Costall, B., Kelley, M.E., and Naylor, R.J. The actions of nicotine and cocaine in a mouse model of anxiety. Pharmacology, Biochemistry and Behavior. (May 1 1989) v 33 n 1. pp. 197-. Costantino, Anthony G., Caplan, Yale H., and Levine, Barry S. Thiamylal: Review of the Literature and Report of a Suicide. Journal of Forensic Sciences. (January 1 1990) v 35 n 1. pp. 89. Cotler, Julio, Luis Pasara, and Jorge Parodi, Democracia, sociedad y gobierno en el Peru. Peru: Centro de Estudios de Democracia y Sociedad, 1988). Cottam, Martha L. Cognitive Psychology and Bargaining Behavior: Peru Political Psychology. 1989). Courtwright, David T. Dark Paradise: Opiate Addiction in America before 1940. Cambridge, Harvard University Press, 1982. Courtwright, David T. Opiate Addiction as a Consequence of the Civil War, Civil War History 25 (June 1978), 101-11. Craft, Neal E. Preparation and Certification of Standard Reference Material 1507: 11-Nor-Delta9-tetrahydrocannabinol-9-carboxylic Acid in Freeze-Dried Urine. Analytical Chemistry. 61:6 (March 15 1989), pp. 540-. Summary: The certified concentration of 11-nor-Delta9-tetrahydrocannabinol-9-carboxylic acid, the major urinary marijuana metabolite, is obtained from the concordant results of GC/MS and HPLC analyses. Results from five Department of Defense laboratories are presented. Craig, Richard B., and Michael A. Turner. International Control of Narcotics and Dangerous Drugs, Indian Political Science Review 11 (1977), 33-47. Craig, Richard B. Colombian Narcotics and United States-Colombian Relations, Journal of Interamerican Studies and World Affairs 36 (1981), 243-70. Craig, Richard B. Domestic Implications of Illicit Drug Cultivation, Processing, and Trafficking in Colombia, Journal of Interamerican Studies and World Affairs, 25 (1983), 325-50. Craig, Richard B. Human Rights and Mexico's Antidrug Campaign, Social Science Quarterly, 60 (1980), 691-701. Craig, Richard B. Illegal Drug Traffic, in Borderlands Sourcebook: A Guide to the Literature of Northern Mexico and the American Southwest. Edited by E.R. Stoddard, R. L. Nostrand, and J.P. West. Norman, University of Oklahoma Press, 1983, 209-13. Craig, Richard B. Illicit Drug Traffic Implications for South American Source Countries, Journal of Interamerican Studies and World Affairs 29:2 (Summer, 1987), 1-34. Craig, Richard B. Illicit Drug Trafficking and U.S.-Latin American Relations, Washington Quarterly 8 (1985), 105-24. Craig, Richard B. La Campaa Permanente: Mexico's Antidrug Campaign, Journal of Interamerican Studies and World Affairs, 20 (1978), 107-31. Craig, Richard B. Operacin Intercepcin: una poltica de presin internacional, Foro Internacional 22 (1981), 203-30. Craig, Richard B. Operation Condor: Mexico's Antidrug Campaign Enters a New Era, Journal of Interamerican Studies and World Affairs 22 (1980), 345-63. Craig, Robert J., and Olson, Ronald E. MCMI Comparisons of Cocaine Abusers and Heroin Addicts. Journal of Clinical Psychology. (March 1 1990) v 46 n 2 pp. 230. Cristobal, Juan. Todos murieron? 1a ed. Lima: Tierra Nueva, 1987. Crowley, P. Family therapy approach to addiction. Bulletin on Narcotics, 40:1 (1988), pp. 57-. Crumb, Jr. William J. Electrocardiographic evidence for cocaine cardiotoxicity in cat. Canadian Journal of Physiology and Pharmacology (May 1 1990) v 68 n 5 pp. 622-. Curriden, Mark. Holding Mom Accountable. ABA Journal. (March 1 1990) v 76 pp. 50-. Summary: Cocaine-addicted women have a good chance of giving birth to cocaine-addicted babies. Is that a crime? Should it be a crime? Cushing, Michael A. Combating Street-Level Narcotics Sales. The Police Chief, 56:10 (October 1, 1989), pp. 113-. Czitrom, Carolyn Baus Reed. Tecuexes y cocas: dos grupos de la region Jalisco en el siglo XVI. Mexico: Instituto Nacional de Antropologia e Historia, Departamento de Investigaciones Historicas, 1982. Da Matta Chasin, A.A., and Midio, A.F. Cocaine-related problems in the city of Sao Paulo, 1982-1986. Bulletin on narcotics. 1989) v 41 n 1 / 2. pp. 99-. Daigle, Robert D., Clark, H. Westley, and Landry, Mim J. A Primer on Neurotransmitters and Cocaine. Journal of Psychoactive Drugs. (July 1 1988) v 20 n 3 pp. 283. Davidson, Adele K. Narcotics in California: a program review. A special report for CAPAN, Incorporated. Los Angeles, Welfare Planning Council, Los Angeles Region, 1961. Series title: Welfare Planning Council, Los Angeles Region Special report series no. 62. Series title: Welfare Planning Council, Los Angeles Region. Research Dept Special report no. 62. Davis, Jr., Sammy. Sammy Davis Jr.: How He Faced Aging And Cocaine Crisis. Ebony. (July 1 1989) v 44 n 9. pp. 66-. de Greiff, Monica, and Gugliotta, Guy. A Woman Today, "I Fought the Drug Lords". Ladies' Home Journal, 107:3 (February 1, 1990), pp. 22-. Summary: As minister of justice in Colombia, she tried to combat the deadly terror of the cocaine kingpins. Now she and her family have been forced to flee their homeland in fear for their lives. De Olloqui, Jos Juan. On the Formulation of a U.S. Policy toward Mexico, in Mexico in Transition. edited by Susan Kaufman Purcell. New York: Council on Foreign Relations, 1988). De Vry, Jean Food Deprivation and Acquisition of Intravenous Cocaine Self-Administration in Rats: Effect of Naltrexone and Haloperidol. The Journal of Pharmacology and Experimental Therapeutics. (November 1 1989) v 251 n 2. pp. 735. Degregori, Carlos Ivan. Sendero Luminoso. 4a ed. Lima: Instituto de Estudios Peruanos, 1986. Del Villar, Samuel I. Drogas: el Nudo Gordiano, Nexos 126 (junio, 1988). Del Villar, Samuel I. The Illicit Drug Market between Mexico and the United States: Failure and Alternative. (Mexico, D.F., 1988), scheduled to appear in a book on U.S.-Mexican relations of the School of Advanced Social Studies, Johns Hopkins University). Delaine, Bernard L. Coca farming in the Chapare, Bolivia. microform: a form of collective innovation, Ph.D. thesis, St. Louis University, 1979. xi, 230 Delfs, J.M., Schreiber, L., and Kelley, A.E. Microinjection of Cocaine into the Nucleus Accumbens, Elicits Locomotor Activation in the Rat. Journal of Neuroscience. (January 1 1990) v 10 n 1. pp. 303. Derlet, R.W., and Albertson, T.E. Acute cocaine toxicity: Antagonism by agents interacting with adrenoceptors. Pharmacology, Biochemistry and Behavior. (June 1 1990) v 36 n 2. pp. 225-. Derlet, R.W., and Albertson, T.E. Anticonvulsant modification of cocaine induced toxicity in the rat. Neuropharmacology. (March 1 1990) v 29 n 3. pp. 255. Deutsch, Harold L., and Millard, D. Ralph Jr., A New Cocaine Abuse Complex: Involvement of Nose, Septum, Palate, and Pharynx. Archives of Otolaryngology--Head & Neck Surgery. (February 1 1989) v 115 n 2 pp. 235. Dews, P.B. Directional running in mice: effects of cocaine and chlorpromazine. Psychopharmacology. (June 1 1990) v 101 n 2. pp. 190-. Di Francesco, P., Pica, F., and Favalli, C. Inhibition of rat ribroblast cell proliferation at specific cell cycle stages by cocaine. Cell Biology International Reports, 14:6 (June 1, 1990), pp. 549-. Dickson, C. Drug Stings in Miami. FBI Law Enforcement Bulletin (January 1988), pp. 1-6. Digregorio, G. John. Cocaine Update: Abuse and Therapy. American Family Physician, 41:1 (January 1, 1990), pp. 247-. Summary: The effects of cocaine abuse include acute, possibly fatal overdose and chronic, severe psychologic dependence. Dillin, J. (1989)a) US Paying Stiff Price for Porous Borders. The Christian Science Monitor (10 (October), 1- 2. Dillin, J. (1989)b) Task Force Steps Up Drug War. The Christian Science Monitor (24 (October), 7. Dionne, E. J. Drugs as 1988) Issue: Filling a Vacuum, New York Times, (May 24, 1988), 14y. Dolkart, Lawrence A., Plessinger, Mark A., and Woods Jr., James R. Effect of Alpha, Receptor Blockade Upon Maternal and Fetal Cardiovascular Responses to Cocaine. Obstetrics and Gynecology. (May 1 1990) v 75 n 5. pp. 745. Summary: Although phenoxybenzamine, an alpha 1 receptor blocker, eliminated the maternal and fetal hypertensive responses to maternally administered cocaine, the vasoconstrictive action upon the uterine vasculature persisted. Dollberg, S., Armon, Y., and Gur, I. Hyponatremia in a Neonate of a Cocaine Abusing Mother. Journal of toxicology. Clinical toxicology, 27:4-5 (1989), pp. 287. Dow-Edwards, D., Fico, T.A., and Osman, M. Comparison of oral and subcutaneous routes of cocaine administration on behavior, plasma drug conentration and toxicity in female rats. Pharmacology, Biochemistry and Behavior. (May 1 1989) v 33 n 1. pp. 167-. Doyle, Kate, and Duklis, Jr., Peter S. The Andrew Wellington Cordier Essay The Long Twilight Struggle: Low-Intensity Warfare and the Salvadoran Miltary. Journal of international affairs, 43:2 (Winter 1990), pp. 431-. Dressler, Frederick A., Malekzadeh, Sonya, and Roberts, William C. Quantitative Analysis of Amounts of Coronary Arterial Narrowing in Cocaine Addicts. The American Journal of Cardiology. (February 1 1990) v 65 n 5. pp. 303-. Summary: Twenty-two cocaine addicts were studied at necropsy over a 10-year period and were divided into 2 groups: those with cocaine-related deaths and those in whom death was not due to cocaine. Dubiel, Diana. Action stat! Cocaine overdose. Nursing, 20:3 (March 1, 1990), pp. 33. Duffy, Patricia and Kalivas, Peter W. Inhibition of Endogenous Dopamine Release from the Ventromedial Mesencephalon after Daily Cocaine or Morphine. Annals of the New York Academy of Sciences. 1988) v 537 pp. 475. Dumlao, Jr., Pantaleon G. International Policing: International Cooperation - Marijuana Eradication in the Philippines. The Police Chief, 56:11 (November 1, 1989), pp. 12-. Duncan, S. (1989) Testimony to hearing of Subcommittees on Legislation and National Security and Government Information, Justice and Agriculture, U.S. House of Representatives, 17 (October. 101st Congress, 1st Session. Mimeo. Duster, Troy. The Legislation of Morality: Law, Drugs, and Moral Judgement. New York: The Free Press, 1970. Dworkin, Steven I., Bimle, Cindy, and Miyauchi, Tatsuo. Differential effects of pentobarbital and cocaine on punished and non-punished respongind. Journal of the Experimental Analysis of Behavior. (March 1 1989) v 51 n 2 pp. 173. Eagleburger, Lawrence S. The case against Panama's Noriega. Washington, D.C.: U.S. Dept. of State, Bureau of Public Affairs, Office of Public Communication, Editorial Division, Current Policy, No. 1222 (November 1989). EFE News Agency. Colombia Might Repudiate Extradition Treaty with U.S., Miami Herald, (May 17, 1988), 11a. Ehrenfeld, R. and M. Kahan. The 'Doping of America': The Ambivalence of the Narco-terrorist Connection and a Search for Solutions, in Contemporary Research on Terrorism, edited by Paul Wilkinson and A. M. Stewart. Aberdeen: Aberdeen University Press, 1987. Ehrenfeld, R. and M. Kahan. The Narcotic-Terrorism Connection, Wall Street Journal, (February 10, 1986. Ehrenfeld, R. Narco-Terrorism: The Kremlin Connection, The Heritage Foundation, (February, 1987. Ehrenfeld, R. The United States and the Drug Problem, The World and I (October 1986). Eisenlohr, L. E. S. International narcotics control. London, G. Allen & Unwin ltd. 1934; New York: Arno Press, 1981. Elliott, Ronald D. Intelligence Communications in Nonconvential Warfare. Signal, 44:3 (November 1 1989), pp. 57-. Summary: An era of low intensity conflict places radically different demands on communications and calls for modular automated media. Elliott, Ronald D. Intelligence Communications in Nonconvential Warfare. Signal, 44:3 (November 1, 1989), pp. 57-. Summary: An era of low intensity conflict places radically different demands on communications and calls for modular automated media. Engebo, David A. Safe and effective use of tetracaine, adrenaline, and cocaine (TAC) solution anesthesia for anesthetizing of lacerations. Journal of Emergency Nursing: JEN. (March 1 1990) v 16 n 2. pp. 100. Engelking, L.R., Anwer, M.S., and McConnell, J. Cocaine and Lidocaine Interfere with Epinephrine-Induced Changes in Intracellular Calcium Concentration and Glucose Efflux from Rat Hepatocytes. Pharmacology. (March 1 1990) v 40 n 3 pp. 129. Erickson, P.G., Murray, G.F. Sex Differences in Cocaine Use and Experiences: A Double Standard Received? The American Journal of Drug and Alcohol Abuse. 1989) v 15 n 2. pp. 135. Erickson, Patricia, et al., The Steel drug: cocaine in perspective. Lexington, Mass.: Lexington Books, 1987. Erickson, Patricia G., and Murray, Glenn F. The Undeterred Cocaine User: Intention to Quit and its Relationship to Perceived Legal and Health Treats. Contemporary Drug Problems. Sumr 89 v 16 n 2. pp. 141. Summary: Twenty-four of 111 Ontario users of cocaine and cannabis intended to quit using cocaine. Factors predicting this included never having purchased it, seeing harm in regular use, and feeling uncontrollable urges to use; fear of legal consequences. Erickson, Patricia G., and Murray, Glenn F. The Undeterred Cocaine User: Intention to Quit and its Relationship to Perceived Legal and Health Treats. Contemporary Drug Problems, 16:2 (Summer 1989), pp. 441-. Summary: Twenty-four of 111 Ontario users of cocaine and cannabis intended to quit using cocaine. Factors predicting this included never having purchased it, seeing harm in regular use, and feeling uncontrollable urges to use; fear of legal consequences. Eurman, Daniel W. Chest Pain and Dyspnea Related to Crack Cocaine Smoking: Value of Chest Radiography. Radiology. (August 1 1989) v 172 n 2 pp. 459. Evans, Anne. Allergic Inhalant Dermatitis Attributable to Marijuana Exposure in a Dog. Journal of the American Veterinary Medical Association, 195:11 (December 1, 1989), pp. 1588-. Evans, E.B.,and Wenger, G.R. The acute effects of caffeine, cocaine and d-amphetamine on the repeated acquisition responding of pigeons. Pharmacology, Biochemistry and Behavior. (March 1 1990) v 35 n 3 pp. 631. Fagan, Jeffrey. Initiation into Crack and Cocaine: A Tale of Two Epidemics. Contemporary Drug Problems, 16:4 (Winter 1989), 579-. Summary: Crack has been characterized as a uniquely powerful drug and a gateway for criminal justice involvement, new generations of users and dealers, and violence, to an extent unseen in past drug epidemics. Comparative analyses of arrests for cocaine hydrochloride powder in 1983-84 and crack in 1986 suggest that the natural history of crack does not differ markedly from that of other forms of cocaine. Fajardo Sainz, Humberto. La herencia de la coca: pasado y presente de la cocaina: estudio sobre la coca y su influencia en el desarrollo psico-fisico, social y economico del hombre de los Andes Bolivianos. Ed. ampliada y corr. La Paz, Bolivia: Universo, 1984. Falco, Mathea. The Historical Record: U.S. Narcotics Control Collaboration with Turkey, Mexico and Colombia (Bilateral Commission on the Future of United States-Mexico Relations, Working Documents, Mexico D.F., (August 1987). Falk, J. L., Vigorito, M., and Tang, M. Schedule-induced cocaine drinking: Choice between cocaine and vehicle. Pharmacology, Biochemistry and Behavior. (January 1 1990) v 35 n 1 pp. 187-. Farnsworth, Elizabeth. Special Report: Peru. World Policy Journal. 1988). Feinman, Beth N. Neurologic Sequelae of Cocaine. Hospital practice. (January 30 1989) v 24 n 1A pp. 97. Fernandez Salvatteci, Jose Antonio. Guerrillas y contraguerrillas en el Peru: Sendero Luminoso y el gobierno del Arq. F. Belaunde T. Lima, Peru: Ediciones Fernandez Salvatteci, 1984. Fernandez Salvatteci, Jose Antonio. Terrorismo y guerra sucia en el Peru. Lima, Peru: Ediciones Fernandez Salvatteci, 1986. Fields, Howard. Senate unit hears testimony on censorship. Publishers Weekly. 235:10 Mar 24 1989). Finnell, Richard H., Toloyan, Sorahi, and Van Waes, Michael. Preliminary Evidence for a Cocaine-Induced Embryopathy in Mice. Toxicology and Applied Pharmacology. (April 1 1990) v 103 n 2. pp. 228. Fiorelli, R. L., Manfrey, S. J., and Belkoff, L. H. Priapism associated with intranasal cocaine abuse. The Journal of Urology, 143:3 (March 1, 1990), pp. 584-. Fischman, Marian W., Foltin, Richard W., and Nestadt, Gerald. Effects of Desipramine Maintenance on Cocaine Self-Administration by Humans. The Journal of Pharmacology and Experimental Therapeutics (May 1 1990) v 253 n 2. pp. 760-. Fitzgerald, Mark, A case of ethics, Editor & Publisher, the Fourth Estate.122:11-12 Mar 4 1989). Fitzmaurice, L.S., Wasserman, G.S., and Knapp, J.F. TAC Use and Absorption of Cocaine in a Pedriatirc Emergency Department. Annals of Emergency Medicine. (May 1 1990) v 19 n 5. pp. 515. Foltin, R.W., and Fischman, M.W. The effects of combinations of intranasal cocaine, smoked marijuana, and task performance on heart rate and blood pressure. Pharmacology, Biochemistry and Behavior. (June 1 1990) v 36 n 2. pp. 311-. Foltin, R.W., and Fischman, M.W. The effects of combinations of intranasal cocaine, smoked marijuana, and task performance on heart rate and blood pressure. Pharmacology, Biochemistry and Behavior, 36:2 (June 1, 1990), pp. 311-. Foltin, R.W., Fischman, M.W., and Brady, J.V. The regularity of smoked marijuana self-administration. Pharmacology, Biochemistry and Behavior, 32:2 (February 1, 1989), pp. 483-. Foltin, Richard W., Fischman, Marian W., and Brady, Joseph V. Motivational Effects of Smoked marijuana: Behavioral Contingencies and Low-probability Activities. Journal of the Experimental Analysis of Behavior, 53:1 (January 1, 1990), pp. 5-. Fonseca, R., Hinojal Martinez, J. J., and Rodriguez-Hevia, A. J. Characteristics of a population undergoing treatment for Drug addiction in a therapeutic community setting in Spain. Bulletin on Narcotics, 40:1 (1988), pp. 67-. Fontana, David J. Effects of Cocaine on Conflict Behavior in the Rat. Life Sciences. 1989) v 45 n 9 pp. 819. Fox, J. Edward. Department of State Memorandum accompanying Report to Congress, Section 2013, P.L. 99-570, Reports and Restrictions Concerning Certain Countries, (May 1, 1988). Fraker, Jr., Theodore D., Temesy-Armos, Peter N., and Brewster, Pamela S. Mechanism of Cocaine-Induced Myocardial Depression in Dogs. Circulation. (March 1 1990) v 81 n 3. pp. 1012. Frank, D. A. Cocaine Use During Pregnancy. Pediatrics. EC 1 1988) v 82 n 6 pp. 888. Frankel, Alison, and Freeland, Lisa Is Street-Level Enforcement A Bust? The American Lawyer, 12:2 (March 1, 1990), pp. 100-. Summary: Following one day's arrests by a Manhattan Tactical Narcotics Team suggests that concentrated buy-and-bust operations can make a difference-at least temporarily. Freud, Sigmund. Cartas de Amor. Mexico: Premia Editora, 1983. Friedman, Milton, et al. America After Prohibition. Reason, 20:5 (October 1, 1988), 22-. Summary: Milton Friedman, Ethan Nadelmann, Ron Paul, et al. Nine prescriptions for withdrawal from bad drug policy. Frishman, William H., Karpenos, Alexander, and Molloy, Thomas J. Cocaine-induced Coronary Artery Disease: Recognition and Treatment. The Medical Clinics of North America (March 1 1989) v 73 n 2 pp. 475. Summary: Recreational use of cocaine has reached epidemic proportions. Recent reports have linked cocaine use to various acute and chronic cardiovascular disorders. The pharmacology of cocaine is discussed in this article, and the experiences with cocaine-induced coronary artery disease reviewed. Fulroth, R. Infants Exposed to Cocaine and/or Heroin In Utero. American Journal of Diseases of Children. (August 1 1989) v 143 n 8 pp. 905. Ganem, Bruce. The Flash Vacuum Thermolysis of (--)-Cocaine. Chemtracts. Organic Chemistry. (March 1 1990) v 3 n 2 pp. 157-. Garhart, Christine A., Anwer, Sawkat M., and Shuster, Louis. Cocaine-induced changes in perfusion pressure and bile flow in perfused rat livers. Biochemical Pharmacology. (July 1 1989) v 38 n 13 pp. 2139. Garrison, Peter. Innocence Abroad: Even the drug wars can't sully the vivid, unexpected pleasures of flying in Mexico. Flying, 117:3 (March 1, 1990), pp. 78-. Gatley, S.J., MacGregor, R.R., and Fowler, J.S. Rapid Stereoselective Hydrolysis of (+)-Cocaine in Baboon Plasma Prevents Its Uptake in the Brain: Implications for Behavioral Studies. Journal of Neurochemistry. (February 1 1990) v 54 n 2. pp. 720. Gaviria Berrio, Hernan. Letter to Fabio Castillo, Medelln Cvico, (April, 1987. Gawin, Frank H., Allen, D., and Humblestone, B. Outpatient Treatment of 'Crack' Cocaine Smoking With Flupenthixol Decanoate: A Preliminary Report. Archives of General Psychiatry. (April 1 1989) v 46 n 4 pp. 322-. Gawin, Frank H., Kleber, Herbert D., Byck, Robert Desipramine Facilitation of Initial Cocaine Abstinence. Archives of General Psychiatry. (February 1 1989) v 46 n 2 pp. 117. Gawin, Frank H., Morgan, C., and Kosten, T.R. Double-blind evaluation of the effect of acute amantadine on cocaine craving. Psychopharmacology. (March 1 1989) v 97 n 3 pp. 402-. George, F.R., and Ritz, M.C. Cocaine produces locomotor stimulation in SS but not LS mice: relationship to dopaminergic function. Psychopharmacology. (May 1 1990) v 101 n 1 pp. 18. George, F.R. Cocaine produces low dose locomotor depressant effects in mice. Psychopharmacology. (October 1 1989) v 99 n 2 pp. 147 Georgia broadcaster in drug arrest. Broadcasting, 117:32 (Sep 25 1989). Gerber, G.J., and Wise, R.A. Pharmacological regulation of intravenous cocaine and heroin self-administration in rats: A variable dose paradigm. Pharmacology, Biochemistry and Behavior. (February 1 1989) v 32 n 2 pp. 527. Gettman, Jon. Decriminalizing Marijuana. American Behavioral Scientist, 33:3 (January 1, 1989), pp. 243. Ghosh, Srikanta. The traffic in narcotics and drug addiction. New Delhi: Ashish Pub. House, 1987. Gifford, Douglas, and Pauline Hoggarth. Carnival and coca leaf: some traditions of the Peruvian Quechua ayllu. Edinburgh: Scottish Academic Press, 1976. Gilmore, William C. Narcotics interdiction at sea: UK-US cooperation. Marine Policy. (July 1 1989) v 13 n 3 pp. 218. Giordano, Magda, Moody, Carole A., and Zubrycki, Eve M. Prenatal Exposure to Cocaine in Rats: Lack of Long-Term Effects on Locomotion and Stereotypy. Bulletin of the Psychonomic Society. (January 1 1990) v 28 n 1. pp. 51. Glockman, Walter. A Thorn Among the Roses. Security Management. (May 1 1989) v 33 n 5. pp. 72-. Summary: How Tampa Air's security system thwarts Colombian drug smugglers. Godshaw, Gerald, Ross Koppel, and Russell Pancoast. Antidrug Law Enforcement Efforts and Their Impact. Bala Cynwyd, PA: Wharton Econometrics, (August, 1987. Goeders, N., Bell, V., and Guidroz, A. Dopaminergic involvement in cocaine induced up-regulatin o benzodiazepine receptors in the rat caudate nucleus. Brain Research. (May 7 1990) v 515 n 1 / 2 pp. 1-. Goff, M. Lee, Omori, Alvin I., and Goodbrod, James R. Effect of Cocaine in Tissues on the Development Rate of Boettcherisca peregrina (Diptera: Sarcophagidae). Journal of Medical Entomology. (March 1 1989) v 26 n 2 pp. 91. Golwyn, D.H. Cocaine Abuse Treated with Phenelzine: The International Journal of the Addictions. 1988) v 23 n 9 pp. 897. Gomez, Hugo Chvatal. New Control Center for EPM in Medellin, Colombia.: IEEE Computer Applications in Power. (July 1 1989) v 2 n 3 pp. 9-. Gomez, J. Rodriguez, A. An evaluation of the results of a drug sample analysis. Bulletin on Narcotics, 41:1-2 (1989), pp. 121-. Gonzalez, Gerardo M. Perceptions of Risk as Predictors of Alcohool, Marijuana, and Cocaine Use Among College Students. Journal of College Student Development, 31:4 (July 1, 1990), pp. 313-. Gonz lez, Raul, "Sendero: Los Problemas del campo y dela ciudad ... Y ademas el MRTA", QueHacer, 50 (Jan-Feb, 1988). Gonz lez, Raul. Trafficking, Subversion in Upper Huallaga, Quehacer, (September-(October 1987, 55-72. Goodell, John A., Gilroy, Genevieve, and Huntress, Jeffrey D. Reducing cocaine solution use by promoting the use of a lidocaine-phenylephrine solution. American Journal of Hospital Pharmacy. December 1 1988) v 45 n 12 pp. 2510. Goodman, L. and J. Mendelson (1988) Whose Drug War is it, anyway? The Christian Science Monitor (22 (July), 12. Goodman, Murray, and Mierke, Dale F. Configurations of morphiceptins by 1H and 13C NMR spectroscopy. Journal of the American Chemical Society. 111:3489-96 (May 10 1989). Gorriti, Gustavo A. How to Fight The Drug War. The Atlantic. (July 1 1989) v 264 n 1 pp. 70-. Summary: Fitful efforts at crop eradiation and law enforcement have failed to undermine the cocaine business in Peru, Bolivia, and Colombia. A more effective way to curb supply, the author suggests, would be to strengthen the legal economies of the coca-producing countries. Gorriti, Gustavo. Southern Exposure: The View From Peru. New Perspectives Quarterly. 1989). Graham, Bradley. Bolivia Runs Risk in Drug Drive, Washington Post, (July 16, 1986, A1. Graham, Bradley. Drug Killings Cow Colombians, Washington Post, (February 6, 1987, A14. Graham, Bradley. Impact of Colombian Drug Traffickers Spreads, Washington Post, (February 24, 1988), 41. Graham-Mulhall, Sara. The Evil of Drug Addiction, New Republic, 26 (May 18, 1921), 357. Grant, B. F., and Harford, T. C. Concurrent and simultaneous use of alcohol with cocaine: results of national survey. Drug and Alcohol Dependence. (February 1 1990) v 25 n 1. pp. 97-. Greenhaw, Wayne. Flying high: inside big-time drug smuggling. New York: Dodd, Mead, 1984. Greenleaf, Vicki D. Women & Cocaine. New Realities, 10:5 (May 1 1990), pp. 21-. Summary: Cocaine's ability to bolster self-confidence, provide a sense of empowerment, and create a feeling of euphoria has made it the illegal drug of choice for women. Greenleaf, Vicki D. Women & Cocaine. New realities. (May 1 1990) v 10 n 5. pp. 21-. Summary: Cocaine's ability to bolster self-confidence, provide a sense of empowerment, and create a feeling of euphoria has made it the illegal drug of choice for women. Grier, P. (1989) Pentagon's Support Role Increases. The Christian Science Monitor (1 (September), 8. Griffin, Margaret L., Weiss, Roger D. , Mirin, Steven M. A Comparison of Male and Female Cocaine Abusers. Archives of General Psychiatry. (February 1 1989) v 46 n 2 pp. 122. Grilly, D. M., and Grogan, T. W. Cocaine and level of arousal: Effects on vigilance task performance of rats. Pharmacology, Biochemistry and Behavior. (January 1 1990) v 35 n 1 pp. 269-. Grinspoon, Lester, and James B. Bakalar. Cocaine: a drug and its social evolution. Rev. ed. New York: Basic Books, 1985. Guarisco, J. Lindhe, Cheney, Mack L., and LeJeune Jr., Francis E. Isolated Uvulitis Secondary to Marijuana Use. The Laryngoscope. 98:12 (December 1, 1988), pp. 1309-. Hadeed, A.J. Maternal Cocaine Use During Pregnancy. Pediatrics. (August 1 1989) v 84 n 2 pp. 205. Halloran, Richard. In War against Drugs, Military is Found Wanting, New York Times, (May 30, 1988), 20y. Hamow, Ronald, ed., Dealing with drugs: consequences of government control. Lexington, Mass.: Lexington Books, 1987. Hanson, David. Chemical makers rebut link to cocaine trade. Chemical & Engineering News, 67:6 (May 8 1989). Hanson, G.R., Smiley, P., Johnson, M. Response by the nerotensin systems of the basal ganglia to cocaine treatment (EJP 50617). European Journal of Pharmacology. (January 24 1989) v 160 n 1 pp. 23. Harland, R. D., Gauvin, D. V., and Michaelis, R. C. Behavioral interaction between cocaine and caffeine: A drug discrimination analysis in rats. Pharmacology, Biochemistry and Behavior. (April 1 1989) v 32 n 4. pp. 1017-. Hartlyn, Jonathan. The politics of coalition rule in Colombia. Cambridge; Cambridge University Press, 1988). Hartnoll, R., Avico, U., and Ingold, F.R. A multi-city study of drug misuse in Europe. Bulletin on Narcotics, 41:1-2 (1989), pp. 3-. Hartnoll, R., U. Avico, and F.R. Ingold. A multi-city study of drug misuse in Europe. Bulletin on narcotics. 1989) v 41 n 1 / 2 pp. 3. Harwood, R. (1989) Hyperbole Epidemic, The Washington Post National Weekly Edition (October 9-15). Hatsukami, D., Keenan, R., and Carroll, M. A method for delivery of precise doses of smoked cocaine-base to humans. Pharmacology, Biochemistry and Behavior. (May 1 1990) v 36 n 1 pp. 1-. Hazleton, William A., and Woy-Hazleton, Sandra. Sendero Luminoso and the Future of Peruvian Democracy. Third World Quarterly, 12:2 (April 1, 1990), pp. 21-. Hazleton, William A., and Woy-Hazleton, Sandra. Terrorism and the Marxist Left: Peru's Struggle against Sendero Luminoso. Terrorism: an International Journal, 11:6 (1988), pp. 471-. Healey, Kevin. Bolivia and Cocaine: A Developing Country's Dilemma, British Journal of Addiction, 1988). Healey, Kevin. Coca, The State, and the Peasantry in Bolivia, l982-1988). Journal of Interamerican Studies and World Affairs. Sumr 88 v 30 n 2 & 3. pp. 105. Healey, Kevin. The Boom Within the Crisis: Some Recent Effects of Foreign Cocaine Markets on Bolivian Rural Society and Economy, Coca and Cocaine, edited by Deborah Pacini and Christine Franquemont. Peterborough, NH: Transcript Publishing Company, 1986. Healey, Kevin. The Cocaine Industry and Bolivian Peasants, Andean Focus, 3, (June 1986, 4. Heishman, S.J., and Stitzer, M.L. Effect of d-amphetamine, secobarbital, and marijuana on choice behavior: social versus nonsocial options. Psychopharmacology, 99:2 (October 1, 1989), pp. 156-. Henderson, M.G., and McMillen, B.A. Effects of prenatal exposure to cocaine or related drugs on rat development and neurological indices. Brain Research Bulletin. (February 1 1990) v 24 n 2 pp. 207-. Henry, Douglas J. Greene, Margaret A. White, Francis J. Electrophysiological Effects of Cocaine in the Mesoaccumbens Dopamine System: Repeated Administration. The Journal of Pharmacology and Experimental Therapeutics. December 1 1989) v 251 n 3 pp. 833 Hernandez, Luiz, Lee, Francis, and Hoebel, Bartley G. Microdialysis in the Nucleus Accumbens during Feeding or Drugs of Abuse: Amphetamine, Cocaine, and Phencyclidine. Annals of the New York Academy of Sciences. 1988) v 537 pp. 508. Herridge, Peter and Gold, Mark S.. Pharmacological Adjuncts in the Treatment of Opioid and Cocaine Addicts. Journal of Psychoactive Drugs. (July 1 1988) v 20 n 3 pp. 233. Hersh, Seymour M. Our Man in Panama: We call Manuel Noriega a common goon these days, but for 20 years we overlooked his drug dealing and brutality. Life. (March 1, 1990), pp. 81-. Hersh, Seymour M.. Why Democrats Can't Make an Issue of Noriega, New York Times, (May 4, 1988), 31y. Hertsgaard, Mark.The Media in Panama: In an effort to cover the Noriega manhunt, did the news media miss the real story? Rolling Stone (March 8, 1990), pp. 77-. Higgins, Patrick Learning from Bolivia: Mission stint alters life of New York priest. Maryknoll. (May 1 1989) v 83 n 5 pp. 23 Higgins, Rosemary. Cocaine abuse: What every emergency nurse should know. Jen, Journal of Emergency Nursing. (July 1 1989) v 15 n 4 pp. 318. Summary: Current data suggest that 30 million Americans have at least experimented with cocaine, but neither the public nor the health care community are fully aware of all its dangerous effects. Hilton, Isabelle. The terrorist threat to tourism in Peru. The Geographical Magazine. 1989). Hilton, Robert E. Recent Developments Relating to the Posse Comitatus Act, Army Lawyer 121 (January 1983), 1-8. Hoban, Phoebe. Getting Clean. New York. (February 20 1989) v 22 n 8 pp. 38. Summary: All over town, young New Yorkers are flocking to meetings of Alcoholics Anonymous, Cocaine Anonymous, and Narcotics Anonymous. There are some 1,800 meetings of AA alone each week in Manhattan. Though cynics might say becoming sober is the lastest fashion, most of these addicts are very serious about recovery. Hoffman, Christopher K. Pulmonary Edema in Cocaine Smokers. Radiology. (August 1 1989) v 172 n 2 pp. 463. Hogan, Harry, et al. Drug Control: Highlights of P.L. 99-570, Antidrug Abuse Act of 1986. Washington: Congressional Research Service. Library of Congress, 86-968 GOV, (October 31, 1986. Hoge, Warren. Bolivians Find A Patron in Reputed Drug Chief, New York Times, (August 15, 1982, 1. Hood, Ian, Ryan, David, and Monforte, Joseph. Cocaine in Wayne County Medical Examiner's Cases. Journal of Forensic Sciences. (May 1 1990) v 35 n 3. pp. 591-. Horowitz, Jay. Anesthetic implications of substance abuse in the parturient. AANA Journal, 56:6 (December 1, 1988), pp. 510-. Summary: The author discusses the effects of four commonly abused substances-alcohol, marijuana, cocaine and Narcotics-on the mother fetus, as well as the anesthesia implications. Horowitz, Jay. Anesthetic implications of substance abuse in the parturient. AANA Journal. December 1 1988) v 56 n 6 pp. 510. Summary: The author discusses the effects of four commonly abused substances--alcohol, marijuana, cocaine and narcotics--on the mother fetus, as well as the anesthesia implications. Horowitz, Jay. Anesthetic implications of substance abuse in the parturient. AANA journal, 56:6 (December 1, 1988), pp. 510-. Summary: The author discusses the effects of four commonly abused substances-alcohol, marijuana, cocaine and narcotics-on the mother fetus, as well as the anesthesia implications. House, Mary Ann. Here's what cocaine and crack abusers look like and what you can do to help them. AJN: American Journal of Nursing. (April 1 1990) v 90 n 4. pp. 40-. Howell, L.L., and Morse, W.H. Behavioral effects of chronically administered cocaine in squirrel monkeys. Psychopharmacology. (January 1 1989) v 97 n 1 pp. 12. Howell, Sam L., and Ezell, Anna L. An example of cocaine tolerance in a gunshot wound fatality. Journal of analytical toxicology, 14:1 (January 1, 1990), pp. 60. Hoyme, H. Eugene, Jones, Kenneth Lyons, and Dixon, Suzanne D. Prenatal Cocaine Exposure and Fetal Vascular Disruption. Pediatrics. (May 1 1990) v 85 n 5 pp. 743-. Hser, Yih-Ing, Chou, Chih-Ping, and Anglin, M. Douglas. The Criminality of Female Narcotics Addicts: A Causal Modeling Approach. Journal of Quantitative Criminology, 6:2 (June 1, 1990), pp. 207-. Huang, Q. F., Gebrewold, A., and Altura, B. T. Cocaine-induced cerebral vascular damage can be ameliorated by Mg2+ in rat brain. Neuroscience Letters. (February 5 1990) v 109 n 1 / 2 pp. 113-. Hubner, C. B., and Koob, G. F. The ventral pallidum plays a role in mediating cocaine and heroin self-administration in the rat. Brain Research. (January 29 1990) v 508 n 1 pp. 20-. Hume Jr., Roderick. In utero cocaine exposure: Observations of fetal behavior. American Journal of Obstetrics and Gynecology.1989). Hunt, C. W. Booze boats and billions: smuggling liquid gold! Toronto: McClelland and Stewart, 1988). Hunt, Claude William. Booze boats and billions: smuggling liquid gold! Toronto: McClelland and Stewart, 1988). Hunt, Michael H. Ideology and U.S. Foreign Policy. New Haven: Yale University Press, 1987. Hurd, Y. L., Weiss, F., and Koob, G. The influence of cocaine self-administration on in vivo dopamine and acetylcholine neurotransmission in rat caudate-putamen. Neuroscience Letters. (February 5 1990) v 109 n 1 / 2 pp. 227-. Hurley, Dan. Cycles of Craving. Psychology Today. (July 1 1989) v 23 n 7 / 8. pp. 54-. Summary: From pot to LSD, from cocaine to crack, our patterns of drug use have shifted. Plus: The Search for Cocaine's Methadone. Hurley, Dan. The search for cocaine's methadone. Psychology Today. (July 1 1989) v 23 n 7 / 8 pp. 59. Inciardi, James A. and Duane C. McBride, Legalization: A High-Risk Alternative in the War on Drugs. ABS, American Behavioral Scientist. (January 1 1989) v 32 n 3 pp. 259. Inciardi, James A. Debating the Legalization of Drugs. American behavioral scientist. (January 1 1989) v 32 n 3 pp. 233. Inciardi, James A. The War on Drugs: Heroin, Cocaine, Crime, and Public Policy. Palo Alto, Calif.: (Mayfield Pub. Co.,1986. Ingold, F.R., and Ingold, S. The effects of the liberalization of syringe sales on the behaviour of intravenous drug users in France. Bulletin on Narcotics, 41:1-2 (1989), pp. 67-. Isaac, W.L., Nonnenan, A.J., and Neisewander, J. Prefrontal Cortex Lesions Differentially Disrupt Cocaine-Reinforced Conditioned Place Preference but Not Conditioned Taste Aversion. Behavioral Neuroscience. (April 1 1989) v 103 n 2 pp. 345. Ishizuka, Y. Differential Senstitivity to Cocaine in Spontaneously Hypertensive and Wistar Kyoto Rats. Life sciences. 1989) v 45 n 3 pp. 223-. Jaffe, J.H., Cascella, N.G., and Kumor, K.M. Cocaine-induced cocaine craving. Psychopharmacology. (January 1 1989) v 97 n 1 pp. 59. Jain, R.K., Jain, M.K., and Bachenheimer, L.C. Factors Determining Whether Cocaine Will Potentiate the Cardiac Effects of Neurally Released Norepinephrine. The Journal of Pharmacology and Experimental Therapeutics. (January 1 1990) v 252 n 1. pp. 147-. Jandreski, Mark A., Bermes, Edward W., and Leischner, Ralph. Rhabdomyolysis in a Case of Free-Base Cocaine ("Crack") Overdose. Clinical Chemistry, 35:7 (July1, 1989), pp. 1547-. Jandreski, Mark A., Bermes, Edward W., and Leischner, Ralph. Rhabdomyolysis in a Case of Free-Base Cocaine (Crack) Overdose. Clinical Chemistry. (July 1 1989) v 35 n 7 pp. 1547. Janke, Jill Real. Prenatal Cocaine Use: Effects on Perinatal Outcome. Journal of Nurse-Midwifery. (March 1 1990) v 35 n 2. pp. 74. Summary: A review of the effects on cocaine use during pregnancy on perinatal morbidity and mortality. Jaramillo, Jaime, Leonidas Mora R., Fernando Cubides C. Colonizacion, coca y guerrilla 3a ed. Bogota: Alianza Editorial Colombiana, 1989). Jeffcoat, Robert A., Prez-Reyes, Mario, and Hill,Judith M. Cocaine Disposition in Humans after intravenous Injection, Nasal insufflation (Snorting), or Smoking. Drug Metabolism and Disposition. (March 1 1989) v 17 n 2 pp. 153. Jindal, Satya P., and Lutz, Theresa. Mass Spectrometric Studies of Cocaine Disposition in Animals and Humans Using Stable Isotope-Labeled Analogues. Journal of pharmaceutical sciences. December 1 1989) v 78 n 12. pp. 1009-. Johanson, Chris-Ellyn, and Fischman, Marian W. The Pharmacology of Cocaine Related to Its Abuse. Pharmacological reviews. (March 1 1989) v 41 n 1. pp. 3- . Johansson, Eva. Urinary Excretion Half-Life of delta1-Tetrahydrocannabinol-7-oic Acid in Heavy Marijuana Users After Smoking. Journal of Analytical Toxicology, 13:4 (July 1, 1989), pp. 218. Johnston, L.D. The survey technique in drug abuse assessment. Bulletin on Narcotics, 41:1-2 (1989), pp. 29-. Jones, Leslie F., and Tackett, Randall, L. Central Mechanisms of Action Involved in Cocaine-Induced Tachycardia. Life Sciences. 1990) v 46 n 10 pp. 723-. Jones, Patricia A. Cocaine and Violence. The Crisis. (March 1 1989) v 96 n 3 pp. 17. Joyce, Stephanie. Snorting Peru's Rain Forests. International Wildlife. (May 1 1990) v 20 n 3. pp. 20. Summary: Cocaine is killing the land. Kabas, J. Scott, Blanchard, Susan M., and Matsuyama, Yuzuru. Cocaine-Mediated Impairment of Cardiac Conduction in the Dog: A Potential Mechanism for Sudden Death After Cocaine. The Journal of Pharmacology and Experimental Therapeutics. (January 1 1990) v 252 n 1. pp. 185-. Kaker, R.N. Laws for controlling illicit drug traffic in Narcotics-a summary. The Indian Journal of Social Work, 50:1 (January 1, 1989), pp. 113-. Kalivas, Peter W. Similar Effects of Daily Cocaine and Stress on Mesocorticolimbic Dopamine Neurotransmission in the Rat. Biological Psychiatry. (April 1 1989) v 25 n 7 pp. 913. Kamstra, Jerry. Weed: Adventures of a Dope Smuggler. New York: Bantam Books, 1974. Kantak, K.M., Bourg, J.F., and Lawley, S.I. Failure of magnesium to maintain self-administration in cocaine-naive rats. Pharmacology, Biochemistry and Behavior. (May 1 1990) v 36 n 1 pp. 9-. Kantak, K.M. Magnesium alters the potency of cocaine and haloperidol on mouse aggression. Psychopharmacology. (October 1 1989) v 99 n 2. pp. 181. Kaplan, John. Heroin. Washington, D.C.: U.S. Dept. of Justice, National Institute of Justice, 1988). Kaplan, John. Heroin: a study guide. Rockville, MD: U.S. Dept. of Justice, National Institute of Justice, 1986. Kardon, Randy H., Denison, Chad E., and Brown, Carl K. Critical Evaluation of the Cocaine Test in the Diagnosis of Horner's Syndrome. Archives of Ophthalmology. (March 1 1990) v 108 n 3. pp. 384-. Karler, R., Calder, L.D., and Chaudhry, I.A. Blockage of Reverse Tolerance to Cocaine and Amphetamine by MK-801. Life Sciences. 1989) v 45 n 7 pp. 599. Kawell, Jo Ann. Drug Wars: The Rules of the Game. Nacla report on the americas, 23:6 (April 1, 1990), pp. 9-. Summary: As drug war blustering replaces Cold War rhetoric, the Pentagon's low intensity conflict theorists turn their sights on the Andes. Kawell, Jo Ann. Going to the Source. NACLA Report on the Americas. (March 1 1989) v 22 n 6 pp. 13-. Summary: What fuels the guerrilla presence in Peru's coca-growing Huallaga Valley is not the drug traffickers, but U.S. drug control policy itself. It has failed to stem the growth of the cocaine industry, and threatens to draw the United States into a vast and bitter war. Kawell, Jo Ann. Under the Flag of Law Enforcement. NACLA Report on the Americas. (March 1 1989) v 22 n 6 pp. 25 Summary: In Bolivia, after the U.S. Embassy pushed through a harsh new anti-coca law and failed to offer a viable alternative crop, may now view U.S. actions as a graver threat to democracy than the drug trade itself. Kazahaya, Yasuko, Akimoto, Kiyoshi, and Otsuki, Saburo. Subchronic Methamphetamine Treatment Enhances Methamphetamine- or Cocaine-Induced Dopamine Efflux in Vivo. Biological Psychiatry. (April 1 1989) v 25 n 7 pp. 903-. Kelly, Thomas H., Foltin, Richard W., and Rose, Andrea J. Smoked Marijuana Effects on Tobacco Cigarette Smoking Behavior. The Journal of Pharmacology and Experimental the , 252:3 (March 1, 1990), pp. 934-. Kennedy, Joseph. Coca Exotica: the Illustrated Story of Cocaine. Rutherford: Fairleigh Dickinson University Press ; New York: Cornwall Books, 1985. Kerr, Peter. U.S. Drug Crusade Is Seen Undermining Itself, New York Times, (October 26,1987, 13y. Kharasch, Sigmund, Vinci, Robert, and Reece, Robert Esophagitis, Epiglotitis, and Cocaine Alkaloid (`Crack'): `Accidental' Poisoning or Child Abuse? Pediatrics, 86:1 (July 1, 1990), pp. 117-. Kinder, Douglas Clark, and William O. Walker III. Stable Force in a Storm: Harry J. Anslinger and United States Narcotic Policy, 1930-1962, The Journal of American History, 72:4 (March 1986), 908-927. Kinder, Douglas Clark. Bureaucratic Cold Warrior: Harry J. Anslinger and Illicit Narcotics Traffic, Pacific Historical Review, 50 (May 1981), 169-191. Kinder, Douglas Clark. Nativism, Cultural Conflict, Drug Control:United States and Latin American Antinarcotics Diplomacy through 1965 in Donald J. Mabry (ed.) The Latin American Narcotics Trade and US National Security. Westport CT: Greenwood Press, 1989). King, Rufus. The Drug Hang-Up: America's Fifty Year Folly. New York: W. W. Norton, 1972. King, T.S., Schenken, T.S., and Kang, R.S. Cocaine Disrupts Estrous Cyclicity and Alters the Reproductive Neuroendocrince Axis in the Rat. Neuroendocrinology, 51:1 (January 1, 1990), pp. 15-. Kinsley, Michael TRB: Regrets Only. The New Republic, 202:18 (April 30 1990), pp. 4. Summary: Youthful indiscretions with marijuana are fine, so long as you're very sorry. Kleber, Herbert. Epidemic Cocaine Abuse: America's present, Britain's future? Journal of rehabilitation of the Deaf. December 1 1988) v 83 n 12 pp. 1359. Kleiman, Mark A. and Christopher E. Putala. State and Local Drug Enforcement: Issues and Practice, Program in Criminal Justice Policy and Management, John F. Kennedy School of Goverent, Harvard University, Cambridge, Mass., (March 1987. Kleiman, Mark A. Snowed In. New Republic. (April 23 1990) v 202 n 17. pp. 14-. Summary: A cold-eyed analysis of why trying to keep cocaine our of the country is destined to prove futile. Kleven, M.S., and Woolverton, W.L. Effects of bromocriptine and desipramine on behavior maintained by cocaine or food presentation in rhesus monkeys. Psychopharmacology. 1990) v 101 n 2. pp. 208-. Kline, Joel N., and Hirasuna, Jon D. Pulmonary edema after freebase cocaine smoking--Not due to an adulterant. Chest. (April 1 1990) v 97 n 4. pp. 1009-. Klonoff, D.C., Andrews, B.T., and Obana, W.G. Stroke Associated With Cocaine Use. Archives of Neurology. September 1 1989) v 46 n 9 pp. 989. Knox, Paul. The Cost of Cocaine: How long can Colombia pay the emotional and economic price of its war on drugs. Report on business magazine, 6:7 (January 1, 1990), pp. 121-. Koek, Wouter, and Colpaert, Francis C. Selective Blockade of N-Methyl-d-Aspartate (NMA)-Induced Convulsions by NMA Antagoists and Putative Glycine Antagonists: Relationship with Phencyclidine-Like Behavioral Effects. The Journal of Pharmacology and Experimental Therapeutics. (January 1 1990) v 252 n 1. pp. 349. Koek, Wouter, Colpaert, Francis C., Woods, James H. The phencyclidine (PCP) analog N-[1-(2-benzo(B)thiophenyl)cyclohexyl]piperidine shares cocaine-like but not other characteristic behavioral effects with PCP, ketamine and MK-81. The Journal of Pharmacology and Experimental Therapeutics. September 1 1989) v 250 n 3. pp. 119. Kohn, Howard. Company Town: What does it take to become the cocaine capital of the world? Hard work, marketing and a talent for murder. Rolling Stone. (April 6 1989) n 549, pp. 67-. Kokko, Juha P. Metabolic and Social Consequences of Cocaine Abuse. The American Journal of the Medical Sciences, 299:6 (June 1, 1990), 362-. Kolb, Lawrence and A. G. DuMez. The Prevalence and Trend of Drug Addiction in the United States and the Factors Influencing It, Public Health Reports 23 (May 1924), 1198. Koren, Gideon, Graham, Karen, and Shear, Heather. Bias against the Null Hypothesis: the Reproductive Hazards of Cocaine. The Lancet, 2:8677 (December 16, 1989), pp. 1440-. Kosten, Thomas R. Pharmacotherapeutic Interventions for Cocaine Abuse. Matching Patients to Treatments. Journal of Nervous and Mental Disease. (July 1 1989) v 177 n 7 pp. 379. Kovacs, G.L., Sarnyai, Z., and Babarczi, E. The role of oxytocin-dopamine interactions in cocaine-induced locomotor hyperactivity. Neuropharmacology. (April 1 1990) v 29 n 4. pp. 365-. Kremsner, P. G., Zotter, G. M., and Feldmeier, H. In vitro drug sensitivity of Plasmodium falciparum in Acre, Brazil. Bulletin of the World Health Organization, 67:3 (1989), pp. 289-. Kudrow, D.B. Botulism Associated with Clostridium botulinum Sinusitis after Intranasal Cocaine Abuse. Annals of Internal Medicine. December 15 1988) v 109 n 12 pp. 984. Summary: A 25-year-old man developed botulism associated with maxillary sinusitis 10 days after intranasal cocaine abuse. Anaerobic cultures of maxillary sinus fluid subsequently grew Clostriuium botulinum type A. The incubation period in this case of C. botulinum sinusitis is similar to that seen in patients with wound botulism. Kurtz, Warren, Jr., Lt. Col. A Proposed Military Strategy for the War on Drugs. Study Project. U.S. Army War College. (April 8, 1989). Kwitny, Jonathan.The crimes of patriots: a true tale of dope, dirty money, and the CIA. New York: W.W. Norton, 1987. Nugan Hand Bank--Corrupt practices. Money laundering--Australia. Murder--Australia. United States. Central Intelligence Agency. LAB [y] IEPALA.Narcotrafico y politica: militarismo y mafia en Bolivia / LAB [y] IEPALA. Madrid: IEPALA, 1982. Lacey, M. G., Mercuri, N. B., and North. R. A. Actions of cocaine on rat dopaminergic neurones in vitro. British Journal of Pharmacology. (April 1 1990) v 99 n 4. pp. 731-. Lafuente, Basilia. Coca y cocaina: una vision distinta. Bolivia: Impresion Quipus, 1986. Lane, Dennison, and Weisenbloom, Mark. Low-intensity conflict: In search of a paradigm. International Defense Review, 23:1 (January 1, 1990), pp. 35-. Lange, R.A., Cigarroa, R.G., and Flores, E.D. Potentiation of Cocaine-Induced Coronary Vasoconstriction by Beta-Adrenergic Blockade. Annals of Internal Medicine. (June 15 1990) v 112 n 12. pp. 897-. Summary: Cocaine-induced coronary vasoconstriction is potentiated by beta--adrenergic blockade, Beta-adrenergic blocking agents probably should be avoided in patients with cocaine-associated myocardial ischemia of infarction. Lanska, Douglas J., and Lanska, Mary Jo. PCP use among adolescent marijuana users. The Journal of Pediatrics, 113:5 (November 1, 1988), pp. 950-. Lawrence, C. C. Members Plan New Assault in War on Drugs. Congressional Quarterly Weekly Report (March 26, 1988), p. 776. League of Nations, Advisory Committee on Traffic in Opium and Other Dangerous Drugs. Report on the Work of the Committee During its Second Session, held at Geneva from (April 19-29, 1922 C. 233 (1).1922.XI (Geneva, 1922), 1-3. League of Nations, Opium Advisory Committee. Report to the Council on the Work of the Fifth Session (May 24 to (June 7, 1923) A.13.1923.XI. 12. Lee, III, Rensselaer W. The white labyrinth: cocaine and political power. New Brunswick: Transaction Publishers, 1989). Lee, III., Rensselaer W. South American Cocaine: Why the U.S. Can't Stop It. ORBIS. Current. (June 1 1989) n 313 pp. 22-. Lee, Rensselaer W. Cocaine Mafia. Society, 27:2 (January 1, 1990), pp. 53-. Lee, Rensselaer W. The white labyrinth: cocaine and political power. New Brunswick: Transaction Publishers, 1989). Leirer, Von O., Yesavage, Jerome A., and Morrow, Daniel G. Marijuana, Aging, and Task Difficulty Effects on Pilot Performance. Aviation Space and Environmental Medicine, 60:12 (December 1, 1989), pp. 1145-. Lernoux, Penny. The U.S. in Bolivia: Playing Golf While Drugs Flow. The Nation. (February 13 1989) v 248 n 6 pp. 188-. Lester, Barry M. Effects of Marijuana Use during Pregnancy on Newborn Cry. Child development, 60:4 (August 1, 1989), pp. 765-. Lett, B.T. Conditioned taste preference produced by pairing a taste with a low dose of morphine or sufentanil. Psychopharmacology. (June 1 1989) v 98 n 2. pp. 236. Lett, B.T. Repeated exposures intensify rather than diminish the rewarding effects of amphetamine, morphine, and cocaine. Psychopharmacology. (July 1 1989) v 98 n 3. pp. 357. Levine, Barry S., and Caplan, Yale H. A comprehensive study of cocaine and its metabolites. Journal of analytical toxicology. September 1 1989) v 13 n 5. pp. 50. Levy, Susan J., and Pierce, John P. Predicting intention to use cocaine in teenagers in Sydney, Australia. Addictive Behaviors. 1989) v 14 n 2 pp. 105. Lewis, Keeta DeStefano, Bennett, Barbara, and Schmeder, Nadya Hellinger. The Care of Infants Menaced by Cocaine Abuse. MCN, the American journal of maternal child nurs September 1 1989) v 14 n 5. pp. 324. Summary: Parents can be prepared to promote the development of their drug-affected infants and children--0 to 3 years. Lewis, R. European markets in cocaine. Contemporary crises. (March 1 1989) v 13 n 1 pp. 35. Lex, B.W., Griffin, M.L., and Mello, N.K. Alcohol, Marijuana, and Mood States in Young Women. The international Journal of the Addictions, 24:5 (1989), pp. 405-. Lex, Barbara W. Narcotics Addicts' Hustling Strategies: Creation and Manipulation of Ambiguity. Journal of Contemporary Ethnography, 18:4 (January 1, 1990), pp. 388-. Lindau, J. D.. Percepciones mexicanas de la poltica exterior de Estados Unidos: el caso Camarena Salazar, Foro Internacional, 27 (1987), 562-575. Lindesmith, Alfred R. The Addict and the Law. Bloomington: Indiana University Press, 1965. Lindesmith, Alfred R. Traffic in Dope: Medical Problem, Nation, 182 (April 21, 1956), 337-338. Little, Arthur D., Inc. International narcotics control; a source book of conventions, protocols, and multilateral agreements, 1909-1971. Washington, Drug Control Division, Bureau of Narcotics & Dangerous Drugs, 1972. Logan, L., Carney, J.M., and Holloway, F.A. Effects of caffeine, cocaine and their combination on fixed-interval behavior in rats. Pharmacology, Biochemistry and Behavior. (May 1 1989) v 33 n 1. pp. 99-. Loh, E.A., and Roberts, D.C.S. Break-points on a progressive ratio schedule reinforced by intravenous cocaine increase following depletion of forebrain serotonin. Psychopharmacology. 1990) v 11 n 2. pp. 262-. Lomax, P., and Daniel, K. A. Cocaine and Body Temperature in the Rat: Effects of Ambient Temperature. Pharmacology. (February 1 1990) v 40 n 2. pp. 103-. London, Edythe D., Phillips, Robert L., and Dannals, Robert F. Cocaine-Induced Reduction of Glucose Utilization in Human Brain: A Study Using Positron Emission Tomography and [Fluorine 18]-Fluorodeoxyglucose. Archives of general psychiatry, 47:6 (June 1, 1990), pp. 567-. Long, Janice. Chemical group vows to help fight drugs. Chemical & Engineering News. 67:5 Sep 11 1989). Long, Robert Emmet. Drugs and American society. New York: Wilson, 1986. Long, William. Powerful Medelln Cartel Safe in its Colombian Base, Los Angeles Times, (February 21, 1988), 18. Lpez Alvarez, M.J., Gutirrez Renedo, T., and Hernndez Meja, R. Extent and patterns of drug use by students at a Spanish university. Bulletin on Narcotics, 41:1-2 (1989), pp. 117-. Losada Posada, Benjamin. Economia subterranea, o, El imperio del contra-derecho en Colombia. Bogota: Informativo Finanzas, 1981. Louie, Alan K., Lannon, Richard A., and Ketter, Terence A. Treatment of Cocaine-Induced Panic Disorder. The American Journal of Psychiatry. (January 1 1989) v 146 n 1 pp. 40. Lurie, I.S., Moore, J.M., and Kram, T.C. Isolation identification and seperation of isomeric truxillines in illicit cocaine. Journal of Chromatography. (April 20, 1990) v 504 n 2 pp. 391. Lynch, Jim. In the Line of Fire: Hispanic Drug Enforcement. Administration agents face frustration from within and danger from without in the war against Narcotics. Hispanic (July 1, 1990), pp. 38-. Mabry, Donald J., and Shafer, Robert J. Neighbors--Mexico and the United States: Wetbacks and Oil. Chicago: Nelson-Hall, 1981. See chapters on drugs and sealing the border. Mabry, Donald J. Andean Drug Trafficking and the Military Option, The Military Review (March, 1990). Mabry, Donald J., Drugs and Democracy in Central America, International Center Conference, Washburn University, (November, 1988). Mabry, Donald J., ed., The Latin American Narcotics Trade and U.S. National Security. Westport: Greenwood Press, (November, 1989). Mabry, Donald J., Military Options, Illicit Drugs, and the Andes, paper presented to conference sponsored by Leadership for the Americas, Baton Rouge, Louisiana, (January 4, 1990). Mabry, Donald J., The Andean Initiative and the Military Option, testimony to the Committee on Government Operations, U.S. House of Representatives, (October 18, 1989). Mabry, Donald J. The Latin American Narcotics Trade and Hemispheric Security, International Third World Studies Journal and Review 1 (1988), 1-7. Mabry, Donald J., The Military and the Drug War, paper presented to the International Studies Association, University of London, (March, 1989). Mabry, Donald J., The Possible Roles of the U.S. Military in the Andes, The Andean Drug Strategy and the Role of the U.S. Military. Proceedings of a seminar held by the Congressional Research Service, (November 9, 1989). Report of the Defense Policy Panel and Investigations Subcommittee of the Committee on Armed Services, House of Representatives, 11st Congress, First Session. Washington: Government Printing Office, (January, 1990). pp.39-41, plus printed testimony. Mabry, Donald J., The Role of the U.S. Military in the War on Drugs in the Caribbean Basin, paper presented to the International Drug Money Laundering Symposium, University of Miami, (October 26-28, 1989). Mabry, Donald J., The U.S. Military and the War on Drugs, paper presented to the Wilson International Center for Scholars (Smithsonian Institution) and George Washington University Seminar on Latin American Narcotics, Washington, D.C., (September, 1988). Mabry, Donald J. The U.S. Military and the War on Drugs in Latin America, Journal of Interamerican Studies and World Affairs 30:2 (Summer-Fall 1988). Macdonald, Patrick T. Competing Theoretical Explanations of Cocaine Use: Differential Association Versus Control Theory. Journal of Contemporary Criminal Justice. (June 1 1989) v 5 n 2 pp. 73-88. Macdonald, Patrick T., Waldorf, Dan, and Reinarman, Craig. Heavy Cocaine Use and Sexual Behavior. Journal of Drug Issues. Fall 198 v 19 n 3 pp. 437. Mackerron, Conrad B., CMA takes issue with Bush's drug remarks, Chemical Week. 144:15 (May 10 1989). Madras, B. K., Kamien, J. B., and Fahey, M. A. N-Modified fluorophenyltropane analogs of cocaine with high affinity for cocaine receptors. Pharmacology, Biochemistry and Behavior. (April 1 1990) v 35 n 4. pp. 949. Madras, Bertha, Fahey, Michele A., and Bergman, Jack. Effects of Cocaine and Related Drugs in Nonhuman Primates. I. [3H]Cocaine Bindings Sites in Caudate-Putamen. The Journal of Pharmacology and Experimental Therapeutics. (October 1 1989) v 251 n 1. pp. 131. Mahar, Maggie. Dirty money: it triggers a bold, new attack in the war on drugs, Barron's, 69:6-7+ Jun 26 1989). Malcomson, Scott L. Cocaine Republic, Village Voice, (August 26, 1986. Marc, Bernard, Baud, Frederic J., and Aelion, Mony J. The Cocaine Body-Packer Syndrome: Evaluation of a Method of Contrast Study of the Bowel. Journal of Forensic Sciences. (March 1 1990) v 35 n 2. pp. 345-. Marcella, Gabriel. The Latin American Military, Low Intensity Conflict, and Democracy. Journal of Interamerican Studies and World Affairs, 32:1 (Spring 1990), pp. 45-. Mardon, Mark. The Big Push. Sierra. (November 1 1988) v 73 n 6 pp. 66. Summary: Sierra's reporter files a battlefield report from the U.S.-sponsored war on cocaine-and offers some thoughts on the rainforest connection. Marks, Tom. Corner of the Dead. Soldier of Fortune, 15:3 (March 1, 1990), pp. 44-. Summary: Peru is fighting against rampant inflation, indifferent politicians and an incredibly violent Maoist insurgency-Sendero Luminoso (The Shining Path). SOF's correspondent is on the ground in Ayacucho, focal point of the insurgency, to determine if Peru can continue to hold the line. Marks, Tom. Peru's Fatal Distraction. Soldier of Fortune, 15: 7 (July 1, 1990), pp. 30-. Summary: Are drugs lords or the Sendero Luminoso guerrillas the real threat to Peru? Our veteran political/military analyst interviews a senior Peruvian intelligence officer on the explosive situation. Marshall, Eliot. A War on Drugs With Real Troops? Science, 241. Martin, Billy R., Boni, Joseph P., and Lue, Louis P. Pyrolysis and Volatilization of Cocaine. Journal of Analytical Toxicology. (May 1 1989) v 13 n 3 pp. 158. Martin, Steven D., Yeragani, Vikram K., and Lidhi, Rashid. Clinical Ratings and Plasma HVA During Cocaine Abstinence. Biological Psychiatry. (August 1 1989) v 26 n 4 pp. 356. Martsh, J. (1989) Comments in Drugs and Latin America: Economic and Political Impact and U.S. Policy Options, report of the Select Committee on Narcotics Abuse and Control, 101st Congress, 1st Session, Washington DC: US Government Printing Office. Marzuk, P.M., Tardiff, K., and Leon, A.C. Prevalence of Recent Cocaine Use Among Motor Vehicle Fatalities in New York City. JAMA, 263:2 (January 12, 1990), pp. 250-. Mathew, R.J., Wilson, W. H., and Tant, S. R. Acute changes in cerebral blood flow associated with marijuana smoking. Acta Psychiatrica Scandinavica, 79:2 (February 1, 1989), pp. 118-. May, Herbert L. The International Control of Narcotic Drugs, International Conciliation 441 (May 1948), 31-371. Mayer, John E., and Ligman, Jeffrey D. Personality Characteristics of Adolescent Marijuana Users. Adolescence, 24:96 (Winter 1989), pp. 965-. McCaffery, Margo, and Beebe, Alexandra Giving Narcotics for pain: A problem-solver handbook. Summary: A Nursing89 Handbook, packed with useful facts and handy charts. Nursing, 19:10 (October 1, 1989), pp. 161 McCarthy and Anglin. Narcotics Addicts: Effect of Family and Parental Risk Factors on Timing of Emancipation, Drug Use Onset, Pre-addiction Incarcerations and Educational Achievement. Journal of Drug Issues, 20:1 (Winter 1990), pp. 99-. McClintock, Cynthia. The Prospects for Democratic Consolidation in a Least Likely Case: Peru. Comparative Politics, (January 1 1989), v 21 n 2. pp. 127. McCurdy, H. Horton, Callahan, Lisa S., and Williams, Robert D. Studies on the Stability and Detection of Cocaine, Benzoylecgonine, and 11-Nor-Delta-9-Tetrahydrocannabinol-9-Carboxylic Acid in Whole Blood Using Abuscreen Radioimmunoassay. Journal of Forensic Sciences. (July 1 1989) v 34 n 4 pp. 858. McFadden, Peter. New Eradication Program Winning Over Coca Farmers, Business News, December 31, 1987, 8. McMahon, Bernard F. Low-Intensity Conflict: The Pentagon's Foible. Orbis, 34:1 (Winter 1990), pp. 3-. McWilliams, John C. Unsung Partner Against Crime: Harry J. Anslinger and the Federal Bureau of Narcotics, 1930-1962. The Pennsylvania Magazine of History and Biography, 113:2 (April 1, 1989), pp. 207-. Means, L. B., Small, M., and Capone, D. M. Client Demographics and Outcome in Outpatient Cocaine Treatment. The international journal of the addictions, 24:8 (1989), pp. 765-. Meese, Edwin, III. Organized Crime and International Drug Trafficking. Police Chief (January 1988), p. 12. Meisch, R. A., George, F. R., and Lemaire, F. A. Orally delivered cocaine as a reinforcer for rhesus monkeys. Pharmacology, Biochemistry and Behavior. (January 1 1990) v 35 n 1. pp. 245-. Mello, N.K., Mendelson, J.H., and Bree, M.P. Buprenorphine Suppress Cocaine Self-Administration by Rhesus Monkeys. Science. (August 25 1989) v 245 n 4920 pp. 859. Mellow, Craig, Congress just says no, Business Month, 133:14-15 (May 1989). (Drug Free Workplace Act of 1988). Melvern, Linda, Anning, Nick, and Hebditch, David. Techno-bandits. Boston: Houghton Mifflin, 1984. vi, 313 p. ; Includes index. Bibliography: p. [285]-305. Menard, Scott, and Huizinga, David. Age, Period, and Cohort Size Effects on Self-Reported Alcohol, Marijuana, and Polydrug Use: Results from the National Youth Survey. Social Science Research, 18:2 (June 1, 1989), pp. 174-. Mercado I, Ivan. El Genocidio aprista contra Sendero Luminoso. Lima: Ediciones Latinoamericanas, 1986. Mercado, Rogger, ed. Algo mas sobre Sendero: teoria y tactica, violencia, represion y desaparecidos: documentos Lima, Peru: Ediciones de Cultura Popular, 1983. Mercado, Rogger. El Partido Comunista del Peru: Sendero Luminoso. 3ra. ed., corr. y aum. Lima: Librerias Studium-La Universidad, 1986. Mercado, Rogger. Los partidos politicos en el Peru: el (AprilA, el P.C.P. y Sendero Luminoso, sintesis historiografica, documentos. Lima, Peru: Ediciones Latinoamericanas, 1985. Mercado, Rogger. Periodismo para el pueblo y por el pueblo. Lima, Peru: Ediciones Latinoamericanas, 1986. Metz, Steven. An American Strategy for Low-Intensity Conflict. Strategic Review, 17:4 (Fall 1989), pp. 9-. Mexico, Office of the President, Bureau of Social Communication. The Mexican Army and the Fight Against Drugs, Mexico Today (April, 1987), 6-7. Mexico. Treaties, etc. United States, 1977 (June 2. Protocols, etc., 1983 Nov. 10. Narcotic drugs, additional cooperative arrangements to curb illegal traffic: agreement between the United States of America and Mexico, amending the agreement of (June 2, 1977, as amended and extended, effected by exchange of letters, signed at Mexico (November 10, 1983. Washington, D.C.: Dept. of State, U.S. G.P.O., 1988). Meyer, Lorenzo. Carta Abierta al Alcalde Koch: Certificar al Certificador, Excelsior, (March 9, 1988), 7. Milhorn Jr., H. Thomas. Nicotine Dependence. American Family Physician. (March 1 1989) v 39 n 3 pp. 214. Summary: The pharmacologic and behavioral processes involved in nicotine addiction are similar to those that determine addiction to other drugs such as heroin and cocaine. Miller, Norman S., Gold, Mark S., and Belkin, Beth M. The Diagnosis of Alcohol and Cannabis Dependence in Cocaine Dependents and Alcohol Dependence in their Families. British journal of addiction, 84:12 (December 1, 1989). pp. 1491-. Miller, Norman S., Gold, Mark S., and Millman, Robert L. Cocaine: Cocaine intoxication can produce virtually any psychiatric symptom. Many of the effects can be attributed to the dopamine system. American family physician. (February 1 1989) v 39 n 2 pp. 115. Mills, James. The underground empire: where crime and governments embrace. Garden City, N.Y., Doubleday, 1986. Minsky, Terri. Don Juan in Hell. Premiere. (May 1 1990) v 3 n 9. pp. 48-.Mintz, Sidney W. The Forefathers of Crack. NACLA Report on the Americas. (March 1 1989) v 22 n 6 pp. 31. Summary: Stimulants have played a key role in the history of capitalism. But unlike tea, coffee, sugar and tobacco, cocaine sins thrice: It interferes with labor productivity, the profits it garners are not made by respectable capitalists, and the state has trouble claiming its share. Misra, A. L., Pontani, R. B., and Vadlomani, N. L. Interactions of Cocaine with Barbital, Pentobarbital and Ethanol. Archives internationales de pharmacodynamie et de therapie. (May 1 1989) v 299 pp. 44. Misra, A.L., Pontani, R.B., and Vadlamani, V.L. Blockade of tolerance to morphine analgesia by cocaine. Pain. (July 00 1989) v 38 n 1 pp. 77. Mitchell, Marilyn, Sabbagha, Rudy E., Keith, Louis. Ultrasonic growth parameters in fetuses of mothers with primary addiction to cocaine. American Journal of Obstetrics and Gynecology. (November 1 1988) v 159 n 5 pp. 1104. Mitsui, T., Hida, M., and Fujimura, Y. Determination of alkaloidal Narcotics by pyrolysis-gas chromatography. Journal of Analytical and Applied Pyrolysis, 17:1 (December 1, 1989), pp. 83-. Mohr, C. Drug Bill Passes, Finishing Business of 100th Congress, New York Times, (October 23, 1988), 1y, 16y. Molano, Alfredo. Selva Adentro. Bogot , 1987. Moore, F.M.L., and Simpson, D. Detection of benzoylecgonine (cocaine metabolite) in urine: a cost-effect low risk immunoassay procedure. Medical Laboratory Sciences. (April 1 1990) v 47 n 2 pp. 85-. Moore, Mark H. Drug Policy and Organized Crime in President's Commission on Organized Crime, Report to the President and the Attorney General, America's Habit: Drug Abuse, Drug Trafficking, and Organized Crime, Appendix. (Washington: GPO, 1986). Moore, Mark H. Drug trafficking. Washington, D.C.: U.S. Dept. of Justice, National Institute of Justice, 1988). Moore, W. John. No Quick Fix, National Journal, (November 21, 1987, 2954. Morales, Edmundo. Cocaine: White Gold Rush in Peru. Tucson: University of Arizona Press, 1989). Note: An important book based on field research in Peru. Contradicts the findings of many Congressional reports on narcotics control programs. Important, as well, for his data on coca growing and Sendero Luminiso. Morales, Luis Guillermo. Colombia: New Tax Measures. Bulletin for international fiscal documentation. (April 1 1989) v 43 n 4 pp. 181. Summary: A series of new tax measures were recently adopted by Congress and national Gevernment of Colombia which affect, inter alia, the net wealth tax, the presumption of income, disclosure requirement of banks, non-deductible expenses, depreciation, bad debts and leasing. This article summarizes several of the new measures. Morales, Waltraud Queiser. "The War on Drugs: a New US National Security Doctrine?" Third World Quarterly, V11, (July 1989). Morgan, H. Wayne. Drugs in America: A Social History, 1800-1980. Syracuse: Syracuse University Press, 1981. Morley, Christopher. Cocaine Bottle and Untitled. The Baker Street Journal, 40:1 (March 1, 1990), pp. 37-. Morley, J., and Byrne, M. The Drug War and 'National Security': The Making of a Quagmire. Dissent (Winter 1989), 39-46. Morley, Jefferson. The Great American High: Contradictions of Cocaine Capitalism. The nation. (October 2 1989) v 249 n 10 pp. 341. Mortimer, William Golden. History of Coca; the Divine Plant of the Incas. Fitz Hugh Ludlow Memorial Library edition, complete and unabridged. San Francisco, And/or Press, 1974. Muhlemann, Christoph. Surviving on the Coca Bush. Swiss Review of world Affairs. (April 1 1990) v 40 n 1 pp. 11-. Muntaner, C., Cascella, N.G., and Kumor, K.M. Placebo responses to cocaine administration in humans: effects of prior administrations and verbal instructions. Psychopharmacology. (October 1 1989) v 99 n 2. pp. 282. Muntaner, C., Walter, D., and Nagoshi, C. Self-report vs laboratory measures of aggression as predictors of substance abuse. Drug and alcohol dependence. (February 1 1990) v 25 n 1. pp. 1. Murphy, Sheigla B., Reinarman, Craig, and Waldorf, Dan. An 11-year Follow-up of a Network of Cocaine Users. British Journal of Addiction (to Alcohol and Other Drugs). (April 1 1989) v 84 n 4 pp. 427. Musto, David F. America's First Cocaine Epidemic. The Wilson Quarterly. 1989). Musto, David F. The American Disease: Origins of Narcotic Control. New Haven: Yale University Press, 1973. Expanded ed. New York: Oxford University Press, 1987. Musto, David F. Why Did Sherlock Holmes Use Cocaine? Baker Street Journal: an Irregular Quarterly. 1988). Nadelmann, Ethan A. Drug Prohibition in the United States: Costs, Consequences and Alternatives. Science, 245:4921 (September 1, 1989), pp. 939-. Nadelmann, Ethan A. The DEA in Latin America. Dealing with Institutionalized Corruption. Police Journal. (January 1 1989) v 62 n 1 pp. 31. Nadelmann, Ethan A. The Drugs Enforcement Agency in Latin America: The Ins and Outs of Working Around Corruption. Part Two. Police Journal, 62:2 (April 1, 1989), pp. 157-. Nadelmann, Ethan A. The Great Drug Debate: The Case for Legalization. The Public Interest (Summer 1989), pp. 3-. Nadelmann, Ethan A. U.S. Drug Policy: A Bad Export? Foreign Policy (Spring 1988), pp. 83-108. Navaratnam, V., and Foong, K. Development and application of a system for monitoring drug abuse: the Malaysian experience. Bulletin on Narcotics, 41:1-2 (1989), pp. 53- . Neerhof, Mark G., MacGregor, Scott N., and Retzky, Sandy S. Cocaine abuse during pregnancy: Peripartum prevalence and perinatal outcome. American journal of obstetrics and gynecology. September 1 1989) v 161 n 3. pp. 633. Summary: In this study peripartum cocaine abuse was common, increased during the 2-year study period, and was associated with increased perinatal morbidity. Nettleton, Jilda, and Wang, Ging Kuo. pH-dependent binding of local anesthetics in single batrachotoxin-activated Na+ channels. Cocaine vs. quaternary compounds. Biophysical Journal, 58:1 (July 1, 1990), pp. 95-. Newcomb, Michael D., Fahy, Bridget N., and Skager, Rodney. Correlates of Cocaine Use Among Adolescents. Journal of Drug Issues. Fall 198 v 19 n 3 pp. 327. Nicholl, Charles. The Fruit Palace: An Odyssey Through Colombia's Cocaine UnderWorld. New York: St. Martin's Press, 1985. London: Heinemann, 1985. Nightline. Role of the Military in the War on Drugs. Nightline. (January 4, 1990). Guests: Sen. Sam Nunn, Adm. William Crowe (Ret.). Novak, Michal, and Salemink, Cornelis A. Novel rearrangements during pyrolysis of cocaine. Tetrahedron. 1989) v 45 n 13 pp. 4287. Nuckols, Cardwell C., and Greeson, Janet. Cocaine Addiction: Assessment and Intervention. The Nursing clinics of North America. (March 1 1989) v 24 n 1 pp. 33. Summary: The cocaine epidemic is causing clinical problems that are recognizable, have predictable patterns, and are treatable. Technologies exist that allow for accurate assessment of pathologic severity. Medical research has assisted with chemical tools that aid in restoration of depleted neurochemistry. However, in the treatment of cocaine addition the basics still apply. Measurers such as good assessment and chemical intervention will not solve the problem without overall rehabilitative and self-help support. Nunes, Edward V., McGrath, Patrick J., and Wager, Steven. Lithium Treatment for Cocaine Abusers With Bipolar Spectrum Disorders. The American Journal of Psychiatry. (May 1 1990) v 147 n 5. pp. 655-. Olson, Wm. J. Low-Intensity Conflict: The Challenge to the National Interest. Terrorism: An International Journal, 12:2 (1989), pp. 75-. Olsson, Gayle Lanie, leddo, Christine C., and Wild, Lorie. Nursing management of patients epidural Narcotics. Heart & Lung, 18:2 (March 1, 1989), pp. 130-. Orozco, Jorge Eliecer. Lehder: El Hombre. Bogot , 1987. Ortega, Julio. [ Adios Ayacucho] Adios Ayacucho ; seguido de, El oro de Moscu, y otros peligros que acechan a los adolescentes en su primeros pasos hacia la vida adulta. Lima: Mosca Azul Editores ; Philadelphia, PA: ISHI Publications, 1986. Ortiz, A., Romano, M., and Soriano, A. Development of an information reporting system on illicit drug use in Mexico. Bulletin on Narcotics, 41:1 (1989), pp. 41-. Oviedo, Alvaro. Colombia Narcocracy-Will It Be Defeated? New Times. (October 10 1989) n 41 pp. 23. Pacella, James A. Controlled substance cross reference index: DEA base drug code, generic names, common trade names. 2nd ed. Washington, D.C.: U.S. Dept. of Justice, Drug Enforcement Administration, Office of Diversion Control, 1986. Pacini, Deborah, and Franquemont, Chrisitine, eds. Coca and cocaine: effects on people and policy in Latin America: proceedings of the conference, the Coca Leaf and its Derivatives-- Biology, Society and Policy. Cambridge, MA: Cultural Survival ; Ithaca, N. Y.: LASP, 1986. Pan, Z. Z., and Williams, J. T. GABA- and Glutamate-Mediated Synaptic Potentials in Rat Dorsal Raphe Neurons In Vitro. Journal of neurophysiology. (April 1 1989) v 61 n 4. pp. 719. Pan, Z. Z., Colmers, W. F., and Williams, J. T. 5-HT-Mediated Synaptic Potentials in the Dorsal Raphe Nucleus: Interactions with Excitatory Amion Acid and GABA Neurotransmission. Journal of neurophysiology. (August 1 1989) v 62 n 2. pp. 481. Pan, Z.Z., and Williams, J.T. Differential Actions of Cocaine and Amphetamine on Dorsal Raphe Neurons in Vitro. The Journal of Pharmacology and Experimental Therapeutics. (October 1 1989) v 251 n 1. pp. 56. Parks, James M., Reed, Gary, and Knochel, James P. Cocaine-Associated Rhabdomyolysis. American Journal of Medical Sciences. (May 1 1989) v 297 n 5 pp. 334. Pascual-Leone, A., Dhuna, A., and Altafullah, I. Cocaine-induced seizures. Neurology. (March 1 1990) v 40 n 3 p 1. pp. 404-. Payne, Douglas W. The Drug "Super State" in Latin America. Freedom at Issue (March 1, 1989), pp. 7-. Payne, Richard. Medication-Induced Performance Deficits: Analgesics and Narcotics. JOM, Journal of Occupational Medicine, 32:4 (April 1, 1990), pp. 362-. Pearce, Jenny. The Dirty Wars. NACLA Report on the Americas. (April 1 1990) v 23 n 6. pp. 22-. Summary: Cocaine-financed death squads, operating with the advice and consent of the armed forces, have murdered 8,000 grassroots activists since 1986. When not killing leftist, these paramilitary armies advance the drum barons' quest for political power. Pela, A.O. Recent trends in drug use and abuse in Nigeria. Bulletin on Narcotics, 41:1 (1989), pp. 103 Pellens, Mildred. The Opium Problem. New York: The Bureau of Social Hygiene, 1928. Prez Escamilla Costas, Juan Ricardo. La Estructura Administrativa de la Administracin de Justicia enMxico (submitted to the El Colegio de Mexico-Harvard Conference on a New Approach to the U.S.-Mexico Antidrug Strategy held at El Colegio de Mexico, Mexico D.F., on (April 28-29, 1988). Peris, J., and Zahniser, N. R. Persistent augmented dopamine release after acute cocaine requires dopamine receptor activation. Pharmacology, Biochemistry and Behavior. (January 1 1989) v 32 n 1 pp. 71. Peris, Joanna, Boyson, Sally J., and Cass, Wayne A. Persistence of Neurochemical Changes in Dopamine Systems After Repeated Cocaine Administration. The Journal of Pharmacology and Experimental Therapeutics (April 1 1990) v 253 n 1. pp. 38-. Perl, Raphael F. Congress, International Narcotics Policy, and the Antidrug Abuse Act of 1988), Journal of Interamerican Studies and World Affairs 30:2 (Summer-Fall 1988). Perl, Raphael F.. International Narcotics Control and Foreign Assistance Certification: Requirements, Procedures, Timetables, and Guidelines. Report prepared for the Committee on Foreign Relations, U.S. Senate. Washington: GPO, 1988). Perl, Raphael F.. International Narcotics Control: The President's (March 1, 1988) Certification for Foreign Assistance Eligibility and Options for Congressional Action. Washington: Congressional Research Service, 1988). Perl, Raphael. International narcotics control and foreign assistance certification: requirements, procedures, timetables, and guidelines: report / prepared for the use of the Committee on Foreign Relations, United States Senate ; by the Congressional Research Service, Library of Congress. Washington: U.S. G.P.O., 1988). Perry, Stuart H. The Unarmed Invasion. Atlantic Monthly 135 (January 1925), 70-77. Peterson, Allen L. Flying Air Cavalry Missions in the Low-Intensity Conflict. United states army aviation digest, 90:2 (March 1, 1990), pp. 54-. Peterson, S.L., Olsta, S.A., and Matthews, R.T. Cocaine enhances medial prefrontal cortex neuron response to ventral tegmental area activation. Brain Research Bulletin. (February 1 1990) v 24 n 2. pp. 267-. Petronis, K.R., and Anthony, J.C. An epidemiologic investigation of marijuana-and cocaine-related palpitations. Drug and Alcohol Dependence, 23:3 (June 1, 1989), pp. 219-. Phelps, J. F. Report of the United States Situation and Trends in Drug Abuse and Illicit Traffic. Police Chief (March 1987), pp. 141-2. Phillips, Chris. Living in Fear. The nation's Narcotics nightmare: One girl's terrifying tale of life in a Drugged-out neighborhood. YM, 38:5 (June 1, 1990), pp. 72-. Pike, Ronald F. Cocaine Withdrawal: An Effective Three-Drug Regimen. Postgraduate Medicine. (April 1 1989) v 85 n 4 pp. 115-. Pilotte, N.S., Sharpe, L.G., and Dax, E.M. Multiple, but not acute, infusions of cocaine alter the release of prolactin in male rats. Brain Research. (March 26 1990) v 512 n 1. pp. 107-. Pinto Flores, Aquiles. Yo fu rehn del M-19 (61 dasen la Embajada de la Repblica Dominicana. Bogot : Canal Ramrez-Antares, 1980). Pitts, D.K. and Marwah, J. Chronic cocaine reduces a2-adrenoceptor elicited mydriasis and inhibition of locus coeruleus neurons. European Journal of pharmacology. (January 31 1989) v 160 n 2 pp. 21. Plunkett, L.M., Seifen, E., and Kennedy, R.H. Effects of Morphine Pretreatment of Cocaine Cardiotoxicity in Anesthetized Guinea-Pigs. Archives internationales de pharmacodynamie et de therapie... (January 1 1989) v 297 pp. 60. Pogue, Velvie A., and Nurse, Hazeline M. Cocaine-Associated Acute Myoglobinuric Renal Failure. The American Journal of medicine. (February 1 1989) v 86 n 2 pp. 183. Summary: The four cases reported provide additional support for an association between cocaine use, non-traumatic rhabdomyolysis, and myoglobinuric renal failure. Pollack, Mark H., Brotman, Andrew W., and Rosenbaum, Jerrold F. Cocaine Abuse and Treatment. Comprehensive Psychiatry. (January 1 1989) v 30 n 1 pp. 31. Pombo, Jose Ignacio de. Comercio y contrabando en Cartagena de Indias, 2 de junio de 1800. 1a ed. Bogota, Colombia: Procultura, 1986. Ponce Caballero, A. Gaston. Coca, cocaina, trafico. [La Paz?]: Empresa El Diario, 1983. Pooley, Eric. Death of a Hood. New York, 23:4 (January 29 1990), pp. 26. Summary: Last (February, when cocaine cowboy Gus Farace killed undercover drug agent Everett Hatcher, he touched off a nationwide manhunt. But not only the Feds were after the hulking wiseguy. Police pressure on the Bonanno and Colombo crime families had put them in a hunt as well. Then, last (November, Farace was shot dead while he sat in a Pontiac on a Bensonhurst street. "We'd all seen that face in our sleep,"says the detective who identified Farace's body. Post, Robert M., Weiss, Susan R.B., and Pert, Agu. Cocaine-Induced Behavioral Sensitization and Kindling: Implications for the Emergence of Psychopathology and Seizures. Annals of the New York Academy of Sciences. 1988) v 537 pp. 292. Potter, Gary, Gaines, Larry, and Holbrook, Beth. Blowing Smoke: An Evaluation Of Marijuana Eradication In Kentucky. American Journal of Police, 9:1 (1990), pp. 97- . Povenmire, Katie Izor, and House, Mary Ann. Recognizing the cocaine addict. Nursing, 20:5 (May 1 1990), pp. 46-. Summary: With cocaine-related hospital admissions on the rise, this clinical profile of the cocaine addict will enhance your assessment skills. President's Commission on Organized Crime, The. America's Habit: Drug Abuse, Drug Trafficking and Organized Crime. Report to the President and the Attorney General, (March 1986. Puyana, Alicia. El Narcotr fico y la Sociedad Colombiana, Notas para el Estudio del Fenmeno, (paper presented in the El Colegio de Mexico-Harvard on a New Approach to the U.S.-Mexico Antidrug Strategy, held at El Colegio de Mexico, Mexico, D.F. (April 28-29, 1988). Puyana Garca, Gabriel. La Seguridad Interior en la Defensa Nacional de Colombia, in Seguridad Nacional y Relaciones Internacionales: Colombia, edited by S. Cintra. Mexico: Centro Latinoamericano de Estudios Estratgicos, 1987. Qiao, J. T., Dougherty, P.M., and Wiggins, R.C. Effects of microiontophoretic application of cocaine, alone and with receptor antagonists, upon the neurons of the medial prefrontal cortex, nucleus accumbens and caudate nucleus of rats. Neuropharmacology. (April 1 1990) v 29 n 4. pp. 379-. Rachlinski, J.J., Foltin, R.W., and Fischman, M.W. The Effects of Smoked Marijuana on Interpersonal Distances in Small Groups. Drug and Alcohol Dependence, 24:3 (December 1, 1989), pp. 183-. Raines, Virgil E., Lt. Col. Criteria for Success in the War on Drugs. Study Project. U.S. Army War College. (March 31, 1989). Ramirez Figueroa, Yonel. Coca, cocaina, el trafico ilicito. 1a ed. [Lima, Peru]: Y. Ramirez Figueroa, [1983. Ramsey, Russell W. Panama Today: Should the West Help. The Army Quarterly and Defence Journal, 119:3 (July 1, 1989), pp. 307-. Summary: General Manuel Noriega still holds power. What will happen in 1990. Rangel, Charles B. Legalize drugs? Not on Your Life, op. ed., New York Times, (May 17, 1988), A25. Ranly, Ernest W. Peru in Peril, The Christian Century. 1989) Rau, Kenneth, Voorhees, Richard Z., and Vines, Mack M. The Word from the Trenches. Police Chief, 57:5 (May 1, 1990), pp. 42-. Summary: Patrol NET in Suffolk County; The Narcotics Strike Force; Controlling Drugs in Dallas; Drug Abatements: An Effective Tool; Community Empowerment Policing; Effective use of Search Warrant in the War on Crack. Raum, W. J., McGivern, R. F., and Peterson, M. A. Prenatal inhibition of hypothalamic sex steroid uptake by cocaine: effects on neurobehavioral sexual differentiation in male rats. Developmental Brain Research. (May 1 1990) v 53 n 2. pp. 230-. Rawson, Richard A. Cut the Crack: The Policymaker's Guide to Cocaine Treatment. Policy Review (Winter, 1990), pp. 10-. Reid, Michael. Peru, paths to poverty. London: Latin America Bureau, Third World Publications, 1985. Reuter, Peter, and Mark Kleian. Risks and Prices: An Economic Analysis of Drug Enforcement, Crime and Justice (July 1986), 293. Reuter, Peter, Gordon Crawford, and Jonathan Crane. Sealing the Borders: The Effects of Military Participation in Drug Interdiction, Santa Monica, Rand Corporation, 1988). Reuter, Peter. Eternal Hope: America's International Narcotics Effort. Santa Monica: The Rand Corporation, 1987. Reuter, Peter. Eternal Hope: America's Quest for Narcotics Control, The Public Interest 79 (Spring 1985). Reuter, Peter. Quantity Illusions and Paradoxes of Drug Interdiction: Federal Intervention into Vice Policy. Law & Contemporary Problems (Winter 1988), pp. 233-52. Reuter, Peter. Testimony to Committee on Government Operations, U.S. House of Representatives. (October 17, 1989). Mimeo. Revkin, Andrew C. Crack in the Cradle: The horrors of cocaine are penetrating ever deeper into our society, claiming more and more victims within the womb. Discover. September 1 1989) v 10 n 9 pp. 62. Reznik, Vivian M., Anderson, Jack, and Briswold, William R. Successful Fibrinolytic Treatment of Arterial Thrombosis and Hypertension in a Cocaine-Exposed Neonate. Pediatrics. (October 1 1989) v 84 n 4. pp. 735. Richardson, Gale A. The Effect of Prenatal Alcohol, Marijuana and Tobacco Exposure on Neonatal Behavior. Infant Behavior & Development, 12:2 (April 1, 1989), pp. 199-. Ridgway, John M. [ Road to Elizabeth] Road to Osambre: a daring adventure in the high country of Peru. 1st American ed. New York, NY: Viking, 1987,c 986. 244 p., [8] p. of plates: col. ill., maps ; First published in Great Britain under the title: Road to Elizabeth--T.p. verso. Maps on lining papers. Riding, Alan. Colombia Says U.S. Reprisals Weakens Support for Drug Fight, New York Times, (January 13, 1988), A13. Riding, Alan. Colombians Grow Weary of Waging War on Drugs, New York Times, (February 1, 1988), 8y. Rielly, John E., ed. American Public Opinion and U.S. Foreign Policy 1987. Chicago: Chicago Council on Foreign Relations, 1987. Riemer, Blanca, Rossant, John, and Dwyer, Paula. The drug war--European style. Business Week. 31-2 Oct 2 1989). Salzano, Carlo J. Security of U.S. ports challenged by thieves, smugglers and terrorists. Traffic World. 219:11+ Sep 25 1989). Ringwalt, Christopher L., and Palmer, James H. Cocaine and Crack Users Compared. Adolescence, 24:96 (Winter, 1989), pp. 851-. Ritterband, Charles E. Colombia: 'La Violencia' Continues. Swiss Review of World Affairs. (October 1 1989) v 39 n 7 pp. 8. Ritz, M. C., Cone, E. J., and Kuhar, M. J. Cocaine inhibition of ligand binding at dopamine, norepinephrine and serotonin transporters: A structure-activity study. Life Sciences. 1990) v 46 n 9. pp. 635-. Ritz, Mary C., and Kuhar, Michael J. Relationship between Self-Administration of Amphetamine and with Cocaine. The Journal of Pharmacology and Experimental Therapeutics. (March 1 1989) v 248 n 3 pp. 110. Rob, Marilyn, Reynolds, Ingrid, and Finlayson, Paul F. Adolescent Marijuana Use: Risk Factors and Implications. Australian and New Zealand Journal of Psychiatry, 24:1 (March 1, 1990), pp. 47-. Roberts, D.C.S., Bennett, S.A.L., and Vickers, G.J. The estrous cycle affects cocaine self-administration on a progressive ratio schedule in rats. Psychopharmacology. (July 1 1989) v 98 n 3 pp. 408. Roberts, D.C.S., Loh, E.A., and Vickers, G. Self-administration of cocaine on a progressive ration schedule in rats: dose-response relationship and effect of haloperidol pretreatment. Psychopharmacology. (April 1 1989) v 97 n 4. pp. 535-. Roberts, S.M., Pounds, J.G., and James, R.C. Cocaine toxicity in cultured rat hekpatocytes. Toxicology Letters. (February 1 1990) v 50 n 2/3. pp. 283-. Robin, Wong. Increased Lung Water and Ascites after Massive Cocaine Overdosage in Mice and Improved Survival Related to Beta-Adrenergic Blockage. Annals of Internal Medicine. (January 29 1989) v 110 n 3 pp. 202. Robison, Leslie L., Buckley, Jonathan D., and Daigle, Anne E. Maternal Drug Use and Risk of Childhood Onlymphoblastic Leukemia Among Offspring: An Epidemiologic Investigation Implicating Marijuana (A Report From the Childrens Cancer Study Group). Cancer; Diagnosis, Treatment, Research, 63:10 (May 15, 1989), pp. 1904-. Roehrich, Herb. For RPhs: A Review of the Changing Cocaine Epidemic. Pharmacy Times. (July 1 1989) v 55 n 7 pp. 35.Lett, B.T. Repeated exposures intensify rather than diminish the rewarding effects of amphetamine, morphine, and cocaine. Psychopharmacology. (July 1 1989) v 98 n 3 pp. 357. Ropp, Steve C. Panama's Defiant Noriega. Current History, 87:533 (December 1, 1988), pp. 417-. Rosenberg, Tina. A Mess in the Andes - Columbia's government-by-cocaine. The New Republic. 1989). Rosenberg, Tina. Colombia: Murder City. The Atlantic. (November 1 1988) v 262 n 5 pp. 20. Rosenberg, Tina. Guerrilla Tourism. The New Republic, 202:25 (June 18, 1990), pp. 23-. Summary: A guided tour through the netherworld of Sendero Lumnoso, whose members have no doubt that victory will ultimately be theirs. Rosenstein, B.J., Wheeler, J.S., and Heid, P.L. Congenital Renal Abnormalities in Infants With In Utero Cocaine Exposure. The Journal of urology, 144:1 (July 1, 1990), 110-. Rossini, R.G., and Thomas, J.J. The Size of the Informal Sector in Peru: A Critical Comment on Hernando de Soto's El Otro Sendero. World Development, 18:1 (January 1, 1990), pp. 125-. Rothman, Richard B. High Affinity Dopamine Reuptake Inihibitors as Potential Cocaine Antagonists: A Strategy for Drug Development. Life Sciences. 1990) v 46 n 20. pp. PL-17-. Rubin, Rhonda B., and Neugarten, Joel. Cocaine-Induced Rhabdomyolysis Masquerading as Myocardial Ischemia. The American Journal of Medicine. (May 1 1989) v 86 n 5 pp. 551. Summary: Rhabdomyolysis must be added to the ever-growing list of medical complications associated with the illicit use of cocaine. Ruseler, Sonia. Growing Dependence: Sonia Ruseler reports from Peru where cocaine eases the pain of poverty. The Listener. (April 5 1990) v 123 n 3159. pp. 4-. San Pedro, R. M. Ponce, E. G. School programmes in Drug rehabilitation and social reintegration in the Philippines. Bulletin on Narcotics, 40:1 (1988), pp. 63- . Sanders, Thomas Griffin. Peru Between Democracy and the Sendero Luminoso. Hanover, NH: Universities Field Staff International, 1984. Satel, S. L., and Gawin, F. H. Migrainelike Headache and Cocaine Use. JAMA. the Journal of the American Medical Association. (May 26 1989) v 261 n 20 pp. 2995. Schama, K.F., and Branch, M.N. Tolerance to effects of cocaine on schedule-controlled behavior: Effects of fixed-interval schedule parameter. Pharmacology, Biochemistry and Behavior. (January 1 1989) v 32 n 1 pp. 267. Schemmer, Benjamin F. Senate Leaders Ask Scrowcroft for New White House Focus on Low-Intensity Conflict. Armed Forces Journal International, 126:8 (March 1, 1989), pp. 66-. Schmeckebier, Lawrence F. and Francis X. A. Eble. The Bureau of Internal Revenue: Its History, Activities, and Organization. Baltimore: The Johns Hopkins University Press, 1923. Schroth, Raymond A. Has God forgotten Peru? Commonweal. 1989). Schultz, T.W., Wyatt, N.L., and Lin, D.T. Structure-Toxicity Realtionships for Nonpolar Narcotics: A Comparison of Data from the Tetrahymena, Photobacterium and Pimephales Systems. Bulletin of Environmental Contamination and Toxicology, 44:1 (January 1, 1990), pp. 67-. Schulze, Gene E., McMillan, D.E., and Bailey, John R. Acute Effects of Marijuana Smoke on Complex Operant Behavior in Rhesus Monkeys. Life Sciences, 45:6 (1989), pp. 465-. Schwartz, Richard H., Estroff, Todd, and Fairbanks, David N.F. Nasal Symptoms Associated With Cocaine Abuse During Adolescence. Archives of Otolaryngology--Head & Neck Surgery. (January 1 1989) v 115 n 1 pp. 63. Schwartz, Richard H., Lewis, David C., and Hoffmann, Norman G. Cocaine and Marijuana Use by Medical Students before and during medical school. Archives of Internal Medicine, 150:4 (April 1, 1990), pp. 883. Sciolino, Elaine, with Stephen Engelberg. Narcotics Efforts Foiled by U.S. Security Goals, New York Times, (April 10, 1988), 1y, 10. Segal, Nicholas, and Lillian Segal. The Drug Evil, New Republic, 34 (March 7, 1923), 41-43. Selser, Gregorio. Bolivia, el cuartelazo de los cocadolares. Mexico: MEX-SUR, 1982. Sen, Sankar. Drug War in Colombia. Police Journal, 63:2 (April 1, 1990), pp. 153-. Serecigni, J., Guardia Vidal, J., and Masip Segues, M. C. Viladrich Follow-up study of heroin-addicted persons admitted for treatment in Barcelona. Bulletin on Narcotics, 40:1 (1988), pp. 71-. Seymour, Allen Raskin, and E. H. Uhlenhuth. Cocaine: clinical and biobehavioral aspects. New York: Oxford University Press, 1987. Shafer, Robert J., and Donald J. Mabry. Neighbors--Mexico and the United States. Chicago: Nelson-Hall, 1981. Shaffer, Howard J., and Jones, Stephanie B. Quitting cocaine. Lexington, MA: Lexington Books, 1989). Shannon, Elaine. Desperados: Latin Drug Lords, U.S. Lawmen, and the War America Can't Win. New York: Viking Press, 1988). Shannon, Michael, Lacouture, Peter G., and Roa, Jaime. Cocaine Exposure Among Children Seen at a Pediatric Hospital. Pediatrics. (March 1 1989) v 83 n 3 pp. 337. Sharma, K., and Shukla, V. Rehabilitation of Drug-addicted persons: the experience of the Nav-Chetna Center in India. Bulletin on Narcotics, 40:1 (1988), pp. 43-. Sharpe, Kenneth. The Drug War: Going After Supply - A Commentary. Journal of Interamerican Studies and World Affairs, 30:2-3 (Summer 1988), pp. 77-. Sheffield, Alan W. Narcotics Investigation for the Smaller Agency. The Police Chief, 55:10 (October 1, 1988), pp. 58-. Sherer, Michael A. Intravenous Cocaine: Psychiatric Effects, Biological Mechanisms. Biological Psychiatry. December 1 1988) v 24 n 8 pp. 865. Shoemaker, Pamela J., ed., Communication campaigns about drugs. L. Erlbaum, 1989). Excellent study of the relation between the news media and the percpetion of the drug problem. Shultz, George Pratt. Narcotics: a global threat. Washington, D. C.: U. S. Dept. of State, Bureau of Public Affairs, Office of Public Communication,Editorial Division, 1987. Shultz, George Pratt. Winning the war against narcotics. Washington, D.C.: U.S. Dept. of State, Bureau of Public Affairs, Office of Public Communication, Editorial Division, 1988). (Current Policy ; no. 1099). Shultz Jr., Richard H. Low intensity conflict. Survival, 31:4 (July 1, 1989), pp. 359-. Siegel, B. Z. Mercury in Marijuana. Bioscience, 38:9 (October 1, 1988), pp. 619-. Siegel, Loren. Zero Tolerance and Calls for the Military Spark Debate about Decriminalization, Civil Liberties. (Spring/Summer, 1988), 4-5. Silva, Guillermo Rochabrun. Crisis, Democracy, and the Left in Peru, Latin American Perspectives, Sumr 88 v 15 n 3 pp. 77-. Single, Eric W. The Impact of Marijuana Decriminalization: An Update. Journal of Public Health Policy, 10:4 (1989), pp. 456-. Sivam, S. P. D1 dopaminereceptor-mediated substance P depletion in the striatonigral neurons of rats subjected to neonatal dopaminergic denervation: implications for self-injurious behavior. Brain research. (October 23 1989) v 500 n 1 / 2. pp. 119. Sivam, S.P. Cocaine selectively increases striatonigral dynorphin levels by a dopaminergic mechanism. The Journal of Pharmacology and Experimental Therapeutics. September 1 1989) v 250 n 3 pp. 818. Skinner, William F., and Cattarello, Anne M. Understanding the Relationships among Attitudes, Group Norms, and Behavior Using Behavioral Commitment: A Structural Equation Analysis of Marijuana Use. Journal of Applied Social Psychology, 15:1 (November 1, 1989), pp. 1268-. Smith, Deborah E. Heavy Cocaine Use by Adolescents. Pediatrics, 83:4 (April 1, 1989), pp. 539-. Smith, M. O., and Khan, I. An acupuncture programme for the treatment of Drug-addicted persons. Bulletin on Narcotics, 40:1 (1988), pp. 35. Smolen, T.N., and Smolen, A. Developmental expression of cocaine hepatotoxicity in the mouse. Pharmacology, Biochemistry and Behavior. (June 1 1990) v 36 n 2. pp. 333-. Sobolev, Vitaly. Coca, "Donkeys" and Bombs. NewTimes. December 19 1989) n 51. pp. 20-. Sobrian, S.K., Burton, L.E., and Robinson, N.L. Neurobehavioral and immunological effects of prenatal cocaine exposure in rat. Pharmacology, Biochemistry and Behavior. (March 1 1990) v 35 n 3. pp. 617-. Spealman, R.D., Madras, B.K., and Bergman, Jack. Effects of Cocaine and Related Drugs in Non-Human Primates. II. Stimulant Effects on Schedule-Controlled Behavior. The Journal of Pharmacology and Experimental Therapeutics. (October 1 1989) v 251 n 1. pp. 142. Spear, L.P., Frambes, N.A., and Kirstein, C.L. Fetal and maternal brain and plasma levels of cocaine and benzoylecgonine following chronic subcutaneous administration of cocaine during gestation in rats. Psychopharmacology. (April 1 1989) v 97 n 4 pp. 427. Speckart, George. Modeling the Longitudinal Impact of Legal Sanctions on Narcotics Use and Property Crime. Journal of Quantitative Criminology, 5:1 (March 1, 1989), pp. 33-. Stawar, Terry L. IES Arrow Dot Performance and Success in a Cocaine Detoxification Program. Perceptual and motor skills. December 1 1988) v 67 n 3 pp. 960. Stieb, Jeffrey D. Survey of United States Jurisdiction Over High Seas Narcotics Trafficking. The Georgia Journal of International and Comparative Law, 19:1 (1989), pp. 119-. Strang, John. Crack and cocaine use in South London drug addicts: 1987-1989). British Journal of Addiction. (February 1 1990) v 85 n 2. pp. 193 -. Surrett, W. R. The International Narcotics Trade: An Overview of Its Dimensions, Production Sources, and Organizations. Congressional Research Service Report No. 88-643-F. Washington DC: Library of Congress, 1988).. Swartz, Conrad M., Breen, Kevin, and Leone, Filippa. Serum Prolactin Levels During Extended Cocaine Abstinence. The American Journal of Psychiatry. (June 1 1990) v 147 n 6. pp. 777-. Tamura, M. Japan: stimulant epidemics past and present. Bulletin on Narcotics, 41:1-1 (1989), pp. 83-. Tang, M., and Falk, J. L. Schedule induced oral self administration of cocaine and ethanol solutions: lack of effect of chronic desipramine. Drug and Alcohol Dependence, 25:1 (February 1 1990), pp. 21-. Tardiff, Kenneth, Gross, Elliot, and Wu, Jeffrey. Analysis of Cocaine-Positive Fatalities. Journal of Forensic Sciences, 34:1 (January 1 1989), pp. 53-. Taxa Cuadros, Manuel. Drogas, pornografia y otras tragedias ; Cocaina y narcotrafico. Lima, Peru: Diselpesa, 1987. Taylor, Arnold H. American Diplomacy and the Narcotics Traffic, 1900-1939: A Study in International Humanitarian Reform. Durham: Duke University Press, 1969. Taylor, Wanda A., and Gold, Mark S. Pharmacologic Approaches to the Treatment of Cocaine Dependence. The Western Journal of Medicine. (May 1 1990) v 152 n 5. pp. 573-. Tella, Srihari R., Schindler, Charles W., and Goldberg, Steven R. Role of Central and Autonomic Neural Mechanisms in the Cardiovascular Effects of Cocaine in Conscious Squirrel Monkeys. The Journal of Pharmacology and Experimental Therapeutics. (February 1 1990) v 252 n 2. pp. 491-. Texeira, Stephen B. Port conference addresses issue of drugs on the docks. Traffic World, 219 (Aug 21 1989), 23-4. Thomas, Jon. Mexico and Narcotics: A Must-Win Situation. Tempe, AZ: INCAMEX, 1987. Thompson, Mark. Senate Oks Bill Pitting Military Against Drugs, Miami Herald, (May 28, 1988), 8a. Timberlake, James H. Prohibition and the Progressive Movement, 1900-1920. Cambridge: Harvard University Press, 1966. Tokatlian, Juan G. National Security and Drugs: Their Impact on Colombia-U.S. Relations. Journal of Interamerican Studies and World Affairs (Spring 1988), pp. 133-60. Tongue, E., and Turner, D. Treatment options in responding to drug misuse problems. Bulletin on Narcotics, 40:1 (1988), pp. 3-. Toro, Maria Celia. Acuerdos de Cooperacin Fallidos: Mxico y Estados Unidos frente al Narcotr fico,submitted to the El Colegio de Mexico-Harvard Conference on a New Approach to the U.S.-Mexico Antidrug Strategy, held at El Colegio de Mexico, Mexico D.F. on (April 28-29, 1988). 24. Torry, Saundra. Call to Debate Legalization of Drugs Becomes Louder, New York Times, (May 15, 1988), 1. Trachtenberg, Michael C. and Blum, Kenneth. Improvement of Cocaine Induced Neuromodulator Deficits by the Neuronutrient Tropamine. Journal of Psychoactive Drugs. (July 1 1988) v 20 n 3 pp. 315. Trainor, John C. Coping With the Drug Runners at Sea, Naval War College Review, V. 40, summer, 1987. Tran, Mary Helen M. Obstetrical complications and perinatal effects associated with cocaine use and abuse during pregnancy. Hospital Pharmacy, 25:6 (June 1, 1990), pp. 530. Summary: Current information suggests that the dramatic increase in the recreational use and abuse of cocaine has a great influence on the outcome of pregnancy. Trebach, Arnold S. The great drug war: and radical proposals that could make America safe again. New York: Macmillan ; London: Collier Macmillan, 1987. Treverton, Gregory F. U.S. Interests in Mexico Beyond Drugs, paper prepared for the El Colegio de Mexico-Harvard Conference on a New Approach to U.S.-Mexico Antidrug Strategy, held at El Colegio de Mxico, Mexico D.F. on (April 28-29, 1988). Trevio Cant, Javier. Evaluacin de la Estratega Internacional de Eradicacin de Cultivos, submitted to the El Colegio de Mxico-Harvard Conference on a New Approach to the U.S.-Mexico Antidrug Strategy, held at El Colegio de Mxico, Mexico D.F. on (April 28-29, 1988). Tudehope, David I. Perinatal Cocaine Intoxication: a Precaution. Medical Journal of Australia, 150:6 (March 20, 1989), pp. 290-. Tumlin, James A., Sands, Jeff M., and Someren, Ayten. Hemolytic-Uremic Syndrome Following "Crack" Cocaine Inhalation. The American Journal of the Medical Sciences, 299:6 (June 1, 1990), pp. 366-. Turkanis, S. A., Partlow, L. M., and Karler, R. Effect of cocaine on neuromuscular transmission in the lobster. Neuropharmacology. September 1 1989) v 28 n 9. pp. 971. U.S. News & World Report. The AIDS threat to teenagers. Casual sex and crack cocaine. U.S. News & World Report (1989). U.S. News and World Report. Cocaine, Communism and crisis in Peru. The war on drugs... U.S. News & World Report. 1989). U.S. News and World Report. Cocaine, Communism and crisis in Peru. The war on drugs... U.S. News & World Report. 1989). Uchimura, N., and North, R. A. Actions of cocaine on rat nucleus accumbens neurones in vitro. British Journal of Pharmacology. (April 1 1990) v 99 n 4. pp. 736-. Uchimura, N., and North, R. A. Actions of cocaine on rat nucleus accumbens neurones in vitro. British Journal of Pharmacology. (April 1 1990) v 99 n 4. pp. 736-. United Nations. International Conference on Drug Abuse and Illicit Trafficking (1987 (June 17-26: Vienna): Report of the International Conference on Drug Abuse and Illicit Trafficking, Vienna, 17-26 (June 1987. New York: United Nations, 1987. United Nations. International Conference on Drug Abuse and Illicit Trafficking (1987 (June 17-26: Vienna): Report of the International Conference on Drug Abuse and Illicit Trafficking, Vienna, 17-26 (June 1987. New York: United Nations, 1987. United Nations. The Draft Convention against Illicit Traffic in Narcotic Drugs and Psychotropic Substances: a report on the status of the draft convention, the U.S. neg wanted on drug-trafficking charges in Florida. United Nations. The Draft Convention against Illicit Traffic in Narcotic Drugs and Psychotropic Substances: a report on the status of the draft convention, the U.S. negotiating position, and issues for the Senate / prepared for the use of the Senate Caucus on International Narcotics Control. Washington: U.S. G.P.O., 1987. United States. An act to amend the Drug abuse office and treatment act of 1972, and for other purposes. Washington: U.S. G.P. O., 1980. Public Law ; 96-181. United States. Congress. Congressional Research Service Library of Congress. Compilation of narcotics laws, treaties, and executive documents: report /prepared for the Committee on Foreign Affairs, U.S. House of Representatives. Washington: U.S. G.P.O., 1986. 99th Congress, 2d session. United States. Congress. Congressional Research Service Library of Congress. Narcotics Interdiction and the Use of the Military: Issues for Congress: proceedings of a seminar held by the Congressional Research Service, (June 7, 1988): report of the Defense Policy Panel and Investigations Subcommittee of the Committee on Armed Services, House of Representatives, One Hundredth Congress, second session. Washington: U.S. G.P.O., 1988). United States. Congress. Congressional Research Service Library of Congress. Narcotics-related foreign aid sanctions: an effective foreign policy?: report/ prepared by the Congressional Research Service, Library of Congress, on a seminar held on (July 30, 1987 for the Caucus on International Narcotics Control of the United States Senate. Washington: U.S. G.P.O., 1987 [i.e. 1988)]. United States. Congress. Congressional Research Service Library of Congress. Combating international drug cartels: issues for U.S. policy: report /prepared by the Congressional Research Service, Library of Congress, on a seminar held on (May 8, 1987 for the Caucus on International Narcotics Control of the United States Senate. Washington: U.S. G.P.O., 1988). (S. prt. ; 100-45). United States. Congress. House. Committee on Appropriations. Subcommittee on Foreign Operations and Related Agencies (1968-1978). Foreign assistance and related agencies appropriations for 1974. Hearings before a subcommittee of the Committee on Appropriations, House of Representatives, Ninety-third Congress, first session [by] Subcommittee... Washington, U.S.G.P.O., 1973. United States. Congress. House. Committee on Armed Services. Investigations Subcommittee. Military Role in Drug Interdiction (3). Hearing before the Investigations Subcommittee of the House Armed Services Subcommittee. (September 21, 1989). One hundred and first Congress. 101-35. United States. Congress. House. Committee on Armed Services. Investigations Subcommittee. Military Role in Drug Interdiction [1]. Hearing before the Investigations Subcommittee of the House Armed Services Subcommittee. (February 22, 1989). One hundred and first Congress. 101- 2. United States. Congress. House. Committee on Armed Services. Investigations Subcommittee. Military Role in Drug Interdiction (2). Hearing before the Investigations Subcommittee of the House Armed Services Subcommittee. (April 18, 1989). One hundred and first Congress. 101-5. United States. Congress. House. Committee on Energy and Commerce. Railroad Drug Abuse Prevention Act of 1988): report together with separate views (to accompany H.R. 4748) (including cost estimate of the Congressional Budget Office). Washington, D.C.: U.S. G.P.O., 1988). House Report ; 100-940. United States. Congress. House. Committee on Foreign Affairs. Bulgarian-Turkish narcotics connection: United States-Bulgarian relations and international drug trafficking: hearings and markup before the Committee on Foreign Affairs and its Subcommittee on Europe and the Middle East,... Washington: U.S. G.P.O., 1984. United States. Congress. House. Committee on Foreign Affairs. Subcommittee on International Security and Scientific Affairs. Foreign assistance legislation for fiscal years 1984-85: hearings before the Subcommittee on International Security and Scientific Affairs of the Committee on Foreign Affairs, House of Representatives,... Washington, D.C.: U.S. G.P.O., 1983- United States. Congress. House. Committee on Foreign Affairs. International narcotics control: hearings before the Committee on Foreign Affairs, House of Representatives, Ninety-seventh Congress, second session, (April 20, 21, and 22, 1982. Washington: U.S. G.P.O., 1982. United States. Congress. House. Committee on Foreign Affairs. Narcotics review in South America: hearing before the Committee on Foreign Affairs, House of Representatives, One Hundredth Congress, second session, (March 17 and 22, 1988). Washington: U.S. G.P.O., 1988). United States. Congress. House. Committee on Foreign Affairs. Worldwide narcotics review of the 1988) international narcotics control strategy report: hearing before the Committee on Foreign Affairs, House of Representatives, One Hundredth Congress, second session, (March 3, 1988). Washington: U.S. G.P.O., 1988). United States. Congress. House. Committee on Foreign Affairs. Narcotics review in southeast/southwest Asia, the Middle East, and Africa: hearing before the Committee on Foreign Affairs, House of Representatives, One Hundredth Congress, second session, (March 15, 1988). Washington: U.S. G.P.O., 1988). United States. Congress. House. Committee on Foreign Affairs. Consideration of miscellaneous bills and resolutions: markup before the Committee on Foreign Affairs, House of Representatives, One Hundred First Congress, first session, on H.R. 1373, S. Con. Res. 15, H.J. Res. 187... Washington: U.S. G.P.O., 1989). United States. Congress. House. Committee on Foreign Affairs. Subcommittee on Asian and Pacific Affairs. Review of Attorney General's trip to Asia in regard to the narcotics situation: hearing before the Subcommittee on Asian and Pacific Affairs of the Committee on Foreign Affairs, House of Representatives,... Washington: U.S. G.P.O., 1983. United States. Congress. House. Committee on Foreign Affairs. Narcotics review in Central America: hearing before the Committee on Foreign Affairs, House of Representatives, One Hundredth Congress, second session, (March 10, 1988). Washington: U.S. G.P.O., 1988). United States. Congress. House. Committee on Foreign Affairs. Narcotics review in the Caribbean: hearing before the Committee on Foreign Affairs, House of Representatives, One Hundredth Congress, second session, (March 9, 1988). Washington: U.S. G.P.O., 1988). United States. Congress. House. Committee on Foreign Affairs. International narcotics control: report of staff study missions to Latin America, Southeast Asia, and Pakistan (October 22, 1981-(April 3, 1982, to the Committee on Foreign Affairs, U.S. House of Representatives, December... Washington: U.S. G.P.O., 1982. United States. Congress. House. Committee on Foreign Affairs. Subcommittee on International Security and Scientific Affairs. Foreign assistance legislation for fiscal year 1983: hearings before the Subcommittee on International Security and Scientific Affairs of the Committee on Foreign Affairs, House of Representatives,... Washington: U.S. G.P.O., 1982- United States. Congress. House. Committee on Foreign Affairs. Subcommittee on Arms Control, International Security, and Science. Foreign assistance legislation for fiscal years 1988)-89: hearing before the Subcommittee on Arms Control, International Security, and Science of the Committee on Foreign Affairs, House of Representatives, One... Washington: U.S. G.P.O.: U.S. G.P.O., 1987. United States. Congress. House. Committee on Foreign Affairs. International narcotics control: report of staff study missions to Latin America, Southeast Asia, and Pakistan, (October 22, 1981-(April 3, 1982, to the Committee on Foreign Affairs, U.S. House of Representatives, December... Washington: U.S. G.P.O., 1982. United States. Congress. House. Committee on Foreign Affairs. Consideration of miscellaneous bills and resolutions: markup before the Committee on Foreign Affairs, House of Representatives, One Hundredth Congress, first session on H.Con. Res. 146 .... Washington: U.S. G.P.O., 1988). United States. Congress. House. Committee on Foreign Affairs. Annual review of international narcotics control programs and the impact of Gramm-Rudman on overseas narcotics control efforts: hearing before the Committee on Foreign Affairs, House of Representatives,... Washington: U.S.G.P.O., 1986. United States. Congress. House. Committee on Foreign Affairs. Cuban involvement in international narcotics trafficking: hearings before the Committee on Foreign Affairs, House of Representatives, One Hundred First Congress, first session, (July 25 and 27, 1989). Washington: U.S. G.P.O.: U.S. G.P.O., 1989). United States. Congress. House. Committee on Foreign Affairs. Foreign assistance legislation for fiscal years 1986-87: hearings before the Committee on Foreign Affairs, House of Representatives, Ninety-ninth Congress, first session. Washington: U.S. G.P.O., 1985-1986. United States. Congress. House. Committee on Foreign Affairs. Foreign assistance legislation for fiscal years 1990)-91: hearings before the Committee on Foreign Affairs, House of Representatives, One Hundred First Congress, first session .... Washington: U.S. G.P.O. 1989). United States. Congress. House. Committee on Foreign Affairs. Foreign assistance legislation for fiscal years 1980-81: hearings before the Committee on Foreign Affairs, House of Representatives, Ninety-sixth Congress, first session. Washington: U.S.G.P.O., 1979. United States. Congress. House. Committee on Foreign Affairs. Foreign assistance legislation for fiscal year 1981: hearings before the Committee on Foreign Affairs, House of Representatives, Ninety-sixth Congress, second session ... Washington: U.S.G.P.O., 1980. United States. Congress. House. Committee on Foreign Affairs. Foreign assistance legislation for fiscal years 1988)-89: hearings before the Committee on Foreign Affairs, House of Representatives, One hundredth Congress, first session. Washington, D.C.: U.S. G.P.O., 1987. United States. Congress. House. Committee on Foreign Affairs. Foreign assistance legislation for fiscal year 1982. Washington: U.S. G.P.O., 1981. United States. Congress. House. Committee on Foreign Affairs. Foreign assistance legislation for fiscal year 1985: hearings before the Committee on Foreign Affairs, House of Representatives, Ninety-eighth Congress, second session. Washington: U.S. G.P.O., 1984- United States. Congress. House. Committee on Foreign Affairs. Review of United States narcotics control efforts in the Middle East and South Asia: hearings before the Committee on Foreign Affairs, House of Representatives, Ninety-ninth Congress, second session, (May 13 and (May... Washington: U.S. G.P.O., 1986. United States. Congress. House. Committee on Foreign Affairs. Review of the international narcotics control strategy report: mid-year update: hearing before the Committee on Foreign Affairs, House of Representatives, One hundredth Congress, first session, (October 7, 1987. Washington: U.S. G.P.O., 1987. United States. Congress. House. Committee on Foreign Affairs. Review of Latin American narcotics control issues: hearing before the Committee on Foreign Affairs, House of Representatives, One hundredth Congress, first session, (March 18, 1987. Washington: U.S. G.P.O., 1987. United States. Congress. House. Committee on Foreign Affairs. Review of the 1989) International Narcotics Control Strategy. Hearings before the House Foreign Affairs Committee, (February and (March, 1989). United States. Congress. House. Committee on Foreign Affairs. Review of the 1989) International narcotics control strategy report: hearings before the Committee on Foreign Affairs, House of Representatives, One Hundred First Congress, first session, (February 28; (March 7, 9, 14,... Washington: U.S. G.P.O., 1989). United States. Congress. House. Committee on Foreign Affairs. Review of the International Aspects of the President's Drug Control Strategy. Hearing before the House Foreign Affairs Committee. (September 12, 1989). United States. Congress. House. Committee on Foreign Affairs. Review of the President's Andean Initiative. Hearing before the House Foreign Affairs Committee. (November 7 and 8, 1989). United States. Congress. House. Committee on Foreign Affairs. Review of the Department of State Inspector General's reports on Bureau of International Narcotics Matters programs: hearings before the Committee on Foreign Affairs, House of Representatives, One Hundred First... Washington: U.S. G.P.O., 1990). United States. Congress. House. Committee on Foreign Affairs. Task Force on International Narcotics Control. Status report on GAO's worldwide review of narcotics control programs: hearing before the Committee on Foreign Affairs, House of Representatives, One hundredth Congress, first session, (July 29, 1987. Washington: U.S. G.P.O., 1987. United States. Congress. House. Committee on Foreign Affairs. U.S. response to Cuban government involvement in narcotics trafficking and review of worldwide illicit narcotics situation: hearings before the Committee on Foreign Affairs, House of Representatives,... Washington: U.S. G.P.O., 1984. United States. Congress. House. Committee on International Relations. Foreign assistance legislation for fiscal year 1978: hearings before the Committee on International Relations, House of Representatives, Ninety-fifth Congress, first session .... Washington: U.S.G.P.O., 1977- United States. Congress. House. Committee on International Relations. Foreign assistance legislation for fiscal year 1979: hearings before the Committee on International Relations, House of Representatives, Ninety-fifth Congress, second session. Washington: U.S. G.P.O., 1978- United States. Congress. House. Committee on Interstate and Foreign Commerce. Subcommittee on Health and the Environment. Drug abuse office and treatment act amendments of 1975: hearings before the Subcommittee on Health and the Environment of the Committee on Interstate and Foreign Commerce, House of Representatives, Ninety-fourth Congress,...Washington: U.S. G.P.O., 1975. United States. Congress. House. Committee on Interstate and Foreign Commerce. Subcommittee on Health and the Environment. Drug Abuse Office and treatment amendments of 1978: hearing before the Subcommittee on Health and the Environment of the Committee on Interstate and Foreign Commerce, House of Representatives, Ninety-fifth Congress,...Washington: U.S. G.P.O., 1978. United States. Congress. House. Committee on Interstate and Foreign Commerce. Subcommittee on Health and the Environment. Drug Abuse Office and treatment amendments of 1978: hearing before the Subcommittee on Health and the Environment of the Committee on Interstate and Foreign Commerce, House of Representatives, Ninety-fifth Congress,... Washington: U.S.G.P.O., 1978. United States. Congress. House. Committee on Interstate and Foreign Commerce. Subcommittee on Public Health and Environment. Special Action Office for Drug Abuse Prevention. Hearings, Ninety-second Congress, first session, on H.R. 9264 ... [and] H.R. 9059 ... Washington: U.S. G.P.O., 1971. United States. Congress. House. Committee on Interstate and Foreign Commerce. Subcommittee on Health and the Environment. Comprehensive alcohol abuse and alcoholism prevention, treatment, and rehabilitation act and the Drug Abuse Office and treatment act authorizations: hearing before the Subcommittee on Health and the Environment of... Washington: U.S. G.P.O., 1979. United States. Congress. House. Committee on the Judiciary. Subcommittee on Crime. Drug production and trafficking in Latin America and the Caribbean: hearing before the Subcommittee on Crime of the Committee on the Judiciary, House of Representatives, Ninety-eighth Congress, first session ... (May... Washington: U.S. G.P.O., 1984. United States. Congress. House. Select Committee on Narcotics Abuse and Control. Asian Heroin Production and Trafficking. Hearing before the House Select Committee on Narcotics Abuse and Control. (August 1, 1989). SNAC-101- 1-10. United States. Congress. House. Select Committee on Narcotics Abuse and Control. Cocaine Production in the Andes. Hearing before the House Select Committee on Narcotics Abuse and Control. (June 7, 1989). SNAC-101-1- 6. United States. Congress. House. Select Committee on Narcotics Abuse and Control. International narcotics control: hearings before the Select Committee on Narcotics Abuse and Control, House of Representatives, Ninety-ninth Congress, first session, Thursday, (September 12, 1985. Washington: U.S. G.P.O., 1986. United States. Congress. House. Select Committee on Narcotics Abuse and Control. International narcotics control: provisions of the Anti-Drug Abuse Act of 1986 and budget decisionmaking: hearing before the Select Committee on Narcotics Abuse and Control, House of Representatives, One... Washington: U.S. G.P.O., 1987. United States. Congress. House. Select Committee on Narcotics Abuse and Control. International narcotics control study missions to Latin America and Jamaica (August 6-21, 1983), Hawaii, Hong Kong, Thailand, Burma, Pakistan, Turkey, and Italy (January 4-22, 1984): a report of the Select Committee... Washington: U.S. G.P.O., 1984. United States. Congress. House. Select Committee on Narcotics Abuse and Control. Legalization of illicit drugs: (a review of recent hearings): report of the Select Committee on Narcotics Abuse and Control, One Hundred First Congress, first session, together with additional views. Washington: U.S. G.P.O., 1989). United States. Congress. House. Select Committee on Narcotics Abuse and Control. Review of LEAA narcotics funding: hearing before the Select Committee on Narcotics Abuse and Control, House of Representatives, Ninety-fifth Congress, first session, (June 8, 1977. Washington: U.S. G.P.O., 1977. United States. Congress. House. Select Committee on Narcotics Abuse and Control. International study missions: summary report 1984 / Select Committee on Narcotics Abuse and Control of the U.S. House of Representatives. Washington, D.C.: U.S. G.P.O., 1984. United States. Congress. House. Select Committee on Narcotics Abuse and Control. International narcotics control study missions to Latin America and Jamaica (August 6-21, 1983), Hawaii, Hong Kong, Thailand, Burma, Pakistan, Turkey, and Italy (January 4-22, 1984): a report of the Select Committee... Washington: U.S. G.P.O., 1984. United States. Congress. House. Select Committee on Narcotics Abuse and Control. Latin American study missions concerning international narcotics problems (August 3-19, 1985): a report of the Select Committee on Narcotics Abuse and Control, Ninety-ninth Congress, second session. Washington: U.S. G.P.O., 1986. United States. Congress. House. Select Committee on Narcotics Abuse and Control. International narcotics control: hearing before the Select Committee on Narcotics Abuse and Control, House of Representatives, Ninety-eighth Congress, second session, (June 27, 1984. Washington: U.S. G.P.O., 1984 [i.e. 1985]. United States. Congress. House. Select Committee on Narcotics Abuse and Control. Drugs and Latin America: Economic and Political Impact and U.S. Policy Options. Proceedings of a seminar held by the Congressional Research Service, (April 26, 1989). Report of the House Select Committee on Narcotics Abuse and Control. SNAC-101-1-12. United States. Congress. House. Special Study Mission to Latin America and the Federal Republic of Germany. The world narcotics problem: the Latin American perspective: report, pursuant to H. Res. 267 ... Washington, U.S.G.P.O., 1973. United States. Congress. International Narcotics Control Act of 1989): conference report (to accompany H.R. 3611 [101st, 1st session: 1989)]). Washington, D.C.: U.S. G.P.O., 1989). House Report ; 101-383. United States. Congress. Senate. Committee on Agriculture, Nutrition, and Forestry. Subcommittee on Agricultural Research, Conservation, Forestry, and General Legislation. Status of American foreign food assistance programs: hearing before the Subcommittee on Agricultural Research, Conservation, Forestry, and General Legislation of the Committee on Agriculture, Nutrition, and Forestry,... Washington: U.S. G.P.O. , 1987. S. hrg. ; 100-47. United States. Congress. Senate. Committee on Appropriations. Subcommittee on Foreign Operations. International narcotics control: hearing before a subcommittee of the Committee on Appropriations, United States Senate, Ninety-ninth Congress, first session: special hearing: congressional witnesses, Department... Washington: U.S. G.P.O., 1985. United States. Congress. Senate. Committee on Appropriations. Subcommittee on District of Columbia. Followup hearings on District of Columbia appropriations for fiscal year 1984: hearings before a subcommittee of the Committee on Appropriations, United States Senate, Ninety-eighth Congress, first session. Washington: U.S. G.P.O., 1983. S. hrg. ; 98-534. United States. Congress. Senate. Committee on Foreign Relations. Foreign assistance legislation, fiscal year 1972. Hearings, Ninety-second Congress, first session, on S. 1656 ... and S. 1657 ... (June 10, and 14, 1971. Washington, U.S.G.P.O., 1971. United States. Congress. Senate. Committee on Foreign Relations. Subcommittee on East Asian and Pacific Affairs. Southeast Asian drug trade: hearing before the Subcommittee on East Asian and Pacific Affairs of the Committee on Foreign Relations, United States Senate, Ninety-seventh Congress, second session, on Southeast Asian... Washington: U.S. G.P.O., 1982. United States. Congress. Senate. Committee on Foreign Relations. International narcotics control: hearing before the Committee on Foreign Relations, United States Senate, Ninety-eighth Congress, first session on International Narcotics Control Program and drug trafficking in the... Washington: U.S. G.P.O., 1983. S. hrg. ; 98-598. United States. Congress. Senate. Committee on Foreign Relations. FY 1981 foreign assistance legislation: hearings before the Committee on Foreign Relations, United States Senate, Ninety-sixth Congress, second session, on S. 2423 ... S. 2422 ... S. 2588. Washington: U.S. Govt. Print. Off., 1980-. United States. Congress. Senate. Committee on Governmental Affairs. Permanent Subcommittee on Investigations. U.S. Government Anti-Narcotics Activities in the Andean Region of South America. Hearings before the Permanent Subcommittee on Investigations. Senate Governmental Affairs Committee. (September, 1989). 101- 311. United States. Congress. Senate. Committee on Governmental Affairs. Subcommittee on Federal Spending, Budget, and Accounting. Review of the Anti-Drug Abuse Act of 1986: joint hearing before the Subcommittee on Federal Spending, Budget, and Accounting of the Committee on Governmental Affairs, United States Senate and the Senate Caucus... Washington: U.S. G.P.O., 1988). S. hrg.; 100-525. United States. Congress. Senate. Committee on Governmental Affairs. Permanent Subcommittee on Investigations. International narcotics trafficking: hearings before the Permanent Subcommittee on Investigations of the Committee on Governmental Affairs, United States Senate, Ninety-seventh Congress, first session, (November... Washington, D.C.: U.S. G.P.O., 1981 [i.e. 1982]. United States. Congress. Senate. Committee on Human Resources. Subcommittee on Alcoholism and Drug Abuse. Drug abuse office, prevention, and treatment amendments of 1978: hearing before the Subcommittee on Alcoholism and Drug Abuse of the Committee on Human Resources, United States Senate, Ninety-fifth Congress,... Washington: U.S. G.P.O., 1978. United States. Congress. Senate. Committee on Human Resources. Nominations: hearing before the Committee on Human Resources, United States Senate, Ninety-fifth Congress, first session, on Peter G. Bourne, of the District of Colombia, to be Director, Office of Drug Abuse Policy... Washington: U.S. G.P.O., 1977. United States. Congress. Senate. Committee on Labor and Human Resources. Subcommittee on Children, Family, Drugs and Alcoholism. International narcotics control report: hearing before the Subcommittee on Children, Family, Drugs, and Alcoholism of the Committee on Labor and Human Resources, United States Senate, Ninety-ninth Congress, first... Washington: U.S. G.P.O., 1985. S. hrg. ; 99-74. United States. Congress. Senate. Committee on Labor and Public Welfare. Nominations. Hearing, Ninety-second Congress, second session, on Dr. Jerome H. Jaffe, of Virginia, to be director and Paul Louis Perito, of Massachusetts, to be deputy director of the Special Action Office for... Washington, U.S. G.P.O., 1972. United States. Congress. Senate. Committee on Labor and Public Welfare. Nomination. Hearing, Ninety-third Congress, first session, on Robert L. DuPont, of Maryland, to be Director of the Special Action Office for Drug Abuse Prevention. (June 4, 1973. Washington, U.S. G.P.O., 1973. United States. Department of Defense. Report to House and Senate Armed Services Committee, accompanying 20 (April 1989) letter from J.D.C. White, Office of National Drug Control Policy, to Les Aspin, Chairman, Committee on Armed Services, House of Representatives. United States. Department of Justice. Bureau of Justice Statistics. Drug law violaters, 1980-86: Federal offenses and offenders. Washington, D.C.: U.S. Department of Justice, Bureau of Justice Statistics, 1988). United States. Department of Justice. Drug Enforcement Administration. Training manual. 1st ed. , Feb. 1988). Washington, D.C.: U.S. Department of Justice, Drug Enforcement Administration, 1988). United States. Department of Justice. Drug Enforcement Administration. National Conference on the Control and Diversion of Controlled Substances. Committee report on license revocation & management control systems: presented at the National Conference on the Control and Diversion of Controlled Substances, San Antonio, Texas, 1987. Washington, D.C.: U.S. Department of Justice, Drug Enforcement Administration, 1988). United States. Department of Justice. Drug Enforcement Administartion. Intelligence collection and analytical methods. Washington: U.S. Department of Justice, Drug Enforcement Administration, 1987. United States. Department of Justice. Drug Enforcement Administration. The Illicit drug situation in the United States and Canada, 1984-1986. Washington, D.C.: Drug Enforcement Administration, 1987. United States. Department of Justice. Drug Enforcement Administration. National Conference on the Control and Diversion of Controlled Substances. Committee report on scheduling of controlled substances, precursors, chemicals and controlled substances analogs: presented at the National Conference on the Control and Diversion of Controlled Substances, San Antonio, Texas, 1987. Washington, D.C.: U.S. Department of Justice, Drug Enforcement Administration, 1988). United States. Department of Justice. Drug Enforcement Administration. Procedimentos de seguranca para o manuseio e a remocao de substancias qumicas apreendidas em laboratorios ilegais de cocaina no exterior. Washington, D.C.: Departamento de Justica dos Estados Unidos, Administraao para a Execuao das Leis Antitoxicas, 1987. United States. Department of Justice. Drug Enforcement Administration. Intelligence trends. Vol. 14, no. 3. Washington, D.C.: U.S. Dept. of Justice, Drug Enforcement Administration, 1987. United States. Department of Justice. Drug Enforcement Administration. Training manual. 1st ed., Feb. 1988). Washington, D.C.: U.S. Department of Justice, Drug Enforcement Administration, 1988). United States. Department of Justice. Drug Enforcement Administration. Procedimientos para el manejo y la eliminacion en condiciones de seguridad de productos quimicos decomisados en lugares de fabricacion ilicita de cocaina en el exterior. Washington, D.C.: Departamento de Justicia de los Estados Unidos, Administracion para la Ejecucion de las Leyes sobre Estupefacientes, 1987. United States. Department of Justice. Drug Enforcement Administration. Procedures for the safe handling and disposal of chemicals seized at foreign illicit cocaine sites. Washington, D. C.: U.S. Department of Justice, Drug Enforcement Administration, 1987. United States. Department of Justice. Drug Enforcement Administration. Committee report on model state programs: presented at the 2nd National Conference on the Control and Diversion of Controlled Substances. Tucson, Ariz.: U.S. Department of Justice, Drug Enforcement Administration, 1986. United States. Department of Justice. Drug Enforcement Administration. National Conference on the Control and Diversion of Controlled Substances. Conference report: 2nd National Conference on the Control and Diversion of Controlled Substances. Tucson, Ariz. Washington: U.S. Dept. of Justice, Drug Enforcement Administration, 1986. United States. Department of Justice. Le Programme de stupefiants d'INTERPOL. Washington, D. C.: U.S. Department of Justice: U.S. Department of Treasury, 1987. United States. Department of State. Bureau of International Narcotics Matters. International Narcotics Control Strategy Report. Washington: 1990). United States. Department of State. Bureau of International Narcotics Matters. International Narcotics Control Strategy Report. Washington: GPO, 1988). United States. Department of State. Bureau of International Narcotics Matters. International Narcotics Control Strategy Report. Washington: 1989). United States. Department of State. Bureau of International Narcotics Matters. International Narcotics Control Strategy Report. Washington: 1987. United States. Department of State. Bureau of Public Affairs. The International drug problem and U.S. foreign policy. Washington, D.C.: U.S. Department of State, Bureau of Public Affairs, Office of Public Communication, Editorial Division, 1988). United States. Department of State. Bureau of Public Affairs. International narcotics control update. Washington, D.C.: U.S. Dept. of State, Bureau of Public Affairs, 1989). United States. Department of State. Bureau of Public Affairs. International Narcotics Control. Washington, D.C.: Bureau of Public Affairs, Department of State, 1987. United States. Department of State. Bureau of Public Affairs. International narcotics control. Washington, D.C.: Bureau of Public Affairs, Department of State, 1988). (Gist, (June 1988). United States. Department of State. Bureau of Public Affairs. Narcotics in Latin America. Washington, D.C.: Bureau of Public Affairs, Department of State, 1987. United States. Department of State. Bureau of Public Affairs. International narcotics control update. Rev. Jan. 1990). Washington, D.C.: U.S. Dept. of State, Bureau of Public Affairs, 1990). United States. Department of State. The Drug problem: Americans arrested abroad. Washington, D.C.: Bureau of Public Affairs, Department of State, 1986, 1987, 1988). (Gist). United States. Department of State. Travel warning on drugs abroad. Washington, D. C.: U.S. Department of State, Bureau of Consular Affairs, 1987. (Department of State publication; 9558). United States. Department of the Interior. Wanted, your help in locating marijuana grown on public lands. Washington, D.C.: U.S. Department of the Interior, Bureau of Land Management, 1988). United States. Department of the Interior. Wanted: your help in locating marijuana grown on national forest lands. Milwaukee, Wis.: U.S. Department of Agriculture, Forest Service, Eastern Region, 1987. United States. Department of the Treasury. Bolivia. Latin American Reports (March 3, 1988), 8. United States. Department of the Treasury. Customs Service. Narcotic identification manual. Rev. 1988). Washington, D.C.: Department of the Treasury, U.S. Customs Service: U.S.G.P.O., 1988). United States. Department of the Treasury. Customs Service. Narcotic identification manual. Rev. 1988). Washington, D. C.: Department of the Treasury, U.S. Customs Service, 1988). United States. Department of the Treasury. Customs Service. Usted puede ayudar: denuncie el contrabando de estupefacientes al Servico de Aduanas de los Estados Unidos. Washington: Treasury, U.S. Customs Service, 1986. United States. Department of the Treasury. Customs Service. You can help!: report drug smuggling to U.S. Customs: 1 (800) BE ALERT. Washington, D.C.: Department of the Treasury, U.S. Customs Service, 1988). United States. Department of the Treasury. Customs Service. You can help!: join America's crusade against drug abuse. Washington, D.C.: U.S. Customs Service, Drug Awareness Program, 1987. (Customs publication ; no. 569). United States. Department of the Treasury. Customs Service. You can help!: report drug smuggling to U.S. Customs. Washington, D.C.: Treasury, U.S. Customs Service, 1986. United States. Department of the Treasury. Drug Enforcement Administration. Procedures for the safe handling and disposal of chemicals seized at foreign illicit cocaine sites. Washington, D.C.: U.S. Department of Justice, Drug Enforcement Administration, 1987. United States. Department of the Treasury. Internal Revenue Service. Drugs, money launderers, and banks. Washington, D.C.: Department of the Treasury, Internal Revenue Service, 1986. United States. Department of the Treasury. Traffic in Narcotic Drugs: Report of the Special Committee of Investigation Appointed (March 25, 1918, by the Secretary of the Treasury (Washington: GPO, 1919). United States. Departments of Justice and Treasury. El Programa INTERPOL de estupefacientes. Washington, D.C.: U.S. Department of Justice: U.S. Department of the Treasury, 1987. United States. Departments of Justice and Treasury. Le Programme de stupefiants d'INTERPOL. Washington, D.C.: U.S. Department of Justice: U.S. Department of Treasury, 1987. United States. Departments of Justice and Treasury. The INTERPOL drug program. Washington, D.C.: U.S. Department of Justice: U.S. Department of Treasury, 1987. United States. Drug abuse office and treatment act for 1972: P.L. 92-255 (S 2097) 86 Stat 65. Englewood, Colo.: Information Handling Services, 1974. United States. Drug Abuse Policy Office. Office of Policy Development, the White House. 1984 national strategy for prevention of drug abuse and drug trafficking: prepared pursuant to the Drug Abuse Office and Treatment Act of 1972. Washington, D.C.: Drug Abuse Policy Office, Office of Policy Development, the White House, 1984. United States. General Accounting Office. DOD Counter-Drug Activities: GAO Review of DoD's Compliance with FY 1989) Dod Authorization Act. Testimony, (October 17, 1989). GAO-T-NSIAD-90-03. United States. General Accounting Office. Drug Control: U.S.-Supported Efforts in Colombia and Bolivia. NSIAD-89- 24. (November, 1988). United States. General Accounting Office. Drug Control: Enforcement Efforts in Burma Are Not Effective. NSIAD-89- 197. (September, 1989). United States. General Accounting Office. Drug Control: Issues Surrounding Increased Use of the Military in Drug Interdiction. NSIAD-88-156. (April, 1988). United States. General Accounting Office. Drug control: U.S. supported efforts in Burma, Pakistan, and Thailand: report to the Congress. Washington, D. C.: The Office, 1988). United States. General Accounting Office. Drug interdiction: Operation Autumn Harvest: a National Guard-Customs anti-smuggling effort: report to Congressional requesters. Washington, D.C.: U.S. General Accounting Office, 1988). United States. General Accounting Office. Drug Interdiction: Customs Service's Procurement of the P-38 Airborne Early Warning Aircraft. NSIAD-89-139. (June, 1989). United States. General Accounting Office. Drug Law Enforcement: Military Assistance for Drug Enforcement Agencies. NSIAD-89-45. (November, 1988). United States. General Accounting Office. Drug Smuggling: Capabilities for Interdicting Private Aircraft are Limited and Costly. (GAO/GGD-89-93). 9 (June 1989). Washington, DC: GAO, 1989). United States. General Accounting Office. Federal Drug-Related Efforts: Budget Information by Strategy. GGD-89-96FS. (June, 1989). United States. General Accounting Office. Review of selected narcotics enforcement research and development projects: report / of the Comptroller General of the United States. Washington: General Accounting Office, 1977. United States. House. Committee on Agriculture. Subcommittee on Forests, Family Farms, and Energy. Review of the drug law enforcement activities of the Forest Service; and the Omnibus Public Lands Act of 1987: hearing before the Subcommittee on Forests, Family Farms, and Energy of the Committee on Agriculture, House of Representatives, One Hundredth Congress, second session, on H. R. 3680, (July 12,1988). Washington: U.S. G. P. O., 1988). United States. House. Committee on Banking, Finance, and Urban Affairs. Subcommittee on International Development Institutions and Finance. Decertification resolutions: hearing before the Subcommittee on International Development Institutions and Finance of the Committee on Banking, Finance, and Urban Affairs, House of Representatives, One-hundredth Congress, second session, (May 5, 1988). Washington: U.S. G.P.O., 1988). United States. House. Committee on Banking, Finance, and Urban Affairs. Subcommittee on Financial Institutions Supervision, Regulation and Insurance. Tax evasion, drug trafficking, and money laundering as they involve financial institutions: hearings before the Subcommittee on Financial Institutions Supervision, Regulation, and Insurance of the Committee on Banking, Finance, and Urban Affairs, House of Representatives, Ninety-ninth Congress, second session, on H.R. 1367 ... H.R. 1474 ... H.R. 1945 ... H.R. 2785 ... H.R. 3892 ... H.R.4280 ... H.R. 4573 ... (April 16, 17, 23; and (May 14, 1986. Washington: U.S.G.P.O., 1986. United States. House. Committee on Foreign Affairs. Developments in Latin American narcotics control, (November 1985: hearing before the Committee on Foreign Affairs, House of Representatives, Ninety-ninth Congress, first session, (November 12, 1985. Washington: U.S. G.P.O., 1986. United States. House. Committee on Foreign Affairs. Disapproving the 1988) certification by the President with respect to Peru under section 481(h) of the Foreign Assistance Act of 1961: report together with dissenting views (to accompany H.J. Res. 497 which ... was referred jointly to the Committee on Foreign Affairs and the Committee on Banking, Finance, and Urban Affairs) (including cost estimate of the Congressional Budget Office). Washington, D.C.: U.S. G.P.O., 1988). (Rept. / 100th Congress, 2d session, House of Representatives. United States. House. Committee on Foreign Affairs. Disapproving the 1988) certification by the President with respect to Bolivia under section 481(h) of the Foreign Assistance Act of 1961: report together with dissenting views (to accompany H.J. Res. 493 which ... was referred jointly to the Committee on Foreign Affairs and the Committee on Banking, Finance, and Urban Affairs) (including cost estimate of the Congressional Budget Office). Washington, D.C.: U.S. G.P.O., 1988). (Rept. / 100th Congress, 2d session, House of Representatives ;100-61). United States. House. Committee on Foreign Affairs. European Integration, the United States, and Narcotics Control: Rhetoric and Reality. Report of a staff study mission to Great Britain, Italy, Portugal, Spain, and Kenya, (January 8-26, 1990), to the House Foreign Affairs Committee. (March, 1990). United States. House. Committee on Foreign Affairs. International Narcotics Control Act of 1986: report of the Committee on Foreign Affairs (including cost estimate of the Congressional Budget Office) on H. R. 5352 to combat international narcotics trafficking. Washington:, 1986. (Report / 99th Congress, 2d session, House of Representatives ; 99-798). United States. House. Committee on Foreign Affairs. International Narcotics Control Act of 1988): report together with additional views (to accompany H.R. 4841 which ... was referred jointly to the Committee on Foreign Affairs, the Committee on Banking, Finance, and Urban Affairs, and the Committee on Ways and Means) (including cost estimate of the Congressional Budget Office). Washington, D.C.: U.S. G.P.O., 1988). (Rept. / 100th Congress, 2d session, House of Representatives). United States. House. Committee on Foreign Affairs. Issues in United States-Panamanian antinarcotics control: hearing before the Committee on Foreign Affairs, House of Representatives, Ninety-ninth Congress, second session, (June 19, 1986. Washington: U.S. G.P.O.: 1986. United States. House. Committee on Foreign Affairs. Legislation on international narcotics control: markup before the Committee on Foreign Affairs, House of Representatives, One Hundredth Congress, second session on H.R. 4841, (June 15, 1988). Washington: U.S G.P.O., 1988). United States. House. Committee on Foreign Affairs. Legislation on international narcotics control: markup before the Committee on Foreign Affairs, House of Representatives, Ninety-ninth Congress, second session, on H.R. 5352, (August 6, 1986. Washington: U.S. G.P.O., 1986. United States. House. Committee on Foreign Affairs. Narcotics issues in the Bahamas and the Caribbean: hearing before the Committee on Foreign Affairs, House of Representatives, One hundredth Congress, first session, (May 12, 1987. Washington: U.S. G.P.O., 1987. United States. House. Committee on Foreign Affairs. Narcotics review in Central America: hearing before the Committee on Foreign Affairs, House of Representatives, One Hundredth Congress, second session, (March 10, 1988). Washington: U.S. G. P. O., 1988). United States. House. Committee on Foreign Affairs. Narcotics review in the Caribbean: hearing before the Committee on Foreign Affairs, House of Representatives, One Hundredth Congress, second session, (March 9, 1988). Washington: U.S. G.P.O., 1988). United States. House. Committee on Foreign Affairs. Narcotics review in southeast/southwest Asia, the Middle East, and Africa: hearing before the Committee on Foreign Affairs, House of Representatives, One Hundredth Congress, second session, (March 15, 1988). Washington: U.S. G. P. O., 1988). United States. House. Committee on Foreign Affairs. Narcotics review in South America: hearing before the Committee on Foreign Affairs, House of Representatives, One Hundredth Congress, second session, (March 17 and 22, 1988). Washington: U.S. G.P.O., 1988). United States. House. Committee on Foreign Affairs. Nicaraguan government involvement in narcotics trafficking: hearing before the Committee on Foreign Affairs, House of Representatives, Ninety-ninth Congress, second session, (March 11, 1986. Washington: U.S. G.P.O., 1986. United States. House. Committee on Foreign Affairs. Recent developments in Colombia: hearing before the Committee on Foreign Affairs, House of Representatives, One Hundredth Congress, second session, (January 27, 1988). Washington: U.S. G.P.O., 1988). United States. House. Committee on Foreign Affairs. Review of the international narcotics control strategy report: mid-year update: hearing before the Committee on Foreign Affairs, House of Representatives, One hundredth Congress, first session, (October 7, 1987. Washington: U.S. G.P.O., 1987. United States. House. Committee on Foreign Affairs. Review of Latin American narcotics control issues: hearing before the Committee on Foreign Affairs, House of Representatives, One hundredth Congress, first session, (March 18, 1987. Washington: U.S. G.P.O., 1987. United States. House. Committee on Foreign Affairs. Review of United States narcotics control efforts in the Middle East and South Asia: hearings before the Committee on Foreign Affairs, House of Representatives, Ninety-ninth Congress, second session, (May 13 and (May 22, 1986. Washington: U.S. G.P.O., 1986. United States. House. Committee on Foreign Affairs. Status report on GAO's worldwide review of narcotics control programs: hearing before the Committee on Foreign Affairs, House of Representatives, One Hundredth Congress, first session, (July 29, 1987. Washington: U.S. G.P.O., 1987. United States. House. Committee on Foreign Affairs. Subcommittee on Western Hemisphere Affairs. Presidential certifications regarding international narcotics control: hearing and markup before the Subcommittee on Western Hemisphere Affairs of the Committee on Foreign Affairs, House of Representatives, One Hundredth Congress, second session on H. R. 4162, H. J. Res. 491, 493, 495, 497, and 499, (March 29 and (April 13, 1988). Washington: U.S. G. P. O., 1988). United States. House. Committee on Foreign Affairs. The role of the U.S. military in narcotics control overseas: hearing before the Committee on Foreign Affairs, House of Representatives, Ninety-ninth Congress, second session, (August 5, 1986. Washington: U.S. G. P. O., 1986. United States. House. Committee on Foreign Affairs. The role of intelligence in international narcotics control: hearing before the Committee on Foreign Affairs, House of Representatives, One hundredth Congress, first session, (May 7, 1987. Washington: U.S. G.P.O., 1987. United States. House. Committee on Foreign Affairs. The worldwide drug situation and international narcotics control programs: hearing before the Committee on Foreign Affairs, House of Representatives, One Hundredth Congress, first session, (March 5, 1987. Washington: U.S. G.P.O., 1987. United States. House. Committee on Foreign Affairs. U.S. narcotics control efforts in the Caribbean: report of a staff study mission to the Caribbean, (August 23-(September 6, 1987 to the Committee on Foreign Affairs, U.S. House of Representatives. Washington: U.S. G.P.O., 1987. 100th Congress, 1st session. United States. House. Committee on Foreign Affairs. Worldwide narcotics review of the 1988) international narcotics control strategy report: hearing before the Committee on Foreign Affairs, House of Representatives, One Hundredth Congress, second session, (March 3, 1988). Washington: U.S. G.P.O., 1988). United States. House. Committee on Government Operations. Reorganization to combat drug traffic and drug abuse: report (to accompany H. R. 5266) (including cost estimate of the Congressional Budget Office) . Washington, D.C.: U.S. G.P.O., 1986. (Report / 99th Congress, 2d session, House of Representatives; 99-786). United States. House. Committee on Government Operations. Agriculture Subcommittee. National narcotics law enforcement strategy: hearing before a subcommittee of the Committee on Government Operations, House of Representatives, One Hundredth Congress, second session, (March 31, 1988). Washington: U.S. G. P. O., 1988). United States. House. Committee on Government Operations. Clandestine manufacturing of dangerous drugs: thirty-third report / by the Committee on Government Operations. Washington: U.S. G.P.O., 1986. House report / 99th Congress, 2d session ;99-570). United States. House. Committee on Government Operations. Coast Guard drug interdiction air operations: the case of the faltering Falcon jet: forty-seventh report / by the Committee on Government Operations together with dissenting and additional views. Washington: U.S. G.P.O., 1988). (House report / 100th Congress, 2d session ; 100-628). United States. House. Committee on Government Operations. Going to pot: marijuana cultivation on public lands and the federal response: twenty-seventh report / by the Committee on Government Operations together with additional views. Washington: U.S. G.P.O., 1987. (House report / 100th Congress, 1st session. United States. House. Committee on Government Operations. Government Information, Justice, and Agriculture Subcommittee. Initiatives in drug interdiction: hearings before a subcommittee of the Committee on Government Operations, House of Representatives, Ninety-ninth Congress, first session . . . . Washington: U.S. G.P.O., 1986. Pt. I. (February 6, 7, (April 16, (May 14, and (September 9, 1986--Pt. 2. United States. House. Committee on Government Operations. Government Information, Justice, and Agriculture Subcommittee. Oversight of the Anti-Drug Abuse Act of 1986: hearings before a subcommittee of the Committee on Government Operations, House of Representatives, One Hundredth Congress, second session, (June 1, 2, and 3, 1988). Washington: U.S.G.P.O., 1988). United States. House. Committee on Government Operations. Government Information, Justice, and Agriculture Subcommittee. Federal antidrug abuse policies, 1987: hearings before a subcommittee of the Committee on Government Operations, House of Representatives, One Hundredth Congress, first session, (May 8, 21, (September 10, (October 28, and December 17, 1987. Washington: U.S. G.P.O., 1988). United States. House. Committee on Government Operations. Government Information, Justice, and Agriculture Subcommittee. The clandestine manufacture of illicit drugs: hearings before a subcommittee of the Committee on Government Operations, House of Representatives, Ninety-ninth Congress, first session, (September 24, and December 5, 1985. Washington: U.S. G.P.O., 1986. United States. House. Committee on Government Operations. Just saying no is not enough: HUD's inadequate response to the drug crisis in public housing: forty-eighth report / by the Committee on Government Operations. Washington: U.S. G.P.O., 1988). (House report / 100th Congress, 2d session ; 100-702). United States. House. Committee on Government Operations. Operation Alliance: drug interdiction on the Southwest border: forty-fourth report / by the Committee on Government Operations. Washington: U.S. G.P.O.,1988). (House report / 100th Congress, 2d session ; 100-562). United States. House. Committee on Government Operations. The National Drug Policy Board: a failure in the war on drugs: twelfth report / by the Committee on Government Operations, together with additional views. Washington: U.S. G.P.O., 1987. (House report / 100th Congress, 1st session ; 100-184). United States. House. Committee on Government Operations. The National Drug Policy Board: fighting the war without a battle plan: sixty-eighth report / by the Committee on Government Operations together with additional views. Washington: U.S. G.P.O., 1988). (House report / 100th Congress, 2d session ; 100-1063). United States. House. Committee on Merchant Marine and Fisheries. Subcommittee on Coast Guard and Navigation. Zero tolerance drug Policy and confiscation of property: hearing before the Subcommittee on Coast Guard and Navigation of the Committee on Merchant Marine and Fisheries, House of Representatives, One Hundredth Congress, second session... (May 26, 1988). Washington: U.S. G.P.O., 1988). United States. House. Committee on Merchant Marine and Fisheries. Subcommittee on Coast Guard and Navigation. Coast Guard drug activities: hearing before the Subcommittee on Coast Guard and Navigation of the Committee on Merchant Marine and Fisheries, House of Representatives, One Hundredth Congress, second session, on H.R. 4230, H.R.4446, H.R. 4608, and H.R. 4658, bills to enforce drug laws, to curtail the flow of drugs into the United States, and promote a drug free America, (June 15,1988). Washington: U.S. G.P.O., 1988). United States. House. Committee on Merchant Marine and Fisheries. Subcommittee on Panama Canal/Outer Continental Shelf. Update on Panama situation: hearing before the Subcommittee on Panama Canal/Outer Continental Shelf of the Committee on Merchant Marine and Fisheries, House of Representatives, One Hundredth Congress, second session . . . (March 10 and (April 20, 1988). Washington: U.S. G.P.O., 1988). United States. House. Committee on Merchant Marine and Fisheries. Subcommittee on Coast Guard and Navigation. Coast Guard oversight: hearings before the Subcommittee on Coast Guard and Navigation of the Committee on Merchant Marine and Fisheries, House of Representatives, Ninety-ninth Congress, first session. Washington: U.S.G.P.O., 1986. United States. House. Committee on Merchant Marine and Fisheries. Coast Guard Drug Interdiction and Law Enforcement Act of 1986: report (to accompany H.R. 5406) (including cost estimate of the Congressional Budget Office). Washington, D.C.: U.S. G.P.O., 1986. (Rept. / 99th Congress, 2d session, House of Representatives ;99-973). United States. House. Committee on Merchant Marine and Fisheries. Coast Guard Drug Enforcement Act of 1988): report together with dissenting views (to accompany H. R. 4658) (including cost estimate of the Congressional Budget Office) . Washington, D.C.: U.S. G.P.O., 1988). (Rept. / 100th Congress, 2d session, House of Representatives ;100-814). United States. House. Committee on Merchant Marine and Fisheries. Subcommittee on Coast Guard and Navigation. Coast Guard drug interdiction: hearings before the Subcommittee on Coast Guard and Navigation of the Committee on Merchant Marine and Fisheries, House of Representatives, Ninety-fifth Congress, second session, on H.R. 10371 and H.R. 10698 .... Washington: U.S. Govt. Print. Off., 1978. United States. House. Committee on Public Works and Transportation. FAA's role in aviation drug enforcement: hearing before the Committee on Public Works and Transportation, House of Representatives, One Hundredth Congress, second session, (June 8, 1988). Washington: U.S. G.P.O., 1988). United States. House. Committee on Public Works and Transportation. Federal Aviation Administration Drug Enforcement Assistance Act of 1988): report (to accompany H.R. 4844) (including cost estimate of the Congressional Budget Office). Washington, D.C.: U.S. G.P.O., 1988). (Report / 100th Congress, 2d session, House of Representatives ; 100-891) Caption title.: 88-576-P. (September 7, 1988). United States. House. Committee on Rules. Providing for the consideration of H. R. 5484: report (to accompany H. Res. 541) . Washington, D.C.: U.S. G.P.O., 1986. (Report / 99th Congress, 2d session, House of Representatives ; 99-810). United States. House. Committee on Rules. Providing for the establishment of the Select Committee on Hunger, the Select Committee on Children, Youth, and Families, and the Select Committee on Narcotics Abuse and Control: report together with minority views (to accompany H. R. 26). Washington, D.C.: U.S. G.P.O., 1987. (Report / 100th Congress, 1st session, House of Representatives ; 100-1). United States. House. Committee on Small Business. Subcommittee on Regulation and Business Opportunities. Impact of clandestine drug laboratories on small business: hearing before the Subcommittee on Regulation and Business Opportunities of the Committee on Small Business, House of Representatives, One Hundredth Congress, second session, Eugene, OR, (May 13, 1988). Washington: U.S. G.P.O., 1988). United States. House. Committee on the District of Columbia. Subcommittee on Fiscal Affairs and Health. National capital area--drug trafficking: joint oversight hearing before the Subcommittee on Fiscal Affairs and Health of the Committee on the District of Columbia and the Select Committee on Narcotics Abuse and Control, House of Representatives, One Hundredth Congress, second session on interstate drug trafficking in the Washington Metropolitan Area, (April 20, 1988). Washington: U.S. G.P.O., 1988). United States. House. Committee on the District of Columbia. Subcommittee on Judiciary and Education. Drug problem in schools and colleges: hearing before the Subcommittee on Judiciary and Education of the Committee on the District of Columbia, House of Representatives, Ninety-ninth Congress, second session . . . (September 23, 1986. Washington: U.S. G. P. O., 1987. United States. House. Committee on the Judiciary. Designer Drug Enforcement Act of 1986: report (to accompany H. R. 5246 . . . was referred jointly to the Committee on the Judiciary and the Committee on Energy and Commerce) (including cost estimate of the Congressional Budget Office) . Washington, D.C.: U.S. G.P.O., 1986. (Rept. / 99th Congress, 2d session, House of Representatives ;99-848, pt. 1). United States. House. Committee on the Judiciary. Drug Enforcement Enhancement Act of 1986: report (to accompany H. R. 5393) (including cost estimate of the Congressional Budget Office) . Washington, D.C.: U.S. G.P.O., 1986. (Report / 99th Congress, 2d session, House of Representatives. United States. House. Committee on the Judiciary. Federal Firearms Law Reform Act of 1986: report together with additional views (to accompany H. R. 4332) (including cost estimate of the Congressional Budget Office) . Washington, D.C.: U.S. G.P.O., 1986. (Report / 99th Congress, 2d session, House of Representatives ; 99-495). United States. House. Committee on the Judiciary. Narcotics Penalties and Enforcement Act of 1986: report together with additional views (to accompany H.R. 5394 ... referred jointly to the Committees on the Judiciary and Energy and Commerce) (including cost estimate of the Congressional Budget Office). Washington, D.C.: U.S. G.P.O., 1986. (Rept. / 99th Congress, 2d session, House of Representatives ; 99-845, pt. 1). United States. House. Committee on the Judiciary. Subcommittee on Crime. White House Conference on Narcotics Abuse and Control: hearing before the Subcommittee on Crime of the Committee on the Judiciary, House of Representatives, Ninety-ninth Congress, second session, on H. J. Res. 631 . . . (July 24, 1986. Washington: U.S. G. P. O., 1987. United States. House. Committee on the Judiciary. Subcommittee on Crime. Designer drugs: hearing before the Subcommittee on Crime of the Committee on the Judiciary, House of Representatives, Ninety-ninth Congress, first session,on H.R. 214, H.R. 2977, H.R. 3936, and S. 1437, (May 1, 1986. Washington: U.S.G.P.O., 1986. United States. House. Committee on the Judiciary. Subcommittee on Crime. Drug Enforcement Administration reauthorization for fiscal year 1986: hearing before the Subcommittee on Crime of the Committee on the Judiciary, House of Representatives, Ninety-ninth Congress, first session ... (May 1, 1985. Washington: U.S. G.P.O., 1986. United States. House. Committee on the Judiciary. Subcommittee on Crime. Armed career criminal legislation: hearing before the Subcommittee on Crime of the Committee on the Judiciary, House of Representatives, Ninety-ninth Congress, second session, on H.R. 4639 and H.R. 4768 ... (May 21, 1986. Washington: U.S. G.P.O., 1987. United States. House. Committee on the Judiciary. Subcommittee on Crime. Military cooperation with civilian law enforcement: hearing before the Subcommittee on Crime of the Committee on the Judiciary, House of Representatives, Ninety-ninth Congress, first session ... (April 24, 1985. Washington: U.S. G.P.O., 1986. United States. House. Committee on the Judiciary. Subcommittee on Crime. Drug enforcement: hearing before the Subcommittee on Crime of the Committee on the Judiciary, House of Representatives, Ninety-ninth Congress, second session, on H.R. 526 and related bills ... (August 7, 1986. Washington: U.S.G.P.O., 1986. United States. House. Committee on the District of Columbia. Subcommittee on Judiciary and Education. Drug problem in schools and colleges: hearing before the Subcommittee on Judiciary and Education of the Committee on the District of Columbia, House of Representatives, Ninety-ninth Congress, second session ... (September 23, 1986. Washington: U.S. G.P.O., 1987. United States. House. Committee on the Judiciary. Subcommittee on Crime. Drug Enforcement Administration reauthorization for fiscal year 1986: hearing before the Subcommittee on Crime of the Committee on the Judiciary, House of Representatives, Ninety-ninth Congress, first session . . . (May 1, 1985. Washington: U.S. G.P.O., 1986. United States. House. Committee on the Judiciary. Subcommittee on Crime. State and local law enforcement assistance provisions of the Anti-Drug Abuse Act of 1986: hearing before the Subcommittee on Crime of the Committee on the Judiciary, House of Representatives, One hundredth Congress, first session, on H.R. 1411 ... (April 1, 1987. Washington: U.S. G.P.O., 1987. United States. House. Committee on the Judiciary. Subcommittee on Crime. Forfeiture portions of the Comprehensive Crime Bill and the Anti-Drug Abuse Act of 1986: hearing before the Subcommittee on Crime of the Committee on the Judiciary, House of Representatives, One Hundredth Congress, first session ...(March 9, 1987. Washington: U.S. G.P.O., 1988). United States. House. Committee on the Judiciary. White House Conference on Drug Abuse and Control Resolution of 1986: report (to accompany H.J. Res. 631 ... was referred jointly to the Committee on the Judiciary, the Committee on Foreign Affairs, and the Committee on Energy and Commerce) (including cost estimate of the Congressional Budget Office). Washington, D.C.: U.S. G.P.O., 1986. (Rept. / 99th Congress, 2d session, House of Representatives ;99-846, pt. 1). United States. House. Committee on Ways and Means. International Drug Traffic Enforcement Act: report together with dissenting views (to accompany H.R. 5410) (including cost estimate of the Congressional Budget Office). Washington, D.C.: U.S. G.P.O., 1986. (Report / 99th Congress, 2d session, House of Representatives. United States. House. Committee on Ways and Means. Subcommittee on Trade. International Drug Enforcement Act: hearing before the Subcommittee on Trade of the Committee on Ways and Means, House of Representatives, Ninety-ninth Congress, second session on H. R. 5310 . . . (August 5, 1986. Washington: U.S. G.P.O., 1987. United States. House. Judiciary Committee. Military Cooperation with Civilian Law Enforcement Officials: hearing before Subcommittee on Crime, (July 23, 1983. Serial No. 141. United States. House. Select Committee on Narcotics Abuse and Control. Drug trafficking and abuse along the southwest border (El Paso): hearing before the Select Committee on Narcotics Abuse and Control, House of Representatives, Ninety-ninth Congress, second session, (January 13, 1986. Washington: U.S. G.P.O., 1986. United States. House. Select Committee on Narcotics Abuse and Control. Drug abuse and drug trafficking in New England: a report of the Select Committee on Narcotics Abuse and Control, Ninety-ninth Congress, second session. Washington: U.S. G.P.O., 1986. Committee print. 99th Congress, 2d session. United States. House. Select Committee on Narcotics Abuse and Control. Study mission to Korea, Thailand, Burma, Singapore, Malaysia, Indonesia, and Hawaii (January 14-25, 1988): report of the Select Committee on Narcotics Abuse and Control, One Hundredth Congress, second session. Washington: U.S. G.P.O., 1988). 100th Congress, 2d session. House of Representatives. United States. House. Select Committee on Narcotics Abuse and Control. Drug interdiction: hearing before the Select Committee on Narcotics Abuse and Control, House of Representatives, One hundredth Congress, first session, (April 30, 1987. Washington: U.S. G. P. O., 1987. United States. House. Select Committee on Narcotics Abuse and Control. Drug trafficking and abuse along the southwest border (San Diego): hearing before the Select Committee on Narcotics Abuse and Control, House of Representatives, Ninety-ninth Congress, second session, (January 16, 1986. Washington: U.S. G.P.O., 1986. United States. House. Select Committee on Narcotics Abuse and Control. Drug abuse treatment and prevention provisions of the Anti-Drug Abuse Act of 1986: hearing before the Select Committee on Narcotics Abuse and Control, House of Representatives, One hundredth Congress, first session, (March 11, 1987. Washington: U.S. G.P.O., 1987. United States. House. Select Committee on Narcotics Abuse and Control. Issues relating to drug trafficking in the New Jersey area: hearing before the Select Committee on Narcotics Abuse and Control, House of Representatives, Ninety-ninth Congress, second session, Friday, (April 11, 1986. Washington: U.S.G.P.O., 1987. United States. House. Select Committee on Narcotics Abuse and Control. Drug abuse prevention in America's schools: hearing before the Select Committee on Narcotics Abuse and Control, House of Representatives, One hundredth Congress, first session, Tuesday, (June 9, 1987. Washington: U.S. G.P.O., 1987. United States. House. Select Committee on Narcotics Abuse and Control. Drug trafficking and abuse along the southwest border (El Paso): hearing before the Select Committee on Narcotics Abuse and Control, House of Representatives, Ninety-ninth Congress, second session, (January 13, 1986. Washington: U.S. G.P.O., 1986. United States. House. Select Committee on Narcotics Abuse and Control. Narcotics control in Mexico: hearing before the Select Committee on Narcotics Abuse and Control, House of Representatives, One Hundredth Congress, first session, (August 5, 1987. Washington: U.S. G.P.O., 1988). United States. House. Select Committee on Narcotics Abuse and Control. Strategy report of New York City Narcotics Control Task Force: report of the Select Committee on Narcotics Abuse and Control, One hundredth Congress, first session. Washington: U.S. G.P.O., 1987. 100th Congress, 1st session. House of Representatives. United States. House. Select Committee on Narcotics Abuse and Control. Sports and drug abuse prevention: hearing before the Select Committee on Narcotics Abuse and Control, House of Representatives, One Hundredth Congress, first session, (September 10, 1987. Washington: U.S. G.P.O., 1988). United States. House. Select Committee on Narcotics Abuse and Control. Panama: hearing before the Select Committee on Narcotics Abuse and Control, House of Representatives, Ninety-ninth Congress, second session, (June 19, 1986. Washington: U.S. G. P. O., 1987. United States. House. Select Committee on Narcotics Abuse and Control. Southwest border hearings: El Paso, Texas--Tucson, Arizona--San Diego, California and Mexico trip report: Nogales--Mexico City--Culiac n (January 12-19, 1986): a report of the Select Committee on Narcotics Abuse and Control, Ninety-ninth Congress, second session. Washington: U.S. G.P.O., 1986. United States. House. Select Committee on Narcotics Abuse and Control. Drug interdiction: hearing before the Select Committee on Narcotics Abuse and Control, House of Representatives, One hundredth Congress, first session, (April 30, 1987. Washington: U.S. G.P.O., 1987. United States. House. Select Committee on Narcotics Abuse and Control. Trafficking and abuse of crack in New York City: hearing before the Select Committee on Narcotics Abuse and Control, House of Representatives, Ninety-ninth Congress, second session, (July 18, 1986. Washington: U.S. G.P.O., United States. House. Select Committee on Narcotics Abuse and Control. The crack cocaine crisis: joint hearing before the Select Committee on Narcotics Abuse and Control, House of Representatives and the Select Committee on Children, Youth, and Families, House of Representatives, Ninety-ninth Congress, second session, Tuesday, (July 15, 1986. Washington: U.S. G.P.O.,, 1987. United States. House. Select Committee on Narcotics Abuse and Control. Dialog [Dialogue] with the Andean Parliament: executive session of the Select Committee on Narcotics Abuse and Control, House of Representatives, One Hundredth Congress, second session, (June 21, 1988). Washington: U.S. G.P.O., , 1988). United States. House. Select Committee on Narcotics Abuse and Control. Drug abuse education: hearing before the Select Committee on Narcotics Abuse and Control, House of Representatives, Ninety-ninth Congress, second session. Washington: U.S. G.P.O., 1987. (May 20, 1986--Pt. 1. (May 21, 1986--Pt. 2. United States. House. Select Committee on Narcotics Abuse and Control. Drug abuse and drug trafficking along the Southwest border (Tucson): hearing before the Select Committee on Narcotics Abuse and Control, House of Representatives, Ninety-ninth Congress, second session, (January 14, 1986. Washington: U.S. G. P. O., 1986. United States. House. Select Committee on Narcotics Abuse and Control. Implementation of provisions of the Anti-Drug Abuse Act of 1986: hearing before the Select Committee on Narcotics Abuse and Control, House of Representatives, One hundredth Congress, first session, (February 26, 1987. Washington: U.S. G.P.O., 1987. United States. House. Select Committee on Narcotics Abuse and Control. National Drug Policy Board strategy plans: hearing before the Select Committee on Narcotics Abuse and Control, House of Representatives, One Hundredth Congress, (April 14, 1988). Washington: U.S. G. P. O., 1988). United States. House. Select Committee on Narcotics Abuse and Control. U.S. foreign Policy and international narcotics control--Part II: hearing before the Select Committee on Narcotics Abuse and Control, House of Representatives, One Hundredth Congress, second session, (March 29, 1988). Washington: U.S. G. P. O., 1988). United States. House. Select Committee on Narcotics Abuse and Control. Narcotics trafficking and abuse in the Los Angeles area: hearing before the Select Committee on Narcotics Abuse and Control, House of Representatives, Ninety-ninth Congress, second session, (October 31, 1986. Washington: U.S.G.P.O., 1987. United States. House. Select Committee on Narcotics Abuse and Control. Drug abuse prevention in America's schools: hearing before the Select Committee on Narcotics Abuse and Control, House of Representatives, One Hundredth Congress, first session, Tuesday, (June 9, 1987. Washington: U.S.G.P.O., 1987. United States. House. Select Committee on Narcotics Abuse and Control. The federal war on drugs; past, present, and future: hearing before the Select Committee on Narcotics Abuse and Control, House of Representatives,Ninety-ninth Congress, second session, (October 3, 1986. Washington: U.S.G.P.O., 1987. United States. House. Select Committee on Narcotics Abuse and Control. Cocaine abuse and the federal response: hearing before the Select Committee on Narcotics Abuse and Control, House of Representatives, Ninety-ninth Congress,first session, Tuesday, (July 16, 1985. Washington: U.S. G.P.O., 1986. United States. House. Select Committee on Narcotics Abuse and Control. International narcotics control: provisions of the Anti-Drug Abuse Act of 1986 and budget decision making: hearing before the Select Committee on Narcotics Abuse and Control, House of Representatives, One hundredth Congress, first session, (March 25, 1987. Washington: U.S. G.P.O., 1987. United States. House. Select Committee on Narcotics Abuse and Control. Heroin and cocaine trafficking and the relationship between intravenous drug use and AIDS (New York): hearing before the Select Committee on Narcotics Abuse and Control, House of Representatives, Ninety-ninth Congress, first session, (November 26, 1985. Washington: U.S. G.P.O., 1986. United States. House. Select Committee on Narcotics Abuse and Control. Drug abuse and drug trafficking in Chicago: hearings before the Select Committee on Narcotics Abuse and Control, House of Representatives, Ninety-ninth Congress, first session, (May 31-(June 1, 1985. Washington: U.S. G.P.O., 1986. United States. House. Select Committee on Narcotics Abuse and Control. U.S. narcotics control efforts in Mexico and on the Southwest border: hearing before the Select Committee on Narcotics Abuse and Control, House of Representatives, Ninety-ninth Congress, second session, (July 22, 1986.: U.S. G.P.O., 1986. United States. House. Select Committee on Narcotics Abuse and Control. Colombian drug trafficking and control: hearing before the Select Committee on Narcotics Abuse and Control, House of Representatives, One hundredth Congress, first session, (May 6, 1987. Washington: U.S. G. P. O., 1987. United States. House. Select Committee on Narcotics Abuse and Control. Drugs and dropouts: a report of the Select Committee on Narcotics Abuse and Control, Ninety-ninth Congress, second session. Washington: U.S. G.P.O., 1986. Committee print. 99th Congress, 2d session, House of Representatives. United States. House. Select Committee on Narcotics Abuse and Control. Cocaine and marihuana trafficking in southeastern United States: hearings before the Select Committee on Narcotics Abuse and Control, House of Representatives, Ninety-fifth Congress, second session, (June 9 and 10, 1978. Washington: U.S. Govt. Print. Off., 1978. United States. House. Select Committee on Narcotics Abuse and Control. Use of international cargo for narcotics smuggling: hearing before the Select Committee on Narcotics Abuse and Control, House of Representatives, Ninety-fifth Congress, second session, (October 24, 1978. Washington: U.S. Govt. Print. Off., 1979. United States. House. Select Committee on Narcotics Abuse and Control. U.S. foreign Policy and international narcotics control: hearing before the Select Committee on Narcotics Abuse and Control, House of Representatives, One Hundredth Congress, second session, (March 16, 1988). Washington: U.S. G. P. O., 1988). United States. House. Select Committee on Narcotics Abuse and Control. Study mission report, US congressional delegation to the Andean Parliament, Paipa, and Bogota, Colombia: report of the Select Committee on Narcotics Abuse and Control, One Hundredth Congress, first session. Washington: U.S.G.P.O., 1987. United States. House. Select Committee on Narcotics Abuse and Control. Intravenous drug use and AIDS: the impact on the black community: hearing before the Select Committee on Narcotics Abuse and Control, House of Representatives, One Hundredth Congress, first session, (September 25, 1987. Washington: U.S. G. P. O., 1988). United States. House. Select Committee on Narcotics Abuse and Control. Drug abuse and drug trafficking in the Northeast region: hearings before the Select Committee on Narcotics Abuse and Control, House of Representatives, Ninety-ninth Congress, first session, (September 20-21, 1985. Washington: U.S. G. P. O., 1986. United States. House. Select Committee on Narcotics Abuse and Control. Latin American study missions concerning international narcotics problems (August 3-19, 1985): a report of the Select Committee on Narcotics Abuse and Control, Ninety-ninth Congress, second session. Washington: U.S. G.P.O.,1986. 99th Congress, 2d session. House of Representatives. United States. House. Select Committee on Narcotics Abuse and Control. Drug abuse and drug trafficking in New England: a report of the Select Committee on Narcotics Abuse and Control, Ninety-ninth Congress, second session.Washington: U.S. G.P.O., 1986. 99th Congress, 2d session. House of Representatives. United States. House. Select Committee on Narcotics Abuse and Control. The Federal Drug Strategy. Hearing before the House Select Committee on Narcotics Abuse and Control. (September 25, 1989). SNAC-101-1-15. United States. House. Select Committee on Narcotics Abuse and Control. 1987 update on drugs and dropouts: report of the Select Committee on Narcotics Abuse and Control, One hundredth Congress, first session. Washington: U.S. G. P. O., 1987. 100th Congress, lst session. United States. House. Select Committee on Narcotics Abuse and Control. Drug abuse and drug trafficking in the Northeast region: hearings before the Select Committee on Narcotics Abuse and Control, House of Representatives, Ninety-ninth Congress, first session, (September 20-21, 1985. Washington: U.S.G.P.O., 1986. United States. House. Select Committee on Narcotics Abuse and Control. Drug abuse treatment and prevention provisions of the Anti-Drug Abuse Act of 1986: hearing before the Select Committee on Narcotics Abuse and Control, House of Representatives, One hundredth Congress, first session, (March 11, 1987. Washington: U.S. G. P. O., 1987. United States. House. Select Committee on Narcotics Abuse and Control. Narcotics interdiction and enforcement efforts in South Florida: hearing before the Select Committee on Narcotics Abuse and Control, House of Representatives, Ninety-ninth Congress, second session, Friday (May 16, 1986. Washington: U.S. G.P.O., 1987. United States. House. Select Committee on Narcotics Abuse and Control. The effect of drug abuse on the black community: hearing before the Select Committee on Narcotics Abuse and Control, House of Representatives, Ninety-ninth Congress, first session, (September 27, 1985. Washington: U.S. G. P. O., 1986. United States. House. Select Committee on Narcotics Abuse and Control. Cocaine babies: hearing before the Select Committee on Narcotics Abuse and Control, House of Representatives, One Hundredth Congress, first session,(October 16, 1987. Washington: U.S. G. P. O., 1988). United States. House. Select Committee on Narcotics Abuse and Control. Federal drug enforcement and interdiction provisions of the Anti-Drug Abuse Act of 1986: hearing before the Select Committee on Narcotics Abuse and Control, House of Representatives, One hundredth Congress, first session, (March 18, 1987. Washington: U.S. G.P.O., 1987. United States. House. Select Committee on Narcotics Abuse and Control. Drug abuse education: hearing before the Select Committee on Narcotics Abuse and Control, House of Representatives, Ninety-ninth Congress, second session. Washington: U.S. G.P.O., 1987. United States. House. Select Committee on Narcotics Abuse and Control. Oversight of the Anti-Drug Abuse Act of 1986 and the federal drug strategy: hearing before the Select Committee on Narcotics Abuse and Control, House of Representatives, One Hundredth Congress, first session, December 8, 1987. Washington: U.S. G.P.O., 1988). United States. House. Select Committee on Narcotics Abuse and Control. International narcotics control: hearings before the Select Committee on Narcotics Abuse and Control, House of Representatives, Ninety-ninth Congress, first session, Thursday, (September 12, 1985. Washington: U.S. G.P.O., 1986. United States. House. Select Committee on Narcotics Abuse and Control. Drug abuse in the workplace: hearing before the Select Committee on Narcotics Abuse and Control, House of Representatives, Ninety-ninth Congress, second session, (May 7, 1986. Washington: U.S. G. P. O., 1987. United States. House. Select Committee on Narcotics Abuse and Control. Hearing on the state and local law enforcement assistance provisions of the Anti-Drug Abuse Act of 1986: hearing before the Select Committee on Narcotics Abuse and Control, House of Representatives, One hundredth Congress, first session, (March 4, 1987. Washington: U.S. G.P.O., 1987. United States. House. Select Committee on Narcotics Abuse and Control. Narcotics control conference: hearing before the Select Committee on Narcotics Abuse and Control, House of Representatives, Ninety-ninth Congress, second session, (February 10, 1986. Washington: U.S. G.P.O., 1987. United States. House. Select Committee on Narcotics Abuse and Control. Drug trafficking and abuse along the southwest border (San Diego): hearing before the Select Committee on Narcotics Abuse and Control, House of Representatives, Ninety-ninth Congress, second session, (January 16, 1986. Washington: U.S. G. P. O., U.S. G.P.O., 1986. United States. House. Select Committee on Narcotics Abuse and Control. Implementation of state and local grants programs: hearing before the Select Committee on Narcotics Abuse and Control, House of Representatives, One Hundredth Congress, second session, (May 26, 1988). Washington: U.S. G.P.O., 1988). United States. House. Select Committee on Narcotics Abuse and Control. Impact of Gramm-Rudman on federal drug programs: hearing before the Select Committee on Narcotics Abuse and Control, House of Representatives, Ninety-ninth Congress, second session, (March 18, 1986. Washington: U.S. G.P.O., 1986. United States. House. Select Committee on Narcotics Abuse and Control. International narcotics control: provisions of the Anti-Drug Abuse Act of 1986 and budget decision making: hearing before the Select Committee on Narcotics Abuse and Control, House of Representatives, One hundredth Congress, first session, (March 25, 1987. Washington: U.S. G.P.O., 1987. United States. House. Select Committee on Narcotics Abuse and Control. 1986 major city survey on drug arrests and seizures: report of the Select Committee on Narcotics Abuse and Control, One Hundredth Congress, first session. Washington: U.S. G.P.O., 1987. 100th Congress, 1st session. House of Representatives. United States. House. Select Committee on Narcotics Abuse and Control. Implementation of the Anti-Drug Abuse Act of 1986: report of the Select Committee on Narcotics Abuse and Control, One Hundredth Congress, first session, together with additional views. Washington: U.S. G. P. O., 1988). 100th Congress, 1st session, House of Representatives. United States. House. Select Committee on Narcotics Abuse and Control. Drug abuse in the workplace: hearing before the Select Committee on Narcotics Abuse and Control, House of Representatives, Ninety-ninth Congress, second session, (May 7, 1986. Washington: U.S. G.P.O., 1987. United States. House. Select Committee on Narcotics Abuse and Control. The federal war on drugs; past, present, and future: hearing before the Select Committee on Narcotics Abuse and Control, House of Representatives, Ninety-ninth Congress, second session, (October 3, 1986. Washington: U.S. G.P.O.: United States. House. U.S. House of Representatives. Conference Report to Accompany H.R. 4481, National Defense Authorization Act for Fiscal Year 1989). Report 100-989. 100th Congress, 2nd sess. 28 (September 1988). United States. House. U.S. narcotics control programs overseas: a continuing assessment: report of a staff study mission to South America, the Mediterranean and Middle East, and Southwest Asia, (March 1986-(January 1987, to the Committee on Foreign Affairs, U.S. House of Representatives. Washington: U.S. G.P.O., 1987. 100th Congress, 1st session. United States. House. Ways and Means Committee. Report No. 852 of the Ways and Means Committee: Importation and Exportation of Narcotic Drugs, 67th Congress, 2nd sess., (March 27, 1922. United States. International Narcotics Control Act of 1989). Washington, D.C.: U.S. G.P.O., 1989). United States. National Defense Authorization Act for FY 1989) (PL-100-456), Congressional Record-House, 100th Congress, 2nd sess., vol. 134. United States. National Institute for Drug Abuse. National Household Survey on Drug Abuse, Washington, GPO, 1988). United States. National Narcotics Intelligence Consumer's Committee. The NNICC Report, 1985-1986. Washington, 1987. United States. Office of Drug Abuse Policy. Federal strategy for prevention of drug abuse and drug trafficking, 1982: prepared for the President pursuant to the Drug Abuse Office and Treatment Act of 1972 / participating departments and independent agencies,... Washington, D.C.: Drug Abuse Policy Office, Office of Policy Development, the White House, U.S. G.P.O., 1982. United States. Office of National Drug Policy. National Drug Control Strategy. Washington, DC: US Government Printing Office, 1989). United States. Office of National Drug Policy. National Drug Control Strategy. Washington, DC: US Government Printing Office, 1990). United States. Office of Technology Assessment. The Border war on drugs. Washington, DC: Congress of the U.S., Office of Technology Assessment, 1987. United States. President. Proposed legislation--Criminal Justice Reform Act of 1987: message from the President of the United States transmitting a draft of proposed legislation to reform procedures for enforcement of the Fourth Amendment to the Constitution, for collateral review of criminal judgments, and for the imposition of capital punishment, and for other purposes. Washington: U.S. G.P.O., 1987. (House document / 100th Congress, 1st session ; 100-117) Referred to the Committee on the Judiciary. 87-641-P. (October 19, 1987. United States. President. The Drug Free America Act of 1986: message from the President of the United States transmitting a draft of proposed legislation to foster a drug-free federal workplace, to promote excellence in American education by achieving and maintaining a drug-free environment in our nation's schools, to extend and make improvements in substance abuse service programs . . . . Washington: G.P.O., 1986. (House document / 99th Congress, 2d session ; 99-266). UNited States. President. White House Conference for a Drug Free America. The White House Conference for a Drug Free America: final report, (June 1988). Washington, D. C.: The Conference, U.S. G.P.O. , 1988). United States. President's Commission on Organized Crime. America's habit: drug abuse, drug trafficking, and organized crime: report to the President and the Attorney General. Washington, D.C.: The Commission: 1986. United States. Senate. Caucus on International Narcotics Control. Drug trafficking: the escalating crisis on the Southwest border: hearing before the Caucus on International Narcotics Control of the United States Senate, One Hundredth Congress, first session ... (August 18, 1987, Phoenix, AZ. Washington: U.S. G.P.O., 1988). United States. Senate. Caucus on International Narcotics Control. National and international security threat of narcotics trafficking: hearing before the Caucus on International Narcotics Control of the United States Senate, One Hundredth Congress, first session . . . (June 8, 1987, New York, New York. Washington: U.S. G.P.O., 1987. (S. hrg. ; 100-246). United States. Senate. Committee on Armed Services. Role of the Department of Defense in drug interdiction: hearings before the Committee on Armed Services, United States Senate, One Hundredth Congress, second session, (June 8, 14, 1988) and a joint hearing before the Committee on Armed Services, United States Senate and the Committee on Armed Services, House of Representatives, One Hundredth Congress, second session, (June 15, 1988). Washington: U.S. G.P.O., 1988). (S. hrg. ; 100-878). United States. Senate. Committee on Banking, Housing, and Urban Affairs. The Drug Money Seizure Act and the Bank Secrecy Act amendments: hearing before the Committee on Banking, Housing, and Urban Affairs, United States Senate, Ninety-ninth Congress, second session, on S. 571 . . . S. 2306 . . . (May 1,1986. Washington: U.S. G. P. O.,U.S. G.P.O., 1986. United States. Senate. Committee on Foreign Relations. International terrorism, insurgency, and drug trafficking: present trends in terrorist activity: joint hearings before the Committee on Foreign Relations and the Committee on the Judiciary, United States Senate, Ninety-ninth Congress,first session, (May 13, 14, and 15, 1985. Washington: U.S. G.P.O., 1986. United States. Senate. Committee on Foreign Relations. Resolution pertaining to the presidential certification that the Bahamas have fully cooperated with the United States anti-drug efforts: report (to accompany S.J. Res. 90). Washington, D.C.: U.S. G.P.O., 1987. (Report / 100th Congress, 1st session, Senate ; 100-24). United States. Senate. Committee on Foreign Relations. Resolution pertaining to the presidential certification that Panama has fully cooperated with the United States anti-drug efforts: report (to accompany S. J. Res. 91) together with additional views. Washington, D.C.: U.S. G.P.O., 1987. (Report / 100th Congress, 1st session, Senate ; 100-25). United States. Senate. Committee on Foreign Relations. Resolution pertaining to the presidential certification that Mexico has fully cooperated with the United States anti-drug efforts: report (to accompany S.J. Res. 92) together with additional views. Washington, D.C.: U.S. G.P.O.,1987. Report / 100th Congress, 1st session, Senate ; 100-26). United States. Senate. Committee on Foreign Relations. Subcommittee on Terrorism, Narcotics, and International Communications. Drugs, law enforcement, and foreign Policy: hearings before the Subcommittee on Terrorism, Narcotics, and International Communications and International Economic Policy, Trade, Oceans, and Environment of the Committee on Foreign Relations, United States Senate, One Hundredth Congress, first session.: U.S. G.P.O., 1988). (S. hrg.; 100-773) Second session--Pt. 2. United States. Senate. Committee on Governmental Affairs. Subcommittee on Federal Spending, Budget, and Accounting. Review of the Anti-Drug Abuse Act of 1986: joint hearing before the Subcommittee on Federal Spending, Budget, and Accounting of the Committee on Governmental Affairs, United States Senate and the Senate Caucus on International Narcotics Control, One Hundredth Congress, first session, (May 4,1987, Miami, FL. Washington: U.S. G.P.O., 1988). (S. hrg. ; 100-525). United States. Senate. Committee on Governmental Affairs. Border management reorganization and drug interdiction. prepared for the Committee on Governmental Affairs, United States Senate, by the Congressional Research Service, Library of Congress. Washington: U.S. G. P. O., 1988). (100th Congress, 2d session). United States. Senate. Committee on Governmental Affairs. Permanent Subcommittee on Investigations. Structure of International Drug Trafficking Organizations. Hearing before the Permanent Subcommittee on Investigations of the Senate Governmental Affairs Committee. (September 12, 13, 1989). No. 101-350. United States. Senate. Committee on Governmental Affairs. Permanent Subcommittee on Investigations. Banking Secrecy Act: hearing before the Permanent Subcommittee on Investigations of the Committee on Governmental Affairs, United States Senate, Ninety-ninth Congress, first session, (October 29, 1985. Washington: 1986. (S. hrg. ; 99-472). United States. Senate. Committee on Governmental Affairs. Permanent Subcommittee on Investigations. Banking Secrecy Act: hearing before the Permanent Subcommittee on Investigations of the Committee on Governmental Affairs, United States Senate, Ninety-ninth Congress, first session, (October 29, 1985. Washington: U.S.G.P.O., 1986. (S. hrg. ; 99-472) United States. Senate. Committee on Governmental Affairs. Permanent Subcommittee on Investigations. General Accounting Office findings on the enforcement of the Bank Secrecy Act: hearing before the Permanent Subcommittee on Investigations of the Committee on Governmental Affairs, United States Senate, Ninety-ninth Congress, second session, (June 12, 1986. Washington: U.S. G.P.O., 1986. United States. Senate. Committee on Governmental Affairs. Permanent Subcommittee on Investigations. Federal Drug Interdiction: Role of the Department of Defense. Hearing before the Permanent Subcommittee on Investigations. (June 9, 1989). One hundred and first Congress. 101-216. United States. Senate. Committee on Governmental Affairs. Permanent Subcommittee on Investigations. Role of the feature film industry in a national effort to diminish drug use among young people: hearing before the Permanent Subcommittee on Investigations of the Committee on Governmental Affairs, United States Senate, Ninety-ninth Congress, first session, (October 24, 1985. Washington: U.S. G. P. O., 1986. (S. hrg. ; 99-566). United States. Senate. Committee on Governmental Affairs. Permanent Subcommittee on Investigations. Drugs and money laundering in Panama: hearing before the Permanent Subcommittee on Investigations of the Committee on Governmental Affairs, United States Senate, One Hundredth Congress, second session, (January 28, 1988). Washington: U.S. G.P.O., 1988). United States. Senate. Committee on Governmental Affairs. Permanent Subcommittee on Investigations. Federal drug interdiction: command, control, communications, and intelligence network: hearings before the Permanent Subcommittee on Investigations of the Committee on Governmental Affairs, United States Senate, One hundredth Congress, first session, (March 18 and 24, 1987. Washington: U.S. G.P.O., 1987. United States. Senate. Committee on Labor and Human Resources. Subcommittee on Children, Family, Drugs and Alcoholism. Scope and impact of narcotic trafficking in Alaska: hearing before the Subcommittee on Children, Family, Drugs, and Alcoholism of the Committee on Labor and Human Resources, United States Senate, Ninety-ninth Congress, first session ... (August 30, 1985. Washington: U.S. G.P.O., 1986.(S. hrg. ; 99-394): United States. Senate. Committee on the Judiciary and International Narcotics Control Caucus. Fighting Drug Abuse. Prepared by the Majority Staffs of the Senate Judiciary Committee and the International Narcotics Control Caucus. (January, 1990). United States. Senate. Committee on the Judiciary. National Narcotics Leadership Act of 1987: hearing before the Committee on the Judiciary, United States Senate, One Hundredth Congress, first session on S. 789 . . . (May 14, 1987. Washington: U.S. G.P.O., 1988). (S. hrg.; 100-486.). United States. Senate. Committee on the Judiciary. Subcommittee on Criminal Law. The Armed Career Criminal Act amendments: hearing before the Subcommittee on Criminal Law of the Committee on the Judiciary, United States Senate, Ninety-ninth Congress, second session, on S. 2312 . . . (May 14, 1986. Washington: U.S. G.P.O., 1986. (S. hrg. ; 99-797). United States. Senate. Committee on the Judiciary. Subcommittee on Security and Terrorism. DEA budget and oversight for fiscal year 1987: hearing before the Subcommittee on Security and Terrorism of the Committee on the Judiciary, United States Senate, Ninety-ninth Congress, second session on examining significant aspects of the DEA's record of achievement during 1985, (April 16, 1986. Washington: U.S. G. P. O., 1986. (S. hrg. ; 99-862). United States. Senate. Committee on the Judiciary. Subcommittee to Investigate Juvenile Delinquency. Stopping mother ships--a loophole in drug enforcement: hearing before the Subcommittee to Investigate Juvenile Delinquency of the Committee on the Judiciary, United States Senate, Ninety-fifth Congress, second session on S. 3437 ... (August 22, 1978. Washington: U.S. Govt. Print. Off., 1978. United States. Senate. Department of Defense Support for Drug Interdiction. Hearing before a Senate Appropriations subcommittee, 1985. #98-1285. United States. Senate. Hearings Before the Subcommittee on Improvements in the Federal Criminal Code of the Committee of the Judiciary Pursuant to S. Res. 67, 84th Congress, 1st sess., (June 2 to December 15, 1955. United States. Senate. Senate Caucus on International Narcotics Control. Legislation aimed at combating international drug trafficking and money laundering: a staff report / prepared for the use of the Senate Caucus on International Narcotics Control. Washington: U.S. G.P.O., 1987. United States. Senate. The U.N. Draft Convention against Illicit Traffic in Narcotic Drugs and Psychotropic Substances: a report on the status of the draft convention, the U.S. negotiating position, and issues for the Senate / prepared for the use of the Senate Caucus on International Narcotics Control. Washington: U.S.G.P.O.: 1987. 100th Congress, 1st session. van de Bor, M. Decreased Cardiac Output in Infants of Mothers Who Abused Cocaine. Pediatrics, (January 1, 1990) 85:1, pp. 30-. van de Bor, Margot, Walther, Frans J., and Sims, Maureen E. Increased Cerebral Blood Flow Velocity in Infants of Mothers Who Abuse Cocaine. Pediatrics. (May 1 1990) v 85 n 5. pp. 733-. Van Vunakis, Helen, Tashkin, Donald, and Rigas, Basil Relative Sensitvity and Specificity of Salivary and Serum Cotinine in Identifying Tobacco-Smoking Status of Self-Reported Nonsmokers and Smokers of Tobacco and/or Marijuana. Archives of Environmental Health, 44:1 (January 1, 1989), pp. 53. Van Wert, J. W. Government of Mexico Herbicidal Opium Poppy Eradication Program: A Summative Evaluation, Unpublished Ph.D. dissertation in political science, University of Southern California, 1985. Van Wert, James W. The US State Department's Narcotics Control Policy in the Americas. Journal of Interamerican Studies and World Affairs, 30:2-3 (Summer 1988), pp. 1-. Vandegaer, Frieda. Cocaine--the deadliest addiction. How to help victims of this widespread, but little understood addiction. Nursing. (February 1 1989) v 19 n 2 pp. 72. Vargas Haya, Hector. Defraudadores y contrabandistas. 2a ed. Lima, Peru: Editorial Nueva Educacion, 1980. Vaughn, J. R. Conbatting the Drug Problem in the United States. Police Chief (October 1988), pp. 17-20. Vereby, Karl, and DePace, Ann. Rapid Confirmation of Enzyme Multiple Immunoassay Technique (EMIT)Cocaine Positive Urine Samples by Capillary Gas-Liquid Chromatography/Nitrogen Phosphorus Detection(GLC/NPD). Journal of Forensic Sciences. (January 1 1989) v 34 n 1 pp. 46. Villacrez Riquelme, Eloy. Nuestra guerra civil: Ayacucho 80--. Lima, Peru: Graphos 100 Editores, 1985. Vitullo, John C. Cocaine-Induced Small Vessel Spasm in Isolated Rat Hearts. The American Journal of Pathology. (July 1 1989) v 135 n 1 pp. 85. Volkow, Nora D., Fowler, Joanna S., and Wolf, Alfred P. Effects of Chronic Cocaine Abuse on Postsynaptic Dopamine Receptors. The American Journal of Psychiatry. (June 1 1990) v 147 n 6. pp. 719-. Walker, William O. III. Control Across the Border: The United States, Mexico, and Narcotics Policy, 1936-1940, Pacific Historical Review 47 (1978), 91-106. Walker, William O. III. Drug Control and National Security, Diplomatic History 12:2 (Spring, 1988). Walker, William O. III. Drug Control in the Americas. Albuquerque: University of New Mexico Press, 1981. Wang, Ging Kuo. Cocaine-induced closures of single batrachotoxin-activated Na+ channels in planar lipid bilavers. The Journal of General Physiology. December 1 1988) v 92 n 6 pp. 747. Ward, B. Guns, Drugs, and Violence: An Unholy Alliance. Police Chief (March 1988), pp. 52-53. Watts, W. David, and Wright, Lloyd S. The Relationship of Alcohol, Tobacco, Marijuana, and Other Illegal Drug Use to Delinquency Among Mexican-American, Black, and White Adolescent Males. Adolescence, 25:97 (Spring 1990), pp. 171-. Watzl, Bernhard, and Watson, Ronald R. Minireview: Immunomodulation by Cocaine--A Neuroendocrine Mediated Response. Life Sciences. 1990) v 46 n 19 pp. 1319-. Weatherford, J. McIver. Narcoticos en Bolivia y los Estados Unidos. 1a ed. La Paz, Bolivia: Editorial Los Amigos del Libro, 1987. Weber, Richard J., and Pert, Agu, The periaqueductal gray matter mediates opiate-induced immunosuppression. Science, 245:188-90 (July 14 1989). Weinberger, Caspar. Our Troops Shouldn't be Drug Cops, Washington Post, (May 22, 1987, c2. Weisman, C.P., Anglin, M.D., and Fisher, D.G. The MMPI Profiles of Narcotics Addicts: II. Ethnic and Criminal History Effects. The International Journal of the Addictions, 24:9 (1989), pp. 881-. Weiss, Roger D., Mirin, Steven M., and Griffin, Margaret L. Psychopathology in Cocaine Abusers. Changing Trends.Journal of nervous and mental disease. December 1 1988) v 176 n 12 pp. 719. Wenger, G.R., and Wright, D.W. Behavioral effects of cocaine and its interaction with d-amphetamine and morphine in rats. Pharmacology, Biochemistry and Behavior. (March 1 1990) v 35 n 3. pp. 595-. Whitaker, Ben. The Global Connection: the Crisis of Drug Addiction. London: J. Cape, 1987. White, Peter T. Coca--An Ancient Herb Turns Deadly. National geographic. (January 1 1989) v 175 n 1 pp. 3. Summary: Used for centuries by South America's highland Indians, a mild stimulant has been transformed into today's international killer drug: cocaine. Wiley, Harvey W. Another Soothing Syrup Victim, Good Housekeeping 60 (June 1915), 709-10. Wiley, Nena. Airborne drug hunters, Air Progress. 51:6-12+ Sep 1989). Wilkerson, R. Douglas. Cardiovascular Effects of Cocaine: Enhancement by Yohimbine and Atropine. The Journal of Pharmacology and Experimental Therapeutics. (January 1 1989) v 248 n 1 pp. 57. Willis, Dawn, and Harbit, Maryanne D. A Fatal Attraction: Cocaine Related Subarachnoid Hemorrhage. Journal of Neuroscience Nursing. (June 1 1989) v 21 n 3 pp. 171. Wise, R.A., Murray, A., and Bozarth, M.A. Bromocriptine self-administration and bromocriptine-reinstatement of cocaine-trained and heroin-trained lever pressing in rats. Psychopharmacology, 100:3 (March 1, 1990), pp. 355. Wisotsky, Steven. Breaking the impasse in the war on drugs. New York: Greenwood Press, 1986. Woods Jr., James R., and Plessinger, Mark A. Pregnancy increases cardiovascular toxicity to cocaine. American Journal of Obstetrics and Gynecology. (February 1 1990) v 162 n 2. pp. 529-. Summary: This study, which demonstrated that pregnant sheep are more sensitive to the cardiovascular effects of cocaine than nonnregnant sheep, suggests that pregnant women may be at increased risk of cocaine-related cardiac or vascular complications if they continue cocaine abuse during pregnancy. Woolverton, W.L., and Virus, R.M. The effects of a D1 and a D2 dopamine antagonist on behavior maintained by cocaine or food. Pharmacology, Biochemistry and Behavior. (March 1 1989) v 32 n 3 pp. 691. Working Group on Comparison and Evaluation of Methods of Treatment and Rehabilitation for Drug Dependence and Abuse (1973: Frankfurt am Main). Comparison and evaluation of methods of treatment and rehabilitation for drug dependence and abuse; report on a working group convened by the Regional Office for Europe of the World Health Organization,... Copenhagen, Regional Office for Europe, World Health Organization, 1973. Working Group on Measures for the Prevention and Control of Drug Abuse and Dependence (1971: Hague). Measures for the prevention and control of drug abuse and dependence. Report on a Working Group convened by the Regional Office for Europe of the World Health Organization, The Hague, 14-17 (April 1971. Copenhagen, World Health Organization, 1971. Wrobleski, Ann B. Presidential Certification of Narcotics Source Countries, U.S. Department of State Bureau of Public Affairs, Current Policy . 1061, Washington, D.C., 1988). Yang, J. Congress Passes Anti-drug Bill Including a Death Penalty, Wall Street Journal, (October 24, 1988). Young, James Harvey. The Medical Messiahs: A Social History of Health Quackery in Twentieth Century America. Princeton: Princeton University Press, 1967. Young, James Harvey. The Toadstool Millionaires: A Social History of Patent Medicines in America Before Federal Regulation. Princeton: Princeton University Press, 1961. Zimanyi, I., Wang, E., and Lajtha, A. Effect of Cocaine and Cocaine Congeners on Veratridine-Induced Depolarization in Mouse Cerebrocortical Synaptoneurosomes. Journal of Neuroscience Research. (February 1 1989) v 22 n 2 pp. 201-. Zubrycki, E.M., Giordano, M., and Sanberg, P.R. The effects of cocaine on multivariate locomotor behavior and defecation. Behavioural Brain Research. (January 1 1990) v 36 n 1 / 2. pp. 155-. Zuckerman, Barry, Amaro, Hortensia, and Bauchner, Howard. Depressive symptoms during pregnancy: Relationship to poor health behaviors. American Journal of Obstetrics and Gynecology, 160:5 (May 1, 1989), pp. 1107-. Summary: Results of this investigation demonstrate a significant association between depressive symptoms during pregnancy and these health behaviors: alcohol consumption, cigarette and marijuana use, cocaine use, and lower weight gain during pregnancy. Zuckerman, Barry, Amaro, Hortensia, and Cabral, Howard. Validity of Self-reporting of Marijuana and Cocaine Use Among Pregnant Adolescents. The Journal of Pediatrics, 115:5 (November 1, 1989), pp. 812-. Zuckerman, Barry. Effects of Maternal Marijuana and Cocaine Use on Fetal Growth. The New England Journal of Medicine. (March 23 1989) v 320 n 12. pp. 762-. Summary: Accumulating evidence documents the adverse effects of cocaine, even in small amounts, upon the fetus. Zurer, Pamela. Illicit drug making destructive to two chemists. Chemical & Engineering News. 67:31 (September 25, 1989). CliffSchaffer's Home Page WT01-B27-30IA031-000655-B041-164http://206.61.184.43:80/schaffer/library/studies/inhemp/ihmenu.htm 206.61.184.43 19970122113528 text/html 2923HTTP/1.0 200 OKDate: Wednesday, 22-Jan-97 11:35:18 GMTServer: WebSitePro/1.1f (S/N wpo-0deb)Allow-ranges: bytesContent-type: text/htmlLast-modified: Saturday, 28-Dec-96 07:03:42 GMTContent-length: 2706 Indian Hemp Drugs Commission Report - Table of Contents Contents | Feedback | Search DRCNet Library | Schaffer Library | Major Studies The Indian Hemp Drugs Commission Report Summary of the Indian Hemp DrugsCommission Report by Tod Mikuriya Introduction, by Tod Mikuriya Centennial Thoughts on the IndianHemp Drugs Commission, by Tod Mikuriya Indian Hemp and the Dope Fiends of OldEngland - A sociopolitical history of cannabis and theBritish Empire 1840-1928, by Sean Blanchard & Matthew J. AthaMSc Chapter IX. Social and Religious Customs Chapter XIV. The Policy of Hemp DrugAdministration Note by Mr. G. A. Grierson, C.I.E.,Magistrate and Collector, Howrah, on references to the hemp plantoccurring in Sanskrit and Hindi literature. Note by Mr. J. M. Campbell, C.I.E.,Collector of Land Revenue and Customs and Opium, Bombay, on thereligion of hemp. Contents | Feedback | Search DRCNet Library | Schaffer Library | Major StudiesWT01-B27-31IA031-000655-B041-188http://206.61.184.43:80/schaffer/library/studies/op/opmenu.htm 206.61.184.43 19970122113538 text/html 16468HTTP/1.0 200 OKDate: Wednesday, 22-Jan-97 11:35:30 GMTServer: WebSitePro/1.1f (S/N wpo-0deb)Allow-ranges: bytesContent-type: text/htmlLast-modified: Saturday, 28-Dec-96 06:52:37 GMTContent-length: 16250 The Opium Problem -- Table of Contents Contents | Feedback | Search DRCNet Library | Schaffer Library | Major Studies | TheOpium Problem THE OPIUM PROBLEM BY CHARLES E. TERRY AND MILDRED PELLENS 1928 TABLE OF CONTENTS PREFACE TO THE ORIGINAL EDITION Personnel of committee-Objects-Scope of work-Procedure. INTRODUCTION The problem-In the United States-Controversial aspects-Methodof study-Terminology. CHAPTER I-EXTENT Numbers involved-Difficulties of determination-Currentstatements- Estimates from importations-Estimates fromsurveys-Early statements, 1867-1871-Michigan survey, 1878-Chicagostudy, 1880-lowa study, 1885-Massachusetts study, 1888--Vermontstudy, 1900-Jacksonville Survey, 1913--Tennessee survey,1915--Treasury Committee, 1918-New York City Clinic,1919-Narcotic Drug Control Commission, 1920-Los Angeles Clinic,1920-Shreveport Clinic, 1919-1923-Summary survey and estimatetable-Recent analysis of certain surveys, Kolb and DuMez-Analysis and discussions. CHAPTER II-DEVELOPMENT OF THE PROBLEM Historical review of use of opium-Use by Sumerians andAssyrians, Mention in Eber's Papyri-Homer's Iliad-Known toHippocrates, Theophrastus, Virgil-Virtues described byGalen-Discovery of alkaloids--Therapeutic uses-Appreciation ofeuphoric effect-De Quincey -The hypodermic syringe-Influence ofCivil and other wars-Influence of opium smoking-Patent medicineindustry as factor-Secret addiction remedies--Medicaleducation-Professional indifference-Production of heroin-Views onsafety and dangers of heroin-Early warnings -Effect ofprohibitory laws-Underworld traffic-Effect of professionalattitude and training. CHAPTER III-ETIOLOGY Incompleteness of studies-Faulty generalizations-Racial andindividual tendencies-Effect of climate-Influences of medicaluse-Use in infancy and childhood-Use of hypodermic-Painfulillnesses--Use for pain and for euphoria-Massachusetts study asto causes-Pichon's studies-Psychical influence-Patent medicinesand self-medication Evilassociations-Dissipation-Chinatown-"Contagion'--Influence ofpersonality make-up -Curiosity-Craving for stimulants andsedatives-Report of British Departmental Committee on Morphineand Heroin Addiction-Table, replies to questionnaires, Treasurycommittee reports Replies to questionnaires of Committee on DrugAddictions-Criminal tendencies and associations. CHAPTER IV-GENERAL NATURE Definitions, effect on control measures-Early opinions andterms-Psychical and ethical effect-Like alcoholism-Morphinism notmorphinomania-A vice, habit, appetite-Mental and physicaldisease-An uncontrollable craving-A real disease-Apsycho-physical disorder-A psychosomatic affection-A truedisease-A drug, auto- and intestinal intoxication-A true organicdisease-A Psychical disturbance-A functional poisoning-A neurosisor psychosis--A pernicious habit-A definite physical disease-Apathologic entity. CHAPTER V-PATHOLOGY-SOMATIC AND PSYCHIC CHANGES Reports of findings scanty-Incompleteness ofstudies-Functional disturbances-Individual tolerance andintolerance-Fatty degeneration of heart and liver-Morphin inliver-Mental deterioration-Ethical changes -Crystals inblood-Effect on leukocytes--Epithelial changes-Lowering ofresistance-Arrest of phagocytosis,-Characterchanges-Hallucinations and delusions-Brain cell changes-Effect onendocrine system Pleasure and deterioration-Generative functionsdepressed-Changes in cortical cells--Changes entirelyfunctional-The blood in morphinists andheroinists-Coagulability-Number of red cells-Number and changesin white cells--White cell resistance The blood duringwithdrawal-Number and varieties of red cells-Hemoglobinpercentage Red cell resistance-Leukocytosis--Differentialfindings--Leukocytic resistance-Similarity to infectiousprocesses-Changes in liver morphologic and functional-Digestivetract-Albuminuria and sediment findings Nature ofalbuminuria-Abscesses--The skin and teeth-Sexualapparatus-Eliminatory crises-Stages of psychic changes--Pulse intolerance ,and withdrawal-Relapse due to psychic changes--Othercauses of psychic changes than the drug-Effect of opium on dog'sintestine-Effect on respiration in dogs--Lipoidchanges-Constitutional make-up of users Excretion ofmorphin-Mental effects-Inhibitory effect of opiumAuto-intoxication-Allergic reaction-Changes in viscosity of bloodWithdrawal phenomena due to organic causes-Digestive hemoclasticreaction-Morphin delirium-Effect of chronic poisoning on growthof rats-Effect on vegetative nervous system-Resulting Psychicalchanges -Lowered biotonus-Resemblance to manic-depressivestates-Relationship to hyper- and hypothyroidism-Selectiveabsorption by nervous system-Effect on basal metabolism-Effect onnutrition-Review of mechanism of tolerance-Conditioned salivaryreflex-Somatic and psychic habituation-Specificity ofhabituation-Evidence of diphasic poisoning-Vagus-sympatheticbalance of vegetative nervous system Relationship of tolerance touremic changes-Effect on unstriped muscle -Sensitiveness ofintestinal muscles not lost-Brain cell changes Calcium andpotassium blood concentration-blood changes in dogs. CHAPTER VI - PATHOLOGY (continued) - TOLERANCE -DEPENDENCE-WITHDRAWAL Tolerance-formation admitted-Dependence questioned-CodeintoIerance, committee report-Elimination of codein--Codein notaddiction forming-Codein addiction-forming-Contradictoryopinions-Case reports, codein addiction-Dual action of opiumalkaloids-Tolerance to eukodal-Effect of eukodal and parakodin onanimals--Questionnaire study on codein addiction--Oxidimorphintheory-Hyperacidity in morphinism-Tolerance similar to trueimmunity-Specific antitoxin formed Morphin storage in brain andliver-Inhibition of glandular function Release ofinhibition-Hypersecretion and glandular engorgement-Enithelialdesquamation-Eliminatory crises-Increased power of organism todestroy morphin as explanation of tolerance-Denial of antitoxinformation-Increased ability of body cells to withstandmorphin-Brain extract of morphinized animals,properties-Precipitation reaction of morphin serum-Increasedability of organism to destroy and cell immunity both reasons fortolerance-Complement fixation tests and anticomplementary actionin morphin serum-Ability of liver to destroy morphin-Withdrawalsymptoms due to retained excrementitious matter-Aggressinsproduced by morphin-Progressive cell adaptivity Effect oncirculation of injections of morphinized serum-Loss of cellsensitiveness in chronic poisoning-Specificity of morphinpoisoning Effect on vegetative nervous system of chronicpoisoning and of withdrawal-Tolerance and withdrawal due toantitoxic substance in blood Chemical changes in nerve cellcomposition cause of withdrawal-Personality changes and sensationobtunding with reactions-Metabolic changes in rats caused bythyroid, thyroidectorny and morphinism-Psychiatricaspects-Lowering of threshold of resistance-Effect on brainlipoids--Relationship to permeability of cell membrane-Reactionto intradermic injections-Congenital addiction-Effect ofwithdrawal on pregnancy-Withdrawal symptoms in new-born-Casereports-Prolongation of pregnancy-Morphin in placentalcirculation-Transmission to fcetus--Questionnaire studies ofCommittee on Drug Addictions-Tables CHAPTER VII-SYMPTOMATOLOGY Detection of chronic use-Classification of symptomsunsatisfactory Abstinence symptoms diagnostic-Symptoms insmokers-Symptoms in chronic poisoning and in withdrawal-Mentalsymptoms-The skin and mucous membranes--Pupils-Kidneys &organs-Nervous system- Vasomotor symptoms---Reflexirritability-Lachrymation-Coryza-Neuralgicpains--Insomnia-Vomiting and purging-Constipation-Pulseirregularity-Collapse-Effects vary in individual salivation indogs-Nutrition in dogs--Withdrawal symptoms in dogs-Withdrawallike an infectious disease-The "vital need'--Mental state inwithdrawalRespiration-Circulatory symptoms---Syncope-Oliguria andanuria-Albuminuria-Glycosuria--Casts--Memory damaged-Characterchanges-Effect on volition-Interference with secretion andexcretion-Fever Circulatory disturbances in dogs--Vegetativenervous system and endocrine disturbances-Addiction andwithdrawal symptoms in dogs. CHAPTER VIII-TYPES OF USERS Classification desirable--Factors to beconsidered-Incompleteness of data-Dangers of generalizing fromavailable material-Sex Distribution-Michigan survey-Chicagostudy-Iowa study-Jacksonville survey-Tennesseesurvey-Philadelphia series--Treasury committee-New York Cityprison cases--New York City clinic series--Discussion-AgeDistribution-Chicago cases--Iowa case Jacksonvilleseries-Tennessee series--Philadelphia hospital cases--BellevueHospital cases, New York New York City clinic cases--Lambert'scases - -Court cases, New York Teachers College questionnairestudy, New York-School children--Juvenile court studies--Use bychildren exaggerated or unfounded-Age of convicted addicts incertain prisons--Form of Drug Used-Therapeutic choice-Individualselection-Influence of illicit traffic, reasons--Heroin amongyoung males--Effect of prohibitory laws on use of heroin-Table bydrugs used-Other Classifications-Conditions in England,1871-Individual opinions of types involved by authors from 1871to 1922-Contradictory views due to studies of selectedcases--Effects of other drugs, "mixed addiction'--Effect ofenvironmental factors on "type" determination-Dangersof conclusions based on insufficient data-No one type of user-Allgroups susceptible-Relation to crime CHAPTER IX-TREATMENT Early efforts-Influence on treatment of current views onnature-Prophylactic considerations--Gradual reduction-Abruptwithdrawal-Rapid reduction--Substitution-Levinstein'smethod-Rapid withdrawal with bromideg--Erinmeyer'smethod-Jennings' method-Rapid detoxication, Sollier-Hyoscinetreatment, Lott-Pettey's treatment-Use of heroin,Morel-Lavall6e-Lambert-Towns treatment-Bishop's principles,interval of dosage, elimination, rational therapeuticconsiderations, individual adaptation of procedures-Comparativevalues of certain methods Sceleth's method-Dercurn'smethod-Riverside Hospital method-Effect of albumen andvenesection in detoxicating dogs-Wholey's method Methods ofDupouy, Wuth, Mignard, Itemer, David, Krauss, Rojas andBelbe-Narcosan treatment-British Departmental Committee onMorphine and Heroin Addiction-Narcosan compared with abruptwithdrawal, Johnson-Kolb-Vegetable protein treatment. CHAPTER X-CONTROL-INTERNATIONAL Slizoighai Conference-Countries represented-Early treatieswith Siam and China-Treaty with Japan-Philippines OpiumCommission-Wright's letter to the President-Resolutions ofcommission-Response to U. S. Circular-Report of Americandelegates-Comment on Hague Opium Convention of 1912-Powerssigning the convention-Resolution presented-Countries not signingthe convention-Final Protocol of Second Opium Conference-Exportsfrom U. S. prohibited-Third International OpiumConference-Instruction to American delegates--Report of Americandelegates-Final Protocol of Third International OpiumConference--Peace Conference articles on OpiumConventions-Article 23 of the covenant of the League ofNations-Resolution of League- Advisory Committee on Traffic inOpium-Resolutions of Council-Requirements; of countries-Reportsand resolutions of Council and various committees-Action of ThirdAssembly on import and export certificate system-Fourth sessionof Advisory Committee-Abuse defined-Causes of abuse-Determinationof abuse-Amounts required for medical and scientificpurposes-Prevention of abuse-Hearings and Resolutions ofCommittee on Foreign Affairs--Resolution as passed by Senate andHouse of Representatives-American Delegation to Fifth Session ofAdvisory Committee 1923-American proposals-Resolutions ofAdvisory Committee-Reservations of Indian Government-Resolutionsof Fourth Assembly, Sept. 1923-Extracts from minutes ofAssembly-Resolutions of Council Dec. 1923-Sixth Session Aug.1924-Recommendations of Conference-Resolutions of meetings ofMixed Sub-Committee-Second International Opium Conference Nov.1924. CHAPTER XI-CONTROL (continued)-NATIONAL Act of 1909-Treaty of 1880--Tariff laws-Results of Act of1909-Bills presented but not passed-Harrison Act andAmendments----Regulations of Secretary of the Treasury-Treasurydecisions-Court decisions -Discussion of law andregulations-Jones-Miller Act-Federal Narcotics ControlBoard-Amendment of June 7, 1924-Creation of Bureau andCommissioner of Prohibition-Control of narcotics vested inProhibition Bureau-Estimates for medical needs, discussion-Propermethod for determining needs,-Maryland study-Studies of Committeeon Drug Addictions-Discussions-Needs based on sales bymanufacturers, discussion. CHAPTER XII-CONTROL (continued)-STATE Historical-Drugs included-Exceptions-Channels ofdistribution-Records required-Smoking opium-First anti-opiumlaws--Special provisions-Provision for addicts-Registration ofaddicts-Definition of addicts-Enforcingagency-Penalties--Legislation in New York State -WhitneyHearings-Department of narcotic drug control-Provisions ofWhitney Law-Regulations under law-Annual report of commissioner-New Orleans clinic-Objects of dispensary-Treatment-Legal statusof clinic. CHAPTER XIII-CONTROL (continued)-MUNICIPAL Jacksonville clinic-New York City clinic-Hospitaltreatment-Health department regulations New York City-Comments ofJudge Collins- Court cases of addiction-Ages-Numberscommitted-Sex distribution of court cases-Report to New YorkState Association of Magistrates- Present conditions-Shreveportclinic-Historical sketch-The dispensary-Results-Resolutions ofmedical society-Los Angeles clinic-Reports of director-List ofclinics. CHAPTER XIV-CONTROL (continued)-MISCELLANEOUS SUGGESTIONS Opinions of committees and individuals taken from currentliterature from 1915 to 1927- APPENDICES BIBLIOGRAPHY INDEX Contents | Feedback | Search DRCNet Library | Schaffer Library | Major Studies | TheOpium ProblemWT01-B27-32IA031-000655-B041-224http://206.61.184.43:80/schaffer/library/studies/lag/lagmenu.htm 206.61.184.43 19970122113552 text/html 4157HTTP/1.0 200 OKDate: Wednesday, 22-Jan-97 11:35:43 GMTServer: WebSitePro/1.1f (S/N wpo-0deb)Allow-ranges: bytesContent-type: text/htmlLast-modified: Saturday, 28-Dec-96 07:03:03 GMTContent-length: 3940 La Guardia Committee Report - Table of Contents Contents | Feedback | Search DRCNet Library | Schaffer Library | Major Studies The La Guardia Committee Report The Marihuana Problem in the City of New York Mayor's Committee on Marihuana, by the New York Academy ofMedicine City of New York , 1944. SOCIOLOGICAL, MEDICAL, PSYCHOLOGICAL AND PHARMACOLOGICAL STUDIES Foreword, by Mayor Fiorello LaGuardia Introduction - E. H. L. Corwin, PhD, Secretary THE SOCIOLOGICAL STUDY Introduction - Dudley D. Shoenfeld, MD Organization of Staff The Mental Attitude of the Marihuana Smoker Toward Society and Marihuana Marihuana and School Children Conclusions THE CLINICAL STUDY Plan and Scope Subjects Selected for the Study Medical Aspects Symptoms and Behavior The Cigarette (Note the use of the Jack Benny radio show in the research) Psychotic Episodes Organic and Systemic Functions Intellectual Functions Findings Summary and Discussion Comparison Between Users and Non-Users from the Standpoint of Mental and Physical Deterioration With special thanks to Peter Webster for his work inscanning this document for the library. Contents | Feedback | Search DRCNet Library | Schaffer Library | Major StudiesWT01-B27-33IA031-000655-B041-252http://206.61.184.43:80/schaffer/library/studies/wootton/wootmenu.htm 206.61.184.43 19970122113604 text/html 2631HTTP/1.0 200 OKDate: Wednesday, 22-Jan-97 11:35:54 GMTServer: WebSitePro/1.1f (S/N wpo-0deb)Allow-ranges: bytesContent-type: text/htmlLast-modified: Saturday, 28-Dec-96 06:45:26 GMTContent-length: 2414 The Wootton Report - Main Menu Contents | Feedback | Search DRCNet Library | Schaffer Library | Major Studies The Wootton Report Thanks to Steven Abrams, the full text of the Wootton Reportwill soon be coming to these pages. We invite you to read hismost interesting history of this report, listed below. Hashish Fudge - The Times Advertisementand the Wootton Report, by Steve Abrams Extract from 'The Strange Case of Pot'by Michael Schofield (Penguin, 1971). Schofield was a social psychologist who sat on the Wootton Committee and, dismayed by its reception, which led to the introduction of the Misuse of Drugs Act, he subsequently published this book. Contents | Feedback | Search DRCNet Library | Schaffer Library | Major StudiesWT01-B27-34IA031-000655-B041-277http://206.61.184.43:80/schaffer/library/studies/ledain/NONMED1.HTM 206.61.184.43 19970122113615 text/html 8025HTTP/1.0 200 OKDate: Wednesday, 22-Jan-97 11:36:05 GMTServer: WebSitePro/1.1f (S/N wpo-0deb)Allow-ranges: bytesContent-type: text/htmlLast-modified: Saturday, 28-Dec-96 07:01:12 GMTContent-length: 7808 Canadian Government Commission of Inquiry - Table ofContents Contents | Feedback | Search DRCNet Library | Schaffer Library | Major Studies THE NON-MEDICAL USE OF DRUGS Interim Report of the Canadian Government Commission ofInquiry CONTENTS Chapter 1. THE COMMISSION'SINTERPRETATION OF ITS TASK The Commission's Terms of References The Implications of the Terms of Reference Methods of Inquiry The Role of the Interim Report Staff and Research Chapter 2. THE DRUGS AND THEIREFFECTS 29 Introduction The Role of Science The Classification of Drugs Psychological Considerations Pharmacological Considerations Tolerance and Dependence Scientific Methods A Review of Selected Drugs Barbiturates Medical Use Administration, Absorption, Distribution and PhysiologicalFate Psychological Effects Physiological Effects Tolerance and Dependence Barbiturates and Other Drugs Alcohol Medical Use Administration, Absorption, Distribution and PhysiologicalFate Short-Term Effects Long-Term Effects Tolerance and Dependence Alcohol and Other Drugs Minor Tranquillizers Medical Use Administration, Absorption, Distribution, and PhysiologicalFate Psychological Effects Physiological Effects Tolerance and Dependence Minor Tranquillizers and Other Drugs Amphetamines Medical Use Administration, Absorption, Distribution and PhysiologicalFate Effects Moderate-Dose Effects Tolerance and Dependence with Moderate Doses High-Dose Effects High-Dose Dependency 'Speed Kills' Amphetamines and Other Drugs LSD Medical Use Administration, Absorption, Distribution and PhysiologicalFate Psychological Effects Physiological Effects Tolerance and Dependence LSD and Other Drugs Cannabis Medical Use Administration, Absorption, Distribution and PhysiologicalFate Effects of Cannabis Overview of Effects Physiological Effects Psychological Effects Tolerance and Dependence Cannabis and Other Drugs Initiation of Cannabis Use Some Cannabis Studies of Current Significance I. The 'La Guardia Report' (1944) II. Isbell et al (1967) III. Weil, Zinberg and Nelsen (1969) IV. Jones and Stone (1969) V. Clark and Nakashima (1968) VI. Crancer et al (1969) VII. Robins et al (1969) VIII. ARF's Marijuana Users Study (1970) IX. Report of the Indian Hemp Drugs Commission (1894) Opiate Narcotics Medical Use Administration, Absorption, Distribution and PhysiologicalFate Physiological Effects Psychological Effects Tolerance and Dependence Opiate Narcotics and Crime The Development of Dependence Opiate Narcotics and Other Drugs Volatile Solvents Medical Use Administration, Absorption, Distribution and PhysiologicalFate Effects Tolerance and Dependence Solvents and Other Drugs References and Selected Bibliography Chapter 3. THE EXTENT AND PATTERNS OF NON-MEDICAL DRUG USE INCANADA Introduction Alcohol Barbiturates and Tranquillizers The Barbiturates The Minor Tranquillizers The Amphetamines The 'Speed' Phenomenon LSD and Other Strong Hallucinogens Cannabis Opiate Narcotics Solvents References Chapter 4. SOME CAUSES OFNON-MEDICAL DRUG USE References Chapter 5. PRESENT CANADIAN POLICY - THE LAW Introduction Law and Law Enforcement Some Historical Background International Framework Constitutional Framework Federal Legislation and its Enforcement The Statutes and Administrative Regulations The Role of Possession and Possessional Offences Burden of Proof The Definition of Trafficking Methods of Enforcement Sentencing Policy Empirical Study of Law Enforcement and Correctional System References Chapter 6. THE ISSUES - SOME INTERIM RECOMMENDATIONS Introduction The Effects of the Drugs General Cannabis LSD Amphetamines Multiple Drug Use Drugs and Crime Extent and Patterns of Non-Medical Drug Use Causes of Non-Medical Drug Use Social Response Research, Information and Education The Law Treatment and Supportive Services Prescribing Practices and Controls Disagreement by M.-A. Bertrand References Appendices: APPENDIX A. Submissions to the Commission APPENDIX B. Letters from Private Citizens APPENDIX C. Commissioners and Staff APPENDIX D. Some Surveys of Drug Use Among CanadianHigh School and University Students APPENDIX E. Current Research on Cannabis and OtherDrugs APPENDIX F. Innovative Services GLOSSARY OF SCIENTIFIC AND TECHNICAL TERMS Contents | Feedback | Search DRCNet Library | Schaffer Library | Major Studies WT01-B27-35IA088-000636-B022-197http://206.61.184.43:80/schaffer/library/studies/vlr/vlrtoc.htm 206.61.184.43 19970122104019 text/html 12053HTTP/1.0 200 OKDate: Wednesday, 22-Jan-97 10:40:01 GMTServer: WebSitePro/1.1f (S/N wpo-0deb)Allow-ranges: bytesContent-type: text/htmlLast-modified: Saturday, 28-Dec-96 06:48:48 GMTContent-length: 11835 Legal History of American Marijuana Prohibition - Table ofContents Contents | Feedback | Search DRCNet Library | Schaffer Library | Major Studies VIRGINIA LAW REVIEW VOLUME 56 OCTOBER 1970 NUMBER6 THE FORBIDDEN FRUIT AND THE TREE OF KNOWLEDGE: AN INQUIRYINTO THE LEGAL HISTORY OF AMERICAN MARIJUANA PROHIBITION Richard J. Bonnie* & Charles H.Whitebread, II** 'Assistant Professor of Law, University ofVirginia. B.A., 1966, JohnsHopkins University; LL.B., 1969, University of Virginia. "Assistant Professor of Law, University ofVirginia. A.B., 1965, Princeton University; LL.B., 1968, YaleUniversity. Mr. Snell. What is the bill? Mr. Rayburn. It has something to do with something that iscalled marihuana. I believe it is a narcotic of some kind. Colloquy on the House floor prior to passage of the MarihuanaTax Act. Introduction We wish to express our sincere appreciation to the studentswho assisted us in the preparation of the tables at Appendix A.Because the drug statutes of the several states are particularlyconfusing and difficult to find, and because so manyjurisdictions have recently changed their drug laws, thepreparation of the chart required long, tedious work which somany were kind enough to perform. To them, our most sincerethanks. We should like to thank especially Michael A. Cohen, John F.Kuether, W. Tracey Shaw, Alan K. Smith, and Allan J. Tanenbaum,all students at the University of Virginia School of Law, whoseresearch assistance and tireless effort were invaluable. We are particularly indebted to Professor Jerry Mandel whosupplied us with much of the raw data used in the historical casestudies in this Article. In his excellent article on drugstatistics in the Stanford Low Review, Problems with OfficialDrug Statistics, 21 STAN. L. REV. 991 (1969), Professor Mandelsuggested in a footnote that someone should attempt a history ofthe passage of anti-marijuana legislation. We have followed hissuggestion and earnestly hope that our product will fill thisgap. A modified and expanded version of this Article will bepublished in book form in the spring of 1971. TABLE OF CONTENTS I. INTRODUCTION II. THE ANTECEDENTS: CRIMINALIZATION OFNARCOTICS AND ALCOHOL A. A Review of the Temperance Movement B. Anti-Narcotics Legislation to 1914 1. Narcotics Use at the Turn of the Century: A Growing Problem 2. State Legislative Response Before 1914 3. Watershed: The Passage of the Harrison Act C. The judicial Role and the Constitutional Framework: The Police Power and Intoxicant Prohibition to 1920 1. Phase One: Prohibition of Sale and Manufacture of Alcohol 2. Phase Two: Prohibition of Sale of Opium 3. Phase Three: Prohibition of Possession of Alcohol to 1915 4. Phase Four: Prohibition of Possession of Narcotics 5 . Phase Five: Prohibition of Possession of Alcohol After 1915 6. A Postscript on the Police Power: The Cigarette Cases III. THE GENESIS OF MARIJUANA PROHIBITION A. Initial State Legislation: 1914-1931 1. Rationale in the West: Class Legislation 2. Rationale in the East: Substitution 3. The International Scene 4. Conclusion B. Judicial Corroboration IV. PASSAGE OF THE UNIFORM NARCOTIC DRUGACT: 1927-1937 A. Origins of the Uniform Law B. Drafting the Law C. Passage of the State Laws 1. Use Patterns and Public Knowledge: 1931-1937 2. Role of the Federal Bureau of Narcotics 3. Legislative Scrutiny and Media Coverage 4. Available Medical Opinion Provisions of the Uniform Narcotic Drug Act and Supplemental Virginia Marijuana Statute (a) Classification and Offenses (b) Penalties V. PASSAGE OF THE MARIHUANA TAX ACT OF 1937 A. State Enforcement of the Uniform Law B. Public Hysteria or Continued Public Ignorance? C. The Tax Act Hearings 1. Who Were Users? 2. What's Wrong with Marijuana? 3. How Dare You Dissent! D. Congressional "Deliberation" and Action E. Provisions of the Act VI. THE 1950's: HARSHER PENALTIES AND A NEWRATIONALE-THE "STEPPING STONE" THEORY A. The Boggs Act and Its Progeny: The First Escalation 1. The Problem: Increased Narcotics Use 2. The Solution: Harsher Penalties 3. Marijuana and the Boggs Act (a) Increased Use (b) Youthful Users (c) The Danger: A New Rationale 4. The State Response: Mindless Escalation B. The Late 1950's: Another Escalation of the Penalties 1. Provisions of the Narcotic Control Act of 1956 2. Marijuana: Along for the Ride 3. Trafficking Patterns 4. Origin and Use 5. Enforcement Patterns 6. The Epitome of Irrationality: Virginia's 1958 Amendment VII. MARIJUANA USERS IN THE COURTS:1930-1965 A. Statutory Fantasies: The Complications of Federal Legislation 1. Quadruple "Jeopardy" and the "Killer Weed 2. Statutory Presumptions B. Attacks on State Legislation C. Procedural Defenses and Entrapment 1. Search and Seizure 2. Entrapment D. The Pro Forma Trial VIII. THE PUBLIC DISCOVERS THE TRUTH ABOUTMARIJUANA A. Marijuana and the Masses B. Enforcement of the Marijuana Laws: 1960-1970 C. Emergence of Medical Opinion 1. Research Obstacles 2. Current Medical Knowledge (a) The Myths (b) Physical Effects (c) Psychomotor Effects (d) Psychological Effects IX. MARIJUANA LEGISLATION CLASHES WITHJUDICIAL SKEPTICISM AND EMERGING VALUES-PIECEMEAL JUDICIALRESPONSE: 1965-1970 A. Multiple Offenses: Untying the Statutory Knots 1. Federal Developments 2. State Developments B. Procedural Objections to Enforcement Practices 1. Search and Seizure 2. Entrapment 3. Other Prosecution Practices C. Sufficiency of Evidence D. Sanction X. THE HEART OF THE MATTER-SUBSTANTIVE CONSTITUTIONALCHALLENGES TO THE MARIJUANA LAWS: 1965-1970 A. The Burden of Justification: The Importance of Having a Presumption on Your Side 1. Due Process and Equal Protection: Rationality of the Classification.. 2. Cruel and Unusual Punishment: Rationality of the Sanction B. Should the Burden Be Shifted?-Marijuana and Fundamental Rights 1. The Robinson-Powell Argument 2. Free Exercise of Religion 3. Right of Privacy 4. The Ninth Amendment-The Forgotten Kitchen Sink C. Another Constitutional Perspective: The Police Power XI. LEGISLATIVE RECONSIDERATION: 1965-1970 A. Virginia Legislative "Reform": Publicity Begets Tokenism B. The Dodd Bill: Half a Loaf C. Postscript: The Dodd Bill Becomes the Comprehensive Drug Abuse Prevention and Control Act of 1970 XII. CONCLUSION: BEFORE THE FALL A. Public Policy Formation Process B. Twentieth Century Values and the Marijuana Laws 1. The Premise 2. Statutory Recommendations APPENDIX A. STATUTORY TABLES APPENDIX B. BIBLIOGRAPHY Contents | Feedback | Search DRCNet Library | Schaffer Library | Major Studies WT01-B27-36IA031-000655-B042-40http://206.61.184.43:80/schaffer/library/studies/cu/cumenu.htm 206.61.184.43 19970122113718 text/html 2596HTTP/1.0 200 OKDate: Wednesday, 22-Jan-97 11:37:08 GMTServer: WebSitePro/1.1f (S/N wpo-0deb)Allow-ranges: bytesContent-type: text/htmlLast-modified: Wednesday, 01-Jan-97 22:45:01 GMTContent-length: 2378 Consumers Union Report on Licit and Illicit Drugs - Tableof Contents Contents | Feedback | Search DRCNet Library | Schaffer Library | Major Studies The Consumers Union Report on Licit and Illicit Drugs by Edward M. Brecher and the Editors of ConsumerReports Magazine, 1972 Table of Contents Chapter 6 - Opium smoking is outlawed Chapter 7 - The Pure Food and Drugs Act of1906 Chapter 12 - The heroin"overdose" mystery and other occupational hazardsof heroin addiction Chapter 44 - How to Launch aNationwide Drug Menace Contents | Feedback | Search DRCNet Library | Schaffer Library | Major StudiesWT01-B27-37IA031-000655-B042-62http://206.61.184.43:80/schaffer/library/studies/dwda/dwdamenu.htm 206.61.184.43 19970122113726 text/html 3396HTTP/1.0 200 OKDate: Wednesday, 22-Jan-97 11:37:19 GMTServer: WebSitePro/1.1f (S/N wpo-0deb)Allow-ranges: bytesContent-type: text/htmlLast-modified: Saturday, 28-Dec-96 07:11:14 GMTContent-length: 3179 Dealing with Drug Abuse -- Table of Contents Contents | Feedback | Search DRCNet Library | Schaffer Library | Major Studies Dealing with Drug Abuse A Report to the Ford Foundation THE DRUG ABUSE SURVEY PROJECT Patricia M. Wald, Co-chairman, Peter Barton Hutt, Co-chairman James V. DeLong, Executive Director Edgar May, Annette Abrams, Peter A. Wilson, Peter B. Goldberg,John F. Holahan, Paul A. Hermingsen, Andrew T. Weil, M.D. Contents Foreword, by McGeorge Bundy Preface, by Patricia M. Wald andPeter Barton Hutt The Drug Abuse Survey Project: Summary of Findings, Conclusions, andRecommendations, by Patricia M. Wald and Peter Barton Hutt Staff Papers 1. The Drugs and Their Effects, byJames V. DeLong 2. Drug Education, by Patricia M.Wald and Annette Abrams 3. Treatment and Rehabilitation, byJames V. DeLong 4. The Economics of Heroin, by JohnF. Holahan, with the assistance of Paul A. Henningsen 5. Federal Expenditures on Drug-AbuseControl, by Peter B. Goldberg and James V. DeLong 6. Altered States of Consciousness,by Andrew T. Weil, M.D. 7. Narcotics Addiction and Control inGreat Britain, by Edgar May The Contributors Contents | Feedback | Search DRCNet Library | Schaffer Library | Major StudiesWT01-B27-38IA031-000655-B042-102http://206.61.184.43:80/schaffer/library/studies/duapip/pipmenu.htm 206.61.184.43 19970122113744 text/html 23916HTTP/1.0 200 OKDate: Wednesday, 22-Jan-97 11:37:35 GMTServer: WebSitePro/1.1f (S/N wpo-0deb)Allow-ranges: bytesContent-type: text/htmlLast-modified: Saturday, 28-Dec-96 07:12:42 GMTContent-length: 23698 Drug Use In America: Problem in Perspective - Table ofContents Contents | Feedback | Search DRCNet Library | Schaffer Library | Major Studies Marihuana, A Signal ofMisunderstanding The Report of the National Commission on Marihuana and DrugAbuse Drug Use In America: Problem in Perspective Commissioned by President Richard M. Nixon, March, 1972 Table of Contents Letter of Transmittal Introduction Chapter One -- Defining the Issues Definitional Confusion: What is Drug Abuse? "Drug"-The All-Purpose Concept Drug Abuse: Synonym for Social Disapproval The Roots of a "Problem" The Social Response: False Premises and the Perpetuation of a Problem The Assumptions and Premises of Present Policy Elimination of Non-Medical Drug Use Risk-Taking and Health Motivation for Mood Alteration Drugs and Individual Responsibility An Overview of the Present Response Risk-Education Coercion Sickness Perpetuating the Problem Defining the Problem The Meaning of Drug Use The Incidence of Drug Use Drug Using Behavior Drug-Related Risk Risks to Individual Health Drug-Induced Behavior Dependence Liability Evaluating the Social Consequences of Drug Use Defining America's Drug Problem The Limits of Social Control The Commission's Role Chapter Two Drug Using Behavior in the United States I. Drug Use in the General Population Tobacco and Alcohol Use of Proprietary and Ethical Psychoactive Substances Incidence and Prevalance Demographic Characteristics Motivations for Use Multi-Drug Use Alcohol, Ethical and Proprietary Psychoactive Drugs Marihuana and Ethical and Proprietary Psychoactive Drugs Concurrent Drug Usage Illicit Drug Use in the General Population Marihuana LSD, Other Hallucinogens Glue, Other Inhalants Cocaine Heroin Multi-Drug Use II. Drug Use Among Students Survey Methodology Comparative National Survey Student Data Incidence of Student Drug Use Alcohol Marihuana Inhalants Hallucinogens Stimulants Depressants Opiates Patterns of Student Drug Use Present and Future Drug Involvement Frequency and Intensity of Drug Use Duration of Student Drug Use Multi-Drug Use III. A Typology of Drug-Using Behavior Experimental Use Social-Recreational Use Circumstantial-Situational Use Intensified Drug Use Compulsive Drug Use IV. Psychosocial and Institutional Influences on Drug-Using Behavior Broad Cultural Influences Drugs and Youth Experimentation, Availability and Need Personal Dissatisfaction and the Search for "Something of Value" Age and Responsibility The Impact of Extended Education Institutional Sources of Identity Mood Alteration in America Factors Bearing on Drug Dependence A Final Note Chapter Three The Social Impact of Drug Dependence andDrug-Induced Behavior I. Drug Dependence Terminological Confusion Addiction Habituation The Search for Precision Drug Dependence Excising "Addiction" Toward a Functional Understanding of Drug Dependence Psychological Dependence: The Primary Reinforcer The Pharmacological Component: Reinforcement Potential Psycho-Social Components The Development of Dependence: Conditioning The Dependence Continuum Measuring the Degree of Dependence: Psychological Components Physical Dependence: The Secondary Reinforcer Summary Evaluating the Social Impact of Drug Dependence Dependence, Health and Behavior The Vulnerability Factor The Relevance of Social Response Present Social Impact Alcohol Heroin Barbiturates Amphetamines and Related Stimulants Cocaine Hallucinogens Cannabis II. Drug Induced Behavior Impact on Perception Impact on Memory Alteration of Mental States Impairment of Psychomotor Function Summary III.Impact on Public Safety Drugs and Crime Drugs and Their Criminogenic Effects Alcohol Marihuana Barbiturates Amphetamines Opiates Cocaine Hallucinogens Other Psychoactive Substances Summary Psychosocial Characteristics of Drug-Dependent Persons: Implications for Public Safety Social and Demographic Characteristics Age Educational Status Income, Occupation and Employment Status Home Environment and Marital Status Psychological Characteristics Problems in Inferring Causation The Costs of Heroin Dependence Cost to the Heroin-Dependent Person Cost to Society from Criminal Activity Criminal Justice Costs: Processing the Drug-Dependent Person The Effect of Drug Treatment on Crime Current Research Findings A Realistic Appraisal Drugs and Driving Research Limitations Research Findings Alcohol Marihuana Other Psychoactive Substances IV. Impact on Public Health and Welfare Public Health and Welfare: A Preventive Concept Assessing the Public Health and Welfare Impact of Drug Use The Population of Heavy Alcohol Users Economic Loss Death Alcohol Heroin Barbiturates Medical Complications of Chronic Drug Use Impact on the Family Structure Compensatory Social Costs Framing a Public Health Response Chapter Four Toward a Coherent Social Policy The Process Goals and Premises Drugs and Social Responsibility Irresponsible Use Discouragement and Social Tolerance Responsible Decision Making Risks and Perceived Advantages Designing a Differential Response to Drug Use I. The Availability Decision Models of Availability The Calculus: An Overview Relative Social Cost Efficacy of Controls Cost of Controls The Social Context of the Availability Decision The Present System Availability Not Limited As To Purpose of Consumption Availability Limited As To Purpose of Consumption Substances Not Available For Consumption Specific Recommendations Opiates Cocaine Amphetamines Barbiturates Non-Barbiturate Sedatives Minor Tranquilizers Hallucinogens Marihuana Alcohol Implementing Restrictions on Availability The Role of International Agreements Federal Enforcement Policy State Enforcement Policy II. The Consumption-Intervention Decision An Overview of the Possession Offense Deviance, Deterrence and Symbolism Philosophical Conflict Constitutionality Functional Overview Deterrence Social Costs of Enforcement Possession and Supply Symbolism Sickness and Treatment Origins of the Cult of Curability Addiction and Treatment: The Early Days The Therapeutic Premise Takes Hold Therapeutic Intervention Comes Under Attack Harnessing the Therapeutic Response Involuntary "Civil" Commitment: The Problems of a Therapeutic Response Therapy and the Criminal Process Dangerousness and Prevention Crime and the Public Safety Contagion and the Public Health and Welfare The Appropriate Role of Preventive Intervention Conclusion: The Possession Offense and Its Enforcement Functional Enforcement Role of the Police III. Defining the Government's Role Governmental Competence General Guidelines Analyzing the Government Response An Overview of the Government Response The Special Action Office: A Stopgap Failures of the Present System Identification of the Nature and Extent of Drug Use Definition of goals and objectives for drug-related functions Effective planning Affective control of resource allocation Coordination among federal agencies Drug-related functions within agencies whose primary mission is not solving drug problems Evaluation of programs in terms of their effectiveness Evaluation of programs in terms of efficiency Separation of drug and alcohol activities Reorganizing the Governmental Response Bringing the Drug Effort Under Control The Structure of the Unified Approach Organization of Response at the Community Level IV. Treatment and Rehabilitation An Overview of the Present Response Uncertainty About the Illness Uncertainty About the Objective of Treatment Diversity of Method History of the Treatment of Opiate Dependence 1870-1900: The Early Years 1900-1915: Years of Optimism 1915-1930: Confidence Wanes 1930-1960: The Dry Years The Sixties: Society Turns to Therapy Again Present Methods and Models of Treatment Hospitalization Ambulatory Drug-Free Treatment Therapeutic Communities Methadone Maintenance Antagonist Treatment Multi-Modality Programs Treatment for Non-Opiate Drug Dependence The Role of the Law in Treatment Legal Controls as Therapy Civil Procedures Criminal Procedures Legal Control of the Treatment Process Heroin Maintenance Conclusions and Recommendations on Treatment of Dependence Federal Funding and Services Federal Evaluation State Treatment Programs The Role of the Legal System in State Programs Uniformity of State Law Emergency Treatment of Drug Users V. Prevention The Information-Education Explosion Goals of Information-Education Prevention Information Policy Education Training The Media and Drug Use Prevention Other Prevention Strategies and Techniques Summary and Conclusion VI. Research A New Interest in Research The Need for a Directed Research Plan Incidence, Frequency and Intensity of Drug Use Etiology and Consequences of Drug Use The Role of the Criminal Justice System Efficacy of Treatment Other Areas VII. The Private Response The Health Professions Pharmaceutical Industry Alcohol Industry Legal Profession Industry Colleges and Universities Mass Media The Religious Community The Family Chapter Five Looking Ahead The Immediate Future: The Goal of the Commission's Recommendations Changing Attitudes Filling the Informational Gaps Unifying the Government Response Developing the Private Response Improving Controls on Availability Rationalizing Consumption Controls Expanding Treatment, Rehabilitation and Prevention Services The Immediate Future Policy Making Over the Long Term Confronting the Basic Question Reappraisal: The Need for Evaluation Sources Bibliography Consultants Contractors and Contributors Research Papers Prepared for Commission Recommendations Index of First Year Recommendations Index of Second Year Recommendations Contents | Feedback | Search DRCNet Library | Schaffer Library | Major Studies Marihuana, A Signal ofMisunderstanding WT01-B27-39IA031-000655-B042-129http://206.61.184.43:80/schaffer/library/studies/fada/fadamenu.htm 206.61.184.43 19970122113754 text/html 3249HTTP/1.0 200 OKDate: Wednesday, 22-Jan-97 11:37:46 GMTServer: WebSitePro/1.1f (S/N wpo-0deb)Allow-ranges: bytesContent-type: text/htmlLast-modified: Saturday, 28-Dec-96 07:07:19 GMTContent-length: 3032 The Facts About Drug Abuse Contents | Feedback | Search DRCNet Library | Schaffer Library | Major Studies | TheFacts About Drug Abuse The Facts About Drug Abuse The Drug Abuse Council, 1980 Contents Foreword by Bethuel M. Webster Board of Directors of the Drug AbuseCouncil Acknowledgments The Contributors Final Report of the Drug Abuse Council Staff Chapters: 1. The Federal Government's Response toIllicit Drugs, 1969-1978 by Peter Goldberg 2. Drug-Law Enforcement Efforts byJohn R.Pekkanen 3. Heroin Treatment: Development, Status, Outlook by David C.Lewis and John Sessler 4. The Influence of Public Attitudes and Understanding on DrugEducation and Prevention by Peter Goldberg and Erik J. Meyers 5. Marijuana and Cocaine: The Process of Change in Drug Policyby Robert R. Carr and Erik J. Meyers 6. American Heroin Policy: Some Alternatives by Erik J. Meyers Appendix: Activities of the Drug Abuse Council Notes Contents | Feedback | Search DRCNet Library | Schaffer Library | Major Studies | TheFacts About Drug Abuse WT01-B27-40IA031-000655-B042-156http://206.61.184.43:80/schaffer/library/forum.htm 206.61.184.43 19970122113805 text/html 19547HTTP/1.0 200 OKDate: Wednesday, 22-Jan-97 11:37:57 GMTServer: WebSitePro/1.1f (S/N wpo-0deb)Allow-ranges: bytesContent-type: text/htmlLast-modified: Saturday, 28-Dec-96 06:42:39 GMTContent-length: 19329 The Report of the California Research Advisory Panel Contents | Feedback | Search DRCNet Library | Schaffer Library | Miscellaneous Statementson Drug Policy The Report of the California Research Advisory Panel The Drug Policy Foundation's LEGISLATIVE FORUM ON DRUG POLICY State Capitol, January 27, 1992 FREDERICK H. MEYERS, M.D. Professor of Pharmacology, University of California, SanFrancisco, CA Note from Cliff Schaffer: This was sent to me personally byDr. Meyers, with a few of his own hand written notes. He was thehead of the Research Advisory Panel for the State of Californiaand states that this speech paraphrases the conclusions of theResearch Advisory Panel. The premise of this meeting--- that the legislature must atthis time accept the suggestions of the nominal experts inproblems of drug abuse here assembled and begin thedecriminalization of drug use-- appears at first glance to bepresumptuous. It is not, however, if one considers ourdeteriorating social and economic state and the forbiddingprospect of the adjustments that must be made by thelegislature at this session. I think that no area of informed, disinterested thinking willchallenge the conclusion that whatever we have attempted bylegislation to regulate the use of the emotionally loaded streetdrugs --- that is, excluding the laudable alcohol---has beenpalpably damaging. The prohibition or legal approach has not beenmerely ineffective but that approach, rather than the effects ofthe drugs themselves, is responsible for the individual andsocietal damage that so appropriately concerns us. Heroin, indeedthe non-medical use of narcotics in general, cannot be inherentlytoo dangerous or harmful or the legislature would not havemandated the provision of methadone, a pharmacologicallyequivalent narcotic, to some of our heroin habituated citizens. It is, then, the reaction of society to the use of certaindrugs rather than the drug effects themselves that cause theproblems and damage that concern us. I react to these problems as I see them in individual patientsand am most concerned about the damage imposed on the individualby social drug use less dangerous to society than the use ofalcohol and by compulsive drug use that is not that differentfrom cigarette smoking. The physical damage and consequent costto society in medical care is much less with heroin, but,cigarettes being legal and relatively inexpensive, the smoker isnot subject to the risk of prosecution or of being driven tocriminal activity. A California legislator in 1992 would, I should think, be moreinterested in the expense involved to the state and recognize anarea where budgetary relief can be achieved with a social andhumanitarian gain rather than the curtailment of a program ofsome value. The financial burden at each governmental level ofenforcing laws whose violation cannot be managed by ordinarypolice tactics is significant. Even greater is the expense anddisorganization imposed by the associated criminal activity onpolice, jail, court, prison, probation and parole activities. Now in deciding whether to accept my thesis, be influenced byyour own observations and common sense, which will establish theclinching argument: all of the enforcement activity of the pastfifty years has been wasted in that the use of more and morevaried drugs has grown progressively to its present level. Before discussing what changes should be made and in whatorder, I will acknowledge and meet the fear of legislators that ashow of rationality will be interpreted as being "soft ondrugs". This idea will be imposed, and the conclusionspresented here today will be challenged only by agents of what Icall the enforcement industry. (Or at least the administratorsof those agencies. I have not recently met an agent orinvestigator working at the street level who thinks that the waron drugs has been or can be won, and I do work with peaceofficers.) Workers in the enforcement area are given to protecting aspecial position within police work. They are not disinterestedinformants just as I am not a disinterested informant in mattersof pay and privilege for U.C. professors. They have greatinfluence on those citizens who depend on the daily media, pressor TV, or who confuse TV dramas with reality. The daily press isnot required to be accurate or comprehensive or to providefollow-up; it is required only to report more or less accuratelywhatever information, misleading or otherwise, is provided by aninformant who may not even be identified. Thus we have had a longseries of largest ever seizures, biggest dealer ever, etc, but itis street level users who resorted to crime to"maintain" who congest our system of criminal justice,and we see no relief in the face of more and more money forenforcement. I insist that if you examine more deliberate, qualityjournalism from as liberal as one dares to be today, for example,The Nation , across the spectrum to Buckley's conservativejournal; if you examine the technical literature of medicine,sociology and even economics and if you note the names andpositions of people supportive of organizations such as the DrugPolicy Foundation, you will agree with my statement above that noarea of informed, disinterested thought disagrees with theconclusions of this meeting. Their agreement is often expressedin terms of legalization of drugs, but, except for radicals likeBuckley and Greenspan, decriminalization is meant. The time for academic discussion has passed. Now it is time tothink tactically, no longer asking if the drug laws should bechanged to achieve decriminalization but looking at what changesshould be made and in what order. My discussion from here on, that is, the changes and tacticssuggested to the legislature, is almost entirely quotes orparaphrases from a report to the legislature by the ResearchAdvisory Panel. I do not appear as a representative of thatgroup, but I see no reason why I should not exploit thecompetence and effort reflected in the report. The panel first established three prior cautions or bases forderiving the changes: 1. Differentiate different drugs and different routes ofadministration. Do not discuss the drug problem. 2. Separate drug effects from associated criminal activity. 3. Consider the risk/benefit ratio for any change. The goal isto reduce the damage done by a drug without significant increase in its use. Nounregulated (legalized) drug nor any industry comparable tocigarette or alcohol industry proselytizing for drug use. The panel then suggests a stepwise approach by thelegislature. The three changes suggested for the first year woulddemonstrate that change could be safely accomplished and preparethe public for more comprehensive revisions. The suggested legislative changes are: Allow Cultivation of Marihuana for Personal Use Insofar as damage to the individual and society is concerned,the quantitatively most important drugs are alcohol and nicotinein the form of cigarettes. There remains, then, as the otherquantitatively important drug, marijuana, which has become, for alarge fraction of the population, a social drug comparable toalcohol in pattern of use and approaching alcohol in extent ofusage. Marijuana is a disinhibiting drug used socially to relieveanxiety and as such has many liabilities in common with alcohol.I acknowledge that marijuana is not without its effect on theindividual user and would not suggest any change that carried therisk of a great increase in the use of marijuana. I resist theuse of the word "legalization" in relation to any drug,including marijuana. On the other hand, an objectiveconsideration of marijuana shows that it is responsible for farless damage to the individual and to society than are alcohol andcigarettes. A further consideration in forming a reaction to thewide use of marijuana is that is a source of conflict betweengenerations and of disrespect for the law. The huge cost ofattempting to enforce these disrespected laws and to punish theirinfraction by people who do not feel guilty is, in my opinion,entirely wasteful and damaging and the monies should be appliedin areas of greater need. Also important is the economic and, to some extent, criminalactivity associated with the marketplace of marijuana. At themoment, we are adding millions to our trade deficit, off of thebooks to be sure, by our purchases of marijuana in Colombia,Mexico, Thailand, and elsewhere. Yet, thanks to a previous actionof the California Legislature, the product of this illegalactivity may be possessed and used by the citizen with thepossibility of only minor sanctions. This change has not lead toany disastrous consequences. On the contrary, it has reduced thetension between generations and decriminalized to some extent thegenerally sanctioned use of this new social drug by large numbersof people. This new situation, for which we applaud the Legislature, ishowever, not stable, in the sense that the failure to act inrelation to the supply of the drug leaves unmet the question ofthe still illegal market and the economic problem that thatentails. If this disparity could be resolved there would beeconomic gain and a great simplification of law enforcement whichnow devotes a considerable effort to seizing a small fraction ofthe illegal importations or cultivations. I therefore suggest that the law be changed to permitcultivation for personal use. Such cultivation would be permittedonly on property serving as the residence for the individual,this is, it would not authorize the cultivation of fifty plantson a National forest and it would not permit the possessionoutside of the home of more than the present one ounce, nor wouldit sanction the provision to others in or out of the residencewhether by sale or in the form "parties". Any change regulating the provision of this drug mustbe made in such a way that we do not see the development ofanother industry comparable to the alcohol or cigarette industry.Permitting the restricted cultivation would avoid that evil butachieve an of the gains promised above. There are people, including I am sure some legislators, who,out of genuine concern rather than mere timidity, will wonderwhether such a change, however, warranted by social and economicgains, would not also result in increased use. I do not dismissthis justifiable concern out of hand. the Panel insisted, and Iagree, that no attitude of approval of marijuana, or alcohol, ortobacco be projected. I would be a prohibitionist if prohibitionwould work. To the extent that prohibition creates a marketplaceor social conflict, we suggest more flexible, practical, andhumane policies. It does ,however, appear that the supply andexperience with marihuana is such that a plateau has been reached and that usage over foreseeablecircumstances will remain about at its present level, as is thecase with alcohol. Remove Penalties for Possession of Needles and Syringes The statement that heroin is inherently not a dangerous drughas been weakened by the appearance in the community of the AIDSvirus. This virus is transmitted, among other ways, by the use byone persons of paraphernalia for injection contaminated with theblood of an infected person. The AIDS virus has already spreadthrough the, drug-using community to an extent that varies withthe sanitary practices of the local population. The prevalence ofinfection is much higher, for example, in New York City than inSan Francisco and lower throughout the balance of California thanin San Francisco. There is thus some urgency and advantage ininstituting control methods. There are two suggested methods of controlling the spread ofthis relatively new virus. The first, demonstrably ineffective,is to adopt a moralizing attitude, continue our current practicesand simple add the individual tragedy and economic burden to thecommunity of more AIDS patients. Such an attitude is consistentwith the feeling that heroin users (and gays and psychotics) arebetter dead and is genocidal. The other method of controlling the spread of the AIDS viruswould be to encourage sanitary practices at the time of injectionby making it possible for each heroin user to use his own"outfit", that is, syringe and needle, rather thanaccept the risk of using one contaminated with another addict'sblood. This would become permissible as well as possible if theintravenous (IV) drug user were permitted to legally possess hisown syringe and needle. Heroin users understandably try to avoid carrying supplies oftheir drug and their injecting paraphernalia any more than isabsolutely necessary since the mere possession of the substanceand the equipment is a punishable crime. The possession ofparaphernalia is defined as a misdemeanor. The availability ofthe charge becomes a convenient mean of harassing the addict andof subjecting him, in effect, to a three-day jail sentencewithout trial. A person with a prior drug related conviction mustbe especially careful since, in such a situation, even thepossession of an ordinary spoon can be construed, according tothe statute, as possession of paraphernalia. As a result, usersare reluctant to carry their own outfits and, their compulsionbeing upon them, are quite likely to use whatever equipment isavailable at the site of drug purchase. People driven by thecompulsion that the heroin user feels, and given their choicebetween using someone else's outfit and being without their drugwill use the possibly contaminated equipment. Laudable as the"needle" exchange programs are and admirable as I findtheir practitioners, they (and the impending legislative respond)are inadequate. The situation is too urgent for an"experimental" program in one city and statutory changeis the definitive change needed to permit education in proper practices by the junkie. Prohibit (legal or illegal) Drug Use in Special StateEstablishments At the same time that we carry out what will be seen as aliberalization of some drug regulations we should demonstratethat our ultimate goal is the reduction of all drug use. Theeffectiveness of education in reducing drug abuse is obviouslydisappointing. Not even the success in controlling cigarettesmoking extends to the youthful population. However, it is fromthe successful imposition and acceptance of restrictions onsmoking by the adult population that we must learn. Drugeducation efforts have focused largely on the populations that weconsider to be deviant and at risk, that is, young people andminority groups. Our efforts to limit the use of quantitativelyimportant drugs should act to influence the entire population sothat an unambiguous attitude of disapproval is projected. The amazing progress in dissuading people from the use oftobacco, suggests additional action in relation to alcohol,already a regulated drug. That prohibition is not feasible hascertainly been adequately demonstrated, but restricted use ofalcohol in inappropriate places is justifiable and would be anessential step in projecting the attitudinal change desired. The Panel applauds the establishment of tobacco free areas inState institutions. As a condition of their funding theLegislature should now insist that certain agencies within theState system not sell or provide alcoholic beverages within theconfines of their campus or building. This should be immediatelyapplied to any medical center campus or hospital. Doctors andother care-givers have a generally favored status and acquirewith that a special responsibility to project an attitude ofdisapproval about the use of any disabling drug while they areaccepting responsibility for a dependent patient. Certainly theState acquires a liability in providing alcohol to individualswho are then going to drive or see patients. More importantly,such use then projects an attitude totally at odds with thatwhich we claim throughout our discussions as desirable. Similarly, it is impossible to rationalize the use of adepressant drug, clearly shown to impair performance after smalldoses, on a University or State University campus dedicated tointellectual activity. Conclusion These changes are minor indeed. However, they would achievesome real progress and, equally important, would demonstrate tothe alarmed citizenry that constructive change is possible andpermit a freer discussion next year. I hope that the Legislaturesenses the urgency in the situation in our state. I close bythreatening you with the aphorism of Francis Bacon of 400 hundredyears ago, "He that will not apply new remedies must acceptnew evils; for time is the great innovator." Contents | Feedback | Search DRCNet Library | Schaffer Library | Miscellaneous Statementson Drug PolicyWT01-B27-41IA031-000655-B042-187http://206.61.184.43:80/schaffer/library/nylawyer.htm 206.61.184.43 19970122113815 text/html 98555HTTP/1.0 200 OKDate: Wednesday, 22-Jan-97 11:38:05 GMTServer: WebSitePro/1.1f (S/N wpo-0deb)Allow-ranges: bytesContent-type: text/htmlLast-modified: Saturday, 28-Dec-96 06:42:20 GMTContent-length: 98337 A Wiser Course: Ending Drug Prohibition Contents | Feedback | Search DRCNet Library | Schaffer Library | Major Studies | A Wiser Course, Ending DrugProhibition A WISER COURSE: ENDING DRUG PROHIBITION by the Association of the Bar of the City of New York June, 1994 The June 1994 issue of "The Record," the officialpublication of the Association of the Bar of the City of NewYork, will include a recently released report by theAssociation's Special Committee on Drugs and the Law. The reportis entitled "A Wiser Course: Ending Drug Prohibition"(the "Report"). In typewritten form, the Report is 83pages long and has 203 footnotes of sources and authorities. On June 15, 1994, the New York Law Journal (the dailynewspaper for lawyers in New York) printed on page one a newsarticle about the Report. Unfortunately, the rest of the"media" (e.g., the New York Times, The Daily News,Newsday, ABC, CBS, NBC, C-SPAN, TBS) have failed, at least sofar, to take any notice of this Report. To get the word out about this Report, the Association hasgiven permission for the Report to be distributed on theInternet. A full-length copy of the Report (about 96,388 bytesbut without the 203 footnotes) is posted here for your readingenjoyment. The dissent is also reproduced at the end. If anyone is interested in purchasing a hardcopy of "TheRecord" issue containing the footnoted version of theReport, please use the following information: The Association of the Bar of the City of New York 42 West 44th Street New York, New York 10036 (212) 382-6600 If you agree with opinions expressed in the Report, pleasetell the media, your state and federal representatives, yourfriends, and your family about the Report. Let's get the debateon the "War On Drugs" rolling!!!! A WISER COURSE: ENDING DRUG PROHIBITION TABLE OF CONTENTS I. INTRODUCTION II. THE COSTS OF PROHIBITION A. DISTORTION OF THE JUDICIAL SYSTEM 1. New York State 2. Other States 3. Federal Courts 4. The Judiciary is Impatient with the Present System 5. Efforts to Handle Court Congestion B. THE PRISON STATE C. EROSION OF THE RULE OF LAW AND CIVIL LIBERTIES 1. Perception of Ineffectiveness 2. Perception of a Self-Perpetuating System 3. Police Corruption 4. Poor Children are Victims of the "War on Drugs" 5. Selective Prosecution 6. Erosion of Constitutional Rights 7. Forfeiture's Heavy Hand 8. Erosion of Privacy Rights D. PROHIBITION-INDUCED VIOLENCE E. PROHIBITION'S FAILURE TO LIMIT DRUG USE F. PROHIBITION THREATENS PUBLIC HEALTH 1. Spread of Disease a. Sharing Needles b. Trading Sex for Drugs c. Neglect of Health d. Avoidance of the Health-Care System 2. Lack of Information and Quality Control a. Adulterated Drugs, Designer Drugs, and Drugs of Unknown Potency b. Lack of Knowledge About Safer Use c. Using Alcohol and Tobacco Instead of "Soft Drugs" 3. Injuries Due to Violence 4. Diversion of Resources from Treatment and Prevention 5. The Sense of Treating Drugs as a Public Health Problem a. Treatment Works b. Self-Help Groups c. Therapeutic Communities d. Other Inpatient Drug-Free Treatment Programs e. Outpatient Methadone Maintenance Programs f. Outpatient Drug-Free Therapy 6. Empirical Research on Effective Drug Treatment a. Studies Examining the Effects of Treatment on Substance Abuse b. Studies Examining the Effects of Drug Treatment on the Consequences of Drug Abuse 7. Education Works a. Life Skills Training Program b. Students Taught Awareness and Resistance c. Project Healthy Choices d. Student Assistance Program e. Smart Moves f. Seattle Social Development Project g. Programs for Children of Addicts III. TOWARD A NEW DRUG POLICY IV. CONCLUSION A WISER COURSE: ENDING DRUG PROHIBITION I. INTRODUCTION In 1986, the Association of the Bar of the City of New York,responding to a general perception that criminal and civil sanctions against the manufacture, distribution, or possessionof drugs were not "solving," or even ameliorating, theproblems associated with drug use in our society, formed aSpecial Committee on Drugs and the Law (the"Committee") to study our current drug laws and toreport its recommendations on the wisdom of such laws. The Committee has considered the complex legal, social,medical, economic, and political issues raised by our nation'scurrent drug control policies. Despite billions of dollars spenton law enforcement, criminal prosecution, and incarcerationduring the past 80 years, the United States has made little or noprogress toward reducing drug use or solving its "drugproblem." On the contrary, illegal drug use remains apervasive and powerful influence in our cities and in the nationat large. Beyond the continuing availability and consumption ofdrugs, the unintended consequences of our current prohibitionpolicy are ubiquitous: our courts, both state and federal, arejammed; our prison populations are burgeoning; urban and ghettochildren, as well as adults, are frequent victims of violent"turf wars"; our civil liberties are being eroded,along with our society's respect for the rule of law generally;our public health is threatened; the enjoyment of urban life hasdeclined; and our nation's institutions, as well as those of ourSouth and Central American neighbors, are undermined by theimmense wealth accumulated illegally under the currentprohibition policies. The Committee has concluded, in some cases reluctantly, thatthe costs of drug prohibition are simply too high and itsbenefits too dubious. The Committee recognizes that calling for an end to drugprohibition cannot be either the end of our inquiry or the sum ofour recommendations. There are several difficult questions thatremain to be answered: What forms of governmental regulation, ifany, are appropriate instead of prohibition? To what degree, ifany, should private distribution of drugs be permitted? Is aregulatory regime similar to one now used to control alcoholicbeverages appropriate for some, if not all, drugs? How should anew regulatory regime treat children, adolescents, or pregnantwomen? What kinds of prevention and treatment programs shouldthere be and how should they be funded? These and other issues demand both the urgent attention andhonest judgment of our Committee and, more broadly, our society. The Committee believes the necessary inquiry cannot begin inearnest so long as our nation remains committed to the illusionthat drug use can be prohibited at an acceptable cost. Only byrecognizing that this is no longer true can we fashion a methodof controlling drugs other than the current coercive drug laws,which have been largely ineffective and which are sapping thevitality of our cities, our legal system, and our society as awhole. It is the Committee's hope that this report will advancethe discussion of this important issue. II. THE COSTS OF PROHIBITION A. DISTORTION OF THE JUDICIAL SYSTEM At a time of ever-increasing competition for scarce publicfunds, the volume of drug prosecutions and convictions continuesto increase, as does the strain on judicial budgets, personnel,and facilities in the federal and state systems. The addedburdens on the judiciary due to drug prosecutions havesubstantially diminished the courts' capacity to manage the civildocket. Criminal cases take priority, with civil jury trialsrelegated to the bottom of an increasing waiting list. Somecourts, for purely budgetary reasons, have been forced to suspendall civil jury trials for periods of time. 1. New York State The majority of drug cases are handled by state and localcourts. Consequently, it is instructive to review first theimpact of these increased caseloads and costs on New York State. In 1991, New York State spent a total of $8,641,418,000 forall judicial and legal services (including police protection,$3,662,389,000; courts, $932,314,000; prosecution and legalservices, $461,790,000; and public defense, 197,194,000). It isdifficult to obtain specific dollar figures for the cost of drugarrests and prosecutions in New York State, but by combining theavailable data on caseloads and judicial costs it is possible tomake some rough estimates. In 1987, total arrests in New YorkState were 481,676, whereas in 1991 the total was 506,710, anincrease of 5.2%. During the same period, felony drug arrestsrose from 42,655 (approximately 9% of total arrests) in 1987 to54,184 in 1991 (11% of all arrests), a 27% increase. By contrast,between 1987 and 1991, misdemeanor drug arrests dropped from53,621 to 36,489, a decrease of 32%. In 1991 a tremendous volumeof caseload activity confronted the Judiciary's judges andnonjudicial personnel. Nearly 79,000 felony indictments andsuperior court informations were filed in Supreme and CountyCourts throughout New York. That number represents a 54% increasecompared with 1985. Most of the statewide increase was the resultof phenomenal caseload increases in New York City. This year, theSupreme Court Criminal Term in New York City received over 52,000felony filings, an astonishing 70% increase since 1985. Theremarkable level in felony filings is primarily caused byincreases in drug-related filings. . . . Unquestionably, these caseload increases are the productof the drug crisis which, perhaps for the first time in ourState's history, threatens to test our ability to administerjustice on the local level, not just in New York City, butstatewide. The increasing number of drug prosecutions in New York'scourts has taken its toll on the judicial system. One New YorkState Supreme Court Justice has summarized the impact of theso-called "war on drugs" on New York's criminal justicesystem as follows: Our court calendars groan under the burden of ever-increasingnew drug cases. New York City's Corrections Department estimatesthat 70 percent of its inmates are charged with drug-relatedcrimes. Yet these ever-growing prosecutions and incarcerationsare having little or no impact on drug crimes. In 1980 only 11percent of the total inmate population was incarcerated for drugoffenses, yet by 1992 this figure rose to 44 percent. At a costof $30,000 per year to maintain each prisoner, our state spentover $195 million in 1992 to confine drug offenders alone. Lastyear the state's Office of Court Administration requested anadditional $40 million just to cover the expense of drug cases.Since the advent of crack a decade ago, the city has hired 9,000new police, 700 additional assistant district attorneys, and hasadded 18,000 new cells on Rikers Island. The total cost: $591million a year. 2. Other States State court convictions for drug law violations have increaseddramatically nationwide since the mid-1980s. Between 1986 and1988, there was a nearly 70% increase in the number of personsconvicted of felony drug trafficking or possession charges (from135,000 to 225,000). The number of persons convicted who receivedstate prison sentences rose from 49,900 to 92,500. In 1988, drugoffenses accounted for approximately one-third of all felonyconvictions in all state courts. 3. Federal Courts The case loads and concomitant costs of managing drug cases infederal courts also have increased substantially over the pastdecade. In 1982, the budget for prosecution of all federal drugcases in the United States was $78.9 million; in 1993, the budgetwas ten times as much -- $795.9 million. In federal districtcourts in 1989, a total of 54,643 criminal cases were prosecuted;of those 16,834 (approximately 30%) were for drug offenses. In1990, 19,271 defendants were prosecuted for drug offenses; ofthose 3,083 were not convicted, and 16,188 were convicted: 13,036by guilty plea (81%), and 3,121 after trial (19%). Between July1992 and June 1993, 50,366 defendants were convicted in thefederal courts, and 27% of these (18,576) were convicted offederal drug offenses. Expenses associated with appeals offederal drug cases rose from $8.2 million in 1982 to $104.2million budgeted in 1993. A significant portion of this increaseresulted from appeals filings in drug-related cases, whichtotalled 1,583 in 1981, 4,386 in 1989, and 5,658 in 1990 (a 29%increase from the previous year alone and, overall, a 383%increase in ten years). In 1991, there were 5,570 federaldrug-related appeals filed. 4. The Judiciary is Impatient with the Present System Federal and state judges throughout the United States havepublicly expressed frustration with the present laws prohibitingdrugs, and some senior federal judges have even refused to sit ondrug cases. In the Southern District of New York and in theEastern District of New York, Judges Whitman Knapp, Robert Sweet,and Jack Weinstein have spoken out publicly against the presentlaws and their associated draconian penalties, and Judges Knappand Weinstein have refused, as is their right as senior judges,to preside over drug trials and sentences. State judges in NewYork have also protested the increasing time on their calendarsthat drug cases take and the Second Offender sentencing rule thatcompels them to give lengthy prison sentences to second-time drugoffenders. These judges seek a solution to the "war ondrugs" before the whole judicial system breaks down underthe strain. 5. Efforts to Handle Court Congestion Because of the enormous increase in drug cases, especially inlarge urban areas, several stop-gap solutions are being pursuedto balance limited court resources against the burgeoningcaseloads. In New York City and New Orleans, for instance,special narcotics divisions have been established to expediteprocessing of drug felonies. These experimental programs aredesigned to hear cases just prior to grand jury proceedings withthe goal of inducing defendants to accept plea bargains that arebetter than would be expected if the case proceeded through thegrand jury process. Also, special court parts -- staffed bypersonnel with expertise in drug cases, addiction, and communitytreatment centers -- have been established in New York City todeal exclusively with drug cases. Unfortunately, none of theseshort-term solutions will correct the fundamental distortion ofthe priorities of the state and federal judicial systems causedby the "war on drugs." B. THE PRISON STATE One of the most tangible, measurable effects of the "waron drugs," has been the creation of a "prisonstate". According to the Federal Bureau of Investigation'sstatistics, one million arrests are made annually for violationsof the federal and state drug laws. As a result of these massivenumbers of arrests each year, "the United States has ahigher proportion of its population incarcerated than any othercountry in the world for which reliable statistics areavailable." Incarceration in America is now at an all-time high. From 1925through 1973, the American prison population fluctuated between90 and 120 people in prison per 100,000 of the population; in1973 the rate was 98 per 100,000, a ten-year low. Between 1973 and 1980, however, there was a 40% increase, to135 people in prison per 100,000; and by 1986, following thestart of the modern "war on drugs," the incarcerationrate had jumped to 200 per 100,000. In 1993, the rate ofAmericans serving prison time stood at 325 per 100,000. In 1993,the number of inmates in federal and state prisons in New Yorkincreased by 4.6%, to 64,600. On average, it costs $20,000 per year to maintain oneprisoner, $100,000 to build a single prison cell, and $20,000 peryear to staff a prison cell. More than one in forty American males between the ages 14 and34 are locked up. Between 1980 and 1990, the total prison population in theUnited States increased by 133% to over 771,000 prisoners. In 1993, the total prison population reached 949,000, nearlythree times as many as in 1980. During the 1980s, newimprisonments on drug charges increased over 1,000%. Drug offenders have accounted for an increasing percentage ofthe population in State and Federal correctional facilities. Drug offenders constituted an estimated 22% of the Stateprison population in 1991, up from 6% of the population in 1979.In Federal correctional facilities, drug offenders accounted for61% of the population, up from 16% in 1970, 25% in 1980, and 52%in 1990. The vast majority of the prison population increase during the1980s, which doubled the number of persons under custody for allcharges, involved drug law violations. Due to the great increasein drug-related incarcerations, the federal and state prisonsystems are overwhelmed, as reported almost daily in thenewspapers. Prison overcrowding persists despite an unprecedentedboom in prison construction. For example, between 1983 and 1992,New York State built 29 prisons, increasing the number of prisonsin the state to 68 and the inmate capacity from 29,253 to 57,862. No one wants overcrowding. It riles inmates, strains prisonguards, encourages the spread of illness and generally makesprisons more volatile places. In the past, when there was moneyto spend, the solution to overcrowding would have been clear --create more space. Not any more. With money scarce and a sensethat more prison beds have not resulted in less crime, manylawmakers are being forced to conclude they can no longer buildtheir way out of the problem. According to the United States Department of Justice,"drug offenders" are becoming a larger share of theprison population for two reasons: first, the likelihood that aconviction will result in incarceration is increasing; andsecond, those convicted on drug charges are receiving longerprison sentences. Mandatory sentencing laws, such as the federal sentencingguidelines, exacerbate the problem by forcing judges to imposelengthy sentences for simple possession of small amounts ofdrugs. These laws, first passed in the 1970s but increasinglyrelied on as a weapon in the "drug war" in recentyears, have in large measure been responsible for today's severeovercrowding. Mandatory minimum sentences require judges toimpose a statutorily-defined minimum period of incarcerationwithout the possibility of parole, with no consideration of thespecific facts of the crime or any mitigating circumstances.Faced with mandatory sentences laws, there has been at a growingmovement at the state level to minimize their draconian effects.In New York, for example, the courts had been cooperating withprosecutors and defense attorneys to avoid the harsh effects onsecond-time drug offenders. New York's Governor, Mario Cuomo, inhis 1994 budget message has asked the Legislature to restorediscretion to judges meting out second-time drug felony sentences"to relieve overcrowding in state prisons." For all of the extra burden on the prison and judicial systemsand on the taxpayer caused by the "war on drugs,"American society has little to show for it. "If suchtoughness had much to do with crime, you'd think we'd have seensome results by now. But . . . overall crime has decreased only6% since 1973; violent crimes are up 24%. The National ResearchCouncil of the National Academy of Sciences recently concludedthat a tripling of time served by violent offenders since 1975had `apparently very little' impact on violent crime." With61% of today's federal inmates incarcerated on drug lawconvictions, judiciary and corrections overcrowding and escalatedcosts would necessarily be reduced were the current drug policyaltered toward a less punitive, more humane approach whichremoves the profit motive fueling the black market in illegaldrugs. C. EROSION OF THE RULE OF LAW AND CIVIL LIBERTIES One of the more insidious effects of the "war ondrugs" has been the gradual erosion of the rule of law andthe public's civil liberties. Several interrelated elementscontribute to this particularly destructive consequence of thecurrent drug laws. 1. Perception of Ineffectiveness Politicians from the President of the United States to mayorsrunning in local elections are importuned by the people for theassurance that increasing crime and the criminal element becontained in our society. Our country, with the highest rate ofdrug abuse of any industrial country in the world, also has thelargest budget in the world to enforce its laws prohibitingdrugs. Despite huge increases in the federal government's budgetfor the "war on drugs," the so-called "drugproblem" with all of its ramifications, has notsignificantly abated. The public's perception of its politicalleaders' ineffectiveness in alleviating drug-related violenceadds to the general atmosphere of lawlessness and breeds cynicismand disrespect for the law. Instead of progress since the firstfederal anti-drug law was passed in 1914, nearly 80 years of drugprohibition have yielded few inroads against the sale or use ofdrugs. This, understandably, suggests to the public that the lawitself is an ineffectual tool for dealing with the issue. 2. Perception of a Self-Perpetuating System The large sums of money appropriated for law-enforcementcreate enormous, self-perpetuating bureaucratic agencies, such asthe United States Drug Enforcement Agency ("DEA"),which fight for independence and scarce public resources whilemaking little headway against the "drug problem." Theseagencies have ample motivation to exaggerate or distort theextent and danger of "drug abuse" so as to justify (andthereby insure) their continued existence. Being inherentlybiased, they have great potential to ignore the public's truewelfare. 3. Police Corruption The fact that drug prohibition breeds corruption has beenknown for decades. Every day there are news stories of lawenforcement officers being arrested for their involvement withdrug dealers. The sums of money involved in the drug business aretoo great and too inviting for the law enforcers not to seektheir share. Corrupt police behavior creates a furtherdisillusioned public. In addition, just as organized crime becameentrenched during Prohibition, the current prohibitionist regimeis currently subsidizing the mafia and other organized crimegroups because of the highly inflated prices on the black market. 4. Poor Children are Victims of the "War on Drugs" There is no reason to believe that recognized market forcescease to apply where the drug business is concerned. There ispublic recognition that youths and unemployed adults often cannotjust say "no" to drugs when saying "yes" as adealer or a dealer's helper is much more profitable than are thealternatives. Children living in poor, urban neighborhoods areparticularly susceptible to being drawn into illegal drug-relatedactivities by visions of status and easy money. Laws againstdrugs thus discourage many youths and adults from productivelegitimate employment that would benefit society. 5. Selective Prosecution Criminal prosecutions for violations of the federal and statedrug laws appear to be disproportionately directed againstminorities. Understandably, there is widespread public concernthat the drug laws are selectively enforced with vigor againstthe poor and disenfranchised, while rich and middle class drugusers are permitted to indulge without serious fear of legalconsequences. 6. Erosion of Constitutional Rights The pursuit of a "drug-free" society has resulted ina panoply of intrusions into the lives of United States citizens:The Bill of Rights is in danger of becoming meaningless in casesinvolving drugs. Tenants charged with no crime are evicted fromhomes where police believe drugs are being sold. Public housingprojects are sealed for house-to-house inspections. The SupremeCourt has permitted warrantless searches of automobiles, the useof anonymous tips and drug-courier profiles as the basis forpolice searches, and the seizure of lawyers' fees in drug cases.Property on which marijuana plants are found can be forfeitedeven if the owner is charged with no crime. Prosecutors have beenallowed to try the same person at the state and federal levelsfor the same drug-related crime. A few examples will illustrate the erosion in individual civilliberties occasioned by the "war on drugs." In 1991,the United States Supreme Court in Florida v. Bostick, upheld theconstitutionality of a police tactic of boarding long- distancebuses and asking permission to search passengers' baggage,overruling the Florida Supreme Court's ruling that such anencounter with the police is so inherently coercive that noconsent given for such a search could be truly voluntary. TheFlorida v. Bostick decision was merely one of a number of rulingssince the early 1980s which authorized police stops andquestioning of airline, train, and bus passengers without thelevel of suspicion generally required for Fourth Amendment searchand seizure purposes. The search for tell-tale evidence of drug use has evendescended to the level of compelling federal employees to giveurine samples for analysis, without regard to whether such aprivacy intrusion is related to job performance. The public --led by the government -- appears to be willing to jump on thebandwagon "to restrict civil liberties, and even acceptwarrantless searches of homes and cars, in order to reduce theuse of illicit drugs." 7. Forfeiture's Heavy Hand Forfeiture has become one of the most publicized andcontroversial weapons in the government's anti-drug arsenal. Anyassumption, however, that the law would be deployed only against"drug kingpins" and major players has provedunwarranted as small time dealers and marginal users are moreoften targeted: Under Zero Tolerance, which targets casual drugusers, the government has seized thousands of cars, boats, andhomes because occupants or guests allegedly carried drugs. In1990, seizures exceeded $527 million, and they are expected toexceed $700 million in 1991. The U.S. Marshalls Services now hasa $1.4 billion inventory of seized assets including more than30,000 homes, cars, businesses and other property. In the fiscal year 1993, "the DEA made 14,430 domesticseizures of nondrug property, valued at approximately $669million." Moreover, forfeitures have become a popular way togenerate additional revenue. The in rem nature of a civil forfeiture proceeding, repletewith its many procedural pitfalls, rests on the legal fictionthat the property itself is guilty of wrongdoing. The unevenburdens of proof assigned the parties reveals the imbalance inthe system. To prevail, the government need only have reasonablegrounds to believe the property is subject to forfeiture. Itfalls to the claimant to prove by a preponderance of the evidencethe negative proposition that the property was"innocent." As a result of the over-zealous applicationof the forfeiture statutes, the judiciary has attempted to curbsome of the more visible excesses. For instance, absent exigentcircumstances, pre-hearing seizures of homes, where the tenantswere either evicted outright or were permitted to stay at thesufferance of the United States Marshall, are no longertolerated. And the forfeiture of real property is now expresslysubject to the limitations of Eighth Amendment proportionalityanalysis. A claimant's ability to defend against a forfeiture has longbeen compromised by the maze of rules allowing for the freezingof assets, which alone often discourages private counsel fromtaking on a case. Too often, the failure to secure experiencedcounsel results in the loss of the property. Finally, with newsaccounts of law enforcement personnel driving around in expensivecars seized during drug operations, reports of police helicopterswith sophisticated detection equipment hovering over homes, andthe intrusive subpoenaing of records from bona fide businesses(such as those offering hydroponic gardening equipment), it isclear that forfeiture laws require an overhaul. 8. Erosion of Privacy Rights Although the Ninth Amendment guarantees that "[t]heenumeration in the Constitution of rights shall not be construedto deny or disparage others retained by the people," oursociety has struggled to find a balance between individualliberty and privacy and governmental intrusion. Although theUnited States Supreme Court has recognized certain activities asbeing beyond the reach of most state or federal governmentalintrusion (e.g., birth control, abortion during the firsttrimester, and the possession of adult pornography in the home),drug use has never been found to be within the "right ofprivacy" that the Court has forged. Because the law, as itstands today, does not recognize the right to use drugs, the"war on drugs" has become "in effect, if not inintention, a war on drug users." Year after year, state andfederal laws that prohibit the possession of drugs, demonize andcriminalize the users of drugs, estimated to be at least 20million in the United States alone. Yet, "[d]rugs have beenused to alter consciousness in most societies throughout history,and different drugs have been considered acceptable at differenttimes and places." As Lester Grinspoon and James B. Bakalarhave stated: Of all the Prohibition era mistakes we are now repeating, themost serious is trying to free society of drugs by the use offorce. There is no reason to believe that the inclination toingest substances that alter consciousness can be eradicated. Adrug-free society is an impossible and probably an undesirabledream. . . . Our present drug policies are immoral because theyrequire a war of annihilation against a wrongly chosen enemy. Wewill never be able to regulate the use of consciousness-alteringdrugs effectively until our ends are changed along with the meansthat serve them. Ending drug prohibition would enable the Court and our societyto recognize the right of individuals to alter theirconsciousness (the most private of matters), so long as they donot harm the persons or property of others. D. PROHIBITION-INDUCED VIOLENCE In New York and elsewhere in the United States, wild shootoutsin urban areas are frequently publicized. These reports revealthat innocent bystanders in these areas are often caught in thecross-fire. It is, however, far from clear that the use of orneed for prohibited drugs causes this sort of violent crime.Rather, the available evidence tends to support the conclusionthat it is the prohibitionist laws against drugs that cause theviolent crimes that people generally deplore. So-called "drug-related crime" is often related onlyindirectly to the drugs themselves, resulting instead from theillegal black market in drugs that is, in turn, spawned by lawsprohibiting the legal sale of drugs. For example, the Los Angelespolice have long known that the lucrative black market in cocainehas provided the incentive (as well as the financing) for thebloody gang turf wars in that city. Similarly, it is estimatedthat 40% of the homicides in a study of 414 homicides in New YorkCity precincts were indirectly attributable to black markettrafficking in drugs. Further supporting the fact that it is drugprohibition rather than drug use which is causing the alarming"drug-related" violence saturating our culture is thehistorical precedent of alcohol Prohibition which was accompaniedby the same type of violence. There is no reason to believe that black markets would notdisappear with the ending of drug prohibition. Common senseindicates that without the immense profits guaranteed by thenecessarily restricted nature of the outlets, there would belittle advantage to maintaining such black markets. The currentpatterns of drug-sale related turf violence would besubstantially, if not wholly, undermined. E. PROHIBITION'S FAILURE TO LIMIT DRUG USE Proponents of the "war on drugs" often eagerlydeclare that the draconian prohibitionist laws of the state andfederal government are causing a decline in drug use. Theevidence, however, tends to show that "the number of heavydrug users in the United States is undiminished." Inaddition, recent surveys show an increasing number of high schoolstudents using marijuana and lysergic acid diethylamide("LSD"). Even proponents of the "war ondrugs" candidly admit that "drug abuse cannot beentirely eliminated." Some experts have estimated that thegovernment has spent close to $500 billion dollars over the past20 years to enforce the prohibitionist laws against drugs, whileduring the same period use levels rose and the number of arrestsand the amounts of drugs seized increased unabated annually.750,000 people were incarcerated for violating the prohibitionistdrug laws during a twenty-year period, costing an average of $25billion annually and $61 billion for 1991 alone. Although the vast majority of Americans polled stated thatthey would not take now-prohibited drugs if they were legalized,many people voice the concern that use would escalate sharplyupon legalization. Implicit in the idea that use of drugs wouldrise upon legalization is the assumption that the currentprohibitionist laws discourage many people from using them. Theavailable evidence tends to show that Americans can and dovoluntarily control their use of drugs. The recent decline in middle class use of drugs as well asrecent declines in alcohol and tobacco consumption have beenattributed by many experts to factors (such as education, healthand fitness awareness, and social pressures) other than theprohibitionist laws against drugs. Experts have recognized theseother factors as the basis for the current levels of use of drugs(including alcohol and tobacco) rather than the existence ofprohibitionist laws. Indeed some observers have cited theprohibitionist laws against drugs as a significant factor leadingto increased use and greater numbers of addicts than we wouldotherwise have: [T]he growth of addiction over the last fourdecades in the US had little to do with price reductions or, forthat matter, with the growth of real income. The crucial factorin the spread of the drug habit has been the unrelenting pressureexerted by legions of street pushers in the continuing endeavorto widen the circle of the customers. In other words, the crucialfactor in spreading the drug habit has been the super profitsmade possible only by governments' illegalization of thetrade." It is impossible to prove the levels of post- legalization useof now-prohibited drugs, but reasonable extrapolations may bemade by referring to similar experiences in this country andabroad. Prohibition of alcohol in the United States earlier in thiscentury is a basis for comparison, albeit an imperfect one. Areview of alcohol consumption patterns during and afterProhibition shows that during most of the Prohibition era percapita alcohol consumption actually increased. After"Prohibition's repeal in 1933, consumption remained fairlystable until after the Second World War when, without any changein public policy, it began increasing." The prohibitionistlaws, therefore, seem to have little impact on an individual'sdecision whether to use drugs. Another useful example is theexperience of the ten states that decriminalized the possessionof small amounts of marijuana for personal consumption in the1970s. There was no increase in the level of marijuana use inthose states. Indeed marijuana consumption declined in thosestates just as it did in states that retained criminal sanctionsagainst marijuana. In 1976, the Dutch decriminalized marijuanaconsumption, although possession and small sales technicallyremained illegal. The level of use actually declined afterdecriminalization. Indeed marijuana use in the Netherlands issubstantially lower than in countries waging a "war ondrugs," including the United States and, at least untilrecently, Germany. Among Dutch youths aged 17-18, only 17.7% usedmarijuana at least once in their lifetimes, as opposed to 43.7%of Americans. Only 4.6% of the Dutch had used marijuana at leastonce in the past month, as opposed to 16.7% of the Americans. While indicating clearly that prohibitionist laws do notprevent the use of drugs, these statistics also tend to show thatlegalizing now-prohibited drugs, at least marijuana, does notinevitably cause an increase in use. Under an exception to theBritish prohibitionist system, doctors may provide prohibiteddrugs to addicts. Dr. John Marks of Liverpool commenced such aprogram in 1982, and, to his astonishment, he noted that thenumber of new addicts decreased in Liverpool while in a nearbytown operating under prohibition the rate of new addicts wastwelve-fold higher. Dr. Marks attributed the decline in thenumber of new addicts to the fact that addicts received theirneeded drugs from his program for pennies, thus there was nolonger any need for addicts to bring in new customers to raiseenough money to support their habits. Others addressing the issueof whether the levels of use of now prohibited drugs wouldescalate to overwhelming proportions after legalization (as manyprohibitionists have predicted) have likened possible patterns ofillegal drug use to patterns of alcohol use, with which we have asolid familiarity. They point out that Western cultures havehandled alcohol consumption with tolerable skill for centuriesand point out that most of the American population that drinksoccasionally, or even every day, exercises moderation. Indeed the available data indicate that the vast majority ofthe American population that uses now-prohibited drugs does sowith moderation. According to United States governmentstatistics, more than 75 million persons in the United Stateshousehold population have used prohibited drugs. The NationalInstitute on Drug Abuse estimates that close to 40 millionAmericans continue to consume these substances. Yet, only acomparatively minuscule number of deaths due to drug overdoses,4,242, occurred in 1991 according to medical examiner datacompiled by the Drug Abuse Warning Network. Once the distinctionbetween use of prohibited drugs and abuse is acknowledged, theavailable statistics show that the vast majority of Americans whouse drugs do not abuse them. Based on our experience with American states' and foreigndecriminalization of marijuana, it appears that decriminalizationdoes not lead to greater levels of use nor to abuse. Likewisethere is evidence to support the proposition that thedecriminalization of the so-called "hard drugs" doesnot lead to increased rates of addiction. Perhaps mostimportantly, data analysis strongly indicates that social factorswholly apart from the criminalization of drugs account in thegreatest measure for reduced rates of use. Based on the evidence,it would not be unfair to say that the predicted,post-legalization explosion in the use of drugs has been greatlyoverstated and that use in continued moderation would be the muchmore likely result. European countries, such as the Netherlands,have benefitted from an approach to drugs that focuses on"harm reduction" rather than draconian measures toenforce prohibition. F. PROHIBITION THREATENS PUBLIC HEALTH 1. Spread of Disease a. Sharing Needles Because the possession of hypodermic needles is generallyillegal, users of injectable drugs routinely share needles andsyringes with one another, often in "shootinggalleries" where dozens of addicts may line up to use asingle needle rented out by the dealers and not sterilizedbetween uses. This sharing of needles has become a major sourceof transmission of blood-borne diseases such as acquired immunedeficiency syndrome ("AIDS") and hepatitis. Accordingto a recent national review, "more than 33% of new AIDScases occur among injecting drug users or people having sexualcontact with them." In New York State, the majority of newAIDS cases since 1988 have been reported among users ofinjectable drugs and their sexual partners. Both the Centers forDisease Control and the New York State Department of Health haveestimated that more than 75% of pediatric AIDS cases are childrenwhose mothers either injected drugs or were the sexual partnersof persons who injected drugs. The data suggest, at the veryleast, that sterile hypodermic needles should be readily andfreely available to drug users. So long as drug use remainsunlawful, however, free needle distribution is not likely toattract a substantial portion of the user population. Inresponse, some courts have circumscribed laws dealing with theunlawful possession of hypodermic needles by applying defenses ofmedical necessity. b. Trading Sex for Drugs Because illicit drugs are expensive, many addicts turn toprostitution to make money to support their habits, or exchangesexual services directly for drugs. Prostitute drug addicts oftendo not protect themselves from contracting sexually transmitteddiseases carried by their customers, and they pass such diseaseson to other customers, their lovers, and their children. Thecrack epidemic, in particular, has been blamed for the recentlynoted resurgence of syphilis and other sexually transmitteddiseases. Dr. Robert Rolfs of the Centers for Disease Control placed theblame squarely on cocaine and its high cost: People -- especiallywomen -- have high-risk sex and practice prostitution to supporttheir habits. And it is occurring in a relatively poor populationwhere people have a lot of things that prevent their access totreatment. Therefore, they stay infected longer and are morelikely to pass their infections on to others. Fewer addicts wouldbe forced to resort to prostitution if the current prohibitionsagainst drugs were lifted. c. Neglect of Health Because of addicts' preoccupation with obtaining and usingdrugs, and the debilitating effects of some of the drugsthemselves, many addicts are in very poor health. Malnutrition isa frequent problem and, in turn, contributes to many others.Addicts' poor health makes them especially susceptible todiseases ranging from scurvy and shingles to tuberculosis and theflu. Addicts are also more likely to contract communicablediseases and therefore more likely to spread them. Theinterrelated urban problems of homelessness and illegal drugabuse have contributed to the development of multi-drug-resistantstrains of diseases such as tuberculosis, which was once thoughtto be on the verge of eradication. These more virulent diseasesknow few geographical limitations and pose risks to the generalpopulation. d. Avoidance of the Health-Care System Individuals who use illegal drugs often put off addressingtheir health problems for fear of prosecution or other adverseconsequences (e.g., rebuffs by doctors, loss of job). Thisreluctance to seek medical care is compounded by the fact thatmany drug addicts have no private physicians and rely instead onpublic hospitals or clinics for any care they might get.Prohibition, therefore, has perverse results on health; drugabusers tend to enter the health-care system only if and whentheir need for care is acute, which is also when care is mostcostly to deliver. If, for example, a woman avoids pre-natalcare, she may give birth to a baby with low birth weight andother medical difficulties. If a drug abuser puts off seekingtreatment for illnesses and injuries, he or she may end up in theemergency room and the intensive care ward. Mothers and pregnantwomen face the additional and justifiable fear that anydetectable drug use may be reported as a possible indication ofchild abuse or neglect. In many large city hospitals, the urineof newborn babies is tested for prohibited drugs, and motherswhose babies test positive for pre-natal exposure are reported tothe child abuse authorities. Until recently, in New York City, such babies were routinelykept from their mothers pending investigations that often lastedmany months, interfering with normal bonding and necessarilyadversely affecting the infant's development and relationshipwith the parent. Moreover, these women have, in somejurisdictions, been prosecuted for pre-partum distribution ofprohibited drugs. In addition to the obvious costs to the individuals who becomeinfected with catastrophic illnesses directly through drug use,and the high costs to the health care system of treating them,prohibition contributes to the spread of such diseases throughoutsociety, particularly to the sexual partners and children ofinfected drug users. Left untreated, users and addicts are morelikely to give birth to unhealthy children, to abuse or neglecttheir children after they are born, or to have their childrenplaced in foster care. 2. Lack of Information and Quality Control a. Adulterated Drugs, Designer Drugs, and Drugs of UnknownPotency Because drugs are manufactured and distributed in secret, itis impossible for users to guard against adulteration or todetermine the purity and potency of the drugs they use. Theproblem is compounded by drug growers, manufacturers, anddistributors who, to minimize the risks of apprehension, developand purvey the drug varieties that pack the most intoxicatingeffect into the smallest package. According to an experienced NewYork City researcher, The fact that cocaine, heroin and relateddrugs are illegal encourages the use of injection. Severestatutory restrictions greatly increase the cost of illicitsubstances to nonmedical users. Injecting provides a way toeconomize. Injectable forms of opiates and coca are much moreconcentrated than traditional forms, such as opium or coca tea.Injection provides an intense and economical effect by maximizingthe amount of drug that reaches the brain. People who sniff orsmoke drugs say that if they inject they need only one third ofthe amount of the drug to maintain a habit. Because the injection forms of illicit drugs are concentrated,they are [also] relatively easier to ship. It has beendemonstrated that, as law enforcement and criminal penaltiesintensify, dealers also find other ways to economize by inventingnew drugs -- so-called "designer drugs" -- that are notyet prohibited. This places the ill-informed consumers of suchdrugs at greater risk of overdose and other health problems.Illnesses and deaths have resulted from (1) the introduction ofdangerous substances into drugs that could otherwise have beenused with greater safety, (2) inadvertent overdoses due tovariations in potency, and (3) the development of "designerdrugs" intended to give the effect of familiar intoxicantswith new chemical compositions that put them beyond the reach ofcurrent laws. Just as the prohibition against alcohol led tosales of poisonous wood alcohol and the prohibition againstabortion led to coat-hanger abortions, the prohibition againstdrug manufacture, sale, and possession results in unnecessarydeaths due to adulteration, variable purity, and "designerdrugs." This contrasts sharply with the government's currentregulation of alcoholic beverages, which ensures that thebeverages are pure and that buyers know how strong they are andwhat some of their health effects may be. Experts have noted that heightened efforts to enforce druglaws and amend them to encompass new formulations or banprecursor substances may only push dealers to take greater risks,selling ever more potentially dangerous substances. b. Lack of Knowledge About Safer Use Because many drugs are outlawed, individuals considering druguse rarely have access to accurate information about the effectsof drugs. While a cautious user may err on the side of avoidingcertain activities while under the use of drugs, he or she mayhave no way of knowing, beyond trial and error, the possibleadverse health consequences of certain combinations of drugs andhis or her individual tolerance for particular substances.Because of its penchant for exaggeration and cartoonish treatmentof the issues, most current education about drugs is not takenseriously by young people. As a result, it is far less effectivethan other health education (e.g., about nutrition, fitness, andsmoking cigarettes). c. Using Alcohol and Tobacco Instead of "SoftDrugs" Alcohol and tobacco are completely legal yet do much moreharm, statistically speaking, than illegal drug use. It is alsogenerally recognized that alcohol, at least when used to excess,can cause aggressive, anti-social behavior. The currentprohibitionist laws against marijuana, generally considered an"a-motivational" drug, and other so-called "softdrugs" have the effect of influencing some people to choosealcohol over these "soft drugs." Peter Reuter, aneconomist at the Rand Corporation, concludes that "Ifmarijuana is a substitute for alcohol . . . , alcohol is, bydefinition, a substitute for marijuana. Thus tough marijuanaenforcement must increase drinking." Similarly, FrankChaloupka, an economist at the University of Illinois, foundthrough statistical analysis "that states without criminalsanctions against marijuana possession suffered fewer autofatalities." Finally, Karen Model, a Ph.D. candidate atHarvard, found that "states decriminalizing marijuanareported lower overall rates of drug- and alcohol-relatedemergencies." To the extent that users are choosing alcoholrather than marijuana or other "soft drugs," theoverall public health effects are probably worse than they wouldbe otherwise. 3. Injuries Due to Violence The high prices commanded by prohibited drugs createcompetition among groups and individuals willing to break the lawto supply drugs to consumers. Their competition often becomesviolent and has contributed to the build-up of arms and thepervasiveness of violence in many areas. Gunshot wounds and othertraumas due to the illegal drug business have become commonplacein big-city hospital emergency rooms. Not only traffickers, butalso law enforcement officers and innocent bystanders are oftenthe victims. Mayor Rudolph Giuliani recently noted: The victims of the[] gun battles [of street-level drugdealers] are innocent bystanders -- and often young children.Last year alone, about 500 New York City children were shot; ofthese, 89 were innocent bystanders hit by crossfire. The cost ofprohibiting drugs must be measured in terms of lost lives andexpensive medical care and include the hidden costs of lostproductivity and the psychological damage to individuals andentire communities living in fear, helpless and hopeless. With the possible exceptions of cocaine and PCP, drugsthemselves do not generally cause violent behavior. It is,instead, turf wars for the control of black markets and the drugusers' need for money to purchase such substances that leads toviolence. Indeed, marijuana and heroin have been shown to rendertheir users disinclined to violence or incapable of violencewhile under the influence. These substances are much lessdangerous in this regard than alcohol. 4. Diversion of Resources from Treatment and Prevention Prohibition diverts money that could otherwise be used forpreventing and treating drug abuse. Federal anti-drug legislationprovides a single budget for "supply reduction" and"demand reduction" efforts. Law enforcement agencieshave always received much more than prevention, treatment, andresearch programs combined. The ABA recently reported that"[s]ince the early 1980s, treatment has been a decliningpriority. In 1991, treatment received 14% of the $10.5 billionfederal drug budget compared to 25% ten years earlier."During the same period, "federal spending on law enforcementincreased 737%, with interdiction efforts leading theincrease." Ending drug prohibition would, by definition,eliminate the need for any special law enforcement funds for druginterdiction. It would also allow for the redirection of lawenforcement resources to concentrate on violent crime and qualityof life issues. 5. The Sense of Treating Drugs as a Public Health Problem a. Treatment Works The vast majority of resources in the United States availableto meet this country's "drug problem" have beenutilized for interdiction rather than education and treatment.This allocation of resources has skewed the public's perceptionof the problem, which is seen largely as one of law enforcement.However, drug abuse and drug addiction are fundamentally a publichealth problem. Reallocation of resources away from interdiction and intoeducation and treatment is essential to the successful managementof this problem. Drug abuse and drug addiction are healthproblems that can be treated. Dr. Herbert D. Kleber, formerDeputy Director of the Office of National Drug Control Policy,now Medical Director of the Center on Addiction and SubstanceAbuse and lecturer in psychiatry at Columbia University Collegeof Physicians and Surgeons, has identified a basic fallacyresponsible for the predominant pessimistic outlook: Drug dependence has been viewed as a chronic relapsing illnesswith an unfavorable prognosis. However, there are thousands offormerly dependent individuals in the United States and elsewherewho have remained off both illicit drugs and excess use of licitdrugs like alcohol for decades, functioning as productivecitizens . . . . [T]here are already effective methods oftreatment if the right approach [and] the right person can bebrought together. No one should conclude that treatment is not effective justbecause drug abuse, like alcohol abuse and cigarette smoking,often cannot be "cured" with a single treatment effort.Most people who do conquer drug addiction succeed only aftermultiple efforts and relapses. Because effective treatmentdepends on finding the best method of helping a particular personat a particular time, several attempts may be needed to discoverwhat will work. b. Self-Help Groups Some substance abusers manage their problem with the help ofAlcoholics Anonymous ("AA"), Narcotics Anonymous("NA") or similar groups. These voluntary self-helpassociations offer the structure of a program following"twelve steps" to sobriety and the support of fellowabusers in different stages of recovery. Since these groupsmaintain members' confidentiality and do not keep records ofattendance at meetings, their success has not been measuredstatistically; however, anecdotal evidence of their effectivenessis strong. Additionally, many respected treatment programs relyon methods developed by the self-help groups and prescribeattendance at AA and NA meetings for their patients. c. Therapeutic Communities One of the best-known methods of professional treatment fordrug abuse is a highly structured, long-term residentialinpatient program known as a therapeutic community. The Committeevisited three therapeutic community facilities in New York City-- programs operated by Daytop Village, Project Return andPhoenix House. Patients in therapeutic communities generallyspend one to two years, sometimes more, living and working in thefacility. Through individual counseling and group therapy, thepatients address the causes and effects of their substance abuseand other problems and attempt to rebuild their lives free ofdrugs. Education, vocational training and work experience areimportant components of the treatment, because therapeuticcommunity patients frequently lack necessary skills for makingtheir own way in society. Successful patients gradually re-enterthe outside world, first obtaining jobs and ultimately moving tohomes outside the program. While many patients drop out of thesechallenging and restrictive programs, research has shown thatthree-quarters of the patients who stay for the prescribed courseof treatment remained drug-free seven years later. One studyfound that 56% of the individuals entering residential treatment(including those who dropped out) no longer used heroin orcocaine one year later. By the end of the study, more than 80% ofthe patients no longer used any prohibited drug other thanmarijuana. Another different national study that focused onopiate addicts revealed that nearly three quarters (74%) of theaddicts who entered therapeutic communities were not usingopiates regularly (i.e., on a daily basis) three years later. d. Other Inpatient Drug-Free Treatment Programs Substance abusers with health insurance or other means ofpayment often seek residential treatment in less restrictivesettings and for shorter periods of time. Two of the best-knownprograms providing this sort of inpatient treatment are the BettyFord Center in Palm Springs, California, and the Hazelden programin Minnesota. Patients usually participate in intensiveindividual counseling, group therapy, and AA or NA meetings.Patients most commonly stay for four weeks and are thendischarged to "aftercare" programs for continuingoutpatient treatment or are advised to seek AA or NA meetings inthe community. Many prominent citizens have testified publicly tothe efficacy and value of these sorts of treatment programs. e. Outpatient Methadone Maintenance Programs Methadone maintenance is the most widely used treatment fornarcotics addiction in the United States. Drs. Vincent P. Doleand Marie Nyswander developed the treatment at RockefellerUniversity in the early 1960s. Heroin addicts who are medicatedwith an appropriate daily dose of methadone, a long-actingsynthetic opiate, lose the desire to use heroin but do notexperience either withdrawal symptoms or the euphoric orimpairing effects of narcotic use. Methadone patients canfunction normally and perform successfully in the workplace injobs ranging from attorney to architect to bus driver. In the early stages of treatment, methadone patients visit theprogram daily to receive their doses. They are granted moreflexible schedules as they show progress in treatment byremaining free of other drugs, maintaining steady employment, andmaking progress in other areas. Methadone programs also providecounseling and other health care and usually arrange forvocational rehabilitation, education, and other services. Successful methadone patients may remain in treatment for manyyears, often at reduced doses; and some eventually leavetreatment entirely. A high proportion of methadone patients stay in treatment(more than two-thirds, by many reports), and more than 85% ofthose remaining in treatment for a year never use heroin again. Asubstantial proportion also stop using alcohol and other drugs.The results of research assessing the effectiveness of methadonemaintenance have been strikingly consistent. One major studyfound that, within a year of beginning treatment, 70% of thosewho had entered methadone treatment were no longer using heroin.After three years, use by patients who had remained with theprogram for at least three months had declined by almost 85%.Another study examining AIDS infection among injection drug usersfound that methadone maintenance treatment effectively reducedintravenous drug use by 71%. An earlier study had found that morethan three quarters of the patients who entered methadonemaintenance treatment were still not regularly using opiatesthree years later. f. Outpatient Drug-Free Therapy Substance abusers who cannot commit themselves to inpatienttreatment and do not want methadone treatment (or would notbenefit from it because their primary drug of abuse is notheroin) can participate in a variety of outpatient drug-freetherapies, including the full range of "talk"therapies, supervised twelve-step programs, and programs that useacupuncture to reduce the craving for drugs. Outpatient programsoften are recommended as follow-ups to short-term hospital-based"detoxification" programs, which generally areeffective only for short-term crisis intervention purposes. The Committee visited the Lincoln Hospital Substance AbuseDivision in New York City, which has been treating drug abusepatients with acupuncture for more than 15 years. Acupuncture treatment, which involves the insertion of fiveneedles in the outer ear while the patients sit quietly in acommon room for 30 to 45 minutes, is meant to control withdrawalsymptoms and the craving for drugs and to have a general calmingeffect. At Lincoln Hospital it is used in combination with groupcounseling on the Narcotics Anonymous model, as well asurinalysis monitoring. Like methadone treatment, acupuncturebegins as a daily treatment, with successful patients"graduating" to less frequent schedules. Outpatientdrug-free treatment programs, whether they employ acupuncture ornot, differ in the nature, length and frequency of treatmentsessions. The usefulness of acupuncture treatment for substance abusehas been demonstrated in several studies. Outpatient programs,generally, have demonstrated a fair amount of success in treatingsubstance abusers. One national study found that nearlythree-quarters of the patients who entered outpatient drug-freeprograms for opiate abuse were not using opiates regularly threeyears later. A later study of similar scope revealed that, aftera year in treatment, 42% of the regular cocaine users who stayedin outpatient drug-free treatment for at least three months hadstopped using cocaine completely. Over three to five years,regular heroin use by patients who had received treatment for atleast three months fell by half, and fewer than 20% of thepatients who stayed in treatment for at least three months wereregular users of any prohibited drug except marijuana. 6. Empirical Research on Effective Drug Treatment Virtually all studies conducted over the last 20 years showthat the most commonly practiced methods of treatment do work.Treatment has been shown to reduce substance abuse and ameliorateits consequences. The outcome of treatment has not been found todiffer significantly with the type of treatment received.Methadone programs, inpatient residential programs, andoutpatient drug-free programs all show dramatic results. a. Studies Examining the Effects of Treatment on SubstanceUse The most comprehensive study of the effectiveness of drugtreatment, the Treatment Outcomes Prospective Survey("TOPS") funded by the National Institute on Drug Abuse("NIDA"), strongly confirmed the efficacy of treatmentin reducing drug use. For up to five years after their treatment,TOPS followed 10,000 substance abusers who had been admitted to37 different treatment programs across the country. The programsincluded residential and outpatient drug-free programs andoutpatient methadone maintenance programs. Heroin and cocaine usedeclined significantly for patients in all treatment modalities.After a year in treatment, heroin use by patients in methadonemaintenance programs declined by 70%, while 75% of outpatientdrug-free patients and 56% of residential treatment patients hadstopped using heroin or cocaine. By the end of the study, fewerthan 20% of the patients regularly used any illegal drug exceptmarijuana, and 40% to 50% of the patients abstained altogether. Other studies have reached virtually identical conclusions. Astudy sponsored by NIDA to address the risk of AIDS infection forinjection drug users found that methadone maintenance treatmenteffectively reduced intravenous drug use by 71% among those whoremained in the program for one year. An earlier NIDA study basedon the Drug Abuse Report Program ("DARP") tracked thedrug use of 44,000 opiate addicts admitted to treatment between1969 and 1974. The study found that most patients stopped usingopiates daily and had not resumed daily use three years afterthey were discharged from treatment. More than three quarters ofthe patients who entered methadone maintenance treatment (76%)and nearly three quarters of the patients who entered therapeuticcommunities (74%) or outpatient drug-free programs (72%) werestill not using opiates regularly three years later. A recentfollow-up study of 405 of the original 44,000 addicts found that74% were not using heroin regularly twelve years after theirtreatment ended. Researchers have uniformly concluded that the three mostcommon forms of treatment are effective despite "the varietyof problems suffered by clients, their long histories of deviantand debilitating lifestyles, and a lack of support in thecommunity" that lead so many addicts not to completetreatment programs at all. Researchers also agree that the longeraddicts remain in treatment, the better their chances of success.National studies of the behavior of thousands of addicts haveshown that, while one-third of the patients who stay in treatmentfor more than three months are still not using drugs a yearlater, two-thirds of those who stay in treatment for a year ormore stay off drugs. b. Studies Examining the Effects of Drug Treatment on the Consequences of Drug Abuse Researchers have studied the impact of drug treatment on manyof the health and social problems that drug abuse contributes to-- the spread of AIDS and other diseases, premature death, crime,unemployment, costly medical care -- as one way of assessing thesuccess of drug treatment. Their studies have shown thattreatment reduces these associated consequences of drug abuse.Treatment prevents the transmission of HIV and other blood-bornediseases that spread when addicts share needles or sell sex fordrugs. Two studies have shown that the rate of HIV infectionamong heroin addicts in New York City not in treatment (46%-47%)is twice the rate of infection among addicts in methadonetreatment programs (23%-27%), and a recent study found that noneof a group of methadone patients with ten or more years intreatment tested positive for HIV. Research has shown that treatment also prevents crime. TheTOPS survey found that, in the six months following treatment,97% of the residential therapeutic community clients and 70% ofthe outpatient clients who had admitted committing predatorycrimes in the year before they entered treatment engaged in nocriminal activity at all. Three to five years after treatment,the proportion of addicts involved in predatory crimes had fallenby one half to two-thirds. The DARP study found that arrest ratesfell by 74% after treatment, for all treatment modalities.Research reveals that treatment helps recovering addicts work, aswell. Only 33% of the 44,000 patients in the DARP study worked inthe year before admission to treatment, but 57% were employed inthe year following their discharge. Two- thirds of therapeuticcommunity patients were gainfully employed after discharge. Theemployment rate of clients tracked in the TOPS study also surged.Three to five years after patients entered treatment, theemployment of patients admitted to residential programs haddoubled over pre-treatment levels, while the employment ofaddicts receiving outpatient treatment rose by more than half. The costs of medical treatment for all sorts of healthproblems decline when addicts receive treatment. As noted earlierin this report, addicts themselves suffer many costly illnessesas a result of drug use, ranging from hepatitis, syphilis andtuberculosis to shingles, malnutrition and psychiatric problems.In 1989, general hospital stays in which drugs or alcohol wereidentified as a major factor accounted for 1.9 million days ofhospitalization in New York State alone. Using a conservativelyestimated average cost of $500 a day, that amounts to $9.5billion worth of medical care. Successful drug treatment starts addicts on their way tophysical recovery and therefore reduces these medical costs.Successful drug treatment also prevents the spread of diseases toothers, such as children born to addicted mothers, and stems thecost of medical care for them, as well as the cost of foster carefor children whose addicted parents cannot care for them. Otherbenefits of treatment flow from its effects on criminal behaviorand employment. Treated addicts are much more likely to beemployed and therefore to contribute to the public coffers ratherthan receive welfare. They make more productive employees and areless likely to have accidents at work. Treated addicts are farless likely to commit crimes and therefore will save society thecost of property loss and prosecuting criminal activity. Onestudy that calculated the cost of crime, poor employmentactivity, and medical treatment attributable to drug addictionfound that the total of these costs was ten to twenty-five timesthe cost of treating drug addiction, depending on the cost of thetreatment chosen. The cost of treating an addict in a long-termresidential drug-free program, for example, was found to amountto only four percent of the cost to society of not treating theaddict. A comparison of costs also shows that treatment is much morecost-effective than incarceration. In New York City, residentialdrug treatment costs approximately $17,000 a year per treatmentbed, and outpatient treatment costs only $2,300-$4,000 a year pertreatment slot; the annual operating cost of a prison bed isabout $40,000, and the cost of building new prison cells exceeds$100,000 each. Diverting drug abusers from prison to treatmenttherefore saves New York State or City half the operating costsof incarceration. It also alleviates the need to build expensivenew prisons. If the proven effect of treatment on criminalrecidivism is included, the savings to the criminal justicesystem in the future would be even more substantial. Treatmentworks and is, in fact, a much more cost-effective way of dealingwith substance abuse than arresting drug offenders and lockingthem in prison. Successfully treated drug addicts give up crime,become productive and more healthy citizens, and ultimately makefewer demands on the public for social and medical servicesthroughout their lives. Their cure also reduces the overalldemand for drugs. 7. Education Works One way to reduce the demand for illegal drugs is to preventindividuals at an early and impressionable age from initiatingdrug use. Using the school system and community programs toeducate children about drug use and its destructive consequencesis an idea that would undoubtedly be supported by many segmentsof society. Logic suggests that education programs should beeffective in diverting young people from experimenting withdrugs. Mathea Falco, in her book The Making of a Drug Free America,details both school-based and community-based educationalprograms which have proven results in preventing drug, alcoholand tobacco use. Education has been shown to be effective inpreventing and reducing drug as well as tobacco and alcohol useamong children and teenagers. Simply to advocate"education," however, may not be enough; the assumptionthat "education," and any type of education program,will be effective may be erroneous. Studies of the effectivenessof drug education and prevention strategies seem to suggest thatlong- term programs geared towards examining the "socialinfluences" leading to drug, alcohol, and tobacco use aremore successful in diverting and reducing subsequent use ofdrugs, alcohol, and tobacco. These successful educationalprograms are generally coupled with community and home preventionand education programs. In contrast, certain short-term educationprograms, which lack the corresponding community programs, havenot proven effective in actually reducing drug use. a. Life Skills Training Program This 15 session curriculum, which is geared towards juniorhigh school students, is designed to teach students personalcoping skills so that they may be better able to make decisionsand feel more confident in social situations. Evaluations of thisprogram, which has been taught in 150 junior high schools in NewYork and New Jersey for the past ten years, show that rates ofsmoking and marijuana use are one-half to three-quarters loweramong students who have participated in this program than thosewho have not. b. Students Taught Awareness and Resistance This program, taught to first-year high school students,combines a thirteen session classroom curriculum withcoordinating community, media, and family programs in an effortto teach resistance skills to teenagers and reinforce the socialdesirability of not using drugs. The program is followed-up witha five-session booster course the following school year. Thisprogram, in a five-year follow-up study, has been proveneffective in reducing the rate of tobacco, marijuana, and alcoholuse by 20% to 40% and cocaine use by 50%. c. Project Healthy Choices This program, geared towards sixth and seventh graders,integrates discussions about drugs and alcohol into the everydaycurriculum by training teachers to incorporate the discussion ofdrugs and alcohol into their teaching of academic subjects. Thisprogram is currently implemented in approximately one hundred NewYork City schools. It is believed that this approach willreinforce prevention messages as the students will hear thisdiscussion as part of their learning on a wide variety ofsubjects. The long-range effectiveness of this approach has notyet been determined. d. Student Assistance Program This program, which has been implemented in junior and seniorhigh schools in twenty states, offers counseling during theschool day on a voluntary, confidential basis. A study of theWestchester County, New York school system where the program wasoriginally implemented showed a significant reduction in alcoholand marijuana use. More significantly, studies showed that therates of drinking and drug use were 30% lower among students atschools which implemented the SAP program. e. Smart Moves "Smart Moves" is a program operated out of Boys andGirls Clubs in the inner-cities where children live in high crimeneighborhoods. By offering after-school prevention programs andrecreational, educational, and vocational activities, thisprogram attempts to teach children to recognize the pressures touse drugs and how to develop the verbal and social skills toresist these pressures. Again, studies have shown that this typeof program can reduce cocaine and crack use and improve schoolbehavior and parental involvement. f. Seattle Social Development Project This comprehensive program seeks to strengthen the bondbetween children from high crime neighborhoods and their familiesand schools. The program provides to parents techniques tomonitor their children better; teachers get better training tomaintain order and resolve conflicts; and children, as in theother programs, are taught skills to resist peer pressure.Interestingly, while the program has shown results in deterringgirls from alcohol, tobacco, and drug use, it has not shownsimilar effectiveness with boys. g. Programs for Children of Addicts Finally, a number of cities are attempting to developprevention programs geared towards the children of drug addicts.These programs attempt to teach parents communication andparenting skills and provide children with support and socialskills. Two such programs are "Strengthening Families,"which has been implemented in Salt Lake City, Detroit, and Selma,Alabama, and the "Safe Haven" program in Detroit.Evaluations of the "Strengthening Families" programsuggest it strengthens family and school relationships andaffects attitudes towards alcohol and tobacco use. This provides a summary of the types of successful programsalready available in the communities. Their success depends upona school and community commitment to implementing comprehensiveprograms geared towards preventing drug use by children. Thediversity of the structure of the programs illustrates thecomplexity of the problem. In addition to reaching out to the"average" school age youth and warning them about thedangers of substance abuse, there are children in high-risk homesand crime-ridden neighborhoods who need additional supportstructures to resist the pressures of drug use. III. TOWARD A NEW DRUG POLICY Joycelyn Elders, the United States Surgeon General, hassuggested that a study be made of our current drug policies andperhaps a new drug policy adopted. Despite the Administration'srejection of her suggestion, public perception is that she may beright. Our government tried to prohibit alcohol consumption andfound it did not work. As demonstrated in this report, drugprohibition is also a failure that causes more harm than the druguse it is purportedly intended to control. The obvious answer isthat we must take the necessary steps towards a new approach todrug policy. Several different alternatives to drug prohibition are beingdiscussed. Federal District Judge Whitman Knapp suggests thatCongress should repeal all federal laws banning drug sales orpossession and permit states to devise alternatives toprohibition. This is the present approach to alcohol in theUnited States since the repeal of the 18th Amendment and theVolstead Act. Federal District Judge Jack Weinstein suggests"standing down" and making fewer arrests, having fewerprosecutions, and spending more money on treatment. M.A.R.Kleiman of the Kennedy School of Government at Harvard suggestsas a solution to the drug problem a "grudgingtoleration" allowing for sale of certain drugs throughstate-regulated stores, but the strategy would be to discourageconsumption. These and other alternatives to drug prohibition should bethoroughly considered so that our society may choose a newapproach that will avoid the widespread evils caused by thecurrent drug laws. Any alternative to drug prohibition shouldallow continued criminal sanctions against conduct affectingothers (the most obvious example being operating a vehicle whileunder the influence). It is the Committee's belief that a new approach to drugpolicy should leave state and local governments free to employthe full panoply of coercive penal sanctions when drug use isrelevant to conduct affecting others. For instance, as mentionedabove, operating any vehicle while under the influence of drugsis not tolerated and that should not change. Although in NewYork, voluntary intoxication remains relevant to negate specificintent, the Legislature may wish to restore individual liabilityin this area and make any intoxication that is voluntaryirrelevant as to mitigation, on the theory that by this voluntaryact the actor will be held responsible for the consequences ofhis conduct while under the influence. Such a sanction is hardlyunreasonable, nor would it strike anyone as being unfair,especially if facilities to deal with cases of actual addictionwere readily available. Finally, any alternative to drug prohibition should notpreclude state and local governments from addressing"quality of life" issues. Government should not bepowerless to control persons who are obviously and publiclyintoxicated. Through enforcement of the existing laws dealingwith public behavior, or appropriate amendments to such laws toinclude specific conduct, government intervention would havegreater effect and would be readily accepted as appropriate bythe overwhelming majority of the population. IV. CONCLUSION The Special Committee on Drugs and the Law has spent thebetter part of a decade examining this country's "drugproblem" and the mechanisms utilized to manage it,principally a federal and state system of criminal proscription. In recent years, the criminal penalties for possession anddistribution of proscribed drugs have increased, with mandatorysentences being imposed at both the state and federal levels. Theprison population in the United States has more than doubled inthe past ten years, largely as the result of these prohibitionistlaws. The scarce resources of the federal and state judiciaryhave been increasingly devoted to drug cases. Despite all of these efforts, the drug war rages on. TheCommittee recognizes the urgent and compelling need to makeadditional resources available for education and treatment. Webelieve that even at increased levels, however, treatment andeducation are not enough to control this country's drug problem.The Committee opposes the present prohibitionist system andrecommends the opening of a public dialog regarding newapproaches to drug policy, including legalization and regulation. KATHY HELLENBRAND ROCKLEN, CHAIR* ANN ROBERTSON, SECRETARY Hon. Harold Baer Jr. Stephen L. Kass Nancy A. Breslow Charles Edward Knapp Kenneth A. Brown Daniel Markewich Ellen M. Corcella Eleanor Jackson Piel Edward John Davis James Warwick Rayhill Eugene R. Dougherty Chester B. Salomon John H. Doyle, III Hon. Felice K. Shea Virginia M. Giddens John Trubin * The Committee wishes to express its special thanks to the Honorable Robert W. Sweet, the former Chair of the Committeeand a tireless advocate for drug policy reform. Justice Shea and Ms. Corcella abstained from voting on thereport. Mr. Doyle and Mr. Markewich dissented, in part. See, Separate Statement, infra. SEPARATE STATEMENT TO A REPORT OF THE SPECIAL COMMITTEE ON DRUGS AND THE LAW ENTITLED "A WISER COURSE: ENDING DRUGPROHIBITION" We are in agreement with the Report insofar as it calls forthe opening of a public dialog regarding new approaches to drugpolicy but disagree with its conclusion that drug prohibitionshould be ended. Our disagreement is based upon our concern thatthe legal sale of drugs would increase substantially the numberof persons who use and/or become addicted to drugs, causing harmnot only to themselves but to society. Such harm would, in ourview, outweigh the benefits of eliminating drug prohibition. 1. Legalizing Drugs Would Reduce Their Cost to the Public,Thereby Increasing Demand, Use and Addiction The theory of drug legalization is that it would take theprofit motive out of illegal drug dealing, eliminating the evilsof drug prohibition. In order to accomplish this result drugswould have to be sold at prices lower than their present illicitlevels. Many commentators have reached the conclusion that lowerprices would increase the demand for drugs. In Searching ForAlternatives - Drug-Control Policy in the United States, Editedand With Introduction by Melvyn B. Krauss and Edward P. Lazear,Hoover Institution Press, Stanford University, Stanford,California (1991), the authors have compiled commentar- ies fromboth proponents and opponents of drug legalization, most of whomacknowledged that lessening cost and increasing access may createhigher drug use. See, e.g., id. at 22-25; 83; 107. 2. The Report Fails to Provide a Concrete Proposal The Report states that "The Committee opposes the presentprohibitionist system . . . ." However the Report providesno concrete proposal that would permit us to determine whetherany net benefit to society would result from legaliza- tion.Should we endorse either (i) the legal sale of crack,amphetamines, hallucinogens and similar dangerous drugs or (ii)the sale of drugs to minors? Certainly, if we accept the propo-sition advanced by many commentators that the legal sale ofdrugs, at lower prices than the prices of illegal drugs, wouldgreatly widen demand, we should reject the proposal that suchharmful substances as those mentioned above be legally sold orthat any drugs be sold to minors. On the other hand, prohibitionof sale of those substances, or of drugs generally to minors,would give illegal drug traffickers a continuing opportunity toexploit these markets, and thus by definition the proposal wouldnot end the evils of drug prohibition. The Report's failure to provide a specific proposal leavesthese critical issues unresolved. We agree with the Report'sstatement that "These and other alternatives [types oflegalization proposals] should be thoroughly considered so thatour society may choose a new approach that will avoid the wide-spread evils caused by the current drug laws." A simple endto drug prohibition, however, cannot be accepted as a solution tothese evils, because the "solution" would producegreater social harm than the present system. 3. The Report Does Not Set Forth Any Convincing Basis for ItsConclusion That "Use in Continued Moderation" Would BeThe "Much More Likely Result of Decriminalization" The Report states that "the available evidence does notsupport [the] assumption" that the current prohibitionistlaws discourage many people from using drugs, citing: risinglevels of drug use, arrests and seizures; recent declines inalcohol and tobacco consumption; the role of drug pushers inboosting demand; a description of Prohibition suggesting nocorrelation between prohibition and use; the results of a 1970'sexperiment in which 10 states decriminalized possession of smallamounts of marijuana; and a poll taken of the general public. TheReport also cites drug use trends in the Netherlands and England,where the problems are less severe than in the United States.Since neither the United States nor any other developed countryhas legalized the sale of drugs, there is, of course, noempirical evidence directly on point. None of the evidence citedin the Report refutes the strong likelihood that reducing pricesand facilitating access would significantly increase demand fordrugs. Recent reductions in use of tobacco and alcohol are notreliable guidelines for legalized drugs because the pleasure-enhancing and tolerance-producing (i.e., addictive) characteris-tics of cocaine, crack and heroin are far more powerful thanthose of tobacco and alcohol. See, id. at 18, 24, 78. The resultsof Prohibition suggests a correlation between prohibition anduse. Alcohol use declined at the outset of Prohibition and thenincreased to only 60% to 70% of pre- Prohibition levels.Immediately after Repeal, alcohol use re- mained the same, but itincreased to pre-Prohibition levels during the next decade. See,Miron, "Drug Legalization and the Consumption of Drugs: AnEconomist's Perspective", published in Searching ForAlternatives - Drug-Control Policy in the United States, at id.,pages 74 to 75. England and the Netherlands both prohibit drug traf- fickingand have relaxed enforcement only at the level of the consumer orpatient. The experiences in those countries do not provide anybasis for predictions as to the impact of drug legalization inthe United States where there are far higher levels of bothsupply and demand of illegal drugs. See id. at 172-188.Similarly, the ten states where possession of small amounts ofmarijuana was decriminalized are not reliable indica- torsbecause trafficking and sale continued to be prohibited. 4. The Report is Mistaken in Characterizing Drug Abuse as anIndividual "Right" rather than as a Social Evil The Report argues that "Ending drug prohibition wouldenable the Court and our society to recognize the right of indi-viduals to alter their consciousness (the most private of mat-ters) so long as they do not harm others." Consistent withthis approach, the Report notes that "Any alternative todrug prohibition shall allow the continued minimal control ofconduct affecting others (the most obvious example beingoperating a vehicle while under the influence)." In characterizing drug abuse as a "right of individu-als" the Report ignores its social costs, which includephysical damage to babies born of drug using mothers; abuseand/or neglect by users of parents, offspring, friends andrelatives; death by overdose; teen suicides; homelessness;drug-induced altered states of consciousness producing violence,particularly from the use of cocaine and crack; loss ofproductivity of drug-using workers; waste of educationalresources used in attempts to teach drug-abusing students; theripple effect on the economy from the presence of large numbersof incapacitated or impaired individu- als; and the enormous costof drug treatment programs. See, Commentary by various authors inKrauss and Lazear, supra, at pages 97-107; 202-206; 227-236. 5. The Report Should Stress the Need to Reduce Demand forDrugs Without Endorsing Legalization The Report is enormously thoughtful and comprehensive anddeserves the most serious study. It describes accurately andcompletely the importance and effectiveness of harm reduction anddrug treatment programs. For the reasons stated above, however,the Report should not recommend ending drug prohibition. Becauseof the risk of catastrophic social harm from legalization, manyof the most thoughtful recent works on this topic do not recom-mend this approach. Mathea Falco, in The Making of a Drug-FreeAmerica (1992), cited in the Report, urges against a "biggerdrug war" (emphasis supplied) and that "[w]e need anentirely differ- ent approach" . . . "one that putsinto practice what we have learned in recent years about reducingthe demand for drugs." Id. at 191, 201. The author pointsout that ". . . law enforce- ment plays an important role,but it should not be the center- piece of drug policy." Id.at 199. In Reckoning Drugs, the Cities, and the American Future(1993), Elliot Currie, while noting the same evils of drugprohibition relied upon in the Report, states: ". . . no one seriously doubts that legalization wouldindeed increase availability, and probably lower prices for manydrugs. In turn, increased availability, as we know from theexperience with alcohol, typically leads to increasedconsumption, and with it increased social and public healthcosts." Id. at 187. In Addiction From Biology to Drug Policy (1994),Dr. Avram Goldstein recommends retaining the present prohibitionon heroin, cocaine and the amphetamines while endorsing a varietyof harm reduction and drug treatment methods aimed at reducingdemand. Id. at 268-285. In Drug Use in America (1994), (Peter J.Vesturelli, Editor) Prof. Patricia A. Adler recommends a"middle ground . . . between the extremes of legalizing alldrugs and bearing the costs of the zero tolerance approach."Id. at 260. The author endorses the regulated sale of marijuanawith the use of law enforcement savings for anti-drug abuseprograms aimed at heroin and cocaine. Id. at 262. Prof. Nadelmannhas commented, and we agree, that: "Today, studies similarto that of the Wickesham Commission and the RockefellerFoundation report [on prohibition and alcohol-control strategiesrespectively] are necessary to any systematic evaluation of drugprohibition and its alternatives." Krauss & Lazear,supra, at 242. CONCLUSION For the reasons above stated we agree with the emphasis of theReport on further public dialog, harm reduction and drugtreatment but disagree with its conclusion that drug prohibitionshould be ended. Contents | Feedback | Search DRCNet Library | Schaffer Library | Major Studies | A Wiser Course, Ending DrugProhibition WT01-B27-42IA031-000655-B042-215http://206.61.184.43:80/schaffer/library/studies/aus/cannabis.htm 206.61.184.43 19970122113825 text/html 3356HTTP/1.0 200 OKDate: Wednesday, 22-Jan-97 11:38:18 GMTServer: WebSitePro/1.1f (S/N wpo-0deb)Allow-ranges: bytesContent-type: text/htmlLast-modified: Saturday, 28-Dec-96 07:16:01 GMTContent-length: 3139 Legislative options for cannabis use in Australia Contents | Feedback | Search DRCNet Library | Schaffer Library | Major Studies | LegislativeOptions for Cannabis Legislative options for cannabis use in Australia Commonwealth of Australia 1994 Monograph No. 26 CONTENTS Executive Summary Chapter 1: Introduction Chapter 2: Policy goals Chapter 3: Cannabis in context: history, laws and international treaties Chapter 4: Five legislative options for cannabis in Australia Chapter 5: Diversion and compulsory treatment Chapter 6: Evaluating new legislative approaches to cannabis Chapter 7: Conclusion Appendix 1. The medicinal use of cannabis Appendix 2. Industrial and horticultural uses of cannabis Appendix 3. The authors Contents | Feedback | Search DRCNet Library | Schaffer Library | Major Studies | LegislativeOptions for Cannabis WT01-B27-43IA031-000655-B042-245http://206.61.184.43:80/schaffer/library/studies/ota/otatoc.htm 206.61.184.43 19970122113850 text/html 5309HTTP/1.0 200 OKDate: Wednesday, 22-Jan-97 11:38:37 GMTServer: WebSitePro/1.1f (S/N wpo-0deb)Allow-ranges: bytesContent-type: text/htmlLast-modified: Saturday, 28-Dec-96 06:51:33 GMTContent-length: 5092 Technologies for Understanding and Preventing SubstanceAbuse Contents | Feedback | Search DRCNet Library | Schaffer Library | Major Studies Technologies for Understanding andPreventing Substance Abuse and Addiction TECHNOLOGIES FOR UNDERSTANDING AND PREVENTING SUBSTANCEABUSE AND ADDICTION US Government Office of Technology Assessment October 18, 1994 Contents 1 Executive Summary Root Causes Necessary Preconditions Individual Factors Community Contexts Policy Options 2 Introduction Root Causes What Are Substance Abuse and Addiction Magnitude of the Problem Measuring Substance Use and Abuse Organization and Scope of the Report Part I: Necessary Preconditions 3 Biology and Pharmacology Drug Action Genetic Factors Role of Learning Summary 4 Availability Availability Are Drugs Readily Available Marketing Summary 5 Substance Use and Transitions to Abuse andAddiction Substance Use Stages in the Initiation of Use Stages in the Cycle of Use, Abuse, and Addiction Stages in Problem Behaviors Key Aspects of Use Summary Part II: Individual Factors 6 Individual Risk and Protective Factors Demographics Economics Psychosocial/Behavioral Summary Part III: Activity Settings 7 Ethnographic Drug Studies Ethnographic Studies of Alcohol and Other Drug Use Social Context of Drug Use Poverty, Racism, and Cycle of Abuse Future Research Summary 8 Community Activity Settings Homes and Families Schools and Peers Workplaces Recreational Settings Planning, Implementing, and Evaluating Community-wide Programs Summary 9 Policy Options Federal Focus and Prevention Program Structure Research Needs Community Activity Settings Availability APPENDICES A Drug Control Policy in the United States:Historical Perspectives B Federal Programs: Prevention andCausation C Perspectives on Defining Substance Abuse D List of Contracts E List of Workshops and Participants F Acknowledgments References Contents | Feedback | Search DRCNet Library | Schaffer Library | Major Studies Technologies for Understanding andPreventing Substance Abuse and AddictionWT01-B27-44IA031-000655-B042-270http://206.61.184.43:80/schaffer/library/studies/dac/dacmenu.htm 206.61.184.43 19970122113900 text/html 3905HTTP/1.0 200 OKDate: Wednesday, 22-Jan-97 11:38:53 GMTServer: WebSitePro/1.1f (S/N wpo-0deb)Allow-ranges: bytesContent-type: text/htmlLast-modified: Saturday, 28-Dec-96 06:46:19 GMTContent-length: 3688 Drugs and Our Community - Report of the Premiers' DrugAdvisory Council -March, 1996 Contents | Feedback | Search DRCNet Library | Schaffer Library | Major Studies Drugs and our Community REPORT OF THE PREMIER'S DRUG ADVISORY COUNCIL MARCH 1996 Joint Departmental Information CentreCataloguing-in-Publication entry: Victoria Premier's Drug Advisory Council Drugs and ourCommunity: Report of the Premier's Drug Advisory Council/Premier's Drug Advisory Council, March 1996. Melbourne: Victorian Government, 1996. 164 p.; 30 cmBibliography. ISBN: 0 7306 9227 2 Cover title. 1. Drugutilization - Social aspects - Victoria. 2. Substance abuse -Victoria. I. Title. 362.2909945 Report designed and produced by O'SHEA SAUNDERS PTY. LTD. Tel:(03) 9583 8827 Cover designed and produced by ROYCE COMMUNICATIONS PTY. LTD.Tel: (03) 9820 3733 M A RC H 19 9 6 This report is available only in Adobe Acrobat PDF format DAC Report Part 1 DAC Report Part 2 CONTENTS ACKNOWLEDGMENTS i OVERVIEW iii 1 BACKGROUND 1 1.1 COUNCIL ACTIVITIES 1 1.2 COMMISSIONED WORK 2 2 ILLICIT DRUGS: CONTEXT AND FACTS 3 2.1 NATURE AND EXTENT OF TRAFFICKING AND USE 4 2.2 DETERRING MANUFACTURE, SUPPLY AND DISTRIBUTION 29 2.3 PREVENTING USE AND REDUCING HARM 40 2.4 AUSTRALIAN AND INTERNATIONAL EXPERIENCES 59 3 CHALLENGES AND CHOICES FOR VICTORIA 65 3.1 INTRODUCTION 65 3.2 CURRENT KNOWLEDGE 66 3.3 DEMAND AND SUPPLY TRENDS 68 3.4 DIFFERENT RESPONSES TO DIFFERENT DRUGS 72 3.5 INFORMATION AND HEALTH EDUCATION 77 3.6 SUPPORT AND TREATMENT SERVICES 87 3.7 LAW ENFORCEMENT AND POLICING IN A HARM MINIMISATIONSTRATEGY 100 3.8 THE LAW 105 3.9 INFRASTRUCTURE 115 4 RECOMMENDATIONS 119 APPENDICES 135 Contents | Feedback | Search DRCNet Library | Schaffer Library | Major StudiesWT01-B27-45IA031-000655-B042-302http://206.61.184.43:80/schaffer/library/studies/nycla/nycla.htm 206.61.184.43 19970122113919 text/html 118779HTTP/1.0 200 OKDate: Wednesday, 22-Jan-97 11:39:03 GMTServer: WebSitePro/1.1f (S/N wpo-0deb)Allow-ranges: bytesContent-type: text/htmlLast-modified: Monday, 16-Dec-96 07:34:08 GMTContent-length: 118562 New York County Lawyers' Association Drug Policy TaskForce DRCNetOnline Drug Policy Library Report and Recommendations of the Drug Policy Task Force October, 1996 Table Of Contents Introduction List of Participants I. Failure of Contemporary Drug Policy to Meet its Stated Objectives II. The Costs of Current Drug Policy A. Economic Costs B. Social Costs III. Public Health Consequences of Current Drug Policy IV. The Relationship of Drug Policy to Violent Crime V. Drug Policy, Drug Law Enforcement and People of Color VI. The Impact of Current Drug Policy on Women VII. Effects of Contemporary Drug Policy on the Integrity of Government Task Force Recommendations I. Pursue Alternative Models in Establishing Future Drug Policy II. Provide Immediate Sentencing Relief and Additional Judicial Discretion in Criminal Prosecution of Drug Cases III. Reduce the Harms Associated With Substance Abuse and Drug Prohibition IV. Concentrate Law Enforcement Resources on Reducing Violent Crime and Prosecution of Violent Criminal Offenders V. Reshape the Drug Policy Debate -- Return to Objective Analysis and Realistic Goals VI. Implement Public Education Campaign on Drug Use and Substance Abuse VII. Decriminalize Marijuana VIII. Reverse Encroachments on Civil Rights and Restore "Due Process of Law" IX. Provide Alternative Social and Economic Opportunity for Inner City Youth X. End War on Youth and Inner City Communities -- Restore Confidence and Integrity in Government Bibliography Footnotes Introduction The Drug Policy Task Force, sponsored by the New YorkCountry Lawyers' Association, commenced its operations in theFall of 1993. The Task Force was established as a"blue-ribbon" panel of prominent and respectedindividuals, each known for his or her work, insights andinvolvement in the area of drug policy reform. The stated purpose of the Task Force has been to developand urge implementation of rational and workable alternatives tocurrent drug policy on both the state and federal levels. In an effort to develop a comprehensive and well-balancedapproach to future drug policy, participants of the Task Forcewere drawn from various disciplines, including legal, medical andacademic, as well as from each branch of government --legislative, judicial and executive. After extensive study, public hearings, discussion andanalysis of various issues within the broad scope of the drugpolicy debate, this working body now offers its "Report andRecommendations" for public consideration. The work of the Task Froce, toward development of acomprehensive, multidisciplinary approach to an effective andresponsible drug policy, and in tackling the difficult issuesinvolved in this important area, is ongoing. The "Report andRecommendations" which follow should be read and consideredin the context of the continuing nature of this endeavor. Respectufully, Alan B. Fischler Chair October, 1996 (This report has been approved and adopted by the Board ofDirectors of the New York County Lawyers' Association. NYCLA isone of the largest local bar associations in the nation.) Additional copies of this report are available at a cost of $4each. Please contact: New York County Lawyers' Association 14 Vesey Street New York, N.Y. 10007 Tel. (212) 267-6646 Fax (212) 40-NYCLA or The Drug Policy Foundation 4455 Connecticut Avenue, N.W. Suite B-500 Washington, D.C. 20008 Tel. (202) 537-5005 Fax (202) 537-3007 (You may contact the Chair of the NYCLA Drug Policy TaskForce directly by E-Mail at AlFischler@aol.com.) List of Participants Return to Table of Contents Charles D. Adler, Esq. President Center for Community Alternatives Hon. Sal F. Albanese Member, N.Y.C. City Council Robert M. Baum, Esq. Attorney-in-Charge, Legal Aid Society Hon. Harold Beeler Justice, N.Y.S. Supreme Court New York County Kildare Clarke, M.D. Kings County Medical Center David C. Condliffe Executive Director The Drug Policy Foundation Norman Corenthal, Esq. Borough Chief, N.Y.C. Law Department Family Court Division, Queens County Hon. Stephen G. Crane Justice, N.Y.S. Supreme Court New York County Hon. Lewis L. Douglass Justice, N.Y.S. Supreme Court Kings County Prof. Ernest Drucker, Ph.D. Director, Division of Community Health Montefiore Medical Center Albert Einstein College of Medicine Sheila Dugan, Esq. Attorney, Manhattan Hon. Laura Safer Espinoza Judge, N.Y.C. Criminal Court New York County Lynn Fahey, Esq., Former Deputy Attorney-in-Charge, Legal AidSociety, Criminal Appeals Bureau Alan B. Fischler, Esq. Chair, NYCLA Drug Policy Task Force Hon. Joseph L. Galiber* N.Y.S. Senator, Bronx Co. Robert Gangi Executive Director Correctional Association of New York Hon. Abraham Gerges Justice, N.Y.S. Supreme Court Kings County Prof. Shanara Gilbert* Associate Professor CUNY School of Law Prof. Keri A. K. Gould Director, Externship Programs Fordham University School of Law Diane Gover Special Assistant for Public Safety Office of the Manhattan Borough President Linda Kenepaske, Esq. Attorney, Manhattan Hon. Whitman Knapp Judge, U.S. District Court Southern District of New York Hon. Joseph R. Lentol Member, N.Y.S. Assembly Michael Z. Letwin, Esq. President Association of Legal Aid Attorneys David C. Leven, Esq. Executive Director Prisoners' Legal Services of New York Juliette S. Levin, Esq. Attorney, Manhattan Hon. Yvonne Lewis Justice, N.Y.S. Supreme Court Kings County Rhea Schaenman Mallett, Esq. Project Director Correctional Association of New York Hon. William I. Mogulescu Judge, N.Y.C. Criminal Court New York County John P. Morgan, M.D. Professor of Pharmacology CUNY Medical School Patrick V. Murphy Director, Criminal Justice and Public Policy Programs U.S. Conference of Mayors Ethan A. Nadelmann, J.D., Ph.D. Director Lindesmith Center Leonard Noisette, Esq. Project Director Neighborhood Defender Service of Harlem James Ostrowski, Esq. Attorney, Buffalo JoAnne Page Executive Director Fortune Society Carol Shapiro Project Director Vera Institute of Justice Thomas Sheehan, Esq. Attorney, Queens County Jesse Sligh, Esq. Executive Assistant District Attorney Office of the Queens County District Attorney Hon. Robert W. Sweet Judge, U.S. District Court Southern District of New York Deborah Weich, Esq. Secretary, NYCLA Drug Policy Task Force Hon. Jack B. Weinstein Senior Judge, U.S. District Court Eastern District of New York Lynn Zimmer, Ph.D. Associate Professor of Sociology CUNY at Queens College * We mourn the passing of Joseph L. Galiber, a tireless andarticulate advocate of reason, whose voice shall be sorelymissed. We also regret the loss of Shanara Gilbert, and shallmiss the thoughtful contributions she made to our discussions. I. Failure Of Contemporary Drug Policy To Meet Its Stated Objectives Return to Table of Contents It has become a widely accepted fact that drug policy, asemployed during the past three decades by the federal government,and in state and local jurisdictions throughout the UnitedStates, has largely failed to meet its stated objectives. Current drug policy relies on an "enforcement" or"penal" model, emphasizing interdiction, arrest,prosecution and incarceration of both distributors and users ofcontrolled substances as its primary "weapons" in whathas often been characterized as a "war on drugs."Commonly known substances generally designated as"controlled" or illegal include: hallucinogens(marijuana, hashish, mescaline and LSD), stimulants (amphetaminesand cocaine), and depressants (opium, heroin and barbiturates).(1) Notwithstanding the vast public resources expended on theenforcement of penal statutes against users and distributors ofcontrolled substances, contemporary drug policy appears to havefailed, even on its own terms, in a number of notable respects.These include: minimal reduction in the consumption of controlledsubstances; failure to reduce violent crime; failure to markedlyreduce drug importation, distribution and street-level drugsales; failure to reduce the widespread availability of drugs topotential users; failure to deter individuals from becominginvolved in the drug trade; failure to impact upon the hugeprofits and financial opportunity available to individual"entrepreneurs" and organized underworld organizationsthrough engaging in the illicit drug trade; the expenditure ofgreat amounts of increasingly limited public resources in pursuitof a cost-intensive "penal" or"law-enforcement" based policy; failure to providemeaningful treatment and other assistance to substance abusersand their families; and failure to provide meaningful alternativeeconomic opportunities to those attracted to the drug trade forlack of other available avenues for financial advancement. (2) Moreover, a growing body of evidence and opinion suggests thatcontemporary drug policy, as pursued in recent decades, may becounterproductive and even harmful to the society whose publicsafety it seeks to protect. This conclusion becomes more readilyapparent when one distinguishes the harms suffered by society andits members directly attributable to the pharmacological effectsof drug use upon human behavior, from those harms resulting frompolicies attempting to eradicate drug use. (3) With aid of these distinctions, we see that present drugpolicy appears to contribute to the increase of violence in ourcommunities. It does so by permitting and indeed, causingthe drug trade to remain a lucrative source of economicopportunity for street dealers, drug kingpins and all thosewilling to engage in the often violent, illicit, black markettrade. Meanwhile, the effect of present policy serves to stigmatizeand marginalize drug users, thereby inhibiting and underminingthe efforts of many such individuals to remain or becomeproductive, gainfully employed members of society. Furthermore,current policy has not only failed to provide adequate access totreatment for substance abuse, it has, in many ways, rendered theobtaining of such treatment, and of other medical services, moredifficult and even dangerous to pursue. (4) The appropriate goal of any drug policy must be to decreasethe prevalence and spread of harmful drug use and substanceabuse, and to minimize the harms associated with such problemswhere they are found to exist. (5) Additionally, any policy whichcreates more harmful results than the societal problems itproposes to solve, must be re-evaluated in terms of theadvisability of further pursuit of such policy. Further, tojustify continuation of any public policy, the costs incurredmust always be weighed against the benefits derived. It is withinthis context, and with these criteria in mind, that presentapproaches to drug policy must be objectively assessed and, whereappropriate, alternative models for future policy evaluated andconsidered. (6) In making its assessment, the Task Force has concluded thatcontemporary drug policy has failed by virtually every objectivestandard. Accordingly, we call for a dramatic shift in thinkingand approach in development and implementation of future drugcontrol efforts. At this time, although not recommending"decriminalization" or "legalization" of mostsubstances currently designated as "controlled" underfederal and state penal statutes, the Task Force does urge thatcertain incremental steps be taken to alleviate the more easilyresolved economic and social costs associated with current drugpolicy. These include: the decriminalization of marijuana;further measures attempting to separate the "hard" drugmarkets (e.g., for heroin and cocaine), from markets for"soft" drugs (e.g., marijuana and hashish); thedownward modification of existing draconian sentences for othernon-violent drug offenses; the elimination of mandatory minimumsentences in drug cases; and increased judicial discretion in thesentencing of drug offenders, with further reliance upon drugtreatment and other diversionary programs as alternatives toincarceration for the non-violent drug offender. Moreover, wehighly recommend the further study and serious consideration ofother alternative, non-criminal, regulatory drug controlmeasures, developed in accordance with a "publichealth" rather than a "penal" model of drugpolicy. II. The Costs Of Current Drug Policy Return to Table of Contents A. The Economic Costs Whether viewed in isolation or on balance with the benefitsderived, there can be no question that the economic costs ofcontemporary drug policy, as employed on the federal and statelevels, have proved unacceptably high. Indeed, as we face afuture of increasingly limited resources, the continuation ofpresent policy, with overwhelming emphasis on the arrest,prosecution and incarceration of drug offenders, will produceexponential growth in expenditures required to accommodate andmaintain this policy. (7) As a result of the stepped up incarceration of "drugoffenders" during the past three decades, since the early1970's, our nation has seen an alarming increase in the number ofindividuals incarcerated within its borders. (8) Meanwhile, inaddition to all other resources utilized, the need for additionalprison beds and increased correctional budgets has also grownexponentially, on both state and federal levels. (9) Other unacceptably high costs in the present"penal-based" model of drug policy have been: courtbudgets strained beyond capacity, affecting the ability of ourcourt systems to adequately address both criminal and civil casescoming within their respective jurisdictions; large portions offederal, state and local law enforcement resources devoted todrug interdiction, arrest and prosecution; large portions offederal and state prosecutors' budgets devoted to drug cases;increased costs for court appointed public defenders; and growingbudgets for other national and international drug enforcementefforts -- all exacting a substantial drain on the increasinglylimited financial resources of the nation. Further, the exponential growth in the number of individualsincarcerated throughout the nation has already, and willincreasingly, cause incalculable economic costs in terms of: lostproductivity of those individuals incarcerated; state support offamilies deprived of breadwinners; and the economic decline ofimpoverished communities through incarceration of great numbersof those in the prime of their productive lives, and theirreduced earning capacity upon release from prison. B. The Social Costs The adverse effects of current drug policy have been felt mostprofoundly in the urban centers of our nation. The imposition ofpenal sanctions for drug possession and sale has proven awoefully ineffective and otherwise harmful means of attempting tocontrol substance abuse in communities where, for some, drugs areoften the only escape from the harsh realities of poverty. In aclimate where there is no treatment on demand, criminalizing thesubstance abuser may be viewed as profoundly inhumane andcounterproductive. Imprisoning individuals for drug use causes further detrimentto those individuals and their families, destroying familycohesion and undermining rehabilitation efforts. (10) Theincrease in fatherless and motherless homes, which the currentpolicy of emphasis on incarceration causes, is extraordinarilydisruptive to the family unit, where often, those harmed the mostare the children. The separation of children from their primarycaretakers due to long term imprisonment, often results in amarked decline in the quality of shelter, nutrition, medicalassistance and emotional nurturing. Studies have shown thatchildren whose primary caretakers have spent significant amountsof time in prison are more likely to manifest symptoms ofanxiety, depression, behavioral difficulties and juveniledelinquency, which may often be followed by adult criminalactivity. (11) Many of these children, often left in the care ofless able caretakers, have turned to peer relationships withgangs, seeking to establish a family substitute. (12) The criminalization and consequent stigmatization of drugusers, whether or not accompanied by a period of incarceration,"marginalizes" users, since a criminal record decreasesthe likelihood of successful employment and completerehabilitation, while continuing to impact upon family finances.This, in turn, exacerbates financial and social instability inhouseholds, and financial and emotional instability inneighborhoods, while burdening otherwise stretched resources ofpublic assistance programs. Moreover, the increased enforcement of civil forfeiture lawshas further undermined the security and stability of families.Recognizing a growing trend of evictions and asset forfeiture asa further weapon employed in the "war on drugs," entirefamilies have lost and continue to lose homes and othersubstantial assets for the acts of a single household member,thereby punishing even drug-free members of the community. (13) The black market created by drug prohibition turnsneighborhoods into war zones -- through turf wars over the hugeprofits to be made in the illicit drug industry, violentaltercations over drug transactions gone bad, and battles betweenlocal drug dealers and law-enforcement officers. The increase inviolent street crime which this situation engenders, aggravatedby the experience of violent prison culture which incarceratedoffenders bring back to their neighborhoods upon release, createsa dangerous situation for all members of inner city communities. Moreover, the street culture of guns and violence spawned bythe drug trade spills over into other social interaction in urbanneighborhoods, with violence becoming a commonly accepted mode ofconflict resolution. Community residents live in fear of theviolent street culture generated, in large part, by theblack-market drug trade, and the increased incidence of innocentpedestrians struck in the cross-fires or by stray bullets frombattles involving participants in the drug trade. (14) History has shown us that even in an atmosphere of prohibitionand criminalization of drug dealing, participation in the drugtrade will continue to be widespread, since it indisputablyprovides the greatest entrepreneurial opportunity to many inpoorer communities. There is a strong economic motivation foryoung people and those who might otherwise be legally employedand law-abiding to engage in the sale of drugs, due to the highprofits generated by the illicit industry in an environment ofdrug prohibition, and the dearth of opportunities for poor,uneducated youth in the legitimate job market. Harsh sentencing laws themselves lead to the activerecruitment of children and first time offenders (frequentlywomen - "drug mules") into the drug trade, so thatdealers themselves can escape such penalties. (15) Evidencefurther reveals, that due to the great economic incentivesrepresented by the illicit drug trade, when one street dealer istemporarily incapacitated by incarceration, there is a readysupply of others waiting in the wings to fill the gap in themarket. As such, not only does the widespread incarceration oflow-level drug dealers fail to deter others from entering intothe drug trade, it arguably draws more individuals into theillegal trade than would otherwise occur without the periodicremoval of many of its participants. (16) Moreover, the deterrence rationale of harsh sentencing doesnot necessarily operate among the drug dealing community as mightbe anticipated, where many assume the extraordinary risks alreadyinvolved in the violent but lucrative illicit drug trade. As oneobserver has noted: "Apprehended dealers are replaced from a seemingly bottomless pool, for jail is not a deterrent to those who daily risk death in the drug trade." (17) Additionally, with respect to users of certain controlledsubstances, it appears questionable that conventional deterrencetheory can be meaningfully applied where substance abuse may beaccompanied by physical addiction. Finally, a social byproduct of the misplaced allocation offinancial resources which concentrates huge expenditures on theapprehension and imposition of penal sanctions on drug users andlocal drug dealers, is a clogged criminal justice system unableto focus on society's larger crime problems. Courts jammed withdrug cases inevitably results in insufficient resources availableto properly attend to these and other more serious crimesappearing on overburdened court dockets. This logjam leads toinstances of "revolving door" justice even for violentcriminals, since the system simply cannot handle the overload.(18) A further result of these conditions is a perceivedtrivialization of violent crime itself, reinforced by a penalscheme which punishes drug crimes as severely or more severelythan many criminal acts of violence. III. Public Health Consequences Of Current Drug Policy Return to Table of Contents The Task Force views substance abuse as, first and foremost, a publichealth issue. Accordingly, it appears that problems ofsubstance abuse would be more appropriately and effectivelyaddressed within our health care delivery systems, rather than byour law enforcement agencies, courts and correctionalinstitutions. The emphasis on a "penal" model of drug controlresults in reduced funding for drug treatment facilities. This isan unfortunate irony, since, as concluded by RAND researchers ina 1994 report, a dollar's worth of drug treatment is worth sevendollars spent on the most successful law-enforcement efforts tocurb the use of cocaine. (19) Moreover, the fear of arrest, stigmatization and even removalof their children from homes, (20) discourages substance abusersfrom taking advantage of those health care and counselingfacilities which are available. (21) Pregnant women who aresubstance abusers are deterred from seeking adequate prenatalcare, resulting in unhealthier children. A single positive drugtest result during pregnancy can trigger mandatory reportingrequirements. Therefore, the current policy of criminalization ofdrug use amplifies potential health hazards of substance abuse,and inhibits access to treatment, even for non-drug use relatedhealth care. Since possession and sale of any controlled substance isillegal, dangerous drugs (which despite criminalization are stillwidely available on the black market) are completely unregulated.Under a scheme of criminalization, regulatory control is ceded tounderworld figures, including violent, predatory and oftenruthless criminals. This total lack of quality control of illicitdrugs on the market results in more dangerous, adulterated drugsbeing produced and consumed, which, in turn, causes more diseaseand death from the use of controlled substances than would occurif the production and distribution of these drugs were regulatedby, for instance, U.S. Food and Drug Administration safetyregulations, warnings and other labeling requirements. (22) The "zero tolerance" approach to the "drugproblem," with its primary emphasis on law enforcement andpenal sanctions, results in an absence of any quality control forillegal drugs widely consumed throughout the nation, and a lackof information concerning safer drug use. This presents furtherserious health costs brought on by current drug policy, whichignores the reality that some degree of drug use in our societyis inevitable. This lack of public education and safetyregulations dramatically, and unnecessarily, increases the healthrisks involved in the consumption of those drugs presentlydesignated as illegal. Accordingly, it appears that present drug control lawsthemselves, have directly led to an increase in the health risksassociated with drug use and substance abuse. In addition tothose dangers posed by lack of quality control and safetyregulations governing illegal drugs, drug paraphernalia laws,together with a failure to promote needle exchange programs, haveresulted in the preventable spread of AIDS and other similarlytransmitted diseases to users, their partners and children. (23) Moreover, easier interdiction of marijuana, (with a largermass than other controlled substances), causes greater relativeavailability of "harder," stronger, more dangerousdrugs (e.g., cocaine and heroin), which are easier to conceal,transport and distribute. Additionally, increased dangers to ouryouth and others who may consume "soft" drugs, (e.g.,marijuana and hashish), result from failure of current policy toseparate out the markets for "hard" drugs from thosefor "soft" drugs. Therefore, since consumption of allof these drugs is illegal, (and distributed in the same"black-market"), those who only purchase and smokemarijuana, for instance, are inevitably forced to come in contactwith a more dangerous criminal element in order to obtain thisrelatively harmless substance. (24) Violence associated with the illicit drug trade createssubstantial public health problems, in the form of injuries anddeath. These health problems arise from effects of drugprohibition rather than substance abuse per se. Evidencesuggests that gunshot wounds (due to "drug-traderelated" violence) are more prevalent than overdoses("drug-induced" injuries) in inner city hospitalemergency rooms of major metropolitan areas. (25) Moreover, inaddition to the empirical evidence, our nation's experience withalcohol prohibition suggests the validity of these observations.Once prohibition ended, so did the violence associated with blackmarket alcohol distribution. (26) "Drug prohibition" also causes an increased demandfor more potent legal substances, like alcohol, which isdecidedly more harmful than certain controlled substances, mostnotably, marijuana. (27) Moreover, current drug policy is foundto be, in ways, arbitrary and inconsistent, since it has beenproven that among the most dangerous commonly consumed drugs aretobacco and alcohol, both of which are legal. (28) Finally, current drug policy discourages research intopotentially therapeutic effects of psychotropic drugs, (29) e.g."medical marijuana," which is known to alleviate thesuffering of cancer patients and to be therapeutically beneficialin treatment of certain other diseases. (30) IV. The Relationship of Drug Policy to Violent Crime Return to Table of Contents There exists a large and growing body of respected opinion andcredible evidence which suggests that contemporary drug policyhas failed to deter or reduce the prevalence of violent crime inour communities, notwithstanding harsh treatment of drugoffenders under present "penal" or "lawenforcement" based policy. Indeed, many observers haveconcluded that the current form of "drug prohibition"has generated a great deal of violence, much of it armedviolence encountered in the lucrative underworld drug industry,and some deriving from law enforcement efforts themselves in the"war on drugs". In analyzing these issues, we take great care to distinguishbetween violence caused by actual drug use or substance abuse("drug-induced" violence), and violence caused as abyproduct of the high stakes involved in the illicit drug trade("drug trade" or "drug prohibition" relatedviolence). (31) This distinction is critical, because unless thecauses of crimes and violence are accurately identified, noeffective solutions can be found. There is no doubt that some forms of drug use may result inundesirable, unacceptable and anti-social behavior. (32) However,it appears that the overwhelming causes of violent crimes, whichoften find categorization under the heading of "drugrelated," are caused by various factors unrelated to actualpharmacological effects of controlled substances upon humanbehavior. (33) Rather, much of the violent crime can be said tobe "drug prohibition-related," insofar as it resultsfrom the high costs, huge profits and great stakes involved inthe world of drug commerce as is carried on in cities, states andnations throughout the world. (34) Moreover, the complete banningof all forms of use and sale of controlled substances, includingmarijuana and hashish, has fostered an underworld black market,for both "hard" and "soft" drugs, whereviolence and weapons possession is part and parcel of doingbusiness under conditions of illegality. In cities throughout the United States, we find aproliferation of armed violence resulting from "turf"wars for control of territory for lucrative drug sales, togetherwith regularly recurring dangerous and deadly altercations overdrug deals gone bad. In addition to this community-basedviolence, there are "shoot-outs" between drug dealersand law enforcement officers, the latter developing the need forgreater and more powerful weapons, only to be matched and thensurpassed by those in the drug trade who have enormous profits,and personal liberty, at stake. The net result of thesecircumstances has been an extraordinary casualty rate for thoseinvolved in the drug trade, (35) injury and death to innocentbystanders "caught in the crossfires," injury and lossof life to law enforcement officers, and a prevailing atmosphereof violence in many inner city communities. A further byproduct of these conditions is an increase ofweapons possession, and thereby, the weapons trade, where use andsale of dangerous and increasingly powerful weapons haveproliferated. This widespread possession and use of dangerous anddeadly weapons has further resulted in the increase of armedviolence in our communities, not always directly related to localdrug wars, but fostered by the undercurrent of violence, guns andmoney supported by the drug trade. We note other ways in which current drug policy is likelyserving to exacerbate rather than alleviate violence in ourcommunities. Over the past decades, stepped up law enforcementefforts, disproportionately carried out in our inner citycommunities, have resulted in large and increasing numbers ofminority youth being brought within control of the criminaljustice system. It is reported that almost 1 in every 3 youngblack men in the U.S., between the ages of 20-29, is presentlywithin the control of the criminal justice system -- either inprison, on parole or on probation. (36) This figure is up fromapproximately 1 in every 4 as reported just 5 years ago. (37)Together with the destabilization of families and communitiesaffected by wholesale removal of young men from their ranks, manyindividuals arrested and incarcerated for the inherently"non-violent" offenses of drug possession or sale, arethen exposed to the violence of prison culture. This violence is,in turn, brought back to the communities to which these membersinvariably return. Current drug policy's emphasis on drug arrests, prosecutionand incarceration, also indirectly increases violence bydiverting law enforcement, court and other criminal justiceresources from concentration on violent crime and violentcriminal offenders. Further, institutional pressures bear uponprosecutors to concentrate on drug case, since the availabilityof paid and trained police and other law enforcement officers, asprimary witnesses in such cases, renders prosecution of drugcases easier and the statistical rates of conviction (or return)more favorable. (38) This is not to discount the politicalemphasis often placed on prosecution of drug cases, nor, ofcourse, the obligation of prosecutors to process those cases inwhich legally supportable arrests under current law have beenmade. The net result has been a dramatic shift in the proportionof "non-violent" to "violent" offendersincarcerated in jails and prisons throughout the United States --such shift decidedly toward imprisonment of"non-violent" drug offenders, (39) further stretchingresources and limiting the ability of correctional institutionsto hold and maintain "violent" offenders within theirwalls. (40) On a more global level, there can be no question that theimmense fortunes to be made by involvement in the underground,black market world of drug commerce, has resulted in enormouspower and wealth for national and international narcotics cartelswhich, in the experience of various smaller nations, hasthreatened national security itself. (41) It is clear, therefore, that the most dangerous threats to oursecurity relating to drugs -- in our cities, throughout ournation and even, internationally -- derive not from thepharmacological effects of drug usage, but from the violenceengaged in and power amassed by an entire industry of underworldfigures, driven by the high costs and huge profits to be made inthe illicit drug trade. Searching our nation's history for similar experiences fromwhich we may draw guidance, we turn, as many studying this issuehave, to our national experience with alcohol prohibition duringthe early 20th century. (42) During that era of alcoholprohibition, it was the illegality of that"controlled substance," alcohol, which drove up itscosts, caused a lucrative black market to develop, and supporteda widespread growth in wealth and power for underworld figuresand organizations. (43) This, in turn, brought on violence --between competing bootleggers and racketeers, and between theseunderworld interests and law enforcement officers -- as well asother related and unrelated violence, much as we see today withrespect to the drug trade, although on a much larger scale. Inthe case of drugs and "drug prohibition," theillegality of these substances has supported and perpetuated theviolent culture and dangerous cartels which have profited fromthe resulting economic circumstances. As one commentator hasremarked: "People aren't killing each other because they are high on drugs, any more than Al Capone ordered the execution of rival bootleggers because he was drunk." (44) In the final analysis, it appears evident that our nation'sdrug policy has not only failed to resolve the problems ofviolent crime, it has served to exacerbate them. Indeed, ournation's "war on drugs," as it has come to be known,has likely had the net effect of causing a more dangerous"war" to rage within our communities, with the onlyvision of the future appearing to be, if present trends continue,an increase in violence, the proliferation of weapons, a steadysupply of new community based drug dealers, and the continuedgrowth of ever-more dangerous "kingpins" and underworldorganizations -- all driven by the engine of the lucrative,illegal drug trade. It follows, therefore, that forms of"decriminalization," "legalization," orending "drug prohibition," must be seriously consideredas alternative directions for future drug strategy, howeverradical such ideas may presently appear. (45) Accordingly, theTask Force urges the further study of alternative, non-penalbased models, in development of future drug policy. In summary, it is abundantly clear that, whatever the harmspresently caused by use and abuse of "controlled"substances in our nation, many of the more pressing concerns withrespect to violence in our communities are unlikely to be solveduntil we find a way to take the profit out of the black marketdrug trade itself. If we continue to fail in addressing theseissues in an objective, rational and progressive manner, we mayfind ourselves devoured by a larger, more dangerous beast of ourown creation. V. Drug Policy, Drug Law Enforcement And People Of Color Return to Table of Contents The empirical evidence available clearly demonstrates that theadverse effects of current drug policy impact disproportionatelyon people of color. Although it is estimated that over 80% ofdrug users are white, minorities comprise 74% of thoseincarcerated for drug offenses. (46) Therefore, the injusticesinherent in the enforcement and criminal prosecution of drugoffenses impact more profoundly on communities of color. Mandatory drug sentencing laws and the mass guilty pleas theyentail lead to insufficient checks on improper police activity,since, generally, no trial or suppression hearings occur when adefendant pleads guilty, at which forums improprieties on thepart of law enforcement officers may be exposed. Civil rights areeroded with the creation of additional exceptions to the FourthAmendment's bar on warrantless searches (in what has effectivelybecome the "drug exception" to the U.S. Constitution),while discriminatory stereotyping regarding the profile of a drugdealer leads to the more frequent search and seizure of people ofcolor. Further, vaguely worded loitering and curfew laws,intended to curb drug dealing, are disproportionately enforced oninner city streets. Other factors lead to a disparity in the racial makeup ofthose arrested for narcotics offenses. Wealthier white drug usersmake their purchases behind closed doors, in business districtsand in more isolated suburban communities, away from the eye oflaw enforcement agents -- and therefore, more frequently escapedetection. On the other hand, street dealers, and many drug usersin inner city neighborhoods are considerably more exposed. At the same time, a statistically high number of drugprosecutions result in convictions. This is largely due to the"professional" nature of witnesses involved innarcotics cases, and because drug offenders are typicallyapprehended as a result of "buy-and-bust" operations orpursuant to "observation sales," where police set upoperations in designated "high crime" neighborhoods, soas to make undercover purchases from street dealers, and/orobserve and apprehend individuals involved in street sale andpurchase of narcotics. (47) Additionally, such community based"buy-and-bust" and other similar operations tend toconcentrate on low level dealers and users rather than the drugkingpins, since street sellers and purchasers are simply easierto locate and apprehend. Current drug policy has other irrational and discriminatoryconsequences, e.g. the disparate treatment of crack-cocaineoffenders (generally poor people of color), versus powder-cocaineoffenders (generally white, middle-upper class), and theinequitable prison sentences which this duplicity engenders. (48) Due to lack of other forms of attention, by government andprivate industry, inner city neighborhoods have become thebattleground for much of the drug trade, including enforcementefforts by police. Moreover, the great sums of money involved inthe illegal drug trade encourages police corruption, leading to abreakdown of appropriate law enforcement efforts in thesecommunities. Furthermore, broadly drafted civil forfeiture andother similar laws, providing for the eviction of entire familieswhere one of its members may be involved in drug dealing, (49)are more frequently enforced in poor communities, leading togreater hardship in communities where higher numbers of black andLatino people reside. In summary, many of the social costs outlined in Section II(B)above, are more profoundly felt in minority communities, to wit:high incarceration rates, increase in fatherless and motherlesshomes; active recruitment of children into the drug trade so thatdealers can escape harsh penalties of the drug laws; greaterfinancial and emotional instability in households; greaterfinancial and social instability in neighborhoods;criminalization and stigmatization of many young members of thesecommunities, affecting their future employability; serious injuryto innocent bystanders caught in the "cross-fires" ofrival drug dealers and their battles with police; and a pervasivestreet culture of guns and violence growing out of the drug tradeaffecting other forms of social interaction in urbanneighborhoods, with violence becoming a commonly accepted mode ofconflict resolution. Since current drug policy so profoundly and disproportionatelyimpacts upon people of color, review of present laws must beundertaken to remove any discriminatory bias, and steps taken toensure that whatever drug control laws and strategies areemployed in the future, that they are fairly conceived andeven-handedly enforced. VI. The Impact Of Current Drug Policy On Women Return to Table of Contents Women, particularly minority women, have disproportionatelyfelt the adverse impact of the harsh drug sentencing laws. (50) Astudy of female "drug mules" was conducted by theCorrectional Association of New York, (51) focused onprosecutions occurring in Queens, New York, where JFKInternational Airport serves as a major entry port forinternational travel. The Correctional Association found astartling increase in the number of women arrested and chargedwith "A-I" felony narcotics offenses, many of whom werefirst time arrestees. This was primarily a result of the combinedeffect of the accessorial liability statute and the"Rockefeller Drug Laws," so that women suspected ofbeing used as couriers by drug smugglers frequently facedmandatory prison sentences of 15 and 25 years-to-life, even ontheir first arrest. (52) The report further found that despite the fact that many ofthese women claimed to be unwitting agents of drug distributors,or marginally involved in drug operations, they did not go totrial because of the excessively high stakes involved. Pleabargain agreements, which guaranteed relatively short sentencesof 3 years-to-life, was "too good" an offer to refuse,(although unconscionable under many individual circumstances),given the risk of a much more severe sentence if found guilty attrial. Many of these women were mothers, (53) unable or unwillingto risk being separated from their children for considerablylonger periods in the event of conviction after trial, andtherefore pleaded guilty even if they were innocent or able topresent valid defenses to the offense charged. In these cases, women are disproportionately affected by thelack of judicial discretion involved in the mandatory sentencesstatutes, regardless of any mitigating circumstances which mayexist. (54) Due to draconian drug laws such as these, which oftenfail to distinguish between major and minor participants in drugcases, fail to provide any relief for first time offenders, or toallow reasonable consideration of other mitigating factors and/orindividual characteristics of the defendant, the resulting rateof incarceration for women in Queens County, and for womenthroughout the U.S., has grown dramatically in recent years. Thisgrowth includes an increase of 275% from 1980 to 1992, in thetotal number of women incarcerated in the U.S.; and an increaseof 433% during the five year period from 1986 to 1991, in thenumber of women incarcerated in state prisons for drug offenses.(55) Even those women who are not defendants in drug cases areprofoundly affected by current drug policy, with its emphasis onenforcement rather than rehabilitation. When fathers areincarcerated for drug use or sale, it is the women who are leftto raise children in single parent households. When teenage boysbecome involved in the drug trade, it is their mothers who areevicted when civil forfeiture laws are enforced. When men who areinjection drug users share needles because of lack ofavailability of clean needles, the women they sleep with risk HIVinfection. For those women who have substance abuse problems, acombination of mandatory reporting requirements and the childabuse and neglect laws serve to deprive them of access to medicalservices, pre-natal care, and even substance abuse counseling.(56) A further disturbing trend has emerged in states throughoutthe nation, wherein pregnant women and new mothers, sufferingfrom substance abuse problems, face criminal prosecution onserious charges, including drug distribution, assault and murder,upon theories that such drug use, while pregnant, constitutes"delivery" of drugs to the unborn fetus. (57) In thesecases, it is asserted that injury to the unborn and newly borninfant justifies imposition of severe criminal sanctions upon thefemale drug user. These criminal prosecutions represent a new andnovel category of penal sanctions, (58) from which men areentirely excluded -- another unfortunate result of our nation'scurrent punitive approach to drug policy. VII. Effects Of Contemporary Drug Policy On The Integrity Of Government Return to Table of Contents As a general principle, where respect for the integrity ofgovernment is severely compromised, its ability to govern and therule of law itself breaks down. In this regard, we note that pastdecades of drug policy, characterized by use of draconian penalsanctions, has resulted in legislative and enforcement measuresof questionable wisdom and validity. Integrity of government and, specifically, respect for itsrepresentatives in the law enforcement community has been furthereroded by repeated incidents of individual and systemic policecorruption relating to the lucrative, black-market drug tradewith which many law enforcement officers come into contact.Meanwhile, extreme harshness of drug laws, often requiringdraconian mandatory minimum sentences in the event of convictionafter trial, causes widespread plea bargaining and entry ofguilty pleas, even where such pleas are inappropriate. Thisresults in insufficient checks on improper police activity,generally tested at hearings or trial of such cases. It furtherresults in the criminal conviction of innocent individuals, andincarceration of many such individuals, (albeit for shorterperiods than had they been convicted after trial). A furtherproduct of these circumstances, is the widespread deprivation toindividuals of the right to due process of law (through inabilityto risk trial), and overall loss of confidence in the ability toobtain fair treatment in our courts of justice. Furthermore, there is a growing lack of respect for a justicesystem where drug use or sale, although not generally viewed asbeing as dangerous or morally reprehensible as the perpetrationof violent crime (e.g., robbery, assault, murder), isnevertheless prosecuted more frequently, and more consistently.We must also be mindful of the "trivialization" ofviolent criminal conduct, fostered by undue emphasis upon druglaw enforcement and by a penal scheme which punishes drug crimesas severely or more severely than many violent crimes. In NewYork, for example, the sale of a $10 dollar quantity of cocaine(a Class B felony) is treated as severely as the serious feloniesof armed robbery and rape, and more severely than the highestcharge of assault, i.e., crimes resulting serious physical injury(a Class C felony). (59) The inordinate concentration on street-level drug users andsellers, (generally in inner city neighborhoods, often regardedto as "high crime" areas), has resulted in thedisproportionate and discriminatory impact of drug laws uponpeople of color throughout our nation. (60) Moreover, widespreadinjustice often results from the imposition of unduly harshprison sentences upon drug offenders, pursuant to mandatoryminimum sentencing statutes, even for first time offendersplaying peripheral roles in the drug offenses with which they arecharged. (61) Additionally, the substantial and relentless street-levelenforcement of drug laws, targeted mainly at youth populations inour inner city communities, (unmatched by efforts to reduceviolent crime), has resulted in an atmosphere of police at"war" with the community, and garnering a growingdisrespect for law enforcement and the perpetuation of an"us-against-them" mentality with respect to both thelaw enforcement community and the government which it represents. The erosion of civil liberties tolerated in the name of the"war on drugs," has become so extreme that somecommentators have gone so far as to claim that "[t]he Billof Rights is in danger of becoming meaningless in cases involvingdrugs." (62) The perceived imperative of waging the drug war has twistedconstitutional protections against unreasonable searches andseizures by state officials beyond all recognition, setting anominous precedent for the widespread violation of individualrights which inevitably extends to other governmental activities.What might be called the "drug exception" to theConstitution threatens the civil liberties of every citizen,since precedents set in the context of a drug case are latercited to justify limitations of civil rights in other contexts.As has been further noted: "The Supreme Court has permitted warrantless searches of automobiles, the use of anonymous tips and drug-courier profiles as the basis for police searches, and the seizure of lawyers' fees in drug cases. Property on which marijuana plants are found can be forfeited even if the owner is charged with no crime." (63) Also subject to continuing erosion are our citizens' rights toprivacy in the name of the "drug war," represented byunwarranted and unjustified drug testing of employees, propertysearches of children, and other intrusions into the lives ofindividuals not otherwise implicated in any criminal conduct soas to justify such intrusions. For example, all federal employeesare required to submit to urine testing. (64) Such testing hasalso become commonplace in private industry, not otherwiseconfined by constitutional limitations but, nevertheless,encouraged by governmental policies. Serious "due process" and moral implications arisethrough increased use of civil forfeiture laws, where innocentfamilies are deprived of substantial assets and, at times, theirhomes, due to acts of a single household member, in which theyhad no involvement and over which they had no control. Forexample, the elderly mother of a drug dealer, who personally hasnot participated in any illicit activities, may be evicted fromher home on the grounds that drug related activities were takingplace under her roof. Under these circumstances, the governmentneed only show that there existed reasonable grounds to believethe property was subject to forfeiture -- i.e. that the home wasbeing used for illicit drug dealing activities. The burden ofproof then shifts to the owner (or lessee) of the property toprove by a preponderance of the evidence that the property is"innocent". (65) Meanwhile, innocent family members ofsuspected drug dealers may be rendered homeless. Furthermore, there appears to have developed a trend towardspenalizing innocent property owners, where the government, unableto succeed in its objectives through its own failed policies, hasbegun to shift obligations and responsibilities for eradicatingdrug activity to private citizens. For instance, in somejurisdictions, owners of residential apartment buildings may bedeprived of their property through failure to evict suspecteddrug dealers or users, even where the government, with its lawenforcement and prosecutorial powers, has been unable to convictsuch individuals of any criminal activity. (66) In summary, punitive, draconian, and often irrationalapproaches to drug policy have, over time, caused unwarrantedencroachments upon the civil rights of those within our borders.(67) These are often represented by exceptions to rights embodiedin the U.S. Constitution, including rights guaranteed under theFourth Amendment and the right of individuals to "dueprocess of law," in diverse areas and at various levels ofgovernmental involvement. (68) Therefore, to preserve the integrity of government itself,particularly impacted by our nation's drug policy, we mustreassess our goals (which must be realistic), the purpose andvalues implicit in those goals, as well as the means and policiesby which we hope to achieve betterment of our society. Inreassessing the appropriate direction for future drug policy, wemust first acknowledge that a drastic change in thinking andapproach is clearly called for. Our government's continuedpursuit of a failed, punitive policy, which serves not to providehelp and aid to those in need of assistance, but rather, to"criminalize," "marginalize" and"alienate" growing numbers of its population,ultimately causes more harm than good, garners disrespect for itsinstitutions, and raises the question of its ability to fairlyand effectively govern. Accordingly, we must set out on a course to devise a policywhich inspires confidence for positive and meaningful progress incombating substance abuse, violence, and other related problemsin our society. In embarking on such path, we would do well joinwith the medical profession in adherence to the "Hippocraticoath," which in its most common form of expressioninstructs: "First, do no harm". Task ForceRecommendations Return to Table of Contents I. Pursue Alternative Models inEstablishing Future Drug Policy Replace emphasis on "penal" based approach to drug policy with "medical" or other alternative policy models, which view substance abuse and related problems as primarily a public health issue. Improve and expand drug treatment, vocational support and diversionary programs, utilizing extensive cost savings derived in transition from cost-intensive "penal" based approach to drug policy. Adopt a more rational and compassionate approach to drug policy, founded upon the humane treatment of substance abusers and their families, and placing emphasis on assisting those drug users who need treatment in obtaining such treatment, rather than emphasizing arrest, prosecution and incarceration as a solution. Integrate drug treatment centers with other community based health facilities, so as to bring substance abusers in need of treatment within the health care system. Expand methadone maintenance programs and apply resources saved in transition from a "penal" based policy, to support empirical research on effective treatments of substance abuse problems. Apply cost-benefit analysis for all drug control policies implemented, to ensure that any such policy is unlikely to cause more harm than use of the substance(s) prohibited. Consider alternative drug policy models which would allow for government regulation and quality control for currently designated "controlled substances," in an effort to further reduce health risks associated with purchase and consumption of unsafe adulterated drugs from illegal, unregulated drug markets. Seriously study and consider alternative drug policy models, which attempt to remove huge profits which drive the illegal drug trade, in an effort to decrease the harms associated with "drug prohibition." For those controlled substances which may be "decriminalized," (e.g., marijuana), replace penal sanctions with government regulation and appropriate taxation. Allow states to experiment with alternative approaches to drug policy, including non-penal based models. Study alternative drug policies, including experimental programs conducted in the U.S. and abroad, in an attempt to arrive at the best, most helpful and cost-effective system available. Develop and encourage pilot programs and alternative approaches to substance abuse issues with close monitoring. Create state and federal commissions, including representatives from each of the executive, legislative and judicial branches of national and local governments, to recommend substantial and cohesive changes in drug policy. II. Provide Immediate SentencingRelief and Additional Judicial Discretion in Criminal Prosecution of Drug Cases Repeal mandatory minimum sentencing statutes for non-violent drug offenders. Revise draconian drug laws, downgrading the category of "non-violent" narcotics offenses to levels more commensurate with the seriousness of these offenses in relation to other crimes. Expand judicial discretion in sentencing drug offenders on both the state and federal levels, permitting judges to sentence individual defendants in a manner suitable to the circumstances of the offense and the offender. Where appropriate, permit downward modification of sentences for "drug mules" and other low-level participants in drug transactions. Subject to constitutional protections, provide for statutory relief for presently incarcerated drug offenders, modifying sentences to reflect proposed amendments to drug laws. To the extent criminalization of use and sale of controlled substances remains in place, avoid the present system's over-reliance on weight-based criteria in drug prosecutions, reserving more serious penalties for sales where aggravating factors exist, such as sale to children or use of violence in trade. Establish and improve diversionary and treatment programs and other alternative-to-incarceration programs for non-violent drug offenders. Encourage increased utilization of probation department resources toward facilitating expanded use of such programs by courts in sentencing drug offenders. III. Reduce the Harms AssociatedWith Substance Abuse and Drug Prohibition Move from policy of "zero tolerance," to one incorporating "harm reduction" principles, accepting the reality that marijuana and common recreational drugs, and other potentially harmful substances (including alcohol and tobacco), have always, and will continue to be consumed by some members of society, and concentrate efforts on reducing the harms associated with such use. Adjust policing priorities to concentrate enforcement efforts on curtailing and preventing violent criminal conduct, rather than emphasis on the apprehension and imposition of penal sanctions for use and consumption of drugs. Reduce the risk of young people coming into contact with the "hard" drug market by separating it out from the "soft" drug market. Expand availability of accurate information and education about harms which may be associated with drug use and substance abuse and ways to minimize those harms. Promote needle exchange programs and repeal drug paraphernalia laws, in order to curtail the spread of AIDS and other similarly transmitted diseases. Initiate measures and revise laws to promote, rather than hinder access of substance abusers to medical and other care, as may be needed. Assure doctor-patient privilege/confidentiality for those seeking treatment for substance abuse, pre-natal care and other forms of health care, to prevent fear of prosecution, removal of children from homes and other potential repercussions which discourage individuals from utilizing health care facilities. IV. Concentrate Law EnforcementResources on Reducing Violent Crime and Prosecution of Violent Criminal Offenders Reallocate law enforcement resources currently dedicated to the prosecution of non-violent drug offenders, toward prosecution of violent crime. Concentrate and redirect efforts of police, FBI, and other state, local and federal law enforcement agencies on investigation and arrest of violent criminal offenders. Reserve harsh sentencing laws, together with law enforcement, prosecution, court and prison resources for dealing with violent criminal offenders. Reject the notion that law enforcement efforts can eliminate drug use in our society, and redirect such policing efforts toward concentration on violence and community disruption. Attempt to eliminate causes of violent crime related to the lucrative illicit drug trade, by adopting policies which seek to remove huge profits from drug dealing and underworld black market narcotics distribution. V. Reshape the Drug Policy Debate --Return to Objective Analysis and Realistic Goals Commence objective, rational, non-partisan, and interdisciplinary review of current drug policy, with emphasis on realistic and appropriate goals to be achieved in dealing with problems of harmful drug use and substance abuse. Devise reasonable and compassionate means of addressing such problems. Establish constructive dialogue on drug policy reform, taking care to adopt terminology which distinguishes between harms caused by substance abuse per se and those harms caused by drug control policies themselves. Avoid use of the "drug problem" as "catch-all" for other societal ailments, in an effort to engage in a rational and honest dialogue on the development of a responsible drug policy. Carefully analyze, for scientific validity, claims of causal nexus between use of controlled substances and specific criminal activities. In analyzing causes of "drug-related" crime, identify and distinguish between criminal activity caused by: (i) use or abuse of psychoactive substances; (ii) the lucrative black-market drug trade; and (iii) implementation of current drug policy. Devise realistic policies which reduce, rather than perpetuate violence and other criminal activity. Undertake an accurate, scientific analysis of the pharmacological makeup, uses and effects and dangers of any given drug (controlled or otherwise), in order to inform the determination of a rational and appropriate policy for regulation, use and treatment of such drug. Evaluate how policies presently employed, with emphasis on arrest, prosecution and incarceration, work either to provide assistance, or to cause further harm, to those individuals who use drugs, their families and communities. Commence constructive dialogue distinguishing between substance abuse and drug use generally, in order to develop appropriate and cost-effective goals and policies relating to government, medical or other intervention into lives of citizens, minimizing involuntary intervention absent clear and compelling necessity. VI. Implement Public EducationCampaign on Drug Use and Substance Abuse Increase access to and availability of accurate information about the harms associated with types of drug use and of substance abuse. Provide access to information about safe use of controlled substances, in the absence of abstinence, and ways to reduce harms associated with such use. Counteract inaccurate, misleading and divisive "drug war" propaganda, which has characterized many drug education campaigns initiated by advocates of "zero tolerance" drug policy. VII. Decriminalize Marijuana Decriminalize marijuana, accepting that the economic and social costs of enforcing penal sanctions for possession of this relatively harmless drug can no longer be justified. If not decriminalized, where medically recommended, permit the medical use of marijuana and other controlled substances which have been determined by the medical community to be therapeutically beneficial. VIII. Reverse Encroachments on CivilRights and Restore "Due Process of Law" Repeal draconian sentencing laws for non-violent drug offenses, which deprive individuals of an opportunity to contest charges at trial due to risk of extensive and unreasonable periods of incarceration. In recognition of inherent rights to privacy and personal autonomy, reevaluate whether, and to what degree, government intervention is appropriate and justifiable with respect to casual use of drugs by its citizens. Restore a broader application of the U.S. Constitution's Fourth Amendment prohibition of unjustifiable search and seizure by government, eliminating the "drug exception" to the Constitution which has created unacceptable invasions of privacy and personal freedom. Severely curtail civil forfeiture laws, to permit government restraint of property only upon "reasonable cause," and allow for forfeiture of only those assets directly traceable to criminal transactions, obtained as such with knowledge of the owner of the property to be forfeited, and which laws are enforceable only upon prior notice and with the meaningful right to contest, in accordance with "due process of law". IX. Provide Alternative Social andEconomic Opportunity for Inner City Youth Declare war on causes of substance abuse, including: poverty; lack of education; lack of economic opportunity; family crises and; financial, emotional and physical instability. Utilize substantial savings anticipated from moving from cost-intensive "penal based" model of drug policy, to provide greater educational, vocational and recreational opportunities for youth at risk of becoming involved in the illegal drug trade. Expand and implement affirmative action programs designed to increase educational, economic and career opportunities for minority youth. Encourage public and private investment in poor communities to provide greater economic opportunities in the legitimate job market. X. End War on Youth and Inner CityCommunities -- Restore Confidence and Integrity in Government End discriminatory enforcement of drug laws in inner city communities, which fall most heavily on young people of color. Take measures to reduce violence associated with drug prohibition and the lucrative, illicit drug trade it fosters. Take measures to avoid placing police at "war" with inner city youth, as results from current drug laws and enforcement policies, and work to build positive alliances between police, minority communities and their youth. Restore confidence in government by having it assist and work with those in need, by creation of positive vocational, educational, recreational and other programs, in place of current emphasis upon arrests, prosecution and incarceration which prevails as a result of present drug policy. Equalize penal sanctions applicable to crack-cocaine users and powder-cocaine users, while reducing draconian penalties presently applicable to each. Bibliography Return to Table of Contents Association of the Bar of the City of New York, A WiserCourse: Ending Drug Prohibition, 49 The Record, No. 5,at 523 (June, 1994). Barbara Bloom, Incarcerated Mothers and Their Children:Maintaining Family Ties. Barbara Bloom & David Steinhart, Why Punish Children? AReappraisal of the Children of Incarcerated Mothers of America(1993). P. Bourgois, Just Another Night on Crack Street, NewYork Times Magazine, November 12, 1989, at 65. Bureau of Justice Statistics, U.S. Department of Justice, Drugs,Crime and the Justice System, at 195 (December, 1992). Bureau of Justice Statistics, U.S. Department of Justice, Prisonersin 1993, (1994). Duncan Campbell, Debate that Fails the Dope Test, Guardian(U.K.), May 15, 1993, at 24. Todd R. Clear, Tougher is Dumber, New York Times,December 12, 1993, at 21. Correctional Association of New York, Injustice Will BeDone: Women Drug Couriers and the Rockefeller Laws,(February, 1992). Correctional Association of New York & The New YorkCoalition for Criminal Justice, Imprisoned Generation(September, 1990). Department of Health & Human Services, NationalHousehold Survey on Drug Abuse, SAMHSA, (1993). Department of Justice, Report: Two-Thirds of Non-ViolentOffenders Serving Mandatory Minimum Sentences, The DrugPolicy Letter, Drug Policy Foundation, (Spring, 1994) at 28. Charles B. DeWitt, Information Sharing: A Plus forCorrections Construction, National Institute of JusticeReports, (Jan/Feb, 1991). Drugs & Crime Data Center & Clearinghouse, FactSheet: Drug Data Summary 1 (April, 1994). Drugs & Crime Data Center & Clearinghouse, FactSheet: Drug Data Summary 2, (April, 1994). Federal Bureau of Investigation, Crime in the United States,(1991). Alan B. Fischler, The Incarceration of America, NewYork Law Journal (NYLJ) , 11/6/92, at 2. Sen. Joseph L. Galiber, A Bill to Repeal Criminal DrugLaws: Replacing Prohibition with Regulation, 18 Hofstra L.Rev. 831 (1990). Abraham G. Gerges, The Possible End to 'TASC Pleas', NYLJ11/18/93, at 2. Keri A. Gould, Turning Rat and Doing Time for Uncharged,Dismissed, Or Acquitted Crimes: Do the Federal SentencingGuidelines Promote Respect for the Law?, 10 NYLS Journalof Human Rights 1 (1993). L.A. Greenfield & S.M. Harper, Women in Prison, U.S.Bureau of Justice Statistics, Special Report (1991). L. Grinspoon & J.B. Bakalar, The War on Drugs -- APeace Proposal, 330 New England Journal of Medicine357. L. Grinspoon & J.B. Bakalar, Marihuana -- The ForbiddenMedicine, (1993). J. Jackson, A Real War on Drugs Can't Ignore Poverty, NewYork Newsday, September 18, 1989, at 58. Hon. Whitman Knapp, Dethrone the Drug Czar, New YorkTimes, May 9, 1993, Section 4, at 15 (Op-Ed). Michael Z. Letwin, Report from the Front Line: The BennettPlan, Street-Level Drug Enforcement in New York City and theLegalization Debate, 18 Hofstra L. Rev. 795 (1990). Michael Z. Letwin, Wrong Way to Fight Crime, NewYork Times, October 6, 1990, at 23 (Op-Ed article). Michael Z. Letwin, Sentencing Angela Thompson, NYLJ4/18/94, p.2, col.3. David C. Leven, Curing the Addiction to Punishing Addicts, NYLJ5/24/93, at 2. David C. Leven, Public Hearing Testimony Before the NYSAssembly Standing Committee on Codes on the Rockefeller Drug Laws- Twenty Years Later, Prisoners' Legal Services of New York,June 4, 1993. L.F. Lowenstein, Recent Investigations into Criminality, TheCriminologist, (1992) at 105. Clarence Lusane, Pipe Dream Blues: Racism & the War OnDrugs, (1991). Marc Mauer, Americans Behind Bars: One Year Later, TheSentencing Project, (February, 1992). M. Mauer & Tracy Huling, Young Black Americans and theCriminal Justice System: Five Years Later, The SentencingProject, (October, 1995). M. Mauer, Young Black Men And The Criminal Justice System:A Growing Problem, The Sentencing Project, (1990). Ethan A. Nadelmann, Cops Across Borders, (1994). Ethan A. Nadelmann, Should We Legalize Drugs? HistoryAnswers Yes, American Heritage, (February/March,1993), at 42. Ethan A. Nadelmann, Thinking Seriously About Alternativesto Drug Prohibition, 121 Daedalus 3, (Summer, 1992). E. Nadelmann, A Rational Approach to Drug Legalization, AmericanJournal of Ethics and Medicine, (Spring, 1991). E. Nadelmann, Drug Prohibition in the United States: Costs,Consequences and Alternatives, 245 Science 939(September, 1989). E. Nadelmann, U.S. Drug Policy: A Bad Export, 70 ForeignPolicy 92 (Spring, 1988). James Ostrowski, The Moral and Practical Case for DrugLegalization, 18 Hofstra L. Rev. 607 (1990). James Ostrowski, Thinking about Drug Legalization, CatoInstitute Policy Analysis, No. 121, (May, 1989). Pratt & Peterson, Civil Forfeiture in the SecondCircuit, 65 St. John's L. Rev. 653 (1991). Jill Leslie Rosenbaum, Family Disfunction and FemaleDelinquency, 35 Crime and Delinquency (1989). C.P. Rydell & S.S. Everingham, Controlling Cocaine:Supply Versus Demand Programs, RAND (1994). R. Sabbag, The Cartels Would Like a Second Chance, RollingStone Magazine, May 5, 1994, at 35. J. Schuler & A. McBride, Notes From the Front: ADissident Law-Enforcement Perspective on Drug Prohibition, 18 HofstraL. Rev. 893 (1990). N. Steinberg, The Law of Unintended Consequences, RollingStone Magazine, May 5, 1994, at 33. M. Sviridoff, et al., The Neighborhood Effects ofStreet-Level Drug Enforcement: An Evaluation of TNT by The VeraInstitute Of Justice, (August, 1992). Hon. Robert W. Sweet & Edward A. Harris, Just andUnjust Wars: The War on the War on Drugs - Some Moral andConstitutional Dimensions of the War on Drugs, 87 NorthwesternL. Rev. 1302 (1993). Hon. Robert W. Sweet, The Abolition of Prohibition -- onDrugs, That Is, Mouthpiece, Journal of the N.Y.S.Association of Criminal Defense Lawyers, Vol. 5, No. 5, (Nov/Dec,1992). C. Torres, Legalize It?, The Nation, June 20,1994, at 857. University of California at San Francisco, The PublicHealth Impact of Needle Exchange Programs in the U.S. and Abroad,U.C.S.F. Institute for Health Policy Studies, (September, 1993). Hon. Jack B. Weinstein & Fred A. Bernstein, TheUnwarranted Denigration of Mens Rea on Drug Sentencing, FederalSentencing Reporter, Vol. 7, No. 3, (Nov/Dec, 1994). Hon. Jack B. Weinstein, The War on Drugs is Self-Defeating, NewYork Times, July 8, 1993 (Op-Ed). P. Wilkinson, The Young and the Reckless, RollingStone Magazine, May 5, 1994, at 29. S. Wisotsky, A Society Of Suspects: The War On Drugs andCivil Liberties, (1992). L. Zimmer & J.P. Morgan, Exposing Marijuana Myths: AReview of the Scientific Evidence, The Lindesmith Center,(October, 1995). L. Zimmer, Operation Pressure Point: The Disruption ofStreet-Level Drug Trade on New York's Lower East Side, Centerfor Research in Crime and Justice, N.Y.U. School of Law, (1987),at 9. Footnotes Return to Table of Contents 1. See The Merck Manual, 16th Ed. (1992) at1550; also see 21 U.S.C. 802, (regarding federalcriminal classification of presently designated controlledsubstances). Many of the more commonly known controlled substances were notillegal or "criminalized," until passage of theHarrison Act of 1914. Marijuana was banned in 1937. Alcohol wasbanned in 1920, although "decriminalized," by repeal ofthe 18th Amendment in 1933. While present drug policy hasstatutory "roots" dating back 80 years, we regardcontemporary drug policy, as characterized by the emphasis on"stepped-up" law enforcement efforts and enhanced penalsanctions, a more recent development dating back three decades,to the early 1970's. 2. See National Household Survey on Drug Abuse(1993), U.S. Department of Health and Human Services, SubstanceAbuse and Mental Health Services Administration (SAMHSA), whichreports that 12% of the total U.S. population, or 24 millionpersons within the U.S., had used illicit drugs within the pastyear. 77 million persons had used illicit drugs sometime duringtheir life. In a similar survey, conducted in 1994, it was foundthat 10.8% of the total population, or 22.6 million persons hadused illicit drugs some time during the previous year. Further, a U.S. General Accounting Office report, released in1989, noted the following findings: that drug abuse in the UnitedStates persisted at very high levels throughout the 1980's; thatthe amount of cocaine consumed in the U.S. doubled, whilethe price declined about 30%; that the price of heroin declined20%, while the average purity of heroin sold had doubled; andthat marijuana, while its use declined, continued to be readilyavailable in most areas of the country. See JamesOstrowski, Thinking About Drug Legalization, CatoInstitute Policy Analysis (1989) at 28. Thus, notwithstandinghuge expenditures in waging the "war on drugs," (seeSection IIA, infra), drug use remains widespreadthroughout the nation, its costs have actually decreased andpotency increased. See also, Joseph B. Treaster, HospitalData Show a Rise in Drug Abuse, New York Times, July9, 1992, at B1, (citing lower costs and greater purity of drugs,together with more young sellers entering the drug market due tounemployment, as reasons for upsurge in drug abuse in New YorkCity. Further reporting on New York State Office of Alcoholismand Substance Abuse estimate of 200,000 heroin addicts in NewYork City alone.) See also Association of the Bar of theCity of New York, A Wiser Course: Ending Drug Prohibition,49 The Record, No. 5 (1994) at 544. Failures in ability ofU.S. to prevent production and importation of narcotics,notwithstanding costly efforts, are also well documented. SeeE. Nadelmann, Cops Across Borders, (1993). 3. In aid of more meaningful and objective analysis of whathas commonly been referred to as "the drug problem,"care must be taken and appropriate distinctions made in usingterms such as: "drug use," "substance abuse,""drug-related crime," and "drug-inducedcrime." Definitions of these terms having been blurred inthe drug policy debate thus far, has led to a failure to properlyanalyze and distinguish harms caused by drug use, substanceabuse, the drug-trade, and drug control policies themselves. 4. See "Public Health Consequences of Current DrugPolicy," Section III, infra. 5. We acknowledge the reality, that forms of drug use andother potentially harmful behavior have, and always will be,engaged in by members of our society. Accordingly, we note thatpolicies based on "zero tolerance" are unrealistic,unnecessarily harsh, and often counterproductive to reachingthose in need of assistance. 6. Alternative models of drug policy which merit considerationinclude those incorporating principles of "harmreduction," which have received widespread acceptance amongdrug policy experts and by various governments throughout theworld. "Harm reduction" strategies seek to analyze thephenomenon of substance abuse in society by identifying andisolating the actual societal harms caused by substance abuse, aswell as policies employed to defeat it, and attempting to reducethose harms deriving from each. In seeking to reduce harmsassociated with drug use, "harm reduction" strategiesinclude the expansion of needle exchange programs and methadoneclinics, and education on safe drug use for that segment of thepopulation who will continue to use harmful drugs. Meanwhile,such policy redirects law-enforcement efforts from attempts toeradicate all drug use, to concentration in areas where crime andpublic disorder continue to occur. We find this approach to beboth more realistic and humane than present"zero-tolerance" based policy, with all its attendantcosts, marginal results, and questionable use of availableresources. 7. From 1973 to 1993 the total number of inmates held inprison and jail facilities throughout the U.S. quadrupled.Having doubled from 1973 to 1983, the years from 1983 through1993 saw the total number of prisoners held in the U.S. doubleonce again, from 660,800 to 1,408,685. During this period, thenumber of incarcerated drug offenders rose 510%. It is estimatedthat in 1990, when the number of individuals incarcerated in U.S.jails and prison facilities reached 1.1 million, the cost ofincarcerating these individuals was approximately $20.3 billion,with an anticipated need to double prison facilities inthe federal system. In some states, such as New York, the figures are even morestartling, New York having seen its inmate population almost tripleduring the period from 1981 through 1991. In only six years, from1983 to 1989, the state saw the annual number of individualsimprisoned for drug offenses grow 500%. By 1990, felony drugconvictions in New York represented 50% of all felony convictionshanded down by its state courts, up from 11.6% in 1980. As of1992, New York State anticipated the need for eight new prisons,at an approximate cost of $220 million to build one prison, and$22.5 million per year each to operate -- totaling near termcosts of approximately $2.2 billion dollars. See Alan B.Fischler, The Incarceration of America, N.Y. LawJournal, November 6, 1992 at 2; Marc Mauer and Tracy Huling, YoungBlack Americans and the Criminal Justice System: Five Years Later,The Sentencing Project (1995); M. Mauer, Americans BehindBars: One Year Later, The Sentencing Project (1992); Stateof New York, Division of Criminal Justice Services Statistics,1980-1990; Correctional Association of New York and the New YorkCoalition for Criminal Justice, Imprisones Generation,(September, 1990); Charles B DeWitt, Information Sharing: APlus for Corrections Construction, National Institute ofJustice Reports, (Jan/Feb., 1991). 8. In 1991, the U.S. became the leading nation in the rate atwhich it incarcerates its people. For instance, by 1991, 445 ofevery 100,000 persons in the U.S. were imprisoned, a rate ofincarceration more than 2 to 3 times that of its closest"competitors", e.g. Canada and China each at 111 per100,000, and Japan at 42 per 100,000. See M. Mauer, AmericansBehind Bars: One Year Later, The Sentencing Project (1992). 9. While some economic benefit is admittedly derived in thosecommunities where new prisons are built and to the correctionspersonnel hired to staff these additional facilities, such"benefits," nevertheless, represent redirection ofincreasingly limited public resources, and involve the muchgreater costs associated with warehousing drug offenders. 10. One study noted that 62% of the children of incarceratedwomen live more than 100 miles from the correctional facility,and 47% lived 21-100 miles from the facility; Barbara Bloom, IncarceratedMothers and Their Children: Maintaining Family Ties, at60-64. Overall, 54% of children whose mothers were incarceratednever visited the prison facility; Barbara Bloom and DavidSteinhart, Why Punish Children? A Reappraisal of the Childrenof Incarcerated Mothers of American, (1993) at 20. 11. L.F. Lowenstein, Recent Investigations into Criminality, TheCriminologist, (1992) at 105. 12. Jill Leslie Rosenbaum, Family Dysfunction and FemaleDelinquency, 35 Crime and Delinquency, (1989) at 31,39. Rosenbaum found that 96% of women who had been committed tothe youth authority as children, were later arrested as adults.76% of those women had at least one other family member with acriminal record. 51% of the mothers of those women had felonyarrest records, most of which were drug related. 13. See "Effects of Contemporary Drug Policy on theIntegrity of Government," Section VII, infra. 14. See Clarence Lusane, Pipe Dream Blues: Racism& The War on Drugs, (1991); J. Schuler & A. McBride, NotesFrom the Front: A Dissident Law-Enforcement Perspective on DrugProhibition, 18 HOFSTRA L. REV. 893 (1990); M. Sviridoff, etal., The Neighborhood Effects of Street-Level DrugEnforcement: An Evaluation of TNT by the Vera Institute ofJustice, (August 1992); and Michael Z. Letwin, Report fromthe Front Line: The Bennett Plan, Street-Level Drug Enforcementin New York City and the Legalization Debate, 18 HofstraL. Rev. 795 (1990). 15. On the phenomenon of "drug mules" generally, seeCorrectional Association of New York, Injustice Will Be Done:Women Drug Couriers and the Rockefeller Drug Laws, (1992). 16. See J. Schuler & A. McBride, Notes From theFront: A Dissident Law-Enforcement Perspective on DrugProhibition, 18 Hofstra L. Rev. 893 (1990). 17. See Michael Z. Letwin, Wrong Way to Fight Crime, NewYork Times, October 6, 1990, at 23 (Op-Ed article); andLetwin, Report from the Front Line: The Bennett Plan,Street-Level Drug Enforcement in New York City and theLegalization Debate, 18 Hofstra L. Rev. 795, at notes68 and 127. 18. See also, "Effects of Contemporary Drug Policy onthe Integrity of Government," Section VII, infra. 19. Treatment: Effective (But Unpopular) Weapon AgainstDrugs, RAND Research Review, (Spring, 1995); seealso Joseph Treaster, Study Says Anti-Drug Dollars AreBest Spent on Treatment, New York Times, June 19,1994; Marc Mauer and Tracy Huling, Young Black Americans andthe Criminal Justice System: Five Years Later, The SentencingProject (1995). 20. In New York, for example, a parent's substance abuse andfailure to cooperate with treatment is prima facieevidence of "neglect" for the purposes of Family Courtabuse and neglect proceedings; Family Court Act 1046(a)(iii). 21. For example, New York State law imposes mandatoryreporting requirements on health care professionals, includingmedical practitioners, social workers and counselors, requiringthem to report suspected child abuse and neglect to the ChildWelfare Administration. Since substance abuse is deemed a type of"child neglect" (see note 20, above), this has awidespread deterrent effect on access to health care by drugusers. With respect to fear of arrest and prosecution of women, see"The Impact of Current Drug Policy on Women,"Section VI, infra. 22. See J. Ostrowski, Thinking About DrugLegalization,Cato Institute Policy Analysis, No. 121,May 25, 1989; Association of the Bar of the City of New York, AWiser Course: Ending Drug Prohibition, 49 The Record,No. 5, at 523 (1994); E. Nadelmann, The Case for Legalization, ThePublic Interest, No. 92 (1988). 23. A 1993 Center for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC)study found that needle exchange programs are likely to reduceHIV transmission and do not increase drug use. However, itsrecommendations have not been followed because of, what webelieve to be, an irrational adherence to a "zerotolerance" drug policy. See U.C.S.F. Institute forHealth Policy Studies, The Public Health Impact of NeedleExchange Programs in the U.S. Abroad, (September, 1993). 24. L. Zimmer & J.P. Morgan, Exposing Marijuana Myths:A Review of the Scientific Evidence, The Lindesmith Center,(October 1995). Although between 60 to 70 million Americans haveused marijuana, not one has died from an overdose, a contrast notjust with alcohol but with aspirin; E. Nadelmann, A RationalApproach to Drug Legalization, American Journal of Ethicsand Medicine, (Spring, 1991). Nadelmann also cites DrugEnforcement Administration's Administrative Law Judge, FrancisYoung, concluding, after extensive hearings on the medicinalvalue of marijuana, that "it is one of the safesttherapeutically active substances known to man"); id.at 6. Nadelmann further reports that, in the 11 states thatdecriminalized marijuana during the 1970's, rates of consumptionwere indistinguishable from rates in those states that had not;and that, in the Netherlands, where cannabis was decriminalizedin 1976, consumption among young people had actually decreasedsubstantially. See also Robert W. Sweet, The Abolitionof Prohibition -- on Drugs, that is, Mouthpiece, Journalof the New York State Association of Criminal Defense Lawyers,Vol. 5, No. 5, (Nov/Dec, 1992), reporting on recommendations byPresident Nixon's commission on the drug laws and the those ofthe National Academy of Sciences in 1982, both of which calledfor an end to the criminalization of marijuana. Sweet furthernotes that decriminalization of marijuana would take 850,000arrests out of the system. It is also noteworthy, as reported in J. Ostrowski, ThinkingAbout Drug Legalization, Cato Institute Policy Analysis,No. 121, (1989) at 5, that when marijuana was banned in 1937, nomedical evidence was presented to Congress in support of suchlegislation. 25. Speech by Kildare Clarke, M.D., Kings Co. Medical Center,NYCLA Evening Forum, "Bursting at the Seams: Toward aRational Allocation of Resources in the Criminal JusticeSystem," (November 1992). 26. J. Ostrowski, The Moral and Practical Case for DrugLegalization, 18 Hofstra L. Rev. 607 (1990). 27. L. Zimmer & J.P. Morgan, supra at Note 24. Alsosee Note 28, infra. 28. It is well established that alcohol causes liver diseaseand tobacco is a carcinogen. Additionally, alcohol use and abuse,when combined with other activities, i.e., operation of a motorvehicle, has more dangerous effects than most presently illegalsubstances. Furthermore, alcohol abuse has been implicated inincreased incidence of violent behavior, including domesticviolence. While not advocating a return to "alcoholprohibition," we note that in the case of alcohol,appropriate sanctions are imposed upon harmful activitiesconducted while under the influence of this intoxicant, ratherthan punishment for its consumption per se. Thecomparative statistics are also quite poignant. Alcohol andtobacco have been directly implicated in approximately 100,000and 300,000 deaths per year, respectively. See R. Sweet, TheAbolition of Prohibition -- on Drugs, that is, supra, at 7,and E. Nadelmann, U.S. Drug Policy: A Bad Export, ForeignPolicy, No. 70, at 92 (Spring, 1988). Meanwhile, according tothe National Council on Alcoholism, only 3,562 people were knownto have died in 1985 from use of all illegal drugs combined,notwithstanding 1985 having been was one of the highest for percapita drug consumption. Id. 29. Extensive research in to the potential therapeutic effectsof psychedelics has been conducted by the MultidisciplinaryAssociation for Psychedelic Studies (MAPS). 30. See L. Grinspoon and J. Bakalar, Marihuana --The Forbidden Medicine, (1993). 31. In studying the causes of crime, use of the term"drug related" is often unhelpful and even misleading,as it fails to distinguish between those crimes actually causedby drug use or substance abuse (i.e. "drug induced,"meaning caused by the actual psychotropic experience, or mindand/or physical alterations brought on by use of illicit drugs),and those resulting from participation in the violent butlucrative drug trade under circumstances of drug prohibition,(i.e., "drug trade" or "drug prohibition"related crime). 32. A comparable distinction might be made between"alcohol-induced" crime (e.g., public disorder andaccentuated violent behavior, domestic or otherwise), and"alcohol trade" or "alcohol prohibition"related crime brought on by the era of prohibition (1920 to1933), which included assaults and homicides -- resulting fromturf wars between rival bootleggers, shoot outs with lawenforcement officials, transactions gone bad, etc., extortion,bribery, and sale of adulterated and poisonous liquor. This isnot to state, however, that all occasions of casual drug usecauses behavior which is harmful or sufficiently serious as tojustify intervention by the state, either by penal orrehabilitative measures. See Robert W. Sweet and Edward A.Harris, Just and Unjust Wars: The War on the War on Drugs --Some Moral and Constitutional Dimensions of the War on Drugs,(Book Review), Northwestern University L. Rev., Vol 87,No. 4, (Summer, 1993). 33. See Testimony of John P. Morgan, Professor ofPharmacology, City University of New York Medical School, June1994, at jointly sponsored public hearings of the New York CountyLawyers' Association and the Association of the Bar of the Cityof New York. We note, parenthetically, that of the substanceswhich have been most directly related to violent and other formsof anti-social behavior, alcohol rates most highly. This is not,however, a "controlled substance," as that term isdefined by criminal statutes, nor would the Task Force recommenda return to "prohibition" of alcohol, based on thelessons learned from that failed experiment. 34. Certain nations have succeeded in decreasing such"drug prohibition-related" violence by easingrestrictions on use and, to some extent, on sale of certainsubstances which are designated as "controlled" in theUnited States. This has decreased, to a degree, the black marketactivity and thereby, the cost and violence associated withillegal drug trade. Examples include: the Netherlands, Australiaand the United Kingdom. 35. We cannot fail to note here that many involved in the drugtrade, particularly in our nation's cities, are not"hardened criminals," but rather, minority youth whoare understandably attracted to the possibilities of immediateeconomic advancement through participation in the drug trade. Fordespite its risks, engagement in the sale of drugs represents oneof the few avenues available to such individuals in a world whichappears to present limited economic opportunity. 36. Marc Mauer and Tracy Huling, Young Black Americans andthe Criminal Justice System: Five Years Later, The SentencingProject (1995). 37. See Marc Mauer, Young Black Men and the CriminalJustice System: A Growing National Problem, The SentencingProject (1990). 38. Testimony of Jonathan Soroko, former Special NarcoticsAssistant District Attorney, at jointly sponsored public hearingsof the New York County Lawyers' Association and the Associationof the Bar of the City of New York (June, 1994). 39. As reported in the U.S. Dept. Bureau of Justice, Bureau ofJustice Statistics, Bulletin, Prisoners in 1993: "In 1992 . . . the number of new court commitments for drug offenses totaled an estimated 102,000 [up from 8,900 in 1980, ed.]. The number of persons admitted for drug offenses was nearly as large as the number admitted for property offenses (104,300) and larger than the number for violent offenses (95,300 and public-disorder offenses (29,400). An estimated 30.5% of all new court commitments in 1992 were drug offenders, up from 6.8% in 1980. . . .The increase in drug offenders admitted to prison accounted for nearly 46% of the total growth in new court commitments since 1980. . . . The growth in the number of persons arrested for drug law violations and the increase in the rate of incarceration for drug offenses account for the change in the prison offense distribution. Between 1980 and 1992, the estimated number of adult arrests for drug law violations increased by 108% from 471,200 to 980,700." The resulting shift in the percentage of drug offenders heldin U.S. prisons and jail, as compared to inmates incarcerated forother criminal offenses, is as follows: In 1983, the total drugoffenders held in federal prisons represented 27.6% of the totalinmate population. By 1993, this figure rose to 60.8%. Duringthat same period, the percentage of drug offenders rose in stateprisons from 7.0% to 22.5%, and in local jails from 9.3% to23.0%. Together with the shift in the makeup of jail and prisonpopulations, increased drug arrests and commitment of drugoffenders during this period has resulted in a doubling ofthe total number of individuals incarcerated in the U.S., from660,800 in 1983 to 1,408,685 in 1993. This figure quadruplesthe number of those incarcerated in the U.S. in 1973, just 20years ago; M. Mauer and Tracy Huling, Young Black Americansand the Criminal Justice System: Five Years Later, TheSentencing Project (1995). 40. M. Mauer, Americans Behind Bars: One Year Later,The Sentencing Project (Feb, 1992). Also see Keri A.Gould, Turning Rat and Doing Time for Uncharged, Dismissed, OrAcquitted Crimes: Do the Federal Sentencing Guidelines PromoteRespect for the Law?, 10 N.Y.L.S. Journal of Human Rightsat 1 (1993). 41. See, e.g., experiences of Colombia, Panama andPeru; see also E. Nadelmann, Cops Across Borders,(1993). 42. The 18th Amendment, instituting alcohol prohibition, wasenacted in 1920 and repealed in 1933. 43. E. Nadelmann, Drug Prohibition in the United States:Costs, Consequences, and Alternatives, 245 Science 939(September, 1989); J. Ostrowski, Thinking About DrugLegalization, Cato Institute Policy Analysis, No. 121,(1989). 44. Testimony of Loren Siegel, New York Civil Liberties Union,at jointly sponsored public hearings of the New York CountyLawyers' Association and the Association of the Bar of the Cityof New York (June, 1994). 45. Actually, discussions of "decriminalization" or"legalization" have always found wide currency,particularly in present times, due to the overwhelming failure,at huge cost, of a harsh law enforcement based strategy of drugcontrol. See Anthony Lewis, End the War, NewYork Times, November 3, 1995, at A29; Jefferson Morely, Crackin Black and White, The Washington Post, November 19,1995, at C1. Further, we must be mindful that drug prohibition,in its inception, began just 6 years prior to alcoholprohibition, by passage of the Harrison Narcotics Act of 1914, abill with little popular support but urged by then Secretary ofState William Jennings Bryan, a man of "deep prohibitionistand missionary convictions...'" J. Ostrowski, "ThinkingAbout Drug Legalization," Cato Institute PolicyAnalysis, No. 121, at 3 (1989). While drug control has takenon its present character as a serious law enforcement priorityduring the past three decades, ironically, this same period hasbeen one of unprecedented growth for the underworld, illegal drugindustry, in drug usage, and in the expenditure of economicresources fighting a futile "war on drugs." 46. M. Mauer and Tracy Huling, Young Black Americans andthe Criminal Justice System: Five Years Later, The SentencingProject (October, 1995). This recent report found that althoughAfrican Americans represent about 13% of the total population and13% of those who are monthly drug users, they are 35% of thosearrested for drug possession, 55% of those convicted for drugpossession, and 74% of the total serving sentences ofincarceration for drug possession. See also, 1 in 3 YoungBlack Men in Justice System, Washington Post, October5, 1995, at 1. 47. Such operations are rarely conducted in predominantlywhite, middle and upper-class neighborhoods. 48. According to the U.S. Sentencing Commission, 90% of thoseconvicted in 1994 for federal crack offenses were black and 3.5%were white. For powder cocaine, 29.7% were black and 25.9% werewhite (the rest were Hispanic). Under current federal law, thereis a mandatory minimum sentence of 5 years imprisonment forpossession of 5 grams of crack or 500 grams of powder cocaine.The Sentencing Commission's recent proposal to remove the100-to-1 sentencing disparity was rejected by Congress, theJustice Department and the Clinton Administration. See L.Greenhouse article, New York Times, 10/31/95, at A18. 49. See "Effects of Contemporary Drug Policy on theIntegrity of Government," Section VII, infra. 50. In the five years from 1989 to 1994, black, non-hispanicwomen from the ages of 20 to 29, faced the highest growth incriminal justice "control rates," (i.e., incarcerated,on parole or on probation) which increased 78% during thisperiod. In the five year period from 1986 to 1991, black,non-hispanic women overall faced the highest growth in numbers ofthose incarcerated in state prisons for drug offenses, with anincrease of 828% during this period. See also note 56, infra. 51. Correctional Association of New York, Injustice Will BeDone: Women Drug Couriers and the Rockefeller Drug Laws,(February 1992). 52. For federal arrestees, the potential sentence afterconviction for similar crimes, under the Federal SentencingGuidelines, is 50 years-to-life. 53. 80% of women prisoners are the sole caretakers of childrenunder age 18. L. A. Greenfield and S. M. Harper, Women inPrison, U.S. Bureau of Justice Statistics, Special Report(1991). 54. See, for example, M. Letwin, Sentencing AngelaThompson, NYLJ 4/18/94, p.2, col.3. 55. See Barbara Bloom and David Steinhart, WhyPunish Children?, supra, at 3; also see M.Mauer and Tracy Huling, Young Black Americans and the CriminalJustice System: Five Years Later, The Sentencing Project(1995). Regarding the general increase in the conviction andincarceration of women for drug offenses, in 1991, 1 in 3 womanin state prisons was incarcerated for a drug offense, up from 1in 8 in 1986. From 1986 to 1991, the number of female stateprisoners incarcerated for drug offenses grew from 2,370 to12,633, for an increase of 433%. Id. 56. See "Public Health Consequences of Current DrugPolicy," Section III, supra. 57. As regularly reported in Reproductive Freedom News,the newsletter published by The Center for Reproductive Law andPolicy, New York City. In criminal statutes, "delivery" of narcotics, withor without pecuniary compensation, is generally treated under themore serious category of sale or distribution of such narcotics, (see,for example, New York State Penal Law 220.00(1), whichdefines sale of narcotics as: to "sell, exchange, give ordispose of to another or offer or agree to do the same." (Emphasisadded.) Although such criminal prosecutions against women arenot presently known to have been brought in New York State, theyhave been, and continue to be brought in various statesthroughout the nation, (see Reproductive Freedom News, supra). 58. As regularly reported in Reproductive Freedom News, supra. 59. See New York State Penal Law (P.L.) 220.39(Criminal Sale of a Controlled Substance in the Third Degree), ascompared with P.L. 160.15 (Robbery in the First Degree), P.L.130.35 (Rape in the First Degree), and P.L. 120.10 (Assaultin the First Degree). 60. See "Drug Policy, Drug Law Enforcement and Peopleof Color," Section V, supra. 61. See "The Impact of Current Drug Policy onWomen," Section VI, supra. 62. L. Grinspoon & J. Bakalar, The War on Drugs -- APeace Proposal, 330 New England Journal of Medicine357, at 357. 63. L. Grinspoon & J. Bakalar, ibid., at 357. Seealso Florida v. Bostick, 111 S. Ct. 2382 (1991); U.S. v.Sokolow, 490 U.S. 1, at pp.13-14 (1989) (in his dissent,Justice Brennan enumerates cases in which the court failed toquestion the "chameleon-like way [in which the drug courierprofile] adapt[s] to any particular set of observations." 64. See S. Wisotsky, A Society of Suspects: The Waron Drugs and Civil Liberties, at 180 (1992). 65. The difficulty of establishing this negative propositionis borne out by the government's own statistics, which revealthat the Drug Enforcement Agency (DEA) made 14,430 domesticseizures of nondrug property in 1993, resulting in a fiscalwindfall of approximately $670 million; see Drugs &Crime Data Center & Clearinghouse, Fact Sheet: Drug DataSummary 2, (April, 1994). 66. For example, in New York, pursuant to Real PropertyActions and Proceedings Law 715, the District Attorney can seekfines and other sanctions against owners of such properties whofail to commence eviction proceedings against tenants suspectedof illegal conduct, irrespective of the ability of the DistrictAttorney to bring or sustain criminal charges with respect tosuch tenants. 67. We also note, with great concern, the conduct of variousgovernments outside our borders, both with and without directionand encouragement provided by the United States, whose ownpolicies clearly take on world-wide significance. See, e.g.,E. Nadelmann, Cops Across Borders, (1993). 68. As to the effect of federal drug sentencing laws incompromising the threshold requirement that mens rea beevident in the conduct of an individual defendant as an essentialelement in imposing criminal responsibility, see Jack B.Weinstein & Fred A. Bernstein, The Unwarranted Denigrationof Mens Rea on Drug Sentencing, Federal SentencingReporter, Vol. 7, No.3, (Nov/Dec 1994). 14 Vesey Street New York, NY 10007 (212) 267-6646 Additional Funding for Publication and Distribution ofthis Report Provided by: The DrugPolicy Foundation 4455 Connecticut Avenue, N.W. Suite B-500 Washington, D.C. 20008 (202) 537-5005 Join DRCNet DRCNet Home Page WT01-B27-46IA031-000655-B042-334http://206.61.184.43:80/schaffer/library/studies/redfern/rftoc.htm 206.61.184.43 19970122113929 text/html 3422HTTP/1.0 200 OKDate: Wednesday, 22-Jan-97 11:39:22 GMTServer: WebSitePro/1.1f (S/N wpo-0deb)Allow-ranges: bytesContent-type: text/htmlLast-modified: Sunday, 19-Jan-97 10:54:58 GMTContent-length: 3207 Beyond Prohibition - Table of Contents Contents | Feedback | Search DRCNet Library | Schaffer Library | Major Studies | BeyondProhibition Beyond Prohibition Report of the RedfernLegal Centre Drug Law Reform Project September 1996 Contents Executive Summary 1. History of Project 2. Steps to Harm Reduction 3. Comments on"Steps" 4. Harm Reduction ModelControlled Drug Availability 5. Comments on the HarmReduction Model 6. Future drug law reformactivities Appendices This document has been produced with thefinancial assistance of the Law Foundation of NSW. The opinionsexpressed are those of Redfern Legal Centre and should not betaken as representing the views of the Law Foundation. Contents | Feedback | Search DRCNet Library | Schaffer Library | Major Studies | BeyondProhibitionWT01-B27-47IA031-000653-B005-119http://206.61.184.43:80/schaffer/LIBRARY/studies/inhemp/1intro.htm 206.61.184.43 19970122134356 text/html 11598HTTP/1.0 200 OKDate: Wednesday, 22-Jan-97 13:43:42 GMTServer: WebSitePro/1.1f (S/N wpo-0deb)Allow-ranges: bytesContent-type: text/htmlLast-modified: Saturday, 28-Dec-96 07:04:48 GMTContent-length: 11380 Indian Hemp Drugs Commission Report -- Introduction Contents | Feedback | Search DRCNet Library | Schaffer Library | Major Studies | IndianHemp Drugs Commission Indian Hemp Drugs Commission Report Introduction by Tod Mikuriya, M.D. The Indian Hemp Drugs Commission Report*, comprising some ninevolumes and 3,698 pages, is by far the most completed andsystematic study of marijuana undertaken to date. Because of therarity and, perhaps, the formidable size of this document, thewealth of information contained in it has not found its way intocontemporary writings on this subject. This is indeedunfortunate, as many of the issues concerning marijuana beingargued in the United States today were dealt with in the IndianHemp Drugs Commission Report. It is both surprising and gratifying to note the timeless andlucid quality of the writings of these British bureaucrats. Itwould be fortunate if studies undertaken by contemporarycommissions, task force committees and study groups could measureup to the standards of thoroughness and general objectivityembodied in this report. In the current context of violentlypolarized attitudes toward marijuana, the prospect of a study ofsimilar stature would be improbably if not impossible. History of British Involvement The British government in India had substantial knowledge ofintoxicants other than alcohol because of their activeinvolvement in regulation, taxation and actual trafficking inthese substances for over a hundred years prior to the Hemp DrugsCommission investigation and report. In 1790 duties on alcohol and other intoxicant drugs werefirst levied by the British on Landlords in India. The regulationof cannabis preparations was further specified in 1793 inregulation XXXIV of that year: "No personal shallmanufacture or vend any such drugs (bhang* ganja**, charas*** andother intoxicating drugs) without a license from the collector ofthe zillah_." This system of regulation was instituted "with a view tocheck immoderation consumption, and at the same time to augmentthe public revenue." In 1800 in a further modification of regulation, themanufacture and sale of charas was prohibited as "being of amost noxious quality," while daily rates of duty weredeclared as the basis for taxing procedures. Curiously, in 1824the restriction on charas was rescinded "as this drug wasfound on examination to be not more prejudicial to health thanganja or other intoxicating drugs." In 1849 limits on retail sale of cannabis drugs were fixed"for better securing the abkari__ revenue of Calcutta,"and later extended to the__________________________________________________________ * Leaves and flowers of wild growing or inferior cultivatedcannabis plants. ** Flowering tops of the cannabis plant *** Resin from the mature cannabis plant _ A county-sized district or administrative division (India) __ Manufacture or sale of intoxicating Liquors or drugs;hence, an excise or internal revenue tax on such manufacture ofsale (India) [Abkar: A wine seller; distiller. Also, one whose trade issubject to abkari tax] whole of Bengal. Four years later the daily tax method wasabandoned and a fee charged on a per weight basis, and in 1860 anadditional set of dealers' fees imposed. It should be noted, however, that the system of the state ofBengal was only one of several schemes among the many provinces.Variations on this approach existed in the other states, afunction of the differing local administrations, reflecting thedegree of administrative and fiscal controls exerted by theImperial government. There had apparently been controversies as to the possiblenoxious effects of cannabis drugs, at least from the time of theinception of British controls on these products, unless we assumethat the initial stated reasons for regulation were merelycynical rationalizations for obtaining additional sources ofrevenue. Within a country of several hundred millions ofinhabitants, divided into hundreds of regions, and with onlyrudimentary "homogenizing" forces of effectivetransportation and mass media, it is perhaps reasonable to inferthat wide variations in opinions and beliefs would beencountered. Formation of the Commission On 2 March 1893 a question was raised in the British House ofCommons concerning the effects of the production and consumptionof hemp drugs in the province of Bengal, India. In response, theGovernment of India convened a seven-member commission to lookinto these questions, 3 July 1893. Upon the suggestion of LordKimberley the scope of the investigation was expanded to includeall of India. Procedures The Commission actually met for the first time in Calcutta 3August 1893. Between this date and 6 August of the followingyear, when the study was finished, the Commission receivedevidence from 1,455 witness. Field trips were made to thirtycities in eight provinces and Burma from the end of October 1893through the latter part of April 1894. Eighty-six meetings forexamination of witnesses transpired during the inquiry. Actualparticipation of the members of the Commission was duly noted andreported -- a custom that it might be worthwhile to revive: The following statement shows the attendance of the members ofthe Commission during the period occupied in inquiry (3rd August1893 to April 1894): Period of Attendance with the commission Number of meetings (a) During the (b) during the for examination of Name first tour second tour witnesses attended President 83 days 183 days 86 Mr. Ommaney Ditto Ditto 85 Mr. Fraser Ditto Ditto 85 Dr. Warden Ditto Ditto 86 Raja Soshi From 3rd August From 30th October 44 Sikhareswar to 15th September to 24th January, Roy 44 days from 14th to 16th February, from 22nd to 24th February, and from 7th to 25th March, 112 days Kanwar Harnam Singh 83 days From 13th November 48 to 5th January, 22nd February to 2nd April, and from 12th to 25th April, 78 days Lala Nihal Chand 3rd August to From 30th October to 18th 5 20th September, November and from 17th to 49 days 25th April 29 days The attendance of Raja Soshi Sikhareswar Roy was broken byoccasional absence caused by ill-health and other reasons. The absence of Kanwar Harnam Singh during two short periodswas due to ill-health. The prolonged absence of Lala Nihal Chandwas due to the fact that he suffered from continued ill-health,and was able to be with the Commission only at Calcutta at thefirst; then for some part of their preliminary tour, and at a fewmeetings for the examination of witnesses during the second tour.All the members were present at Simla during the preparation ofthe report. Witnesses whose evidence was received by the Commission weredivided into three categories: (1) Official witnesses able to give information regarding hempdrugs, based on their official and local experience. (2) Non-official witnesses of all ranks able to giveinformation regarding the drugs generally or in connection withcertain classes of the people. (3) Other persons or associations having facts or holdingopinions which they desired to communicated to the Commission. Civil Officers 467 Medical Officers 214 Private Practitioners (European methods) 34 Private Practitioners (Native methods) 87 Cultivators 144 Professional men 55 Missionaries 34 Associations 24 Persons Engaged in Trade 75 Others 59 1,455 228* Native states 189* Native states * Supplementary Volume - 1895 To facilitate collection of information, seventy questionsframed by the Commission were given to witnesses. The writtenanswers to these questions constituted the bulk of the evidencebefore the Commission. Where appropriate, witnesses were examinedorally for further clarification or explanation. In addition,witnesses who had not submitted written statements were examinedorally. It was duly noted in the record which forms of testimonyhad been provided by the individual witnesses. The following excerpts discusses evidence received intestimony and from other sources. Philosophic premises concerningroles and responsibilities of the individual are outlined as aprelude to discussing the practical issues of taxation, politicalpolicy, public safety and health. In applying the principles ofEnglish Common Law to peoples in a subcontinent whose beliefs andcustoms varied greatly from those of Great Britain, the issues offeasibility and the common good were of prime concern. If schemesof regulation of intoxicants followed this rationalistic modeltoday, the mistakes made then might not require repeating in eachgeneration. Current technologic advances do not produce progressin the area of human behavior; they only help to magnify defectsand frailties. Contents | Feedback | Search DRCNet Library | Schaffer Library | Major Studies | IndianHemp Drugs CommissionWT01-B27-48IA031-000653-B005-143http://206.61.184.43:80/schaffer/LIBRARY/studies/inhemp/2centen.htm 206.61.184.43 19970122134411 text/html 14542HTTP/1.0 200 OKDate: Wednesday, 22-Jan-97 13:43:57 GMTServer: WebSitePro/1.1f (S/N wpo-0deb)Allow-ranges: bytesContent-type: text/htmlLast-modified: Saturday, 28-Dec-96 07:04:43 GMTContent-length: 14324 Indian Hemp Drugs Commission Centennial Thoughts Contents | Feedback | Search DRCNet Library | Schaffer Library | Major Studies | IndianHemp Drugs Commission Indian Hemp Drugs Commission Centennial Thoughts Tod H. Mikuriya, M.D. This monumental study exposes the overriding and pervasivepowers of contemporary collective denial and moral failureunderpinning policies of cannabis prohibition. Motivated byconvenient moralism, questions are repeatedly disingenuouslyraised concerning the harm of hemp drugs, cannabis, or marijuana.The engine of agitprop bureaucratic ire fires up. Hearings arescheduled, witnesses heard, proceedings transcribed, summarized,presented to the requesting organization, discussed, filed, andforgotten. The prohibition policies go on. Enforcement,corrections systems strain under the demands of majoritarianmagical beliefs in coercive powers of Government; promoted bycontinuing self-serving Government misinformation and censorship.From the Indian Hemp Drugs Commission's policy perspective,today's drug polices would be unthinkable. In the century since the resolution passed the British Houseof Commons setting up the Indian Hemp Drugs Commission thatresulted in this massive inquiry documented in a nine volumereport there have been drastic changes in public policy in theUnited States and Great Britain. The Indian hemp drug regulation policies were explicitlypredicated upon optimal and minimal government intervention. The subsequent century in the United States, Great Britain,and Europe has seen pandemic spread of prohibitionistauthoritarian Government interference- the American Disease-social experiment run amok. Income taxes, mass conscription, and two world wars have seenregression from utilitarian governance of enlightenednon-interference to intrusive majoritarian autocracy.Authoritative Government has become authoritarian. Less and lessGovernment justification and demonstrated necessity are needed.The principle of non-interference is virtually inoperative. Thespace of human existence where a person reigns uncontrolledcontracts even further. The large departments of individualistichuman life are contracted or eliminated by laws, public andcorporate policy. The second intervention by Government; giving advice andpromulgating information has seen a parallel degradation. Fromlegitimate and trustworthy dissemination of factual informationthrough the institutions of science and medicine to censorship,giving bad advice, dissimulation and deception in the service ofcoercion and manipulation. The ensuing chaos of ignorance,partial truths, and outright lies has produced a cacophonoustoxic confusion surrounding the use of hemp drugs. The font ofcontemporary knowledge is now a stinking swamp, hopelesslypoisoned by the ignorant fantasies, fears, and untruths resultingfrom prohibitionists' drug propaganda efforts. Fifty years after the Indian Hemp Drugs Commission Report inAmerica the New York Mayor's Committee on Marihuana reported onuse of the drug after a five year study, seven years afternational marijuana prohibition. The perspective was based on thepremise that departments of human life and individual circle withuncontrolled reign did not include the right to use marihuana.The authoritative Government intervention of Prohibition is nowaccepted; the non-interference principle of the Millsean IndianHemp Drugs Administration policy; dead- a luxury enjoyed,ironically, by people of India subjugated by the Britishimperium. Descriptions of marihuana use were now from the perspective ofstudying the characteristics of the users of this illicit drug:to what extent, method of distribution, attitude of smoker towardsociety and use of the drug, relationship with eroticism, crime,and juvenile delinquency. Discussions of legitimacy of Governmentintervention are by implication discussing the relativedangerousness of marihuana. The legitimacy of Prohibition as asocial policy was neither justified nor discussed. Religious useor freedom is not mentioned. "I am glad that the sociological, psychological, andmedical ills commonly attributed to marihuana have been found tobe exaggerated insofar as the City of New York is concerned. Ihasten to point out, however, that the findings are to beinterpreted only as a reassuring report of progress and not asencouragement to indulgence, for I shall continue to enforce thelaws prohibiting the use of marihuana until and if completefindings may justify an amendment to existing laws." In the 1970 revision in Government marihuana prohibitionpolicy generated another report in 1972: Marihuana: a Signal ofMisunderstanding- First Report of the National Commission onMarihuana and Drug Abuse. Individual rights are at least discussed in order to beheavily discounted: "So, while we agree with the basic philosophical preceptthat society may interfere with individual conduct only in thepublic interest, using coercive measures only when lessrestrictive measures would not suffice, this principle merelyinitiates inquiry into a rational social policy but does notidentify it. We must take a careful look at this complicatedquestion of the social impact of private behavior. And we mustrecognize at the outset the inherent difficulty in predictingeffects on the public health and welfare, and the strongconflicting notions of what constitutes the publicinterest." "Religious freedom" as currently delineated by theGovernment places the burden on the individual to pass certain"tests" to prove that hemp drugs used for sacramentalpurposes: "Cases dealing with religious freedom in other contextshave isolated three distinct foci of inquiry when a law ischallenged as violative of the "free exercise" clause:(1) Is the claimant's belief and practice really a"religion" within the meaning of the First Amendment?(2) If so, is the practice prohibited by the challenged statuteessential to the practice of the "religion?" (3) Evenif the answers to (1) and (2) are yes, is there nevertheless asufficiently compelling state interest to warrant overriding thepractice? Only when the proscribed activity is essential to aqualified "religion" and the state's interest is notoverwhelming will the courts invoke the First Amendment toinvalidate an otherwise permissible legislativeproscription." In the 1989 Carl Olsen, a white Rastafarian and director ofIowa NORML unsuccessfully attempted a religious freedom defensefor charges of marijuana selling and importation for distributionto other members of the Ethiopian Coptic Zion Church. "If the 'compelling interest' test is to be applied...itmust be applied across the board, to all actions thought to bereligiously commanded... Any society adopting such a system wouldbe courting anarchy.... The rule respondents favor would open theprospect of constitutionally required religious exemptions fromcivic obligations of almost every conceivable kind- ranging fromcompulsory military service....to the payment of taxes.....druglaws." Dutifully crafted by Judge Ruth Bader Ginsburg, now on thesupreme court, no question of how authoritative interference ofGovernment is accepted to be appropriate public policy. Religiousfreedom is now restricted to activity that must be asserted andproven rather than assumed. Proving compelling interest hasswitched from the Government to the individual. Departments of human life were seen not to be imperiouslyguarded for the individual but regarded with mistrust and sourceof opportunities for dissent against public policy. At the heightof the Vietnam war marijuana use was strongly identified with thegrowing student antiwar resistance. The non-intervention principle is at least recognized but thedepartments of individuality and circle around the individualwere routinely stepped over by Government with justification inthis case for national security. Militarism preempted anyconsiderations of individual rights of privacy. Departments ofhuman life were small and confined to cosmetic obligatoryinstitutional ritual displays in the context of growing publicresistance to the American military industrial behemoth run amokin southeast Asia. Notwithstanding the cautious conclusion of the Commission tocritically examine the policies of marijuana prohibition, thereport was conspicuously rejected sight unseen by then presidentRichard M. Nixon to demonstrate his being "tough oncrime" in a presidency struggling to end the Vietnam war. Twenty-two years later on the centennial of the Indian HempDrugs Commission Report finds the principle of Governmentnon-interference is an all but forgotten faded idealistic icon,given hollow obeisance at state ceremonies, a quaintphilosophical curiosity of the past. The circle around theindividual is reduced to a pale, flaccid, tattered, transparent,and permeable membrane. Intrusion is limited only by availablefunding to Government interference. The worsening of the balanceof power between the individual and state has increased by anorder of magnitude, facilitated by advances in technology. Toqueville in his prophetic Democracy in America warns ofdangerous forms of despotism in democratic, egalitarian America: "A great many persons of the present day are quitecontented with this sort of compromise between administrativedespotism and the sovereignty of the people; and they think theyhave done enough for the protection of individual freedom whenthey have surrendered it to the power of the nation at large.This does not satisfy me: the nature of him I am to obeysignifies less to me than the fact of extorted obedience." "Thus it every day renders the exercise of the freeagency of man less useful and less frequent; it circumscribes thewill within a narrower range and gradually robs a man of all theuses of himself. The principle of equality has prepared men forthese things; it has predisposed men to endure them and often tolook upon them as benefits. After having thus successively taken each member of thecommunity in its powerful grasp and fashioned him at will, thesupreme power then extends its arm over the whole community. Itcovers the surface of society with a network of small complicatedrules, minute and uniform, through which the most original mindsand most energetic characters cannot penetrate, to rise above thecrowd. The will of the man is not shattered, but softened, bent,and guided; men are seldom forced by it to act, but they areconstantly restrained from acting. Such a power does not destroy,but it prevents existence, it does not tyrannize, but itcompresses, enervates, extinguishes, and stupefies a people, tilleach nation is reduced to nothing better than a flock of timidand industrious animals, of which the government is theshepherd." Attacked by oaths of "drug free," informers(including children), undercover police, drug-sniffing dogs,random and warrantless searches, child snatching, drug testing,forfeiture of property, surveillance of bank, business,electricity, and other records, the departments of human lifewither. The parts of human life considered reserved territory arenoticeably smaller- the individual, society and"civilization" suffer the loss. Review of the Indian Hemp Drugs Commission Report is importantfor perspective in assessing the legitimacy and direction ofcontemporary Government drug policy in a democratic society.Froude's theorem of functional governance: "no laws are ofany service which are above the working level of public morality,and evasion." was of importance to feudal England, theIndian Hemp Drugs Commission in 1894 and a century later a publicpolicy issue of prime magnitude. THM April 16, 1994 References Contents | Feedback | Search DRCNet Library | Schaffer Library | Major Studies | IndianHemp Drugs CommissionWT01-B27-49IA031-000653-B005-166http://206.61.184.43:80/schaffer/LIBRARY/studies/inhemp/dopefien.htm 206.61.184.43 19970122134424 text/html 52686HTTP/1.0 200 OKDate: Wednesday, 22-Jan-97 13:44:13 GMTServer: WebSitePro/1.1f (S/N wpo-0deb)Allow-ranges: bytesContent-type: text/htmlLast-modified: Saturday, 28-Dec-96 07:03:55 GMTContent-length: 52468 Indian Hemp and the Dope Fiends of Old England Contents | Feedback | Search DRCNet Library | Schaffer Library | Major Studies | IndianHemp Drugs Commission INDIAN HEMP AND THE DOPE FIENDS OF OLD ENGLAND A sociopolitical history of cannabis and theBritish Empire 1840-1928 Sean Blanchard & Matthew J. Atha MSc When the report of the Indian Hemp Drugs Commission (IHDC)reached 1890's England it met official and public apathy. Therewas no political debate. It went into the 'forget about this'file on arrival and has stayed there ever since. There was nopublicity; The news that "Ganja is not appreciablyharmful" was of no concern to the majority of users, whotook cannabis products for their medical benefits. Thenon-medical users were mostly artists who didn't mind alittle harm. Prohibitionist sentiment was concentrated on theopium trade between India and China and on alcohol at home.Cannabis use in England was considered negligible, and theauthorities were content to have no laws at all controlling itfor another thirty years. When laws were later proposed, the Government paid noattention to the evidence in their possession from the IHDC. InIndia, the recommendations of the IHDC report for control bytaxes rather than prohibition went into force quietly,standardising laws and tariffs on cannabis in all the provinces.In March 1895, the Indian Government passed a resolution afterreviewing the report. It said that for the last twenty yearstheir policy had been of "restraining use and improving therevenue by the imposition of suitable taxation" and"imposing as high a rate of duty as can be levied withoutinducing illicit practices" on the grounds that "thebest way to restrict the consumption of drugs is to taxthem..." So, "to that policy the Governor-General...has decided steadily to adhere."[1] There was never any suggestion that the same rules might beapplied in the UK; the Empire didn't work like that. TheGovernor-General (also known as Viceroy), Lord Landsdowne, wasappointed by the UK Government. When they instructed him tocommission a report, he did so, then accepted or rejected it,passed any regulations needed, and told the UK what he'd done.His job was to 'keep natives in their place' and help the Britishget on with de, not to give advice on home affairs. From Mother's Friend to Opium Wars Cannabis was virtually irrelevant to 19th century England. Thedrug of the century was opium, freely available to the Britishpopulation and so popular that the government went to war toprevent the prohibitionist Chinese disrupting the trade. Theopium wars still write their history in the 1990s, as Britain issoon due to hand back Hong Kong, the territory it won from Chinaand those territories leased for 150 years, in 1997. Thomas De Quincy, in his 'Confessions of and English OpiumEater' gave the first popular account of the '...marvellousagency of opium, whether for pleasure or pain'. He may have beenthe first glamouriser of the psychotropic effects of the drug,but, for most people opium was a friend and medicine asindispensable as aspirin or Valium in the 20th century. Godfrey'scordial, or chemists' home-brewed versions of popular patentmedicines, were used to quiet children, while no home would bewithout laudanum (alcoholic tincture of opium). Opium was firstused in the treatment of cholera in the epidemics of the early19th century, and continued to be used for the treatment ofdiarrhoea and sickness, common complaints in the less than hygienicenvironment of the day. It was during the Crimean war that theanalgesic effects were fully exploited, and it is certain thatthe widespread use of laudanum, Collis Browne's mixture or otheropium-based medicines, available to the poor for a penny abottle, enabled ordinary people to cope with the harsh realitiesof life in Dickensian England. From the government's point ofview, it was no doubt preferable to have the poor in a state ofcomfortable stupor than rioting on the streets. India was not the main source of opium for the domesticmarket. Most of this was grown in Turkey or Persia (Iran), asthis opium was of generally high qualify, and trade flourished inthe period following the end of the Napoleonic wars, particularlyafter the treaty of Balta Limon (1838) granting the OttomanEmpire 'most favoured nation' trading status[2]. Indian opium,however, was responsible for one of the British Government inIndia becoming the largest drug-trafficking syndicate in theworld during the latter part of the century. Opium and tea were the mainstays of the British East IndiaCompany, who had a monopoly on the opium produced in Bengal. In1772 Warren Hastings, then chief executive of the company,realised the potential for foreign revenue in exporting Indianopium to China. Opium had been known in China for centuries, but imports bad been banned in 1729 by decree of the Emperor. Anforeign trade was funneled through Canton, opium being smuggledwith legitimate consignments in British ships, and sold throughcorrupt officials to an eager market Other traders smuggled opiumto China overland, and the consumption spread to all levels ofsociety, even to the personal retinue of the Emperor. Exports toChina rose from 10,000 chests ill 1820 to 40,000 chests in 1840.By 1836, a Chinese official in Canton, Hsu Nal-chi, petitionedthe emperor to legalise the trade after witnessing the failure ofprohibition... "the severer the interdicts against (opium)became, the more widely do the evils therefrom spread." Hewas summarily dismissed from his post and replaced with acommitted "war on drugs"-minded individual, LinTse-hsu. Lin was determined to wipe out the opium trade by threateningthe British merchants with the loss of the tea trade, and in 1839forced them to surrender 20,000 chests of the drug. CaptainCharles Elliot the British Chief Superintended, retaliated byordering all British ships out of the Canton estuary,transferring the tea trade to American ships who would transporttheir cargoes to Hong Kong, an inconvenience, but not anobstacle, to the trade. Instead of using Canton, smugglers wouldtake opium consignments ashore up and down the coast in sinallboats, fast enough to evade the Customs craft. Meanwhile Elliothad ordered an expeditionary force of naval steamships whicharrived in 1840 and put direct pressure on Peking. Lin wasdismissed and the trade continued uninterrupted following theChinese capitulation and the end of the first opium war in 1842.To the domestic audience in the UK, Palmerston, the PrimeMinister, bad portrayed the war as an attempt to force theChinese to accept free trade. In reality, the only commoditydirectly involved was -opium, tax revenue from which was becomingincreasingly important to the Indian Government [3]. In Britain, the Conservative opposition was not satisfied withPalmerston's explanations and they opposed the opium trade in the1840 Commons debate. By the time they took power in 1841 theirtune had changed, and the trade continued to expand. The Chinesegovernment was effectively warned that no British ships should besearched. Although fresh edicts against the drug were issued bythe Chinese, they were powerless to stop the trade following thetreaty of Nanking, which ceded Hong Kong to Britain, allowing abridgehead for further opium supplies. In 1856, following growingand-British sentiment, the Chinese gave the British government afurther excuse for war by seizing the Arrow, a Britishvessel with a crew of Chinese criminals anchored off Canton. Thefact that the Arrow's registration had expired,technically justifying the Chinese action, was overlooked byPalmerston, once again the Liberal Prime Minister after fightingan election forced by government defeat on an opposition motioncondemning the war, and winning on a wave of patriotic fervour. Lord Elgin was dispatched with an expeditionary force whichburned down the Summer Palace in Peking to impress upon theEmperor the need to keep agreements. The main consequence of theSecond Opium War was that China was forced to legalise the tradein opium, and were only permitted to tax the product at a levelacceptable to the British. Consumption increased from 60,000chests in 1860 to 105,000 by 1880. The trade generated taxes tothe British Indian Government equivalent to over half their totalrevenue, enough to cover the entire civil service and armedforces budgets. In this climate, financial expediency, as sooften is the case, took precedence over the growing moralarguments against the drug trade. Following increased public pressure to end the trade, and inresponse to a Parliamentary motion, the Government called a RoyalCommission on the production and consumption of opium, which wasonly to consider prohibition among other options, after fullinvestigation. It was during these manoevres that the IHDC wasalso established. The Indian Viceroy, Lord Lansdowne was againstanything that might disrupt business. Prime Minister Gladstonewas much more pro trade than he was anti drug. They packed theopium commission with pragmatists from the Indian Civil Service,with some of the more economically literate abolitionists, andensured that it would concentrate a good deal on money. It firstmet in September 1893 and saw 2,500 witnesses by February '94. When the report was published in '95, it said that opium was"generally used in moderation", and "led to noevident ill-effects". Even some senior anti-opiumists hadbeen convinced. The fact that Chinese missionaries wereoverwhelmingly critical of the effects of opium, in contrast tothe Indian witnesses who were predominantly favourable towardsthe drug, was put down to the fact that in India the drug isnormally taken orally, whereas in China it was generally smoked[3]. There was only one dissent; Joseph Rowntree, one of thecommittee members, was later to denounce the Commission's reportas a whitewash. By that time there was another election underway. Prohibition had no chance under the Conservatives, and therewould be no Liberal government until 1905.(4). The government,despite public opinion, was determined to continue the opium "The Lunatic asylums are filled with GanjaSmokers." The question of cannabis occasionally cropped up as anincidental issue in skirmishes during the long legislative battleagainst the opium business. As early as 1840 the pro-opium bankerWilliam Bingham Baring MP told the Commons that if the opiumtrade were suppressed then there would be a danger of usersturning to drugs "infinitely more prejudicial to physicalhealth and energy than opium". Baring, one of 10 MPs of bothparties from the same pro-free trade family, was particularlyconcerned about "an exhalation of the Hemp plant, easilycollected at certain seasons, which is in every way moreinjurious than the use of the poppy." [3] This was anotherjustification for the lucrative opium trade which flourished in aclimate of official and unofficial governmental encouragement.However, attitudes were slowly changing and in 1875 Mark StewardMP had proposed that the Indian Governor General be instructed toinvestigate the opium trade "with a view to gradualwithdrawal," and lost by 37 votes. Similar moves wereregularly defeated for the next twenty years. By April '91, aspokesman for the Society for Suppression of the Opium Trade(SSOT) had obtained a 30-vote majority for a motion that theGovernments' revenue from opium was "Morallyindefensible". On 16 July 1891 Stewart asked a three part question aboutganja [5]: "i Whether the Secretary of State for India has seen areport in the Allahabad Pioneer of 10 May that ganja, which isgrown sold and excised in much the same way as opium, is far moreharmful, and that "the lunatic asylum of Bengal are filledwith ganja smokers." ii Is he aware that ganja has been made illegal inLower Burma and that excise reports say this has been 'ofenormous benefit to the people.' iii Will he call to the attention of the Governor General thedesirability of extending theprohibition to otherprovinces?" The answers to which were yes, yes, and that he would"Enquire whether further steps should be taken to limitconsumption..." On 7 August 1892 those enquiries wereanswered at some length. The Viceroy's office told London thatthe whole question had been extensively discussed with provincialadministrations in 1871-73. They sent 174 pages of old dispatchesfrom Indian provincial governments to the centre, and from thereto London. After considering these, "The Governor General isof the opinion that while ganja may be among the most noxious ofall intoxicants commonly used in India... even if absoluteprohibition could be enforced, the result might be to induce theuse of more noxious drugs" (e.g. datura). Apart from whichit would be impossible to enforce a prohibition. It was "Ourduty to restrict consumption, but unnecessary to do more thanpersevere in the policy established In 1873." These paperslanguished unread in London, perhaps because there was a generalelection going on. The 1873 dispatches showed the pragmatism of imperialadministrators which was to be repeated by the IHDC, in verysimilar words. The then Viceroy had said that while theGovernment should endeavour to restrict the use of ganja, itwould be impossible to enforce general prohibition, especiallybecause of religious feelings in some groups and because theplants grew freely some areas. It would be inexpedient to orderwhat could not be enforced... "It does not appear to theGovernor-General to be specifically proved that hump incites tocrime more than other drugs or spirits." There was also someevidence that hump, "usually so noxious", mightusefully be taken for medical reasons. There was no doubt thathabitual use tended to cause insanity but not in very many casesrelative to the numbers of the insane.(6]. "General opinionseems to be that the evil effects of Ganja have beenexaggerated." The dispatches from regional governments were more forthright.The Lt.-Governor of the Punjab wrote that considering thepracticalities, they should not restrict hemp drug use unlessthere was proof of connection with crime. Civil, police andmedical officers disagreed on the details but: "His Honouris of the opinion that if people were prohibited from usingpreparations of hemp or opium, they would, in all probability,have recourse to some other stimulant, such as alcohol, the crimeresulting from the use of which would be much greater than thatresulting from the abuse of these drugs .... It seems that theamount of crime, violent or other, incited by ganja, isexceedingly small... If, therefore, these preparations have noeffect on crime and only injure the persons who use them, it isdifficult to see in what manner the law can restrict their use ina country where opium is a monopoly of the Government, theeffects of which are perhaps as injurious when taken in excess asthose of hemp." The local governments of Mysore, Hyderbad, Oudh, and Burmasaid that as hump drugs were little used locally, not necessary.Central Provinces sent plenty of data but no opinions. TheNorthwest Provinces (later Pakistan), one of the main cannabisgrowing areas, said the evidence on crime was confused, where ifthe situation was bad as supposed there would surely be aconsensus. To stop production would be almost impossible, so theycould not recommend attempts to limit or stop consumption.Bombay, Madras, and Bengal said that restrictions and taxesalready in place should be preserved. All agreed excessive use tobe somehow connected with physical harm and perhaps insanity, butthe numbers harmed were very small. Bengal sent the mostinformation. Asked if a particularly popular type of local ganjawas more deleterious than others, they submitted a long report oncultivation, uses and profit margins on all hemp products by DrWatt, State Reporter on Economic Products. Their local productwas popular due to the quality of plants and traditionalproduction skills, rather than sheer strength. A table of samplesanalysed for "Resinous extracts or Cannabin" rangedfrom 1.4% (NW Province) to 12% (Madras), mostly about 4% [7]. Allof the legal trade was inside India. The state of Bengal had beenmaking an average 1 million rupees per year through the 1860's intax on ganja shops and duty at government auctions, about100,000 - tens of millions in today's money. When these papers were taken from the files, twenty yearsafter they were written, the August 1892 elections were underway. The Conservatives went out and the Liberals came in. Drugcontrol was not high on their agenda; however, the new HomeSecretary, Foreign Secretary, and Secretary of State for Indiawere all known to be anti-opium, and the Prime Minister hadspoken out against it in the past. The prohibitionists knew theymight get some sort of opium control agreed if it didn't opposethe Liberals' central Free Trade policy. Believing their momenthad come, they began to quarrel among themselves. Criminalise it! Before the development of the hypodermic syringe by AlexanderWood, the main concern about opium was not the threat ofaddiction, but the danger of poisoning. Only after the 1860s didthe risk of dependency start to cause concern among the medicalprofession. Certainly, people would have been habituated to thedrug, but the stereotype of the drug addict had yet to gainacceptance within the UK. Even where individuals wrote of theirhabit, such as a chemists wife who had been using morphia for 30years, described her experience in a matter of fact way, freefrom any sense of stigma her major concern being the perceivedtendency of the drug to cause her to put on weight. Although thedependency syndrome had been described two centuries earlier byThomas Sydenham, the risk was not taken seriously by most medicalpractitioners. Following increasing reports of dependencysymptoms after 1860, culminating in a series of articles in ThePractitioner in 1870, the debate on the wisdom ofpermitting free access to opium accelerated. In 1878 EdwardLevinstein in Germany started the 'moral' argument about theeffect of opium on the character of the user, and was one of thefirst to promote abstinence as a cure for the addict [2]. From the 1840s on, there were several anti-opiumorganisations, all small and mostly broke. Their membershipsoverlapped, but the leaders didn't get on well. None of them hadever tried to gain mass support. The first organisation to comeout against the trade were the Birmingham Quakers. In 1869, LordShaftesbury urged the Indian government to withdraw from itsmonopoly position in the trade. By 1884 the Society for the Studyand Cure of Inebriety, founded by Sir Norman Kerr, aimed "toeducate the professional and the public mind to the dangers ofintemperance". At that time, alcohol was the main target forthe temperance movement, whereas other, more exotic drugs werenot seen as much of a threat to respectable Britons. These drugswere not expected to be a threat to the well-adjusted Britishgentleman, and habituation among the Chinese and others wasregarded as the kind of 'filthy foreign habit' that should bestopped for the foreigners' own good. Kerr recognised the dangersof opium with a crusading zeal, and railed against its use,denying any possibility that some persons could be able torestrict their use to a moderate level. The Society forSuppression of the Opium Trade (SSOT), founded in 1874, becamethe best-known anti-opium organisation, but had always beenelitist, controlled by Quaker businessmen with knighthoods,funded by one family. Their best argument combined economic andhumanitarian interest; other exports to China had been damaged bythe sleaziness of the opium business. Trade with China had beenstagnant between 1860-80 while business with Japan had tripled.The SSOT moved for ending the India-China opium trade, and anenquiry into alternate ways of making up the money. They took toolong agreeing a proposal with other lobbyists, but did manage toforce the government to concede the 1893 Royal Commission onOpium [8]. Meanwhile, in February '93, William Caine, MP (Bradford East),had the papers on ganja collected the previous year placed in theHouse of Commons Library. 0u the 2nd March 1893 he put a publicquestion to the Under-secretary of State for India. "If hewill instruct the Government of India to create a commission ofexperts to enquire into and report on the cultivation of andtrade in all preparations of hemp drugs in Bengal, the effects oftheft consumption on society, and on the moral condition of thepeople, and the desirability of prohibiting its growth andsale." Would he also invite written reports on the samematters from all other provinces, and include in the commissionnon-official natives of India. The Secretary of State would askthe Viceroy to do just that, "and he will be glad if theresult of this inquiry is to show that further restriction can beplaced upon the sale and consumption of these drugs."(7)Since the Government seemed so amenable, a secondary question bythe Right Hon. Sir Charles E. Schwann, Bart, was then dropped. The members of the commission were named on 3rd July, and heldtheir first meeting on 2nd August - a mouth before the Opiumcommission began to meet. They continued until April, seeing over800 witnesses, assembling over 3000 pages into seven volumes, anda confidential extra volume on hemp drug use in the Army; thenthe Finance and Commerce department of the Government of Indiaconsidered the report, and another British election crept closer.It is unclear what Caine and Schwann thought they were up to.Both were Liberals, Temperance campaigners, and probablyanti-opium. Schwann had a safe scat, a comfortable merchants'fortune and radical opinions. Caine wrote books, including 'YoungIndia', 'Picturesque India' and 'A Trip Around the World.' He hadquit the Liberal Party six years earlier over the Irish question,and been re-admitted in a new scat after losing as anIndependent; he was to lose it again in 1895. The timing, and therequest for the commission to include non-official Indians,suggest that they were part of a faction among theanti-opiumists, perhaps trying to stir them into holder demandsor quicker action. Perhaps they were simply trying to get in onwhat looked like a winning side. Neither is recorded as evermentioning hemp drugs in public again. The Dope Fiends of Old England The international drugs trade was quite a different thing fromhome consumption; for example although the British Empireproduced a great deal of the worlds' opiates, over 80% of theopium used in the UK was from Turkey and Persia [2]. The economicpressure for international prohibition came from traders andnations with rival products. In the UK drug control was at firstpan of an increase in medical involvement in social policy.Prescription by professionals had to take over fromself-medication before complete prohibition became possible. There was not much openly recreational drug use in VictorianEngland, other than alcohol. A few serf consciouslyunconventional young artists and mystics searched for innerexperience, rejecting vulgar materialism, but the majority ofdrug abusers, then as now, considered themselves to be takingmedicines, to help them work or relax. This was an age whichdemanded refinement, in every sense of the term. They tookextracts, tinctures, distillations or the 'active ingredients' oftraditional medicinal plants like Indian hemp or poppies, inamounts that would kill modern addicts. This was all for the goodof their health, so morally impeccable. They didn't do dope toget wasted, or didn't admit to it Vulgar materialism provided ever more purified forms of relieffrom the stresses of righteous life, as opium was dissolved intolaudanum, concentrated into morphine, re-concentrated intoheroin. Some condemned booze while chewing opium, just aswell-known modern anti-drug campaigners have been tranquilliseraddicts. In this atmosphere Cannabis Indica was just anotherpotentially useful plant, which could be perhaps refined intosome sort of medicine but was quite unsuitable in natural form.The distinction between drug use and abuse had hardly beeninvented. Doctors were expensive and not well trusted, so thepoor dosed themselves with whatever remedies they could afford.Pseudo-medical opiate use was decreasing, but still respectable;Elizabeth Barrett Browning and Florence Nightingale had used it,and William Wilberforce, saint of the anti-slavery movement, hadeaten twelve grains a day for thirty years. Self-medicationbluffed into non-medical use. Boozing was low class andunfeminine, so respectable ladies took "tonics." Patentmedicines were a huge business, often including alcohol, opium,or cannabis. Sales of pure morphine, cocaine, and barbiturates weresupposedly controlled by the 1868 Poisons and Pharmacy Act, butquack nostrums and patent medicines were not, and an attempt toextend the law in 1884 had failed. The Act only affected shops,not users. One especially dangerous popular remedy was CollisBrownes' Chlorodyne, containing chloroform and morphine, whichthe British Medical Association campaigned through the 90's tohave banned. "One of the most valuable medicines we possess" There had been increasing medical interest in cannabis sinceWilliam O'Shaughnessy described the use of indian hemp asmedicine and intoxicant [9], relying on accounts of hashish usefrom ancient Persian and Arabic sources, as well as on his ownobservations in India. He described the use of hemp in thetreatment of rheumatism, hydrophobia, cholera, tetanus andinfantile convulsions, as well as describing the delirium inducedby continued use. O'Shaughnessy had written in 1839 that, with acouple of exceptions, "I have been unable to trace anynotice of the employment of this drug in Europe." However,despite citing western works by Ainslie and von Estebeck hemanaged to overlook one classic account. The noted medieval herbalist, Nicholas Culpepper (1616-1654),listed a variety of medical uses of the common european hemp(Cannabis sativa), including anti-inflammatory, analgesic, andantiparasitic activity [10]. Culpepper made no mention of thepsychotropic activity, although the temperate hemp he describedwould normally be of low drug content and be grown for fibre.Culpepper's work would have owed much to the folk herbalism usedby British witches, or wise women, who until the christianpersecutions had provided most primary health care to the ruralpopulation, as well as to the monastic healers who replaced them.By the Victorian "age of reason" most traditional usehad been suppressed, as the pioneer pharmacologists began toanalyse folk medicines to refine and extract the active compoundstherein. An unsuccessful attempt had been made in the 1840's togrow hemp for medicine in the London suburb of Mitcham.Experimenters used it for athsma and other chest problems,sleeplessness especially in cases of opiate or alcoholwithdrawal, and with opium and bromide of potassium in treatinginsanity. One reason why cannabis was not as widely used as opiumproducts, or the newer chemical remedies, was the difficultyfound refining an "active ingredient." There wereproblems getting supplies of reliable strength, confusion aboutapparently different products from the same plant, anduncertainty about its effects in the body. However, it was usedto treat many disorders. In 1889, Dr E.A.Birch described in theLancet the successful use of cannabis indica in the treatment ofchloral hydrate and opium withdrawal, drawing attention to theabolition of craving and the antiemetic (vomit suppressing)effects and the stimulation of appetite in patients who would notnormally eat, or keep down, their food [111. Queen Victoria'spersonal physician, J.R. Reynolds described it in 1890 as"One of the most valuable medicines we possess." Inanother Lancet article published in 1890, he described the use ofcannabis indica for treating insomnia in the senile, alcoholicdelirium, neuralgia, migraine, spastic paralysis, and convulsions[12]..He allegedly prescribed tincture of cannabis to QueenVictoria herself for the treatment of menstrual cramps. Cannabistincture and an extract made from resin were available from PeterSquire of Oxford St in 1864, and wholesale through the Society ofApothecaries by 1871. Chemists extracted stuff they calledcannabene, cannabin tannin, cannabinnene etc. but had no ideawhich, if any, was the "active ingredient" untilcannabinol was isolated in 1895. At the same time some thought of drug-taking as a form ofpoisoning, and some researchers proposed that it either caused,or was, a type of insanity. W.W. Ireland compared the mentalstate of cannabis users to delirium, with its alteration of timeand space and visual illusions. British doctors' reports fromCairo Asylum in 1894 linked violent insanity with"Hashism"(13,14) Some of the medical studies would havebeen recreational use in any other context. Walter Dixon musthave tried it on himself as well as small furry animals when heshowed in 1899 that the effects vary according to type ofpreparation as well as method of ingestion. He recommendedsmoking for immediate effect and wrote in the British MedicalJournal, "Hemp taken as an inhalation may be placed in thesame category as coffee, tea and kola. It is not dangerous andits effects are never alarming, and I have come to regard it inthis form as a useful and refreshing stimulant and foodaccessory, and one whose use does not lead to a habit which growsupon its votary." He was to be a member of the RollestonCommittee on Morphine and Heroin Addiction in the 1920's, whoopposed criminalising narcotics policy. At the end of the century cannabis tincture became popularagain as a cure for cramps, migraine, opium addiction, withdrawaland insomnia, but the fashion faded. In the early 1900's aBritish Medical Association campaign against 'Secret Remedies'got most of the opiates, cocaine and cannabis out of tonics andnon-prescription medicines. Doctors became responsible for mostdrug distribution as the consumer beverage trade withdrew. Asdrag dispensing was professionalised, substances used forself-medication were replaced by more refined, more medicallycontrollable drags. The Indian Hemp Drugs Commission report madeno apparent difference to this at all, and it's quite possiblethat nobody in the medical establishment read it. It held quite alot of scientific data but its purpose had been political ratherthan medical. The political and economic interests of the BritishMedical Association were quite different from those of theGovernment of India. The Cosmopolitan Dope Fiends It is worth noting that most publications from the time referto "Hashish," the Arabic term, Indian Hemp, orCannabis, rather than Charas, Ganja or Bhang, the Hindi names.The French empire in North Africa had at least as much effect onEuropean cannabis use as the British empire in India. A certainstyle of drug use, the Wasted Artist role, as established by thelaudanum swigging Coleridge and De Quincey early in the century,was revived by Dr Jean Moreau in Paris after 1845. The doctor,who experimented with hashish to treat insanity, founded the Clubdes Hashishins with the writer Theophile Gautier, for non-medicalexperiments. Some of the members were quite keen on a littledelirium. Gautier was a hack with brilliant friends, an 'art forarts sake' romantic with a taste for macabre fantasy whoencouraged the Symbolist poets. Rimbaud and Verlaine shared hisdrugs. Baudelaire dedicated "Fleur du Mal" to him, andwrote an essay that explained their attitudes: "On Hashishand Wine as a means of expanding individuality." Theycreated strange, sensuous art, struck foreign poses based ontheir beliefs about the romantic East, scandalised bourgeoissociety [15]. By the 90's the club had imitators in London. If there was norecreational drug use "subculture" in the 1890's, onenetwork came close. This was the circle of poets, psychics,writers and would-be magicians around the Rhymers Club and theHermetic Order of the Golden Dawn. They didn't define theirconnection by shared drug use, but they certainly included drugexperiments in their self-definition. Occult studies, drugs,hypnotism, proto-psychiatry and new styles of arts were all1890's fashions mingled in overlapping cliques in central London.The Golden Dawn was established in 1888 by some occultistFreemasons, as a society of "Christian practiced magic. In1890 Yeats and two others formed the Rhymers Club as a sort ofliterary wing, drawing inspiration from the French Symbolists.None of the Rhymers Club apart from Yeats ever achieved as muchrecognition as their French heroes, but they had the style. Theywere melancholy, self-dramatising, they hoped Byronic. They haddoomed love lives and nervous breakdowns, and mostly died young.Their defiance of conventional society included such un-Englishdeviance as drinking black coffee and speaking comprehensibleFrench, as well as attempted magic, sexual permutations notdiscussed in polite company, and hefty drug use. Yeats and his lover Maude Gonne tried using hashish to improvetheir telepathic powers. Others had a more relaxed, recreationalapproach. Arthur Symons was one Rhymer who survived to hedescribed as "highly strong, over-sensitive" in the1930's, best known for "Confessions - A study inPathology" which described his two years in an Italianlunatic asylum and cure by near-fatal pneumonia in 1909. He wasthe author of 'The Opium Smoker; "I am engulfed, and drowndeliciously/soft music like a perfume, and sweet light/Goldenwith audible odours exquisite/ swathe me in cerements foreternity.../". In a biography of fellow Rhymer Ernest Dowsonhe described one afternoon; a couple of ballet dancers and a poetvisiting, the host issuing tea, cakes, cigarettes and thenhashish. "That slow intoxication, that elaborate experimentin visionary sensations... he sat awaiting the magic, half shy inthe midst of that bright company of young people." Dowsonwrote poems with Latin titles about doomed love affairs,and consorted with the "most degraded" women indockside dives. He experimented with mescal in 1896, with thesexuality researcher Havelock Ellis. He died of TB in 1900, aged32. The other poet present at the hash and tea party and themescal experiment was John Addington Symonds, a historian whostudied the criminal mentality - he was part blinded afterseveral breakdowns and TB. One of their associates, Count EricStenbock, who wrote The Shadow of Death and Studies of Death, wasknown for wearing a live snake around his neck; he died aged 35,of either alcohol or opium.(13) The Wasted Artists were picturesque and dramatic, and theirstyle became a popular image of drug abusers. Ethereal and ratherunhealthy, possibly creative but definitely pasty-faced. Theperception of a difference between drugs suitable for legitimateuse, under medical control, and drugs which can only be abused,was extended by their example; anything they took was obviouslynot doing any good for their health. Still there was no anti-drugpanic in the UK. Drugs were still seen as foreign stuff, onlyused by those who wanted to act like foreigners. The artists wereadded to an existing mythology of the opium addict and the opiumden, spread by popular fiction from Wilkie Collins to OscarWilde, the addict over-sensitive, hollow-cheeked with torment,the dens glided in rococo brothel style, populated by viciousChinese and degenerate aristocrats. The Respectable Fear begins The first demon dope stories came over from the USA in the mid1890's. There were, apparently, ever-increasing numbers of Blackmen with cocaine, Chinese with opium, and Mexicans with both,plus marijuana. These coloured men were allegedly using theirfiendish substances to gain the flesh of white women, and many ofthem would go crazy with big knives if frustrated in any way. TheBritish media only retold a few of these tales at first.The pathological imagination of the US Press kept it up for thenext forty years, changing the drug and the villains' colour nowand again. Heroin was refined in 1898 but for the first few yearsit was considered a miracle painkiller and cure for morphineaddiction. The subject of the grossest stories was cocaine, alsoconsidered a miracle cure a few years earlier. The medicalenthusiasts didn't think it suitable for recreational use. Therecreational users disagreed. The alcohol prohibitionists built amass following and inflicted a huge social disaster on the USA.When the alcohol ban was repealed, drug control was not. Themyths were retired for a few years, but similar stories can befound, only slightly less racist, in the mass media today. Before, during and after Prohibition, the USA lobbied forinternational drugs laws, mixing economic self-interest withmoralism. The Hague Conference in 1912 agreed to the principle ofcertain drugs being strictly for "legitimate medicalpurposes." It was never effective internationally because ofobstruction by the British opiate and German cocaine businesses.The conference suggested an investigation of hemp, but it wasn'tfollowed up. The Assam Opium & Ganja Committee of 1913(16)showed that the IHDC had been forgotten or ignored in thatprovince of India, for instance accepting that ganja causesinsanity without calling any evidence. It did say that when ganjaprices rose users turned to opium, when opium prices rose theyturned to alcohol or, alarmingly, morphine. The number oflicensed shops in Assam had fallen from 1116 in 1878 to 347 in1911, and the committee thought it couldn't be reduced furtherwithout provoking unrest. Recreational drug use in British literary circles in the '90sspread through the next two decades into a wider worlds. Cocaineuse had spread well into the upper class by the First World War.Officialdom grew concerned about officers on leave, who oftenweren't afraid to wreck their health since their chances ofsurvival were slim. Morale would not be improved, it was felt, bythe sight of the upper ranks behaving like beasts, and it wouldbe worse yet if the common soldiers imitated them. There was apress scare about the Germans using drugs and prostitutes,collecting blackmail material. This unlikely tale and otherstories of moral degeneracy caught the imagination of the ArmyCouncil, who banned the sale of all intoxicants to troops in mid1916. In July the first U K law against possession of drags wassneaked through, section 40B of the Defense of the Realm Act. Itcovered cocaine and opiates; cannabis was not included, althoughit had been considered. Section 40B also banned"Malththusian appliances" (contraception) and quackmedicines. The same Act established legal closing times for pubs,which caused a lot more fuss. The post war scandal boom Immediately after the Great War the British press got theirfirst US-style dope story. Actress Billie Carelton, age 21, diedsupposedly from cocaine taken at an alcohol-free Victory Ball.Her supplier was tried for manslaughter but could not beconvicted. It was just as likely the sleeping drug Veronal thatkilled her, but that didn't bother the Daily Express. Theyincluded hashish eating in the habits of a circle of degenerateswho, they said, had mined a sweet and innocent girl. In September1920 a Dangerous Drugs Act was passed, clarifying the wartimepossession law and effectively dividing the drug trade intomedical vs criminal. It was greeted with such apathy byParliament that it was hard to make up a quorum in some ofthe committees. Cannabis was still not banned. Internationally, the UK government stopped blocking drugcontrols after several scandals at home and reports that morphineand cocaine addiction were spreading in the colonies. There weremore sex drugs and foreigner stories to keep up the postwar drugscare. In 1922 the death of dancer Freda Kempton gained unwantedpublicity for Brilliant Chang, Chinese restaurant owner andalleged dope king since 1917, handling morphine, opium andhashish as well as cocaine. After many raids and mentions in thepress he was sentenced to 14 months - not much for such analleged villain - then departed in 1924. Eddie Manning, Jamaicanjazz drummer and alleged dope king, was convicted of dealingopium and cocaine in '23. Both, it was strongly implied, had usedtheir dealing to get close to English girls. In 1922 threesisters were found half dressed and unconscious in the company ofa dead Chinese man, Yee Sing a.k.a. Johnny Hop, in a sealed roomfull of opium smoke above a Cardiff laundry. The girls never toldquite what had happened, so the press made it up, including aChinese love potion made from hashish used especially to subduewhite women, with an antidote made from geraniums.(17) Pulpfiction by the likes of Sax Rohmer helped spread the corruptaristocrat and Chinese dope plot themes. Despite all this advertisement, there was still no workingclass drug subculture. The upmarket drug users of the 20'scontinued to be found where the overlap between high society andthe arts copied what were seen as American fashions for jazz andcocaine. Aleister Crowleys' 1922 novel, Diary of a Drug Fiend,thinly disguised a real West End scene where cocaine was dealt inthe Cafe Royal on Regent Sweet. Crowley was a former Golden Dawnmember who publicised himself as "The Wickedest Man in theWorld," and ran a black magic cult largely based on sex. Heoccasionally kicked his morphine habit cold turkey in front ofacolytes, to show the power of his will; he did quite a lot toestablish a link in the public mind between heavy drug use andbeing a dangerous but pretentious creep. Chloroform and morphinewere popular with Lady Diana Cooper and Katherine Asquith, modelsfor several wild aristos in fiction. Morphine might be risky andmaybe immoral, but boozing was common, which was much worse.Compared to these types cannabis users were sweethearts. Havingpreviously tried smoking it to no effect, the painter AugustusJohn tried a hashish compote or jam after sardines and wine withfriends in Hampstead; "...catching the eye of Iris, we wereboth simultaneously seized with uncontrollable laughter, aboutnothing at all..." Despite the publicity, and penaltiesincreasing in 1922, prosecutions under the Dangerous Drugs Actaveraged a steady 60 a year for cocaine, 65 for opium. Cannabis lust became illegal in the UK after the countryagreed the 1925 Geneva International Convention on NarcoticsControl. It was included in the '25 Convention with the opiatesand cocaine, because Egypt and Turkey proposed it. An Egyptiandelegate stirringly denounced "Chronic Hashism" whichhe said caused most of the insanity in his country. It also, hesaid, weakened users, gave them heart and digestive troubles andmade them look wild-eyed and stupid. India opposed includingcannabis in the Convention, as their delegate said it had beenused there since time immemorial, grew wild, and they doubtedthat a prohibition could enforced. The British delegate abstainedfrom the vote but signed in the end. There was hardly anyparliamentary debate before it came into law as amendments to theDangerous Drugs Act on 281h September 1928. Despite this cannabisoffences, and 206 for opium. In 1950 for the first time therewere more prosecutions for cannabis than for opium andmanufactured drugs together - 86 against 41 opium and 42 others.That year a series of police raids on jazz clubs produced a newcrop of stories about black men with drugs and white women, thistime involving marijuana and benzedrine. Cannabis had finally gotinto the shock horror league. Epilogue The Indian Hemp Drugs Commission finally had its moment inParliament in July 1967, after the Government had established anAdvisory Committee on Drug Dependence. J.J.S. Driberg, Chief ofPolice and Inspector of Prisons for Assam, had given gaveevidence to the IHDC. His son Tom was a Labour MP. According tohis autobiography [18], the poet Alan Ginsberg asked Tom to"look up for him the report... in the House library I foundthat my father had given evidence before this commission, puttingforward strongly the view that people living in a damp, coldclimate needed the traditional consolation of ganja... Theclimate referred to was that of Assam, rather than England; but Ifelt it was almost an act of filial piety to sign a full pageadvertisement in the Times calling for a liberalisation of thelaws on pot..." When it became obvious that there would beno liberalisation, be attacked the government, his own party, inthe parliamentary debate. He said his father had told the IHDCthat when insane people were arrested a form had to be filledsaying why they were insane, and the safest thing to say wasganja as the police knew that no further enquiry would be made.When the government spokeswoman asked rhetorically "Whatsort of society will we create if everyone wants to escape fromreality 7" Driberg answered that "They want to escapefrom this horrible society we have created." The 1968 WootonCommittee on Cannabis was "in agreement with the conclusionsreached by the IHDC... that the long-term consumption of cannabisin moderate doses has no harmful effects." Given widepublicity, the government couldn't completely to ignore this newstudy; instead they did exactly the opposite of what itrecommended, and increased penalties for all cannabis offences ina new 1971 Misuse of Drugs Act. Cannabis use continued toincrease dramatically. By 1990 there were 40,194 convictions andcautions for cannabis in the UK, well over 90% of all recordeddrugs crimes. References: 1. Resolution 1369, Finance and Commerce Dept. (SeparateRevenue), Government of India, 21/3/1895. 23 pp. 2. T.M.Parssinen, Secret Passions, Secret Remedies - Narcotic Drugs inBritish Society, 1820-1930. Manchester University Press 1980 3. B. Inglis (1975) The Forbidden Game London Hodder &Stoughton 4. Report of the Royal Commission on Opium. Parliamentarypapers 1895 5. Hansand, Parliamentary Questions, 6. Resolution 3773, Finance and Commerce Dept., Government ofIndia, 17/12/1873. 7. In full IHDC report. India (Ganja) 97 in House of Commonspapers 1893-4 LXVI.79. 8. In (2) V. Berridge & J. Griffith Edwards, Opium and thePeople, Yale 1982. 9 0'Shaughnessy W.B. (1839) On the preparations of IndianHemp, or Gunjah. Transactions of the Medical and Physical Societyof Bengal 1838-40 pp 421-461 10. Culpepper's Complete Herbal. London, W. Foulsham & Co. 11. Birch E.A. (1889) Indian hemp in the treatment of chronicchoral & opium poisoning. Lancet 30-3-89 p625 12. Reynolds Sir J.R. (1890) Therapeutic Uses & ToxicEffects of Cannabis Indica Lancet, 22-3-90 13. V. Berridge, Origins of the English Drug "Scene"1890-1930, Medical History 32, 1988. Also 14. Walsh J.T. Hemp Drugs and Insanity. Journal of MedicalScience 40 1894 15. The Hashish Club, Ed P. Haining, Peter 0wen 1975, 16. Assam Opium & Crania Committee 1913. 17 Marek Kohn, Dope Girls, Lawrence & Wishart, London1992. 18. Tom Driberg, Ruling Passions, Cape 1977 About the Authors. Sean Blanchard is a freelance journalist andresearcher. From 1981 to 1983 he was coordinator of the LegaliseCannabis Campaign. Matthew J. Atha B.Sc. MSc, was Legalise CannabisCampaign Secretary from 1983 to 1989. His MSc psychology thesis"Quantitative Assessment of Illicit substance use"(Birmingham University 1987) included analyses of surveys of druguse at pop festivals. He divides his time between advocacy workand performing as a rock musician. Contents | Feedback | Search DRCNet Library | Schaffer Library | Major Studies | IndianHemp Drugs CommissionWT01-B27-50IA031-000653-B005-194http://206.61.184.43:80/schaffer/LIBRARY/studies/inhemp/4chapt9.htm 206.61.184.43 19970122134504 text/html 29501HTTP/1.0 200 OKDate: Wednesday, 22-Jan-97 13:44:39 GMTServer: WebSitePro/1.1f (S/N wpo-0deb)Allow-ranges: bytesContent-type: text/htmlLast-modified: Saturday, 28-Dec-96 07:04:37 GMTContent-length: 29283 Indian Hemp Drugs Commission Report - Social and ReligiousCustoms Contents | Feedback | Search DRCNet Library | Schaffer Library | Major Studies | IndianHemp Drugs Commission Indian Hemp Drugs Commission Report CHAPTER IX SOCIAL AND RELIGIOUS CUSTOMS. Scope of this Chapter. 431. In the instructions issued to the Commission by theGovernment of India, reference is made to the use of hemp drugsamong fakirs and ascetics who are held in veneration by largeclasses of the people, and to the custom, which is believed toobtain to a large extent in Bengal, of offering an infusion ofbhang to every guest and member of the family on the last day ofthe Durga Puja. The Commission were instructed to ascertain towhat extent these and similar customs prevail in Bengal and otherparts of India, and how far the use of hemp drugs forms a part ofsocial, or possibly religious, ceremonial or observance.Questions 32 and 33 of the Commission's questions were intendedto elicit information on these points. Bengal. 432. In Bengal there is a considerable body of evidencedealing with these customs, and more particularly with the customof offering an infusion of bhang on the last day of the Durga Puja.Some few witnesses, it is true, state either that no social orreligious custom with which hemp drugs are connected exists, orthat they are unaware of any such custom; but the great majorityof the witnesses either give an account of them more or lessfull, or allude to them briefly as matters of common notoriety. Durga Puja. 433. The custom of offering an infusion of the leaves of thehemp plant to every guest and member of the family on the BijoyaDasami, or last day of the Durga Puja, is common in Bengal, andmay almost be said to be universal. It is alluded to by many ofthe witnesses who refer to its use on this occasion as well as onother days of the Durga Puja festival. But, while there can be nodoubt as to the existence of the custom, there is considerabledivergence of opinion as to the true nature of it. The customitself is a simple one. On the last day of this great festivalthe male members of the family go forth to consign the image tothe waters and on their return the whole family with their guestsexchange greetings and embrace one another. During this rejoicinga cup containing an infusion of the leaves of the hemp plant ishanded round, and all are expected to partake thereof, or atleast to place it to the lips in token of acceptance. Sweetmeatscontaining hemp are also distributed. Opinion is almost equallydivided as to whether the custom is a mere social observance, orwhether it is an essential part of the religious ceremonial ofthe festival. There is difference whether there is any injunctionin theof opinion among the witnesses as to Shastras renderingobligatory the consumption of hemp; but Tantric religious workssanction the use, and the custom whatever be its origin may nowbe said from immemorial usage to be regarded by many people aspart of their religious observances. From the evidence of thewitnesses it would appear that there is no specific direction inthe Shastras of the manner in which the drug should beused but from the references quoted it would appear that the usealluded to is authority that of bhang in the form of aninfusion. Witnesses who can speak Mahamahon hopadhya MahesaChandra Nyayaratna, C.I onthe subject, such as Principalof the Government Sanskrit College, Calcutta, testify toreligious sanction for the use of bhang or siddhi, while manywitnesses of high social position, well acquainted with thehabits of the people, as, for example, Maharaja Sir JotindraMohain Tagore, K.C.S.I., Maharaja Durga Charan Law, Raja PiariMohan Mukharji, C.S.I., Rai Rajkumar Sarvadhikari Bahadur, RaiBahadur Kanai Lall . Day, C.I.E., and others, speak to theprevalence of the custom, its intimate association with thereligious devotions of the people, and the innocent harmlessnessof the practice. Other occasions on which bhang is used. 434. The custom described above, and which refers solely tobhang as distinguished from other preparations of the hemp plant,is he most important occasion on which bhang is used as a part ofsocial or religious ceremonies; but there is evidence to showthat the drug in this form is used at other festivals. Forexample, at the Holi festival, which is observed more generallyin Behar than in other parts of the Lower Provinces, bhang iscommonly consumed; and, according to many witnesses, at suchfestivals as the Diwali, Chait Sankranti, Pous Sankranti,Sripanchami, Sivachaturdasi, Ramnavami, and indeed on occasionsof weddings and many other family festivities. But, so far as theevidence shows, the use on those occasions is a matter of socialcustom observed more generally in some parts of the province thanin others, and, although nodoubt there may be some who considerit essential to their devotions, partaking but little of thenature of general religious observance. In Orissa bhang islargely used by the attendants and worshippers at the temple ofJagannath at Puri; and there appears also to exist a custom,somewhat similar to that of the Durga Puja in Bengal, of offeringsiddhi or bhang in the form of sweetmeats to the god Ganesh,which are then eaten by the worshippers and their friends andrelatives. This festival, called the Ganesh Chaturthi, occurs inthe month of Bhadro (August-September). Connection of ganja with the worship of Siva. 435. It is chiefly in connection with the worship of Siva, theMahadeo or great god of the Hindu trinity, that the hemp plant,and more especially perhaps ganja, is associated. The hemp plantis popularly believed to have been a great favourite of Siva, andthere is a great deal of evidence before the Commission to showthat the drug in some form or other is now extensively used inthe exercise of the religious practices connected with this formof worship. Reference to the almost universal use of hemp drugsby fakirs, jogis, sanyasis, and ascetics of all classes, and moreparticularly of those devoted to the worship of Siva, will befound in the paragraphs of this report dealing with the classesof the people who consume the drugs. These religious ascetics,who are regarded with great veneration by the people at large,believe that the hemp plant is a special attribute of the godSiva, and this belief is largely shared by the people. Hence theof many fond epithets ascribing to ganja the significance of adivine pro-party, and the common practice of invoking the deityin terms of adoration before placing the chillum or pipeof ganja to the lips. There is evidence to show that on almostall occasions of the worship of this god, the hemp drugs in someform or other are used by certain classes of the people it isestablished by the evidence of Mahamabopadhya Mahesa ChandraNyayaratna and of other witnesses that siddhi is offered to theimage of Siva at Benares, Baldynath, Tarakeswar, and elsewhere.At the Shivratri festival, and on almost all occasions before theon which this worship is practised, there is abundant evidenceCommission which shows not only that ganja is offered to the godand consumed by these classes of the worshippers, but that thesecustoms are so intimately connected with their worship that theymay be considered to form in some sense an integral part of it. Trinath. 436. The special form of worship by the followers of Siva,called the Trinath or Tinnath Mela, in which the use of ganja isconsidered to be essential, is mentioned by many witnesses, anddeserves more than a passing notice. A full account of thisreligious practice given by Babu Abhilas Chandra Mukharji will befound in Vol. III Appendices of this Report. The origin of therite, which it is said sprang up first in Eastern Bengal, appearsto be of recent date, about the year 1867. It appears to beobserved at all times and at all seasons by Hindus andMuhammadans alike, the latter calling it Tinlakh Pir. When anobject of special desire is fulfilled, or when a person recoversfrom illness, or a son is born, or a marriage or other ceremonyis performed, the god Trinath, representing in one the Hindutrinity, is worshipped. Originally one pice worth of ganja, onepice worth of oil, and one pice worth of betel-nut was offered tothe god. But now ganja--it may be in large quantities--isproffered, and during the incantations and the performance of theritual it is incumbent on all present to smoke. This form ofworship is shown to have spread extensively throughout EasternBengal and the Surma Valley of Assam, and, according to onewitness, it has penetrated. even to Orissa. On the other hand,there are a few witnesses who say that the practice is graduallydying out. Muhamadans 437. The use of hemp drugs is as a rule in no way connectedwith orthodox Muhammadan observances, whether social orreligious. The Muhammadan religion condemns such practices. Assam.. 438. In Assam, where the use of hemp drugs is but littlepractised by the Assamese proper, there appear to be noindigenous customs connected with the drugs. But the customsprevailing in Bengal are also found in Assam. There is evidenceas to the use of bhang or siddhi at the Durga Puja, and of ganjaby the worshippers of Siva. In Sylhet the Trinath form of worshipappears to prevail to a considerable extent. With reference tothis practice, one witness (Prasanno Kumar Das) observes that"in the Surma Valley ganja is offered in the name ofPit Muhammadan saint) for the benefit of the cattle." North-Western Provinces. 439. In the North-Western Provinces, where the celebration ofthe Durga Puja is not so generally observed as in Bengal, acon-siderable number of witnesses (some fifty in all) state thatthere are no customs, religious or social, with which these drugsare connected. But, on the other hand, there is overwhelmingevidence to establish the almost universal use by the people ofbhang at the Holi festival, and some evidence as to the commonuse of ganja by certain classes of the followers of Siva at theirfestivals and seasons of worship. Of the witnesses who speak tothe use of ganja in connection with religious observances, 22state that it is essential and 92 that it is not essential. As towhether the use of bhang should be regarded as a purely socialcustom or as essential to religious observance,. the opinion ofwitnesses who speak on the point is about equally divided. It issufficient to say that the custom is now a general one, and thatwhere the Holi festival is observed, there the practice ofconsuming bhang during its observance is common. On otheroccasions, such as the Diwali festival, marriages, and familyfestivities, there is evidence to show that among certain classesthe consumption of bhang is common. Allusion is also frequentlymade to the habit of using bhang, to which, for example, theChaubes of Mathra and Brindaban are notoriously addicted, but howfar the habit is connected with the religious observances at thetemples the evidence does not justify the formation of anopinion. A custom is mentioned by, a Kumaon witness, Dharma NandJoshi, who states that a class of people called Kouls, whoworship spirits, meat, fish, etc., have the bhang plant as one ofthe objects of their worship. Punnjab 440. In the Punjab there is evidence as to the general use ofhemp by some of the followers of Siva, and especially of bhang,at the Holi, Dasehra, Diwali, and other festivals, and on theoccasion o marriages and other family festivities. Among theSikhs the use of bhang as a beverage appears to be common, and tobe associated with their religious practices. The witnesses whorefer to this use by the Sikhs appear to regard it as anessential part of their religious rites having the authority ofthe Granth or Sikh scripture. Witness Sodhi Iswar Singh, ExtraAssistant Commissioner, says :"As far as I know, bhang ispounded by the Sikhs on the Dasehra day, and it is ordinarilybinding upon every Sikh to drink it as a sacred draught by mixingwater with it. Legend--Guru Gobind Singh, the tenthguru, the founder of the Sikh religion, was on the gaddi of BabaNanak in the time of Emperor Aurangzeb. When the guru was atAnandpur, tahsil Una, Hoshiarpur district, engaged in battle withthe Hill Rajas of the Simla, Kangra, and the Hoshiarpurdistricts, the Rains sent an elephant, who was trained inattacking and slaying the forces of the enemy with a sword in histrunk and in breaking open the gates of forts, to attack andcapture the Lohgarh fort near Anandpur. The guru gave one of hisfollowers, Bachittar Singh, some bhang and a little of opium toeat, and directed him to face the said elephant. This brave manobeyed the word of command of his leader and attacked theelephant, who was intoxicated and had achieved victories inseveral battles before, with the result that the animal wasoverpowered and the Hill Rajas defeated. The use of bhang,therefore, on the Dasehra day is necessary as a sacred draught.It is customary among the Sikhs generally to drink bhang, so thatGuru Gobind Singh has himself said the following poems in praiseof bhang: "Give me, O Saki (butler), a cup of green colour(bhang), as it is required by me at the time of battle (vide'Suraj Parkash,' the Sikh religious book). "Bhang is alsoused on the Chandas day, which is a festival of the god SheojiMahadeva. The Sikhs consider it binding to use it on the Dasehraday-The quantity then taken is too small to proveinjurious." As Sikhs are absolutely prohibited by theirreligion from smoking, the use of ganja and charas in this formis not practised by them. of old Sikh times, is annuallypermitted to collect without interference a boat load of bhang,which is afterwards. distributed throughout the year to thesadhus and beggars who are supported by the dharamsala. Central Provinces. 441. The evidence as to social or religious customs in theCentral Provinces is somewhat discrepant, but on the whole pointsto the existence of customs akin to those existing in theNorth-Western Provinces. The use of bhang at the Holi and Diwalifestivals and at marriages and such occasions, and of ganja orbhang in connection with. the worship of Siva, is frequentlymentioned by the witnesses. A few local customs are alsomentioned by some witnesses. Regarding a custom of the Chamarcaste, the Rev. Mr. Jacob says: "At Chanda; the Chamars useganja dust in the preparation of a beverage called gulabpani, whichis drunk at a ceremony called dadhi (the first shaving ofthe beard), when no liquor is permitted." Among the Gonds,Cowasjee Nusserwanjee Hattidaru describes the following custom asexisting:." In the funeral ceremony amongst the Gonds ofthese provinces, kalli or flat ganja is placed over thechest of the dead body of the Gond, and when the funeral partyreturns home, a little of the ganja is burnt in the house of thedead person, the smoke of which is supposed to reach the spiritof the dead." Another Satpura witness, Hosen Khan, mentionsa custom of offering "a little ganja at the ChitaraiDebis, or collections of stones with rags tied to some treeabove. They offer either a cock or a cocoanut or some ganja. Itis a custom among travellers. These Chitarai Debis are in theopen, and the travellers have a smoke at the same time." Onewitness states that he has heard of the hemp plant beingworshipped in the Berars, but this is not corroborated by any ofthe witnesses from these districts. Another has heard that theGonds in their hill homes are worshippers of the plant Madras. 442. In the Madras Presidency, where the use of hemp drugs isless common than in most other provinces, many witnesses assertthat there are no customs, social or religious, with which theyare connected, and the evidence as a whole fails to establish theprevalence of any customs so general as those connected with theDurga Puja and the worship of Siva in Bengal or the Holi festivalin the North-Western Provinces. But there is evidence as to theexistence of customs of a less general or widespread nature. InGanjam, the witnesses speak to the common use bhang on the MeshaSankranti day in honour of Siva and Anjanayya, and also inthe worship of Durga. Several also allude to a custom of offeringa confection or draught containing bhang to the image at thetemples of Hanuman. At the festival of Kama, the Indian cupid,bhang is freely made and drunk according to several witnesses.The Rajputs or Bondilis are particularly referred to inconnection with this custom. On occasions of holidays orgala-days, and at the Mohurram, a number of witnesses say it isusual for Muhammadans as well as Hindus to take bhang. It is alsosaid that various intoxicants, including ganja, are sometimesoffered to the gods in worship, and then swallowed by thoseoffering them. Witness M. Sundaram Iyer, Deputy Tahsildar (60),says: "Some of the lower orders make use of ganja asan offering, like cocoa-nut, plantains, liquor, and such otherarticles, for certain deities, such as Mathura--veeran,Muniappan, etc., according to the vow taken by each person. Thiscannot be considered as essential, but is only a practiceobserved in very rare cases. Such practice is not followed bymany people, and it is not injurious. "Others allude to theoffering of ganja to Karuppannam, Kali, Mathuraveeran, Muniappan,Karuannaswami, and Aiyaswami, more particularly in the south ofthe Presidency. Mr. Azizuddin, Sahib Bahadur, Deputy Collector,says: "Neither the Musalman nor the Hindu religionrequires the use of these drugs on religious occasions. On theother hand, it is prohibited. Nevertheless, in the maths ofbairagis, such as at Tripati, and of Muhammadan saints, such asat Nagore Conjeveram, Arcot, and other places, the manager of theshrine distributes ganja to all the fakirs who assemble duringthe festival. In none of these places, religiously speaking,ganja should be distributed, but, according to custom among thefakirs, its distribution is essential." The Rev. Mr.Campbell says that ganja is used in connection with the funeralceremonies observed by certain classes, but that the use is notessential. Mr. Merriman alludes to a custom of offering andconsuming bhang at the funeral of bhang consumers. Bombay 443. An interesting note, entitled "The Religion ofHemp," by Mr. J. M. Campbell, C.I.E., will be found in Vol.III Appendices. In the Bombay presidency the use of hemp inconnection with the worship of Siva, Mahadev or Shankar appearsto be very common. It is referred to by many witnesses. Thefollowing description of this custom as prevailing in part ofGujarat, Kaira, and probably Ahmedabad has been furnished to theExcise Commissioner by Mr. B. E. Modi, Deputy Collector: "Onthe Shivratri day (the last day but one of the month ofMagh), sacred to the god Mahadev or Shankar, bhang water isfreely poured over the lingam. Mahadev is an ascetic, andis fond of bhang, and on this day it is considered a religiousduty to offer him his favourite drink. From this day to the 11thday of Ashad, on which day gods go to sleep, water is keptconstantly dripping upon the lingam of Mahadev from anearthen pot kept above it. "Somewhat similar accountsvarying in detail are given by many witnesses coming fromdifferent parts of the province, of whom some also refer to thehabit which ganja smokers have of invoking the deity beforeplacing the pipe. to their lips. Others also refer to hemp asrequired in the worship of Baldeo and to its use at the Shimga orHoli festival. The Marwaris and some other classes appear to usebhang at marriages and other festivities. Mr. Charles, Collectorof Belgaum, says that among Musalmans and Marathas the ganjaplant is offered to dead relatives who used it in their lifetimeat the time of the anniversary ceremonies of their death. Thereappears to be no special custom of worshipping the hemp plantitself. R. K. Kothavale, of Satara district, says the hemp plantis worshipped, by one sect only, namely, by people from NorthernIndia and Nepal, while Mr. Lamb, Collector of Alibag, remarksthat some of the Kunbis who make Offerings to the localdivinities of their fields at the harvest season include a. smallquantity of ganja in the offerings. Sind. 444. In Sind the customs, both religious and' social, appearto be much the same as in Bombay. In Karachi and some otherplaces bhang is generally offered to all comers on occasions ofmarriages, panchayats, and other gatherings; and the custom offreely distributing bhang as a charity to all who dare to partakeis common both at temples and at other places of resort. Berar. 445. In Berar there is evidence as to the use both of ganjaand bhang at the Shivratri and Holi festivals and at socialgatherings. The hemp plant itself is not worshipped, but,according to one witness, when a consumer dies, the plant is keptnear his corpse during the funeral ceremony. Ajmere-Merwara. 446. At the Holi and the Shivratri and at family festivitiesthe drugs, especially bhang, are used. Baluchistan. 447. Major Gaisford, Deputy Commissioner, states that amongthe Hindu sect called Barn Bargis the consumption of bhang isregarded as essential. Native States. 448. From Native States there is but little informationregarding customs, either social or religious, with which thesedrugs are connected. No purely local or indigenous customs havebeen brought to the notice of the Commission, but there issufficient information to show that practices similar to thoseexisting in British provinces at the Holi and Shrivratrifestivals and on occasions of family rejoicings are observed bycertain classes of the people in many Native States. Worship of the hemp plant 449. The custom of worshipping the hemp plant, although not soprevalent as that of offering hemp to Siva and other deities ofthe Hindus, would nevertheless appear from the statements of thewitnesses to exist to some extent in some provinces of India. Thereason why this fact is not generally known may perhaps begathered from such statements as that of Pandit Dharma NandJoshi, who says that such worship is performed in secret. Theremay be another cause of the denial on the part of the largemajority of Hindu witnesses of any knowledge of the existence ofa custom of worshipping the hemp plant in that the educated Hinduwill not admit that he worships the material object of hisadoration, but the deity as represented by it. The custom ofworshipping the hemp plant, though not confined to the Himalayandistricts or the northern portions of India alone, where the useof the products of the hemp plant is more general among thepeople, is less known as we go south. Still even far south, insome of the hilly districts of the Madras Presidency and amongthe rural population, the hemp plant is looked upon with somesort of veneration. Mr. J. H. Merriman (witness No. 28, Madras)says: "I know of no custom of worshipping the hempplant, but believe it is held in a certain sort of veneration bysome classes." Mr. J. Sturrock, the Collector of Coimbatore(witness No. 2, Madras), says: "In some few localities thereis a tradition of sanctity attached to the plant, but no regularworship. "The Chairman of the Conjeveram Municipal Board,Mr. E. Subramana Iyer (witness No. 143, Madras) says: "Thereis no plant to be worshipped here, but it is generally used assacrifices to some of the minor Hindu deities. "There is apassage quoted from Rudrayanmal Danakand and Karmakaud inthe report on the use of hemp drugs in the Baroda State, whichalso shows that the worship of the bhang plant is enjoined in theShastras. It is thus stated: "The god Shiva says toParvati-- 'Oh, goddess Parvati, hear the benefits derivedfrom bhang. The worship of bhang raises one to my position. In BhabishyaPuran it is stated that "on the 13th moon of Chaitra(March and April) one who wishes to see the number of his sonsand grandsons increased must worship Kama (Cupid) in thehemp plant, etc.". General conclusions In summing up their conclusions on this chapter, the Commission would first remark that charas, which is a comparatively new article of consumption, has not been shown to be in any way connected with religious observance. As regards Northern India, the Commission are of opinion that the use of bhang is more or less common everywhere in connection with the social and religious customs of the people As regards ganja they find that there are certain classes in all parts, except the Punjab, who use the drug in connection with their social and religious observances. The Commission are also of opinion in regard to bhang that its use is considered essential in some religious observances by a large section of the community, and in regard to ganja that those who consider it essential are comparatively very few. The Commission have little doubt that interference with the use of hemp in connection with the customs and observances above referred to would be regarded by the consumers as an interference with long established usage and as an encroachment upon their religious liberty. And this feeling would, especially in the case of bhang, undoubtedly be shared to some extent by the people at large. Regarding Southern India, the same remarks apply with this reservation, that. the difference between ganja and bhang as materials for smoking and drinking respectively is much less marked there, and the distinction between the two forms of the drug is much less clearly recognised, although by the term "bhang" is generally meant the drug as used for drinking, and by "ganja" the drug as used for smoking. Contents | Feedback | Search DRCNet Library | Schaffer Library | Major Studies | IndianHemp Drugs CommissionWT01-B27-51IA031-000653-B005-225http://206.61.184.43:80/schaffer/LIBRARY/studies/inhemp/5chapt14.htm 206.61.184.43 19970122134517 text/html 74425HTTP/1.0 200 OKDate: Wednesday, 22-Jan-97 13:45:07 GMTServer: WebSitePro/1.1f (S/N wpo-0deb)Allow-ranges: bytesContent-type: text/htmlLast-modified: Saturday, 28-Dec-96 07:04:29 GMTContent-length: 74207 Indian Hemp Drugs Commission Report - The Policy of HempDrug Administration Contents | Feedback | Search DRCNet Library | Schaffer Library | Major Studies | IndianHemp Drugs Commission The Indian Hemp Drug Commission Report CHAPTER XIV. THE POLICY OF HEMP DRUG ADMINISTRATION General principles regarding sumptuary laws and theirapplication to India. 553. The question of prohibiting the growth of the hemp plantand the sale of ganja and allied drugs is one which stands in theto forefront Of the present inquiry. It has been remarked by awell known historian that "no laws are of any servicewhich are above the working level of public morality, and thedeeper they are carried down into life, the larger become theopportunities of evasion. If these words are true as applied toEngland under a feudal system, they are much more true in thepresent day as applied to British India. The Government of thiscountry has not grown out of the forces contained within it, buthas been superimposed upon them, and the paternal system ofgovernment which may have been suitable in England during thesixteenth century, and in, the initial development of some Indianprovinces during the period immediately following theirannexation, becomes purely visionary when public opinion is inprocess of formation and the needs of the people are year by yearfinding more ready expression. Occasionally, no doubt, theLegislature in India has anticipated a standard of morality notuniversally accepted by the people, as in the case of lawsrelating to infanticide or the burning of Hindu widows; but thesemeasures were passed under an overwhelming sense of the necessityof correcting popular notions of morality in matters coming wellwithin the sphere of Government, and in the assurance that in thecourse of time they could not fail to secure the assent of allintelligent members of the community. In the chapter of Mill'sPolitical Economy which treats of the non-interference principle,a distinction is made between two kinds of intervention by theGovernment-- the one authoritative interference, and the othergiving advice or promulgating information. And the followingremarks are made regarding the former: "It is evident, even at first sight, that theauthoritative form of Government intervention has a much morelimited sphere of legitimate action than the other. It requires amuch stronger necessity to justify it in any case, while thereare large departments of human life from which it must beunreservedly and imperiously excluded. Whatever theory we adoptrespecting the foundation of the social union, and under whateverpolitical institutions we live, there is a circle around everyindividual human being which no Government, be it that of one, orof few, or of the many, ought to be permitted to overstep thereis a part of the life of every person who has come to years ofdiscretion within which the individuality of that person ought toreign uncontrolled either by any other individual or by thepublic collectively. That there is, or ought to be, some space inhuman existence thus entrenched around no one who professes thesmallest regard to human freedom or dignity will call inquestion: the point to be determined is where the limit should beplaced; how large a province of human life this reservedterritory should include. I apprehend that it ought to includeall that part which concerns only the life, whether inward oroutward of the individual, and does not affect. the interests ofOthers, or affect. them only through the moral influence ofexample. With respect to the domain of the inward consciousness,the thoughts and feelings, and as much of external conduct as ispersonal only, involving no consequences, none at least of apainful or injurious kind, to other people, I hold that it isallowable in all, and in the more thoughtful and cultivated oftena duty, to assert and promulgate with all the force they arecapable of their opinion of what is good or bad, admirable orcontemptible, but not to compel others to conform to thatopinion, whether the force used is that of extra legal coercion,or exerts itself by means of the law. Even in those portions ofconduct which do affect the interests of others, the onus ofmaking out a case always lies on the defenders of legalprohibitions. It is not merely a constructive orpresumptive injury to others which will justify the interferenceof law with individual freedom. To be prevented from what one isinclined to, or from acting contrary to one's own judgment ofwhat is desirable, is not only always irksome, but always tends, protanto, to starve the development of some portion of thebodily or mental faculties, either sensitive or active; and,unless the conscience of the individual goes freely with thelegal restraint, it partakes, either in a great or in a smalldegree, of the degradation of slavery. Scarcely any degree ofutility short of absolute necessity will justify a prohibitoryregulation, unless it can also be made to recommend itself to thegeneral conscience; unless persons of ordinary good intentionseither believe already, or can be induced to believe, that thething prohibited is a thing which they ought not to wish todo." These remarks have been given at length, because theCommission believe that they contain a clear exposition of theprinciples which should guide them in deciding whether theprohibition of the hemp drugs should be authoritatively enforcedby Government. The question of entirely suppressing all intoxicants. 554- Now, a certain number of .persons (among whom may in allprobability,- be reckoned the mover of the question in the, Houseof Commons which led to the appointment of the-Indian Hemp DrugsCommission) deem it to be the duty of the British Government tosuppress the trade in all intoxicants in all the countries underits sway; and there are no doubt special circumstances inIndia which render it less, impossible than in some othercountries to consider even so drastic a policy. These are notablythe general sobriety of its races and the feeling, popular aswell as religious, which prevails against their use among a largesection of the community. Even then no appeal in support of sucha measure can be made to the public morality or practice ofcivilised nations at large, nor, so far as the Commission areaware, to any marked success attending the experiment inparticular instances. In the exceptional cases in which theexperiment has been attended with partial success (as in some ofthe American States), the reformation of the habit has become anobject of desire to the majority of the people, and the enactmentfor promoting Such reformation has presented itself less as arestrictive force than as an auxiliary agency Not laid before the commission 555. But the Commission are not called upon to pronounce on sowide an issue. It was not upon the basis of this generalprinciple that the Secretary of State for India accepted theproposal made in the House of Commons, nor do the instructionsissued to the Commission by the Government of India cover so widea field. The question of prohibiting the production and sale ofthe hemp drugs in India has to be considered by the Commissionapart from the general question, and such prohibition must bejustified, if at all, on some more special ground than the merefact that they are intoxicants. The past history of the case how far to be relied upon. 556. Again, there are a certain number of persons whose'evidence before the Commission points to the assumption that thecase for prohibition of the hemp drugs has already beenestablished in the records of the Government, and that furtherenquiry implies a willful blindness to what has been abundantlyproved by such records. A reference to Chapter XII of this Reportwill show how untrustworthy these records are in regard to theproduction of insanity by the use of the drugs-- an aspect of thequestion which is of the utmost importance, and has formed thebasis of nearly all the official opinion heretofore recorded.against such use. And, after availing themselves fully of everyopportunity of consulting the official literature on the subject,the Commission have arrived at the conclusion that it showslittle originality, and that a very limited amount of personalobservation has been made to do duty as the basis of largeconclusions. The want of reliable data has been compensated byannual reiteration until the stamp of antiquity has secured forthe opinions so expressed a large amount of acquiescence amongofficials who had neither the time nor the opportunity to examinethe matter for themselves So far, therefore, as the effects ofthe hemp drugs are concerned, the Commission have had to approachthe subject as almost a tabula rasa, and, while availingthemselves of the imperfect data previously collected, haveendeavoured to avoid accepting any conclusions without asubstantial foundation of well ascertained facts. The attitude,however, of the Government in regard to the question may bebriefly described. So far back as 1798 an inquiry was made inBengal regarding the quality of ten intoxicating articles--"opium, madak ganja, subzi, bhang, majum, banker, charas,tobacco, and toddy--" with a view to determining whether itmight not be advisable to prohibit altogether the sale of any ofthem. The conclusion arrived at, which was stated in a letter ofthe Board to the Governor-General in Council, No. 22, dated 29thMay 1798, was to the following effect. "It appears that theoriginal productions are as follows: Tobacco, opium, ganja, subzior bhang, banker, and toddy, and that the three remainingarticles are for the most part compositions of those hererecited, as above mentioned. With respect to the drugs specifiedm the foregoing schedule, they are not for the most partrepresented as producing any very violent or dangerous effects ofintoxication except when taken to excess; and, although theoperation of them-may be more powerful in their compound state,we apprehend it would be difficult to sanction the sale of theoriginal productions, and to prohibit with effect the use ofcompositions of which they are susceptible; to which may be addedthat most of these articles, both as original productions and asartificial combinations appear to be useful either in medicine orotherwise; for these reasons we do not deem it necessary torecommend that the sale of any of them be altogether prohibited,but shall proceed to state what appear to us the. best means ofrestraining the use of them, and improving the revenue by theimposition of such taxes as are best adapted to the nature of thecase." A complete inquiry was made in 1871 from allprovinces as to the effects of several preparations of hemp; andif the result should call for any action in the direction ofrestricting them by enhancement of the duty or of limiting, oreven prohibiting, the cultivation of the. plant, the advice ofthe Local Governments was invited as to the expediency andpracticability of such measures. The result is contained in theResolution of the Government of. India, Finance Department, No.3773, dated 17th December 1873. The following passage shows theconclusion arrived at: "Upon a consideration of all the opinions thus collected,it does not appear to the Governor-General in Council to bespecially proved that hemp incites to crime more than other drugsor than spirits. And there is some evidence to show that on rareoccasions this drug, usually so noxious, may be usefully taken.There can, however, be no doubt that its habitual use doesproduce insanity. The total number of cases of insanity is smallin proportion to the population, and not large even in proportionto the number of ganja smokers; but of the cases of insanityproduced by the excessive use of drugs or spirits, by far thelargest number must be attributed to the abuse of hemp. LowerBengal the circumstances have admitted of a system under whichthe consumption of ganja has been reduced one-half, while theamount of duty levied on it has been doubled. It would be verydesirable to control the cultivation and preparation of ganja andbhang elsewhere-in the same way. But it is believed that thiswould not be easy; indeed, it would probably be impracticable.Moreover, with the exception of the Chief Commissioners ofBritish Burma and the Central Provinces, the Local Governmentsare not in favour of altering existing arrangements. HisExcellency in Council, however, trusts that the various LocalGovernments and Administrations will endeavour, wherever it maybe possible, to discourage the consumption of ganja and bhang byplacing restrictions on their cultivation, preparation andretail, and imposing on their use as high a rate of duty as canbe levied without inducing illicit practices. As regards BritishBurma, the Chief Commissioner has already been informed that theGovernor-General in Council concurs with him in thinking that thecultivation and consumption of ganja should be absolutelyprohibited, and it has been prohibited from the beginning of theyear 1873-74. " In 1877 the Bengal Government appointed a special officer,Babu Hem Chunder Kerr, to make a full inquiry into the details ofthe cultivation of ganja, the sufficiency or otherwise of thepresent safeguards, and the reforms which it might be advisableto introduce. Sir Ashley Eden's conclusions on this officer'sreport in regard to the effects of ganja and policy to befollowed were as follows: "The Lieutenant-Governor hashimself no doubt that the use of ganja in any form is injuriousto the consumer, and that it is the duty of Government to makethe tax on this article as high as it can possibly bear.Unfortunately it is habitually used by large numbers of the lowerclasses of the population, who would, if deprived of italtogether, apparently find in the leaves of the wild hemp plantand in other drugs narcotics and stimulants of equallydeleterious character. It does not seem possible, therefore, tostop the cultivation altogether. The policy of Government must beto limit its production and sale by a high rate of duty withoutplacing the drug entirely beyond the reach of those who willinsist upon having it." The last important utterance on thesubject previous to the appointment of the Commission iscontained in the letter of the Government of India, FinanceDepartment, to Her Majesty's Secretary of State, No. 212, dated9th August 1892, in which the following remarks occur: "Weare inclined to believe that ganja is the most noxious of allintoxicants now commonly used in India. But even if the absoluteprohibition of the use of the drug could be enforced, the resultmight be to induce the use of still more noxious drugs. Indiaabounds with plants growing wild from which drugs can be procuredwhich are more deleterious in their effects than ganja. One suchplant is the dhatura (Stramonium), the seeds of whichare already used to intensify the narcotic effects of bhang, aliquid preparation of hemp leaves; and we apprehend that if theuse of ganja were suppressed altogether, dhatura might be largelyresorted to by the poorer classes as a means of satisfying theircraving for stimulants. Apart, however, from the objections justmentioned, we believe. that it would be impossible to enforce inIndia a prohibition of the use of ganja. That drug is produced inNative States, and the difficulties in the way of preventing itsimport from them, if the supply in British India were cut off,would be immense. It would not, moreover, be possible to suppressthe supply in British India. The hemp plant grows readily inIndia, in many places wild without cultivation of any kind, andit would be easy for any one addicted to the use of ganja to growa plant or two in the enclosure of his own house and in nooks andcorners which would be safe from observation and from the risk ofdetection. The question in the House of Commons suggests that asthe possession and sale of ganja has been prohibited for manyyears in Burma, it is desirable that the same prohibition shouldbe extended to other provinces of British India. The analogy ofBurma does not, however, apply to India. When the prohibition wasenforced in Burma, the drug was very little used by the NativeBurmese, its consumption being almost entirely confined tocoolies and other immigrants from India; and the cultivation ofthe plant in Burma, which had never been extensive, had virtuallyceased, the consumers being dependent on importations for theirsupplies. In India, on the other hand, the practice of ganjasmoking has existed from time immemorial, and among certain sectsof Hindus, ascetics, and religious mendicants hemp intoxicationis habitually indulged in; and, as explained in the precedingparagraph, it would be impossible to suppress the growth of theplant. But, although we consider it impracticable to enforce theabsolute prohibition of the use of ganja, we fully recognise itas our duty to restrict its consumption as far as practicable,and we have distinctly laid down the policy to be pursued inrespect of this drug in our Resolution of the 17th December 1873already quoted. The annual reports of Excise Administration showthat the subject has since been continually before LocalGovernments, who are making every possible endeavour to minimisethe evils and discourage the use of the drug wherever it is asource of danger to consumers." Thus "restraining theuse and improving, the revenue by the imposition of suitabletaxation," "discouraging the consumption byplacing restrictions on the cultivation, preparation, and retail,and imposing on their use as high a rate of duty as can be leviedwithout inducing illicit practices," "limiting theproduction and sale by a high rate of duty without placing thedrug entirely beyond the reach of those who will insist uponhaving it," "restricting consumption as far aspracticable, minimising the evils, and discouraging the use ofthe drug wherever it is a source of danger to consumers"have from time to time been the watch-words of the Government inthe matter of the hemp drugs, a policy only once definitelyabandoned, viz., in the case of Burma, where totalprohibition was introduced in 1873. Prohibition in other countries. 557. Allusion must be made to precedents for the prohibitionof the hemp drugs in other countries in order to complete thesegeneral observations. Excepting British Burma (reference to whichwill be made further on), the Commission only know of four casesof prohibition, viz., in Turkey, Egypt, Greece, andTrinidad. For the first three of these, the only information atthe disposal of the Commission is contained in the communicationsfrom Her Majesty's representatives addressed to the Secretary ofState for Foreign Affairs in 1892 in consequence of a requisitionmade on them by the Earl of Rosebery at the request of Mr. W SCaine, M.P. Turkey 558. The ground of the prohibition in Turkey is thus stated ina note addressed by the Grand Vizir to the Ministry Commerce,Constantinople, on 1st March 1292 (sic):"From thereports furnished by the Imperial Medical Council, it appearedthat the use of hashish in the preparation of medicines wasextremely rare, and that, being a narcotic, its use must ofnecessity be injurious, and that consequently the suppression ofthe cultivation of hashish could not fail to prove highlyadvantageous." The effect of the prohibition is thusdescribed in an enclosure to the Ambassador's reply: "Theimportation and sale in Turkey of hashish, though contraband, isstill, I hear, largely carried on, and is used for smoking, inthe composition of various sweetmeats, and as an opiate ingeneral." Egypt. 559. In Egypt the cultivation, use, and importation of hashishwere first forbidden in 1868, but in 1874 it was allowed to beimported on payment of duty. In November 1877 an order wasreceived from Constantinople that all hashish brought into Egyptwas to be seized and destroyed, and finally, in March 1879, theimportation and cultivation of hashish were prohibited by aKhedivial decree. In March 1884 it was provided that confiscatedhashish should be sold by the Customs (for delivery abroad)instead of being destroyed as formerly, and the proceeds of thesale divided amongst the informers and officers who took part inthe seizure. "This measure was rendered necessary,"says Mr. Caillard, the Director-General of the Customs, "bythe absence of any fund from which rewards could bedistributed; while, on the other hand, the profits of smugglingbeing very great, large sums were paid by the smugglers to insurethe silence or complicity of the Customs officers,coastguards-men, and others. A considerable number of persons areemployed in the smuggling trade, many of them having subsistence.Great ingenuity is displayed by the smugglers no other means ofand no sooner has one trick been discovered than another isinthis illicit trade, of the contrainvented. The great obstacle,however, to the complete repression band trade is the refusal ofsome of the European Governments to recognize the right of theEgyptian Government to search suspected shops or warehouses, andto punish the delinquents by fine as well as confiscation. Inview of the impossibility of suppressing the contraband trade inhashish under the suggested to the Minister of Financecircumstances described above, desirability of removing theprohibition against the importation of the and I proposed tocollect a customs duty of P. T. 100 per kilogramme (9s. 3d.perlb.), besides it license-tax on the sale of hashish. It has beenabundantly proved that the vice of hashish smoking cannot besuppressed by legislation, whereas by a system of licenses it maybe kept under control to some extent. "Mr. Caillardestimates that the quantity of hashish consumed annually in Egyptcannot be less than 50,000 okes (about lbs. 140,000)notwithstanding the prohibition. He states that the hashishappears to be manufactured chiefly in Greece. Greece. 560. In Greece there is no law regulating or speciallyalluding to the product as merchandise is allowed, but a Policeorder of 1891 prohibits its sale and consumption in the smallcafes of Athens and the Piroeus, in some of which, during theprevious ten or fifteen years apparently, the habit of using thisdrug had been gradually introduced. The order was based upon areport of the Sanitary Board at Athens, in which prominentmention is made of the observations made in India by Englishdoctors, and the statistics of insanity in Bengal lunatic asylumsascribed to the use of the hemp drugs are put forward asjustifying, repressive measures. The effect of the order passedis not mentioned, sufficient time not having elapsed. Trinidad.. 561. As regards Trinidad, the Commission are not surethat the hemp drugs are prohibited. The fact has been stated bythe Indian Immigrants Commission, Natal, 1885-87, and by Dr.Thomas Ireland, Government Medical Officer, British Guiana, in apaper published in the Alienist and Neurologist, St.Louis, in October 1893. But, on the other hand,Surgeon-Major Comins, lately on special duty in British andForeign Colonies and the Netherlands, in his Note on Emigrationfrom India to Trinidad, 1893, quotes a statement of the Protectorof Immigrants, who says that in the year 1885 an Ordinance waspassed requiring the payment of L100 per acre to obtain a licenseto grow ganja, which had previously been grown in largequantities. This practically put a stop to the growth andconsumption for several years, but immigrants who had leftTrinidad two years previous to the writing of his report had beengrowing it in Venezuela, and several seizures had been made bythe Customs officers from persons endeavouring to introduce itinto Trinidad. The Protector adds: "With a coast linesuch as ours, adjacent to that of the Spanish Main, it will beimpossible to prevent its introduction into this colony ifimmigrants who go there continue to grow it." Dr. Cominshimself says: "I do not know what are the laws in force hereregarding the sale of opium and ganja." Basis of prohibition and results in these countries. 562. Thus in the case of other countries, where the useof the drugs has been prohibited, the Commission do not find inthe literature available to them many arguments for prohibition.In Turkey it rests upon the theory accepted by orthodoxMuhammadans that hashish "being a narcotic its usemust of necessity be injurious," while in Egypt theprohibition emanated from Turkey. In both these countries themeasure has by no means been attended with complete success. InGreece the prohibition in the cafes of Athens is based largelyupon Indian experience, which the Commission have had cause ingreat measure to recast. In Trinidad, if there has beenprohibition, it does not seem of late to have been effectual. Itmust be added that the Commission have no scientific informationregarding the strength of the article of commerce called hashish,and it may differ to some extent from the Indian products. Fromthe description of its manufacture even by the Mayor ofOrchomenus in Mantines in Arcadia, whence the Egyptian supply ismainly derived, it appears to resemble more the charas of Yarkandthan the ganja or bhang of India. Is prohibition in India justifiable, feasible, andadvisable? 563. Starting, therefore, from the position that what is knownof the hemp drugs in the past is not sufficient to justify theirprohibition in India, and that for such a measure there must bestrong justification based on ascertained facts scientificallyand systematically examined, the first question for theCommission to decide is whether such justification is to be foundin the evidence before them, and the second-whether, if this isso, prohibition is feasible and advisable on other grounds. Thesewill now be considered. Prohibition of bhang 564. The effects of the hemp drugs have been treated inChapters X to XIII of the Report; and as the first result ofthese conclusions, the Commission are prepared to state that thesuppression of the use of bhang would be totally unjustifiable.It is established to their satisfaction that this use is veryancient, and that it has some religious tion among a large bodyof Hindus; that it enters into their social customs; that it isalmost without exception harmless in moderation, and perhaps insome cases beneficial; that the abuse of it is not so harmful asthe abuse of alcohol; that its suppression, involving theextirpation of the wild hemp plant, would in some tracts be amatter of great difficulty; that such a measure would beextremely unpopular, and would give rise to widespreaddiscontent; and, finally, that, if successfully accomplished, itwould lead to the use of more hurtful stimulants. The Commissiondeem it unnecessary to traverse the evidence further than hasbeen done in the preceding chapters of this report in support ofthese propositions. It is almost unanimous in regard to them. Theutmost that is necessary in regard to this product is that itshould be brought under more effective control, and this matterwill be dealt with further on. But absolute prohibition is, inthe opinion of the Commission, entirely out of the question. Prohibition of ganja and charas 565. Though it has been shown that as a rule ganja and charasare used in moderation, and that the moderate use ordinarily.does not cause appreciable injury, yet it has been establishedthat the excessive use of these forms of hemp drugs has been moreinjurious than in the case of bhang. Whether they should beprohibited or merely controlled is a question which might besettled merely with reference to their ascertained effects. TheCommission consider that the effects are not such as to call forprohibition, and on the general principles discussed in theopening paragraphs of this chapter, such interference would beunjustifiable. Nevertheless, it. seems advisable to refer to theother evidence with a view to ascertaining the generallyprevailing views on the subject, and considering the grounds onwhich prohibition is advocated or opposed. The evidence regarding prohibition of ganja and charas maybe considered together. 566. In reviewing the evidence on these points, it will not benecessary to draw a distinction between ganja and charas. Theeffects of these two drugs have been shown to be similar, thoughcharas is cateris paribus the more potent. They are bothordinarily smoked, though very occasionally used for eating anddrinking usually in the form of admixtures with other condimentsstated by Mr. Lyall (Bengal 1): "Ganja and charas arereally one, and in time, if the question be scientificallyfollowed up, possibly charas will be the only form used."The refuse of ganja is used in some provinces as bhang, but thissubstance more nearly resembles bhang than ganja properly socalled. The ganja of the different provinces varies in quality.But these distinctions cannot here be specially observed; it willbe sufficient to bear in mind that the opinions in Bengal, theCentral Provinces, Madras, Bombay, and the smallerAdministrations relate to ganja; that those in the Punjab relateto charas; and that those in the North-Western Provinces and Sindrelate to ganja and charass, both of which consumed. Supply of ganja and charas in its relation to prohibition. 567. A few remarks, however, recapitulating the localconditions of ganja and charas will not be out of place. Charasis practically a foreign article. Small amounts are imported fromNepal and Gwalior, but they may be left out of the account. Thebulk comes from Yarkand through the Himalayan passes, or to amuch smaller. degree from offer parts of Central Asia through theroutes on the frontier of Afghanistan. It would not be a verydifficult matter to stop these imports, though the co-operationof the Kashmir Darbar would be necessary in regard to Yarkandcharas. It may, therefore, be accepted that the supply of charasmight be cut off without much difficulty, though, as this articleforms the principal import from Yarkand, the prohibition ofcharas would paralyse, if not extinguish, the trade with thiscountry. In regard to ganja, the problem is more complex. Ganjais regularly cultivated in Bengal, the Central Provinces, Madras,Bombay, and Berar. In Bengal and the Central Provinces, thecultivation of the hemp, plant for its production is undercomplete control. In Berer cultivation is only permitted underlicense. In the other tracts of British territory it is notdirectly Controlled. Assuming that control is possible in thesetracts, it does not follow that it would be equally possible toprevent cultivation altogether. Moreover, there still remains aconsiderable amount of production in many of the Native Statesall over India. To induce these States to prohibit cultivationwould be a difficult matter, and, even if this were done, thesuppression of illicit cultivation would offer the most seriousdifficulties. For, though ganja of good quality requires somecultivation and tending, the evidence before the Commission tendsto establish the fact that ganja of an inferior kind can bemanufactured from the spontaneous or casual growth which is foundnear human habitations and amidst cultivation of other crops inmany parts of India. While, therefore, it cannot be asserted thatthe task of preventing the manufacture of ganja is an impossibleone, it would certainly at the present time be attended withconsiderable difficulty. Opinions of the witnesses regarding prohibition of ganjaand charas. 568. The question addressed to the. witnesses regarding theprohibition of the hemp drugs (No. 35) was so framed as to elicitin the first place opinions as to the feasibility of such. ameasure. The considerations bearing upon the subject were alsoset forth in the form of subsidiary questions. The questionwhether the witnesses advocated prohibition. was not specificallyput, but it is not difficult, comparing the answers to thequestions above mentioned with those relating to other questions,to decide what the opinion of each witness is on this question.Those who hold decided views have no doubt generally stated themin some portion of their answers, and at all events ampleopportunity of doing so was afforded them. A larger number of thewitnesses have contented themselves with merely giving anaffirmative or negative answer to the questions on .the subject.It is impossible to attach much importance to such answers. TheCommission have abstracted them and considered them, but theyfeel bound to give far more weight to the opinions of witnesseswhose replies show that they have formulated an opinion, on thedesirability of prohibition. Some account will now be given ofthese answers. Opinions regarding prohibition of ganja and charas. 569. Out of the total of 1,193 witnesses, 575 haveexpressed a decided opinion on the question of prohibition. Ofthese only 99 advocate it in their answers. The remainder areagainst it. The classification of these witnesses is shown in thefollowing table: Superior Superior Subordinate Civil Officers. Officers. PRACTITIONERS. PROVINCE. ..... Bengal ......... Assam ......... 4 1 .. , North-Western Provinces 10 79 Punjab . 3 ."' 3 36 Cerntral Provinces ....... Madras ] 11111 67 Bombay and Sind 19 7 69 Berar, Ajmere, Coorg, and 1 12 . Quetta-Pishin.  Total - x6 138 4 3 106 4 2o Per cent .... 3 97 x7 83 1o 90 36 64 83 Thus, not only is there a very large preponderance of opinionagainst prohibition, but the preponderance is specially markedamong superior Civil officers. The only witnesses indeed of thelatter class who favour prohibition are three in the Punjab,where charas and not ganja is consumed. The most important of these opinions on either side will nowbe specified. The most forcible opinions in favour of prohibitionwill be quoted at some length in order that the argument for thisview may be .thoroughly appreciated. The opinions againstprohibition are too numerous to be quoted, but the witnesses willbe named under headings setting forth the most prominent viewsexpressed. Bengal opinions in favour of prohibition of ganja 570. The Bengal witnesses in favour of prohibition of ganjaconsist of a Sub-Deputy Collector, an Assistant Surgeon. twoMedical Practitioners, an Honorary Magistrate, two zamindars, twopleaders, a delegate from the Indian Relief Society, Calcutta,the Secretary to the Band of Hope, Faridpur, the Secretary to theBogra Medical Society, and two Missionaries. The Commissioncannot find much to quote from these opinions, but the followingare the most forcible: (238) Delegate, Indian Relief Society, Calcutta, BabuAmrita Krishna Mullick, B.A., B.L.: After quoting officialand medical opinions relating to the injuriousness of ganja, theSociety, endeavours to show that the cultivators of the hempplant lose largely by their occupation, and maintains that it isthe duty of the Government to come to their rescue by abolishingit. The society maintains that the privation to the consumerswould not be serious, and that it is difficult to suggest anydrug more deleterious than ganja to which they could take. TheSociety contends that the alleged religious sanction to the useof the drugs is a fallacy, and refers to the opinions of severalpandits in support of this view. The Society argues that to meetthe deficit in the revenue, which would be about lakhs per annum,the salaries of European officers should be cut down, the dutieson cotton goods re-imposed and the income-tax increased with anenhanced taxable minimum. Savings would be effected by reductionof establishment and by decreased cost of lunatic asylums. (286) Secretary, Band of Hope Temperance Society, Faridpur,Babu Purna Chandra Maitra: "This Society begs to urgeupon the Commission to consider the justice and propriety of ajust, benign, and Christian Government to allow cultivation andsale of a drug which has been excluded from some countries, andin England doubly protected in the poison list." The witnessargues that the drug" has been unreservedly condemned byeminent doctors as one of the most dangerous poisons known, asthe most potent cause of lunacy, and as the most pernicious anddeleterious of all excitants ever in use in any country." Headmits that there are a number of yogis, sanyasis, fakirs, andmendicants addicted to ganja smoking, but states that ganjasmoking forms no part of their religion, and there is not asingle Hindu or Muhammadan religious book which sanctions the useof ganja. "No real disaffection can under the benign rule ofthe British Government be seriously apprehended, and, even in theevent of there being such apprehension, the fact should not belost sight of that the Government in this case will have thesupport of the bulk of the population." He alleges thatganja produces crime, and that the taxation, amounting to 22lakhs, is a drain on the poverty-stricken and half-famishedpeople of Bengal. He finds it difficult to suggest a substitutefor ganja, but liquor may be one, and a peculiar preparation ofstrong tobacco may also serve the purpose. (134) Secretary to Bogra Medical Society (10 members),Pyari SankerDass Gupta, L.M.S.: "the prohibition willgive rise to no political danger. For the ganja smokers have verylittle influence over society. The Government has faced questionsof a greater religious character, as the Suttee or the Age ofConsent Act, with boldness. This is comparatively a minorquestion affecting only depraved men." (203) Rev. W. B. Phillips, Missionary.: "What withliquor and opium and hemp drugs of various kinds, all licensed byGovernment, it does seem as if the population were terriblyexposed to degrading influences. It is not my province to facethe difficult task of dealing with these evils; and I sincerelysympathize with the Government in the heavy duty of solving thegrave problems involved. But I do feel it my duty to set forth asstrongly as possible the assurance that very much mischief isbeing worked in the country by the various intoxicants so freelyand largely sold. I hardly care to distinguish between opium,alcohol, and ganja. I regard them all as bad. My mind is soimpressed with the evil effects of excessive use that I do notcare to consider the moderate use. I would wish Government tobegin with ganja, to proceed with little delay-against opium, andthen tackle alcohol. I prefer this as a matter of policy, asganja is easiest dealt with I am prepared to prohibit all threeintoxicants on account of the evil which I see done by them. (81) Kali Das Mukerji, Sub-Deputy Collector: Afteradvocating prohibition of ganja on the grounds of the evileffects, and stating that there would be no danger from thediscontent caused owing to the small number of the consumers, thewitness proceeds: "The reasons usually put forward infavour of ganja consumption are as follows: (1) that Hindu friarsand jogis cannot do without it, for it helps them in theirreligious contemplation, and sustains them under severe exertionand exposure; (2) that it is a safeguard against disease inmalarious tracts; and (3) that it serves the labouring classes asa refreshing stimulant, alleviating fatigue. I do not think thatany of these reasons is conclusive, though plausible. In fact,none of them stands the test of close examination. If anyintoxicating drug is at all necessary for friars and jogisalcohol, opium or siddhi may serve the purpose. Eight kinds ofintoxicating drugs are prescribed in the Tantras for Hindudevotees, and it is optional with them to take any if they careto do so at all. That ganja is a safeguard against disease inmalarious tracts is not necessarily true Even as a stimulant andremover of fatigue, ganja has very little to recommend it to thelabouring classes A careful observation is sure to establish thefact that any ordinary labourer whose only stimulant is tobaccois on the whole a better workman than his ganja consumingbrother." Opinions against prohibition of ganja in Bengal. 571. It is impossible to quote the mass of opinion againstprohibition of ganja, but the following analysis of some of themost important opinions will give an idea of the strength ofthese opinions :-- (1) Prohibition impossible or unnecessary, or could not beenforced without a large preventive establishment. (1) Hon'ble D. R. Lyall, C.S.I., Member, Board of Revenue. (2) Mr. Westmacott, Commissioner. (9) Mr. Price, Collector. (11) Mr. Skrine, Collector. (21) Mr. Jenkins, Collector. (17) Mr. Gupta, Commissioner of Excise (46) Ganendra Nath Pal, Deputy Collector. (197) Mr. H. M. Weatherall, Manager, Nawab's Estates, Tippera. (2) Prohibition would be strongly resented by religiousmendicants, would be regarded as an interference with religion,or would be likely to become a political danger. (1) Hon'ble D. R. Lyall, C.S.I., Member, Board of Revenue. (3) Mr. Westmacott, Commissioner.(19) Mr. Manisty,Collector.(18) Mr. Hare, Collector. (16) Mr. Marindin, Collector. (32) Mr. Bedford, Deputy Commissioner. (63) Abhilas Chandra Mukharji, Deputy Collector. (62) Kanti Bhushan Sen, Deputy Collector of Excise. (163) Maharaja Bahadur Sir Jotendra Mohan Tagore, K.C.S.I. (174) Radhika Churn Sen, Zamindar. (175) Raghonandan Parsad, Zamindar. .(185) Jogendra Krishna Rat Chaudhri. (207) Purnendu Narayan Sinha. (2o8) Mahendra Chandra Mitra, Chairman, Naihati Municipality. (92) Mr. Ricketts, Manager, Nilgiri State. (217) Biprodas Banarji, Pleader, Newspaper Editor, andChairman, Baraset Municipality. (250) District Board, Monghyr. (228) Jadubans Sahai, Vice-Chairman, Arrah Municipality (3) Prohibition might lead to the use of dhatura or otherintoxicantsworse than ganja. (21) Mr. Jenkins, Collector. (46) Ganendra Nath Pal, Deputy Collector. (62) Kanti Bhushan Sen, Deputy Collector of Excise. (161) Maharaja Girijnath, Roy Bahadur.(164) Raja Surja KantaAcharjya, Bahadur. (167) Radha Balav Chaudhri, Rai Bahadur. (233) Secretary, Rajshahi Association. (217) Biprodas Banarji, Pleader, &c. Assam.Assam.Opinions in favour of prohibition of ganja. 572. The opinions in favour of prohibition of ganja in Assamare those of a Civil Surgeon, the Secretary to the Tezpur RaiyatsAssociation, the Secretary to the Upper Assam .Association, amerchant, and a pensioned Overseer, Public Works Department, andmember of a Local Board. There is nothing especially to note inthese opinions. Opinions against.. 573. Against prohibition we have the Commissioner of the AssamValley, the Commissioner of Excise, the Director of Land Recordsand Agriculture, an Officiating Deputy Commissioner, a CivilSurgeon, an Extra Assistant Commissioner, a medical practitioner,four pleaders, and four planters. Mr. Driberg, Commissioner of Excise,says: "It would be useless to prohibit the use of ganja in aprovince like Assam, surrounded as it is by independent hillpeople, who would cultivate it in their hills and smuggle it downwith little risk of detection. Any prohibition will only lead tothe increase of illicit consumption and to the secret use of thedrug, which would be decidedly bad; of course, stop cultivationin Bengal, and the prohibition of the use of excise ganja couldbe enforced; but there would be serious discourse, though in thisprovince it might not amount to a political danger, and theprohibition would be followed by recourse to opium, and in somecases to alcohol." The evidence of planters tends generallyto show that the use of ganja by the garden coolies, who (exceptin the western districts of the Assam Valley and those of theSurma Valley, all of which border on Bengal) are the principalconsumers, produces no serious effects. There is nothing in anyof the Assam evidence to controvert these views. North-Western Provinces.Opinions in favour of prohibitionof ganja and charas. 574. The advocates of prohibition of ganja and charas in theNorth-Western Provinces are as follows: 6 subordinate civilofficers, 9 subordinate medical officers and private medicalpractitioners, and 18 non-officials. Butfew of these witnessesgive any reasons for their opinions. And the Commission are notable to quote any one of them as having any special weight. Theonly opinion which it appears worth while to quote is that of aCollector (Mr. Addis (4), who does not, however, specificallyrecommend prohibition. He says: "It probably would befeasible to prohibit the use of all these drugs. Public opinionis against their use, and the people are very obedient toauthority. The prohibition would certainly lead to the increaseduse of opium and alcohol. Opinions against prohibition. 575. On the other hand, the opinions against prohibition arevery strong. The following is an analysis of some of the mostimportant:- (1) Prohibition impossible or unnecessary, or could not beenforced without a large preventive establishment. (1) Hon'ble A. Cadell, Member, Board of Revenue.(5) Mr.Stoker, Commissioner of Excise(12) Mr. Brownrigg, OfficiatingDeputy Commissioner.(2o) Mr. Partridge, Officiating DeputyCommissioner.(9) Mr. Jackson, Collector.(10) Mr. Tweedy,Collector.(17) Mr. Spencer, Officiating Collector.(34) Mr.Cockburn, Assistant Sub-Deputy Opium Agent.(32) Mr. Robarts,Joint Magistrate.(26) Rama Shankar, Assistant Collector(24) Mr.Rogers, Assistant Commissioner.(191) Kanwar Kundan Singh,Zamindar. (12) Mr. Brownrigg, Officiating Deputy Commissioner.(9)Mr. Jackson, Collector.(10) Mr. Tweedy, Collector.(34) Mr.Cockburn, Assistant Sub-Deputy Opium Agent.(21) Mr. Gillan,Assistant Collector, (26) Rama Shankar, AssistantCollector.o(46) Panditi Bishambar Nath, Deputy Collector.(28)Mr.Bruce, Assistant Collector..(33)Pandit Sri Lulls OfficiatingJoint(227) Syad Mahammad Nuh, Zamindar. (3) Prohibition might lead to use of dhatura or otherintoxicants worse than ganja or charas. (6) Mr. Stoker, Commissioner of Excise.(15) Mr. Ferard,Collector (28) Mr. Bruce, Assistant Collector.(51) Thakur TukmanSingh, Deputy Collector. Punjab 576. The advocates of theprohibition of charas Opinions for prohibition of charas. in thePunjab are as follows:-- 3 superior civil officers, 3 subordinatecivi1 officers, 2 subordinate medical officers, and 10non-officials.It may be noted that Mr. Ogilvie, FinancialCommissioner in charge of Excise (2), records the followingopinion: "I am inclined to hold the opinion, though I am notquite satisfied on the subject, that the use of charas is sodeleterious that it might be permissible, both on grounds ofmorality and utility, for its use to be prohibited or for theprice of the drug to be so artificially raised as to confine itsconsumption to a very small number indeed. The reason why I saythat I am not quite satisfied on the point is because I have notsufficiently investigated the facts. All that I can, therefore,say with certainty is that my opinion tends to the directionabove indicated I would observe, however, with regard to theYarkand trade that the imposition of a duty so high as to bepractically prohibitive would very considerably injure thattrade, . because the Yarkand trader in exchange for the churnstakes back the products of the Punjab to his own country or toKashmir. The extinction or serious injury of the Yarkand tradewould, of course, be a very regrettable circumstance. On theother hand from my personal knowledge as Deputy Commissioner ofthe Dera  Ismail Khan District, I would say no harm wouldaccrue to general trade on the western border from theprohibition of churns." Mr. Coldstream. Deputy Commissioner (5), though he doesnot seem to have formed a definite opinion regarding the moderateuse of the drugs, says: "The gradual stoppage ofimport of ganja and charas might be tried. It is not as yet avery widely-spread habit, but it might grow. It would cause gentpain and discontent if the prohibition were sudden andcomprehensive, but this would not amount to political danger. Aprohibitory measure regarding ganja and charas would no doubt befollowed at once by a recourse to opium and alcohol. I can quitebelieve the moderate occasional use of the drugs may becomparatively harmless, but I am not aware that they are commonlyused occasionally and in moderation. They may, however, be soused for all I know." Mr. Wilson, Deputy Commissioner (14), says that heshould like to see the experiment made in selected districts ofprohibiting trade in charas (and bhang) all together. As regardscharas, he thinks the prohibition would be feasible, as it isimported, and the discontent would be insignificant. knows of noclass, such as labourers, who take the drug in moderation as anordinary stimulant. Among fakirs and other excessive consumers,he thinks the use produces great evils, and that there is no moreharmful drug which they are likely to take to. He does not knowanything of the use of dhatura except its administration as apoison. He thinks sudden prohibition would be cruel. He wouldtherefore begin by taxation and gradually raise it, leaving thequestion of total prohibition to be decided by experience. Theevidence of Arjan Singh, Extra Assistant Commissioner (19),is much to the same effect, but he states that the use of dhaturais general among the followers of Siva at the Shivratri in theDera Ghazi Khan district. He says it is taken in very smallquantities, so that its effect is almost imperceptible. GeneralMillet (69), formerly District Superintendent of Police,would like to see all intoxicants prohibited which cannot beproved to be actually necessary. He thinks gradual prohibition ofthe hemp drugs feasible, and that educated, intelligent nativepublic opinion, which to a great extent leads that of the lowerclasses, would support prohibition. Discontent at first among thedegraded classes would be inevitable, but there would be nopolitical danger, though tact and discretion would be needed andcalm-minded European officials at the helm. He fears thatrecourse to alcohol would be the result. Shekh Riaz Husain,zamindar (67), thinks that "having regard for thewelfare and good of the people which the British Government hasin view, the prohibition of the hemp drugs (including bhang) isimperatively necessary. Loyal and intelligent subjects andwell-wishers of the country would welcome the prohibition, thoughthe unscrupulous habitual consumers would indeed dislike it. Butas it would be for the good of the people, it is not hoped thatany class of persons would resent it. The enforcement of theprohibition should be effected like other new laws andregulations, exceptions being made to some extent in the case ofthe existing old habitual consumers, because its sudden stoppagewould cause them serious privation. The discontent resultingwould not amount to a political danger. If it were possible tomake charas as expensive as alcohol, that would be one way ofdealing with the subject."Sardar Sujan Singh, RaiBahadur, Contractor (59), considers charas as certainly mostinjurious, and thinks its use should most certainly beprohibited. It does no good to anybody. There are not many kaharswho take it. Those who do, go to the bad. He does not know ofthe use. of dhatura as an intoxicant. The use of madak and chanduis more injurious than charas, and they also should be prohibitedas well as liquor. He would not recommend immediate prohibition,but would put on such a tax, increasing it gradually, as to makeit impossible for the majority of people to buy them at all. Dr. H. M. Clark, Missionary (46), would like to seecharas prohibited if it were possible, He thinks. however, thatalcohol does more harm than charas. He cannot believe that amoderate use of charas is possible. Fakirs and devotees are thechief consumers. Devi Dayal, Editor of the Kaitistha Mitra,*Lahore, circulation 300 copies (83), says: "If charas becalled poison (fatal, killing, murdering drug), it is not anexaggeration of any kind. It is a great vice to smoke charas. MayGod not give this even in the lot of a foe. Only just people ashave bad luck get engaged in this vice. Government will do theirsubjects a very great obligation by saving them from early deathand whirlpool of destruction and ruin. My present belief is thatthere is no such thing as moderation in the use of chards,because, when a charsi visits another, he offers him the chillum,and they smoke in company. The smoke is thus repeatedfrequently." Consumers acknowledge that they would have nocomplaint; and if Government were to prohibit the use of charasto-morrow, the bad habit would die out of itself. Ganesh Das,Pleader, and President, Sarin Sabha, Hoshiarpur (77): Charasjogis, sanyasis, and suthra fakirs, andis consumed by shoemakers,musicians, by some Khatris and Brahmins. The physical effects arevery bad, and most consumers become incapacitated for work andlead a miserable life. The subcommittee of the Sarin Sabhaappointed to consider the subject recommend prohibition. Enquirywas not made from medical experts. Consumers would not take toother intoxicants, because the intoxication of chards is not likethat of opium or other intoxicants. The greatest loss would bethat of the traders of Hoshiarpur and Amritsar, who takemerchandise to Ladakh and Yarkand and bring back charas. Opinions against prohibition of charas. 577. The following is an analysis of some of the mostimportant evidence against prohibition (1) Prohibition impossible or unnecessary, or could not beenforced without a large preventive establishment. (1) Mr. Rivaz, First Financial Commissioner.(3) Mr. Thorburn,Commissioner. (6) Mr. Ibbetson, Deputy Commissioner.(8) Mr.Maconachie, Deputy Commissioner. (13) Mr. Drummond, DeputyCommissioner. (66) Kazi Syad Ahmad, retired Government servant. (2) Prohibition would be strongly. resented by religiousmendicants, or would be regarded as an interference withreligion, or would be likely to became a political danger. (3) Mr.Thorburn, Commissioner. (6) Mr. Ibbetson, Deputy Commissioner. (10) Mr. A. Anderson, Deputy Commissioner. (8) Mr. Maconachie, Deputy Commissioner. (13)Mr. Drummond, Deputy Commissioner. (29)Mr. Brown, Officiating Deputy Inspector-General of PoliceThis paper has ceded to (39) Thakur Das, Rai Bahadur, Assistant Surgeon. (36) BhagwanDass, Assistant Surgeon. (25) Muhammad Ikramulla Khan, Khan Bahadur, Honorary ExtraAssistant Commissloner. (27) Muhammad Barkat Ali Khan, KhanBahadur, retired Extra Assistant Commissioner (86) Bahram Khan, Honorary Magistrate.(93) Gujar Ma!,Trader.(94) Jawala Bhagat, Trader.(3) Prohibition might leadto use of dhatura or other intoxicants worse than charas. (76)Babu P. C. Chatterji Judge, Chief Court.(10) Mr. A. Anderson,Deputy Commissioner.(18) Rai Bahadur Bhagwan Dass, ExtraAssistant Commissioner.(39) Thakur Das, Rai Bahadur, AssistantSurgeon.(27) Muhammad Barkat All Khan, Khan Bahadur, retiredExtra Assistant Commissioner.(85) Lachman Dass, Merchant. Opinions.in favour of the prohibition ofganja. 578. There are only two witnesses in the Central Provinces whoadvocate the prohibition of ganja.Honorary Surgeon-Major Harrison(38) on the retired CentralProvinces.list, employed in theKalahandi State,. Advocates gradual prohibition, "which wouldcause discontent, but not any serious danger. The prohibitionwould no doubt be followed by recourse to alcohol and otherstimulants." The other is a pensioned hospital assistant,who also advocates gradual prohibition. Opinions against prohibition of ganja. 5 79. The following is an analysis of some of the mostimportant evidence against prohibition:- (1) Prohibition impossible or unnecessary, or could not beenforced without a large preventive establishment. (1) .Mr. Neill, Judicial Commissioner.(4) Mr. Laurie,Officiating Secretary to Chief Commissioner.(2) Colonel Bowie,Commissioner. (9) Mr. Drake-Brockman, Officiating ExciseCommissioner.(39) Dr. Prentie, Civil Surgeon.(.66) Rev. IsraelJacob, Missionary. a) Prohibition would be strongly resented by religiousmendicants, or would be regarded as an interference withreligion, or would be likely to become a political danger. (1) Mr. Neill, Judicial Commissioner.(4) Mr. Laurie,Officiating Secretary'to Chief Commissioner.(2) ColonelBowie, Commissioner.(3) Mr. Anderdson, OfficiatingCommissiOner.(6) Mr. Duff, Deputy Commissioner.(27} Mr. Lowrie,Officiating Deputy Conservator of Forests(17)Batuk Bharthy (65)Rev. Israel Jacob, Missionary.(68)Rev. Oscar Lohr,Missionary.(22)Vinayak Balkrishna Khare, Excise Daroga.(59)(47)Mir Iradad Ali Honorary Magistrate. (2) Prohibition might lead to use of dhatura or otherintoxicants worse than ganja. (1) Mr. Neill, judicial Commissioner.(9) Mr. Drake-Brockman,Officiating Excise Commissioner. (39) Dr. Prentie, Civil Surgeon.(64) Rao Sahib Balwantrao Govindrao Bhuskute, Jagirdar. Madrass Opinions in favour of theprohibition of ganja 580. The Madras witnesses in favour of prohibition are a CivilSurgeon, a subordinate civil officer, a medical practitioner, aHindu priest, and six missionaries. Dr. King, (85) says-"The restriction of the sale of ganja under conditionssimilar to those required for poisonous drugs in Great Britainwould be an unqualified blessing to the country, thus contrastingwith the action taken against agitation which I believe to beunnecessary and mischievous. I consider special measures shouldbe taken to restrain the use of ganja by sepoys, and especiallyto prevent the young sepoy from acquiring the habit" In oralexamination however, Dr. King, stated as follows- "Myopinion of the effect of the moderate use in impairing the moralsense and inducing laziness, etc., is a general impression andnot based on actual observation. My impression is based on thefact that persons alleged to have been ganja smokers havepresented these characteristics. They were pointed out asnotorious ganja smokers. I did not discriminate in these casesbetween the moderate and excessive use." Synd Mahmud(I22) says: "It is anunquestionable fact that ganja, bhang, and charas are poisons,and this fact is admitted by all. In my opinion their suppressionwould be an act of virtue deserving of future reward, but it isnot advisable to suppress their use at once. Its suppressionshould be regulated under certain rules without any loss to theState. To the best of my knowledge and researches, alcohol cannotbe safely used as a substitute for ganja, charas, andbhang." Rev. Mr. Laflamme (153) speaking on behalf of theBaptist Missionary Conferences of the Presidency, advocatesprohibition in these terms: "Owing to the scarcity of shopsin these parts practical prohibition exists. Much that isconsumed is consumed illicitly. The introduction of the licensesystem Seems to have had no appreciable effect on the use of thedrugs. The ganja is nearly all grown by the consumers in theirown yards." "The drugs should all be so safeguarded asto prevent or minimize any possible harm resulting from theirabuse." "The general sense of the people isopposed to the use of the drugs." So far as the witness cangather, the members of the Mission are. united in the belief thatin these parts hemp drugs are far less injurious than opium andalcohol; thus far that the latter are not only much moreextensively used, but much more baleful in, their effects. Twoother missionaries, though neutral in opinion, are worth quoting Rev.Mr. Pittendrigh Missionary (160) says that he would haveultimate prohibition in view if possible, but there is not muchground for special interference in anything that he has seen.Another Missionary, the Rev. Mr. Goffin. (145), cannotundertake to criticise the present or any system of exiseadministration. His impression is that Government would be wiseto adopt strictly "let-alone" policy, leaving it to thespread of education and enlightenment among the people to preventand lessen all its effects. The province government should becarefully to watch such effects, and wherever and whenevernecessary interfere with prohibitive legislation. Such necessity,however, in his opinion would not often occur. Opinions against prohibition 581. Among those who are opposed to prohibition, the evidenceof the following witnesses may be quoted :-- (1) Prohibition impossible or unnecessary, or could not beenforced without a large preventive establishment. (1) Hon'ble C. S. Crole, Member, Board. of Revenue.(8) Mr.Willock, Collector.(14) Mr. Bradley, Collector.(19) Raja K. C.Manevedan, Collector. (23) Mr. Campbell, Sub-Collector.(3o) Mr.Levy, Acting Deputy Collector, Salt and Abkari. (2) Prohibition would be strongly resented by religiousmendicants, or would be a political danger. (8) Mr. Willock, Collector.(10) Mr. Stokes, Collector.(6) Mr.Sewell, Collector. (30) Mr. Levy, Acting Deputy Collector; Saltand Abkari.(94) Dr. Walker, Civil Surgeon. (95) Dr. Sarkies,Civil Surgeon. (38) Buddhavarapu Narayana Murthi Pantalugaru,Assistant Collector.(23) Mr. Campbell, Sub-Collector.(121)H.S.A.M..Manju Miyyah Sahib, Medical Practitioner. (3). Prohibition might lead to use of dhatura or otherintoxicants worse than ganja. (23) Mr. Campbell,Sub-Collector, Bombay. Opinions in favour of prohibition of ganja. 582. For the prohibition of ganja or charas in Bombay andSind, we have the following advocates: in Bombay two mamlatdars,a hospital assistant, and a medical practitioner; and in Sind ahealth officer, two hospital assistants, and a. banker. There isnot much that need be quoted from the evidence of thesewitnesses. It may be noted that the Hon'ble T. D. Mackenzie,Commissioner of Abkari, etc. (1), holds that the policy ofGovernment in relation to the hemp drugs should be one ofrestriction, as far as restriction, 'is possible, and that, ifabsolute prohibition were possible, he thinks it would be a goodthing. Owing, however, to the fact that the territories of theBombay Presidency interlace so extensively with foreignterritory, and to the feeling which would be aroused among theconsumers and those who sympathize with them, it would in hisopinion be impossible or undesirable. The Secretary to the AryaSamaj in Bombay (109) states that while fully sympathising withthe objects of the Commission, which are apparently understood tobe the restriction or prohibition of the drugs, the Arya Samaj"is of opinion that any Governmental action in the directionof further restricting the preparation and sale of the drug willbe productive of very little good. The ' * Samaj believesthat education of the masses is the only proper and effective .remedy for correcting such baneful habits, and fears that anycompulsion in this matter is likely to drive the consumersof these comparatively innoccuous drugs to the use. of moreinjurious intoxicants that are plentifully supplied to the peoplelike the various preparations containing alcohol." TheSamaj.prays that the Government will devise measures for therestriction of the sale of European liquor in India. and leavethe hemp drugs to themselves. The only thorough advocateof prohibition whose opinion is worth specifying is RaoSahibShesho Krisna Madkavi (41), who considers-such prohibitionvery necessary and holds that, although there would be temporarydiscontent among the consumers such discontent would not amountto a political danger "the people in this part of thecountry being loyal and of mild nature. and the proportion of thepersons using bhang and ganja to the general population being toosmall to be taken into consideration." Opinions against prohibition 583. On the other hand, the opinions against prohibition areweighty. The following may be specially quoted: (1) Prohibition impossible or unnecessary, or could not beenforced without a large preventive establishment. Bombay (1) Hon'ble T. D. Mackenzie, Commissioner of Abkari, etc (3)Mr. Vidal, Chief Secretary to Government. (10) Mr. Monteath,CoIlector. (12) Mr. Cumine, Acting Collector. (53) Mr. Vincent,C.I.E., officiating commissioner of Police. (110) Rai BahadurVishvanath Keshava Joglekar, Merchant. (108) Daji Abaji Khare,Honorary Secretary, East Indian Association. Sind (1) Mr. James, Commissioner in Sind. (26) Seth VishindasNihalchand, Zamindar and Merchant. (2) Prohibition would be strongly resented by religiousmendicants, or would be regarded as an interference withreligion, or would be likely to become a political danger. Bombay. (l) Hon'ble T. D. Mackenzie, Commissioner of Abkari, etc. (2)Mr. Reid, Commissioner ganja. Apart from all this, there isanother consideration which has been urged in some quarters witha manifestation of strong feeling, and to which the Commissionare disposed to attach some importance, viz., that torepress the drugs in India and to leave alcohol alone would bemisunderstood by a large number of persons who believe, andapparently not without reason, that more harm is done in thiscountry by the latter than by the former. The conclusion of theCommission regarding bhang has been given in paragraph 564; underall the circumstances they now unhesitatingly give their verdictagainst such a violent measure as total prohibition in respect ofany of the hemp drugs. II. The policy advocated is one of control and restrictionaimed at suppressing the excessive use and restraining themoderate use within due limits (Chapter XlV, paragraph 586) Policy in regard to hemp drugs. 586 Failing prohibition, the question arises, whatshould be the policy of the Policy in regard to hemp drugs.Government in regard to the hemp drugs? On this point someimportant evidence has been recorded, and the Commission deem itto be within the scope of their duty to state in general termstheir own conclusions. In the first place, then, they are ofopinion that in view of the harmful effects produced by theexcessive use, and in exceptional cases even by the moderate use,of the drugs, the action of the Government should be directedtowards restraining the former and avoiding all encouragement tothe latter. The object should be to prevent the consumers, as faras may be possible, from doing harm to themselves and to lessenthe inducements to the formation of the habit which might lead tosuch harm In aiming at this object, however, other considerationsneed to be kept in view. There is in the first place the questionof illicit consumption. If the restriction. imposed by Governmentis counterbalanced by a corresponding increase in smuggling noadvantage is gained but, on the contrary, a moral wrong is doneto the community apart from the annoyance necessitated by suchrestrictions. Than, if there is a legitimate use of the drugs,restrictions should not be such as to make the exercise of thisuse impossible. The Commission have formed the opinion that thereis a legitimate use of the hemp drugs, and that it existsgenerally among the poorest of the population. Again, if therestrictions lead to the use of more deleterious substances, oreven drive the people from a habit the evil of which is known toanother of which the evil maybe greater, they are no longerjustifiable. The policy of Government must be tempered by allthese considerations, and the neglect of any one of them may leadto serious error. Contents | Feedback | Search DRCNet Library | Schaffer Library | Major Studies | IndianHemp Drugs CommissionWT01-B27-52IA031-000653-B005-243http://206.61.184.43:80/schaffer/LIBRARY/studies/inhemp/6app1.htm 206.61.184.43 19970122134526 text/html 38653HTTP/1.0 200 OKDate: Wednesday, 22-Jan-97 13:45:17 GMTServer: WebSitePro/1.1f (S/N wpo-0deb)Allow-ranges: bytesContent-type: text/htmlLast-modified: Saturday, 28-Dec-96 07:04:13 GMTContent-length: 38435 Indian Hemp Drugs Commission Report - Note by Mr. G. A.Grierson Contents | Feedback | Search DRCNet Library | Schaffer Library | Major Studies | IndianHemp Drugs Commission Indian Hemp Drugs Commission Report NOTE BY MR. G. A. GRIERSON, C.I.E., MAGISTRATE ANDCOLLECTOR, HOWRAH, ON REFERENCES TO THE HEMP PLANT OCCURRING INSANSKRIT AND HINDI LITERATURE I have the honour to state that I have searched through allthe Sanskrit and Hindi books accessible to me, and to forward theaccompanying note on the references to the hemp plant occurringin the literatures of those languages. I have met the hemp plant in Sanskrit and Hindi literatureunder various names. The principal are: (1) Bhanga. (2) Indracana. (3) Vijaya or Jaya The earliest mention of the word ganja which I have noted isdated about the year 1300 A.D. Whenever the word vijaya is used, it is doubtful whether thehemp plant is meant, or the yellow myrobolan, as the words meansboth. The name Bhanga occurs in the Atharvaveda (say, B.C. 1400).The hemp plant is there mentioned simply as a sacred grass.Panini (say, B.C. 300) mentions the pollen of the hemp flower(bhanga). In the commencement of the sixth century we find thefirst mention of vijaya which I have noted. It is a sacred grass,and probably means here the hemp plant. The first mention of bhanga as a medicine which I have notedis in the work of Sucruta (before the eighth century A.D.), whereit is called an antiphlegmatic. During the next four centuriesbhanga (feminine) frequently occurs in native Sanskritdictionaries in the sense of hemp-plant. In the tenth century the intoxicating nature of bhang seems tohave been known: and the name Indracana, Indra's food,first appears, so far as I know, in literature. Its intoxicatingpower was certainly known in the beginning of the fourteenthcentury. In a play written in the beginning of the sixteenthcentury, it is mentioned as being consumed by jogis (Caivamendicants). It is there named "Indra's food." In later medical works it is frequently mentioned undervarious names. I append a more detailed account of the passages in which Ihave noted the uses of the Indian hemp. I may add that I have not traced in literature any differencebetween the uses of the word ganja and the word bhanga, thoughmodern kavirajas tells me that they are distinct plants. Cir. B.C. 1400. In the Atharvaveda (cir. 1400 B.C.) thebhang plant is mentioned (11, 6, 15) once: "We tell of the five kingdoms of herbs headed by Soma;may it and kuca grass, and bhanga and barley, andthe herb saha release us from anxiety." Here reference is evidently made to the offering of theseherbs in oblations. The grammarian Panini (5, 2, 29) mentions bhangukata,the pollen of the hemp flower, as one of his examples. Cir. B. C. 300. The fact that the pollen of this special flower was quoted isworth noting. Varahamihira in his Brihatsamhita (XLVIII, 39),mentions vijaya as used with other grasses in the rotes ofthe Pusya, bathing festival. A.D. 504. Vijaya is this passage certainly means some plant orother. The word may mean either the Indian hemp-plant or be asynonym of haritaki (the yellow myrobolan). Dr. Hoernleinforms me that in the oldest medical words the word is explainedby commentators in the latter sense. It is doubtful what meaningwe are to adopt here. The word may mean the hemp-plant bhanga.In the passage from the Atharvaveda, already quoted, amongst thefive plants special honoured as oblations, bhanga isclosely connected with the herb saha. So also in theBrihatsamhita, vijaya is mentioned as one of a long listof plants to be used in the offering, and the very next plantmentioned is saha, which is apparently the same as saha.This would encourage the theory that the vijaya of theBrihatsamhita was more probably the same as the bhanga ofthe Atbarvaveda. In Sucruta (Ut. XI, 3) Bhanga is recommended togetherwith a number of other drugs as an antiphlegmatic. Before the eighth century. Vijaya is mentioned in the same work as a remedy forcatarrh accompanied by diarrhea (Ut. XXIV, 20, and Ut. 39, page415, 20), as an ingredient in a prescription for fever arisingfrom an excess of bile and phlegm. In these two passages,however, vijaya is probably an equivalent of haritaki,the yellow myrobolan, and does not mean hemp. In the various kosas, or dictionaries, bhanga isfrequently mentioned as meaning the hemp-plant. Thus, (1) Amarakosa, 2, 9, 20. Cir. A. D. 500. (2) Trikandacesa, 3, 364. Tenth or eleventh century(3) Hemacandra's Anekarthakosa,2, 37. Twelfth century. (4) Hemakandra's Abhidhanacinlamani,1179. The Sarasundari (date not known to me), a commentary onthe Amarakosa mentioned above, Twelfth century by Mathureca, and quoted in theCabdakalpadruma, mentions that the seed of the bhangaplant is the size of that of millet (kalaya). Cakrapanidatta is said to have flourished under Nayapala, aprince who reigned Cir. 1050 A.D. in the eleventh century A.D. In his Cabdacandrika,a medical vocabulary, he gives the following Sanskrit names forbhang: (1) Vijaya (victorious), (2) Trailokyavijaya(victorious in the three worlds), (3) bhanga, (4) Indracana(Indra's food), (5) Jaya (victorious). These names seem to show that its use as an intoxicant wasthen known. The Rajanighantu of Narahari Pandita adds the followingnames to those given by A.D. 1300. Cakrapanidatta in the Cabdacandrika abovementioned: (6) Virapattra (hero-leaved or the leaf of heroes), (7) Ganja, (8) Capala (the light-hearted), (9) Ajaya (the unconquered), (10) Ananda (the joyful), (11) Harsini (the rejoicer) and adds that the plant possesses the following qualities: (1) Katulva (acridity); (2) kasayatra(astringency); (3) Usnatva (heat); (4) tiktatva(pungency); (5) vatakaphapahatva (removing wind andphlegm); (6) samgrahitva (astringency); (7) vakpradatva(speech-giving); (8)balyatva (strength-giving); (9) medhakaritva(inspiring of mental power); (10) cresthadipanatva (theproperty of a most excellent excitant). The Carngadhrasamhita, a medical work by Carngadhara,the date of which is unknown, Say A.D. 1500. but which must have been compiled during theMuhammadan period of Indian History, specially mentions (1, 4, 19) bhangaas an excitant (vyavayin). In the same passage it mentionsopium. The Dhurtasamagama, or "Rogues' Congress," isthe name of an amusing if coarsely A.D. 1550. written farce of about the year 1500 A.D., theauthor of which was one Jyotirica. In the second act two Caivamendicants came before an unjust judge, and demand a decision ona quarrel which they have about a nymph of the bazar. The judgedemands payment of a deposit before he will give any opinion. Oneof the litigants says: "Here is my ganja bag; let it be accepted as adeposit." The Judge (taking it pompously, and then smelling itgreedily): "Let me try what it is like (takes a pinch).Ah! I have just now got by the merest chance some ganja which issoporific and corrects derangements of the humours, whichproduces a healthy appetite, sharpens the wits, and acts as anaphrodisiac." The word used for ganja in the above is Indracana(Indra's food). The Bhavaprakaca, another medical work written byBhavadevamicra (cir. A.D. 1600), has as follows: Cir. A. D. 1600. Bhanga ganja matulani madini vijaya jaya Bhanga kaphahari tikta grahini pacani laghuh Tiksosna pittala moha -mada vag vahni vardhini "Bhanga is also called ganja, matulani, madini(the intoxicating), vijaya (the victorious), and jaya(the victorious). It is antiphlegmatic, pungent, astringent,digestive, easy of digestion, acid, bile-affecting; and increasesinfatuation, intoxication, the power of the voice, and thedigestive faculty." "The Rajavallabha, a materia medica, byNarayanadasa kaviraja, the date of which I 17th century. do not know, but which is quoted in the Cabdakalpadruma,and is believed to be ancient, has the following: Cakra-canam tu tiksno-snam moha-krit kustha-nacanam Bala-medha-gni-krit-clesma -dosa-hari rasayanam Jata mandara-manthanaj jala-nidhau piyusa-rupa pura Trailokye vijaya-prade 'ti vijaya cri-devaraja-priya Lokanam hita-kamyaya ksiti-tale prapta naraih kamada Sarva-" tanka-vinaca-harsa-janani yaih sevita sarvada. "Indra's food (i.e. ganja) is acid, produces infatuation,and destroys leprosy. It creates vital energy, the mental powers,and internal heat, corrects irregularities of the phlegmatichumour, and is an elixir vitae. It was originally produced, likenectar, from the ocean by the churning with Mount Mandara, andinasmuch as it gives victory in the three worlds, it, the delightof the king of the gods, is called vijaya, the victorious.This desire-fulfilling drug was obtained by men on the earth,through desire for the welfare of all people. To those whoregularly use it it begets joy and destroys every anxiety." The Rasapradhipa, a work, the date of which is unknownto me, and which is quoted in ? Date. the Cabdakalpadruma mentions jaya as aremedy for indigestion: Ksaratrayam sutagandhou pancakolam idam cubham Sarvais tulya jaya bhrista tad-ardha cigruja jata Natron, saltpetre and borax, mercury and sulphur, and theprosperous five spices (long pepper, its root, piper chaba,another pepper, and dry ginger). To these add an equal amount ofparched jaya and half of that amount of horse-radish (moringa)and jata. It is not certain whether jaya here means bhang or Haritaki(yellow myrobolan). The word has both significations. The latter,perhaps, suits the formula best. In the Rasaratna-samuccaya, a work written in the southof India, jaya is classified as a semi-poison, Langoli visamustic ca karaviro jaya tatha ? Date Tilakah kanako rkac ca vargo hy upavisatmakah. Langali (Vanguiera spinosa), the root of the Neriumodorum, jaya (Symplocos racemosa) kanaka and ak(a kind of Euphorbia), are semi-poisonous. Bhang is frequently mentioned by vernacular poets. The oldestinstance with which I 1400 A.D. am acquainted is the well-known hymn by Vidyapati Tbakur (1400 A.D.), in which he calls Civa "Digambarabhanga," in reference to his habit of consuming thatdrug. According to an old Hindu poem, on which I cannot now laymy hands, Civa himself brought down the bhang plant from theHimalayas and gave it to mankind. Jogis are well-known consumersof bhang and ganja, and they are worshippers of Civa. In folk-songs, ganja or bhang (with or without opium) is theinvariable drink of heroes before performing any great feat. Atthe village of Bauri in Gaya there is a huge hollow stone, whichis said to be the bowl in which the famous hero Lorik mixed hisganja. Lorik was a very valiant general, and is the hero ofnumerous folk-songs. The epic poem of Alha and Rudal, oruncertain date, but undoubtedly based on very old materials (theheroes lived in the twelfth century A.D.), contains numerousreferences to ganja as a drink of warriors. For instance, thecommencement of the canto dealing with Alha's marriage, describesthe pestle and mortar with which the ganja was prepared, theamount of the intoxicating drink prepared from it (it is called sabzi)and the amount of opium (an absurdly exaggerated quantity) givento each warrior in his court. That the consumption of bhang is not considered disreputableamong Rajputs may be gathered from the fact that Ajabes, who wascourt poet to the well-known Maharaja Bishwanath Singh of Riwa,wrote a poem praising bhang and comparing siddhi to the"success" which attends the worshipper of"Hari." Here there is an elaborate series of puns. Theword siddhi means literally 'success,' and harimeans not only the god Hari, but also bhang. NOTE BY BABU ABHILAS CHANDRA MUKERJI, SECOND INSPECTOR OFEXCISE, BENGAL, ON THE ORIGIN AND HISTORY OF TRINATH WORSHIP INEASTERN BENGAL. Date of origin._In 1867 Babu Ananda Chandra Kali orKailai, of Dhamrai, a village in thana Sabhar of the Daccadistrict, first started the worship at the house of hisfather-in-law at Fattehpur in the Atia pargana of the Mymensinghdistrict (sub-division Tangail). Antecedents of the originator._Dhamrai is an importantvillage in the Dacca district noted for its car festival, whichis annually held in honor of a local idol named Madhab Thakur,and which is witnessed by a large gathering of people. Ananda Chandra received education at the Dacca Normal School.After leaving school he served for some time as a pundit(schoolmaster), and then entered the Police Department, but wasthere only a short time. He is a Barendra Brahman and belongs toa respectable family. He learnt to smoke ganja when he was only aboy. His present age is 60 years. He has the reputation of beinga versifier. He smokes two pice worth of ganja every day. He married at Fattehpur in the Mymensingh district. There heintroduced Trinath worship 27 years ago. A panchali (poem)reciting the praises and exploits of Trinath was first publishedat Dacca in 1871 and the first edition (1,000 copies) was sold ina few months. The circumstances under which the worship was first started._AnandaChandra Kali was at the time living in the house of hisfather-in-law. He was thinking of introducing the worship of acommon god, who might be worshipped by all classes, rich andpoor, Brahman and Chandal, and by all creeds, Saktas, Baishnavas,and Shaivas, and the idea occurred to him of having the presentworship at which ordinary and inexpensive things, such as ganja,oil, and betel-leaf, were alone to be used. Trinath (from Sanskrit Tri, three, and Nath,lord) is represented to be Brahma, Bishnu and Shiva, the HinduTrinity in one. Being a ganja-smoker himself, Ananda Kali may have alsothought that by introducing the worship he would be able to savethe ganja-smokers from disrepute, as then ganja could be consumedin the name of a god and under colour of doing a religious orpious act. Religious aspect of the worship._The followingtranslation of the Introduction to the Trinath MelaPanchali gives some idea of the subject: "The universe consists of the earth, the heaven, and thenether world, and Trinath is the lord of these three worlds. "There was an incarnation of God in the form of Gour(Chaitanya), who delivered the sinners by preaching the name ofHari, but the Lord was not satisfied with this, and becameconcerned for the created, and soon he became incarnate again.Brahma, Bishnu and Shiva, gods in three forms, manifestedthemselves in one form. The one God, the Lord of the universe,seeing the miseries of mankind, came to their deliverance. Ananda(Ananda Chandra Kali, the originator) declares that the true andsincere worshippers of Trinath are sure to obtain salvation.Brahma, Bishnu, and Shiva met together and expressed their desireto come to this world in one form to receive worship. "He is a truly pious man who worships Trinath, andblessings are showered on the worshipper. "The worship should be made in a form in which the richand the poor may equally join and may perform it easily. "Only three things, each worth one pice, are required forthis puja (form of worship). The things which please allmust be selected. The offering should consist of siddhi(ganja), pan (betel-leaf), and oil, each worth one pice. "The votaries should assemble at night and worship withflowers. The ganja should be washed in the manner in which peoplewash ganja for smoking. The worshipper must fill three chillumswith equal quantities of ganja, observing due awe and reverence.When all the worshipers are assembled the lamp should be lit withthree wicks, and the praises of Trinath should be sung. As longas the wicks burn, the god should be worshipped and his praiseschanted. The god should be reverentially bowed to at the close ofthe puja. When the reading of the Panchali is finished,those that will not show respect to the Prasad (theoffering which has been accepted by the god), i.e. chillumof ganja, shall be consigned to eternal hell, and the sincereworshippers shall go to heaven." How the worship spread._Ananda Kali commenced the pujawith the aid of some ganja-smokers in the village of Fattehpur. Alarge number of people consume ganja in the Dacca. NOTE BY MR. J.M. CAMPBELL, C.I.E., COLLECTOR OF LAND REVENUEAND CUSTOMS AND OPIUM, BOMBAY, ON THE RELIGION OF HEMP To the Hindu the hemp plant is holy. A guardian lives in thebhang leaf. As the wife of Vishnu, the preserver, lives in thehysteria-curing tulsi, or Holy Basil, and as Shiva dwellsin the hysteria-curing bel, gle marmelos, so theproperties of the bhang plant, its power to suppress theappetites, its virtue as a febrifuge, and its thought-bracingqualities show that the bhang leaf is the home of the great Yogior brooding aascetics Mahadev. So holy a plant should have special rearing. Shiva explains tohis wife, Parvati, how, in sowing hemp seed, you should keeprepeating the spell 'Bhangri,' 'Bhangi,' apparently that thesound of that guardian name may scare the evil tare-sowinginfluences. Again, when the seedlings are planted the same holyname must be repeated, and also at the watering which, for thespace of a year, the young plants must daily receive. When theflowers appear the flowers and leaves should be stripped from theplant and kept for a day in warm water. Next day, with onehundred repetitions of the holy name Bhangri, the leaves andflowers should be washed in a river and dried in an open shed.When they are dry some of the leaves should be burnt with duerepeating of the holy name as a jap or muttered charm.Then, bearing in mind Vagdevata, or the goddess of speech, andoffering a prayer, the dried leaves should be laid in a pure andsanctified place. Bhang so prepared, especially if prayers aresaid over it, will gratify the wishes and desires of its owner.Taken in the early morning such bhang cleanses the user from sin,frees him from the punishment of crores of sins, and entitles himto reap the fruits of a thousand horse-sacrifices. Suchsanctified bhang taken at daybreak or noon destroys disease.Before the religious user of bhang stand the Ashtadevata or EightGuardians with clasped hands ready to obey him and perform hisorders. The wish of him who with pure mind pours bhang with duereverence over the Ling of Mahadev will be fulfilled. Such holiness and such evil-scaring powers must give bhang ahigh place among lucky objects. That a day may be fortunate thecareful man should on waking look into liquid bhang. So anynightmares or evil spirits that may have entered into him duringthe ghost-haunted hours of night will flee from him at the sightof the bhang and free him from their blinding influences duringthe day. So too when a journey has to be begun or a fresh duty orbusiness undertaken it is well to look at bhang. To meet some onecarrying bhang is a sure omen of success. To see in a dream theleaves, plant, or water of bhang is lucky; it brings the goodnessof wealth into the dreamer's power. To see his parents worshipthe bhang-plant and pour bhang over Shiva's Ling will cure thedreamer of fever. A longing for bhang foretells happiness: to seebhang drunk increases riches. No good thing can come to the manwho treads under foot the holy bhang leaf. So evil-scaring and therefore luck-bringing a plant must playan important part in the rites required to clear away evilinfluences. During the great spirit time of marriage in Bombayamong almost all the higher classes of Gujarat Hindus, of theJain as well as of the Brahmanic sects, the supplies sent by thefamily of the bride to the bridegroom's party during their sevendays' sojourn includes a supply of bhang. The name of the fatherwho neglects to send bhang is held in contempt. Again, after thewedding, when the bridegroom and his friends are entertained atthe house of the bride, richly-spiced bhang is drunk by theguests. The Gujarat Musalman bride before and after marriagedrinks a preparation of bhang. Among the Pardeshi or North IndianHindus of Bombay bhang is given not only at weddings, but thePardeshi who fails to give his visitor bhang is despised by hiscaste as mean and miserly. Another great spirit time during whichbhang plays an important part is the time of war. Before theoutbreak of a war and during its progress the Ling of Mahadevshould be bathed with bhang. Its power of driving panicinfluences from near the god has gained for bhang the name ofVijaya, the unbeaten. So a drink of bhang drives from thefighting Hindu the haunting spirits of fear and wariness. So thebeleagured Rajput, when nothing is left but to die, after loosinghis hair that the bhang spirit may have free entrance, drinks thesacramental bhang and rushing on the enemy completes his juharor self-sacrifice. It is this quality of panic-scaring that makesbhang, the Vijaya or Victorious, specially dear to Mahadev in hischaracter of Tripur, the slayer of the demon Tripurasur. As Shivais fond of bel leaves, as Vishnu is fond of tulsileaves, so is Tripuresvar fond of bhang leaves. He who wishes toobtain his desires must constantly offer bhang to Tripuresvar. Bhang the cooler is a febrifuge. Bhang acts on the fever notdirectly or physically as an ordinary medicine, but indirectly orspiritually by soothing the angry influences to whom the heats offever are due. According to one account in the Ayurveda, fever ispossession by the hot angry breath of the great gods Brahma,Vishnu, and shiva. According to another passage in the Ayurveda,Shankar or Shiva, enraged by a slight from his father-in-lawDaksha, breathed from his nostrils the eight fevers that withermankind. If the fever-stricken performs the Viraya abhishek, orbhang-pouring on the Ling of Shankar, the god is pleased, hisbreath cools, and the portion of his breath in the body of thefever-stricken ceases to inflame. The Kashikhanda Purana tellshow at Benares, a Brahman, sore-smitten with fever, dreamed thatbe had poured bhang over the self-sprung Ling and was well. Onwaking he went to the Ling, worshipped, poured bhang andrecovered. The fame of this cure brings to Benares sufferers fromfever which no ordinary medicine can cure. The sufferers are laidin the temple and pour bhang over the Ling whose virtue hasgained it the name Jvareshwar, the Fever-Lord. In Bombay manypeople sick of fever vow on recovery to pour bhang over a Ling.Besides as a cure for fever bhang has many medicinal virtues. Itcools the heated blood, soothes the over-wakeful to sleep, givesbeauty, and secures length of days. It cures dysentery andsunstroke, clears phlegm, quickens digestion, sharpens appetite,makes the tongue of the lisper plain, freshens the intellect, andgives alertness to the body and gaiety to the mind. Such are theuseful and needful ends for which in his goodness the Almightymade bhang. In this praise of the hemp the Makhzan or greatGreek-Arab work on drugs joins. Ganja in excess causes abscess,even madness. In moderation bhang is the best of gifts. Bhang isa cordial, a bile absorber, an appetiser, a prolonger of life.Bhang quickens fancy, deepens thought, and braces judgment. As on other guardian-possessed objects, the cow, the Vedas, orthe leaf of the bel tree, oaths are taken on the bhangleaf. Even to a truthful witness an oath on the bhang leaf isdreaded. To one who foreswears himself the bhang oath is death. So holy a plant must play a leading part in temple rites.Shiva on fire with the poison churned from the ocean was cooledby bhang. At another time enraged with family worries the godwithdrew to the fields. The cool share of a plant soothed him. Hecrushed and ate of the leaves, the bhang refreshed him. For thesetwo benefits bhang is Shankarpriya, the beloved of Mahadev. Sothe right user of bhang or of ganja, before beginning to drink orto smoke, offers the drug to Mahadev saying, lena Shankar, lenaBabulnath: be pleased to take it Shankar, take it Babulnath.According to the Shiva Purana, from the dark fourteenth of Magh(January-February) to the light fourteenth of Asbadh (July-July),that is, during the three months of the hot weather, bhang shouldbe daily poured over the Ling of Shiva. If not every day, bhangshould be poured at least during the first and last days of thisperiod. According to the Meru Tantra on any Monday, especially onShravan (July-August) Mondays, on all twelfths or pradoshs,and on all dark fourteenths of shivratris, still more onthe Mahashivratri or Shiva's Great Night on the dark fourteenthof Magh (January-February), and at all eclipses of the sun ormoon, persons wistful either for this world or for the world tocome should offer bhang to Shiva and pour it over the Ling. Notevery devotee of Shiva makes offerings of bhang. Such rites inBombay are seldom performed except in the Bhuleswar and Babulnathtemples and there only on special occasions. The bhang offered toMahadev is without pepper or other spice. It is mixed with water,water and milk, or milk and sugar. It is poured over the Ling.According to some authorities the offerer should not touch theoffered bhang. Temple ministrants Atits, Tapodhans, Bhojaks,Bhopis, Bharadis, Guravas alone should drink it. If there are noministrants the remains of the offering should be poured into awell or given to cows to drink. Other authorities encourage theofferer to sip the bhang, since by sipping the bhang reaches andsoothes the Shiva-Shakti or Shiva-spirit in the sipper. Oncertain special occasions during failures of rain, duringeclipses, and also in times of war libations of bhang are pouredover the Ling. Vaishnavas as well as Shaivas make offerings of bhang. Theform of Vishnu or the Guardian to whom bhang is a welcomeoffering is Baladev, Balaram, or Dauji, the elder brother ofKrishna. Baladev was fond of spirits, not of bhang. But Banias,Bhatias, and other high class Hindus, not being able to offerspirits, instead of spirits present bhang. In Bombay the offeringof bhang to Baladev, unlike the special offerings to Shiva, is acommon and every-day rite. Without an offering of bhang noworship of Baladev is complete. Unlike the plain or milk andsugared bhang spilt over the Ling, Baladev's bhang is arichly-spiced liquid which all present, including the offerer,join in drinking. Such social and religious drinking of bhang iscommon in Bombay in the temple of dauji in Kalyan Kirparam lanenear Bhuleshwar. As in the higher class worship of Baladev theliquor offering has been refined into an offering of bhang so itis in the worship of Devi, Shiva's early and terrible consort. Onany Tuesday or Friday, the two weeks days sacred to Devi, stillmore during the Navratra or Nine Nights in Ashwin orSeptember-October, those whose caste rules forbid liquor make apleasing spiced bhang. And as in the worship of Baladev allpresent, worshipper and ministrant alike, join in drinking.Shitaladevi, the Cooler, the dread goddess of small-pox, whosenature, like the nature of bhang, is cooling, takes pleasure inofferings of bhang. During epidemics of small-pox the burning andfever of the disease are soothed by pouring bhang over the imageof Shitaladevi. So for the feverishness caused by the heatsespecially to the old no cure equals the drinking of bhang.Unlike spirits the tempter to flesh bhang the craver for milk ispleasing to the Hindu religion. Even according to the straitestschool of the objectors to stimulants, while to a high casteHindu the penalty for liquor-drinking is death, no penaltyattached to the use of bhang, and a single day's fast is enoughto cleanse from the coarser spirit of ganja. Even amongthose who hold stimulants to be devil-possessed penalty anddisfavour attach to the use of hemp drugs only when they aretaken with no religious object and without observing the duereligious rites. At the other extreme of Hindu thought from the foes tostimulants, to the worshippers of the influences that, raisingman out of himself and above mean individual worries, make himone with the divine force of nature, it is inevitable thattemperaments should be found to whom the quickening spirit ofbhang is the spirit of freedom and knowledge. In the ecstasy ofbhang the spark of the Eternal in man turns into light themurkiness of matter or illusion and elf is lost in the centralsoul-fire. The Hindu poet of Shiva, the Great Spirit that livingin bhang passes into the drinker, sings of bhang as the clearerof ignorance, the giver of knowledge. No gem or jewel can touchin value bhang taken truly and reverently. He who drinks bhangdrinks Shiva. The soul in whom the spirit of bhang finds a homeglides into the ocean of Being freed from the weary round ofmatter-blinded self. To the meaner man, still under the glamourof matter or maya, bhang taken religiously is kindlythwarting the wiles of his foes and giving the drinker wealth andpromptness of mind. In this devotion to bhang, with reverence, not with theworship, which is due to Allah alone, the North Indian Mussalmanjoins hymning the praises of bhang. To the follower of the laterreligion of Islam the holy spirit in bhang is not the spirit ofthe Almighty. It is the spirit of the great prophet Khizr orElijah. That bhang should be sacred to Khizr is natural. Khizr isthe patron saint of water. Still more Khizr means green, therevered colour of the cooling water of bhang. So the Urdu poetsings 'When I quaff fresh bhang I liken its colour to the freshlight down of thy youthful beard.' The prophet Khizr or the Greenprophet cries 'May the drink be pleasing to thee.' Nasir, thegreat North Indian Urdu poet of the beginning of the presentcentury, is loud in the praises of his beloved Sabzi, the Greenone. 'Compared with bhang spirit are naught. Leave all thingsthou fool, drink bhang.' From its quickening the imaginationMusalman poets honour bhang with the title Warak al Khiyall,Fancy's Leaf. And the Makhzan or great Arab-Greek drug bookrecords many other fond names for the drug. Bhang is theJoy-giver, the Sky-flier, the Heavenly-guide, the Poor Man'sHeaven, the Soother of Grief. Much of the holiness of bhang is due to its virtue of clearingthe head and stimulating the brain to thought. Among ascetics thesect known as Atits are specially devoted to hemp. No social orreligious gathering of Atits is complete without the use of thehemp plant smoked in ganja or drink in bhang. To its devoteebhang is no ordinary plant that became holy from its guardian andhealing qualities. According to one account, when nectar wasproduced from the churning of the ocean, something was wanted topurify the nectar. The deity supplied the want of anectar-cleanser by creating bhang. This bhang Mahadev made fromhis own body, and so it is called angaj or body-born.According to another account some nectar dropped to the groundand from the ground the bhang plant sprang. It was because theyused this child of nectar or of Mahadev in agreement withreligious forms that the seers or Rishis became Siddha or onewith the deity. He who, despite the example of the Rishis, usesno bhang shall lose his happiness in this life and in the life tocome. In the end he shall be cast into hell. The mere sight ofbhang cleanses from as much sin as a thousand horse-sacrifices ora thousand pilgrimages. He who scandalises the user of bhangshall suffer the torments of hell so long as the sun endures. Hewho drinks bhang foolishly or for pleasure without religiousrites is as guilty as the sinner of lakhs of sins. He whodrinks wisely and according to rule, be he ever so low, eventhough his body is smeared with human ordure and urine, is Shiva.No god or man is as good as the religious drinker of bhang. Thestudents of the scriptures at Benares are given bhang before theysit to study. At Benares, Ujjain, the other holy places yogis,bairagis and sanyasis take deep draughts of bhang that they maycentre their thoughts on the Eternal. To bring back to reason anunhinged mind the best and cleanest bhang leaves should be boiledin milk and turned to clarified butter. Salamisri, saffron, andsugar should be added and the whole eaten. Besides over the demonof Madness bhang is Vijaya or victorious over the demons ofhunger and thirst. By the help of bhang ascetics pass dayswithout food or drink. The supporting power of bhang has broughtmany a Hindu family safe through the miseries of famine. Toforbid or even seriously to restrict the use of so holy andgracious a herb as the hemp would cause widespread suffering andannoyance and to the large bands of worshipped asceticsdeep-seated anger. It would rob the people of a solace indiscomfort, of a cure in sickness, of a guardian whose graciousprotection saves them from the attacks of evil influences, andwhose mighty power makes the devotee of the Victorious,overcoming the demons of hunger and thirst, of panic fear, of theglamour of Maya or matter, and of madness, able to rest to brookon the Eternal, till the Eternal, possessing him body and soul,frees him from the haunting of self and receives him into theocean of Being. These beliefs the Musalman devotee shares to thefull. Like his Hindu brother the Mussalman fakir reveres bhang asthe lengthener of life, the freer from the bonds of self. Bhangbrings union with the Divine Spirit. 'We drank bhang and themystery I am He grew plain. So grand a result, so tiny a sin.' Contents | Feedback | Search DRCNet Library | Schaffer Library | Major Studies | IndianHemp Drugs CommissionWT01-B27-53IA031-000653-B005-268http://206.61.184.43:80/schaffer/LIBRARY/studies/inhemp/7relhemp.htm 206.61.184.43 19970122134542 text/html 27475HTTP/1.0 200 OKDate: Wednesday, 22-Jan-97 13:45:30 GMTServer: WebSitePro/1.1f (S/N wpo-0deb)Allow-ranges: bytesContent-type: text/htmlLast-modified: Saturday, 28-Dec-96 07:04:03 GMTContent-length: 27257 Indian Hemp Drugs Commission Report - Note on the Religionof Hemp Contents | Feedback | Search DRCNet Library | Schaffer Library | Major Studies | IndianHemp Drugs Commission REPORT OF THE INDIAN HEMP DRUGS COMMISSION, 1893-94. APPENDIX NOTE BY MR. J. M. CAMPBELL, C.I.E., COLLECTOR OF LANDREVENUE AND CUSTOMS AND OPIUM, BOMBAY, ON THE RELIGION OF HEMP. To the Hindu the hemp plant is holy. A guardian lives in thebhang leaf. As the wife of Vishnu, the preserver, lives in thehysteria-curing tulsi, or Holy Basil, and as Shiva dwellsin the dysentery-scaring bel, AEgle marmelos, sothe properties of the bhang plant, its power to suppress theappetites, its virtue as a febrifuge, and its thought-bracingqualities show that the bhang leaf is the home of the great Yogior brooding ascetic Mahadev. So holy a plant should have special rearing. Shiva explains tohis wife, Parvati, how, in sowing hemp seed, you should keeprepeating the spell 'Bhangi', 'Bhangi', apparently that the soundof that guardian name may scare the evil tare-sowing influences.Again, when the seedlings are planted the same holy name must berepeated, and also at the watering which, for the space of ayear, the young plants must daily receive. When the flowersappear the flowers and leaves should be stripped from the plantand kept for a day in warm water. Next day, with one hundredrepetitions of the holy name Bhangi, the leaves and flowersshould be washed in a river and dried in an open shed. When theyare dry some of the leaves should be burnt with due repeating ofthe holy name as a jap or muttered charm. Then, bearing inmind Vagdevata, or the goddess of speech, and offering a prayer,the dried leaves should be laid in a pure and sanctified place.Bhang so prepared, especially If prayers are said over it, willgratify the wishes and desires of its owner. Taken in the earlymorning such bhang cleanses the user from sin, frees him from thepunishment of crores of sins, and entitles him to reap the fruitsof a thousand horse-sacrifices. Such sanctified bhang taken atday break or noon destroys disease. Before the religioususer of bhang stand the Ashtadevata or Eight Guardians withclasped hands ready to obey him and perform his orders. The wishof him who with pure mind pours bhang with due reverence over theLing of Mahadev will be fulfilled. Such holiness and such evil-scaring powers must give bhang ahigh place among lucky objects. That a day may be fortunate thecareful man should on waking look into liquid bhang. So anynightmares or evil spirits that may have entered into him duringthe ghost-haunted hours of night will flee from him at the sightof the bhang and free him from their blinding influences duringthe day. So too when a journey has to be begun or a fresh duty orbusiness undertaken it is well to look at bhang. To meet some onecarrying bhang is a sure omen of success. To see in a dream theleaves, plant, or water of bhang is lucky; it brings the goddessof wealth into the dreamer's power. To see his parents worshipthe bhang-plant and pour bhang over Shiva's Ling will cure thedreamer of fever. A longing for bhang foretells happiness: to seebhang drunk increases riches. No good thing can come to the manwho treads under foot the holy bhang leaf. So evil-searing and therefore luck-bringing a plant must playan important part in the rites required to clear away evilinfluences. During the great spirit time of marriage in Bombayamong almost all the higher classes of Gujarat Hindus, of theJain as well as of the Brahmanic sects, the supplies sent by thefamily of the bride to the bridegroom's party during their sevendays' sojourn includes a supply of bhang. The name of the fatherwho neglects to send bhang is held in contempt. Again, after thewedding, when the bride-groom and his friends areentertained at the house of the bride, richly-spiced bhang isdrunk by the guests. The Gujarat .Musalman bride before and aftermarriage drinks a preparation of bhang. Among the Pardeshi orNorth Indian Hindus of Bombay bhang is given not only atweddings, but the Pardeshi who fails to give his visitor bhang isdespised by his caste as mean and miserly. Another great spirittime during which bhang plays an important part is the time ofwar. Before the outbreak of a war and during its progress theLing of Mahadev should be bathed with bhang. Its power of drivingpanic influences from near the god has gained for bhang the nameof Vijaya, the unbeaten. So a drink of bhang drives from thefighting Hindu the haunting spirits of fear and weariness. So thebeleaguered Rajput, when nothing is left but to die, afterloosing his hair that the bhang spirit may have free entrance,drinks the sacramental bhang and rushing on the enemy completeshis juhar or self-sacrifice. It is this quality ofpanic-scaring that makes bhang, the Vijaya or Victorious,specially dear to Mahadev in his character of Tripur, .the slayerof the demon Tripurasur. As Shiva is fond of bel leaves,as Vishnu is fond of tulsi leaves, so is Tripuresvar fondof bhang leaves. He who wishes to obtain his desires mustconstantly offer bhang to Tripuresvar. Bhang the cooler is a febrifuge. Bhang acts on the fever notdirectly or physically as an ordinary medicine, but indirectly orspiritually by soothing the angry influences to whom the heats offever are due. According to one account in the Ayurveda, fever ispossession by the hot angry breath of the great gods Brahma,Vishnu, and Shiva. According to another passage in the Ayurveda,Shankar or Shiva, enraged by a slight from his father-in-lawDaksha, breathed from his nostrils the eight fevers that withermankind. If the fever-stncken performs the Vijaya abhishek, orbhang-pouring on the Ling of Shankar, the god is pleased, hisbreath cools, and the portion of his breath in the body of thefever-stricken pleased to inflame. The Kashikhanda Purana tellshow at Benares, a Brahman, sore-smitten with fever, dreamed thathe had poured bhang over the self-sprung Ling and was well. Onwaking he went to the Ling, worshipped, poured bhang this curebrings to Benares sufferers from fever which no ordinary medicinecan cure. The sufferers are laid in the temple pour bhang everthe Ling whose virtue has gained it the name Jvareshwar, theFever-Lord. Bombay many people sick of fever vow on recovery topour bhang over a Ling. Besides cure for fever bhang has manymedicinal virtues. It cools the heated blood, soothes theover-wakeful to sleep, gives beauty, and secures length ofdays. It cures dysentery and sunstroke, clears phlegm, quickensdigestion, sharpens appetite, makes the tonic of the lisperplain, freshens the intellect, and gives alertness to the bodyand gaiety to the mind. Such are the useful and needful ends forwhich in his goodness the Almighty made bhang. In thispraise of the hemp the Makhzan or great Greek-Arab work on drugsjoins... Ganja in excess uses abscess, even madness. Inmoderation bhang is the best of gifts. Bhang is a cordial, a bileabsorber, an appetizer, a prolonger of life. Bhang quickensfancy, deepens thought, and Judgment. As on otherguardian-assessed objects, the cow, the Vedas, or the leaf oathsare taken on the bhang leaf Even to a truthful witness an oathon of the be1 tree, dreaded. To one who forswears himself thebhang oath is death the bhang leaf. So holy a plant must play aleading part in temple rights. Shiva on fire with the poisonchurned from the ocean was cooled by bhang. At another timeenraged with family worries the fields. The cool shade .of aplant soothed him. He crushed and of the leaves, and the bhangrefreshed him. For these two benefits bhang is Shankarpri , theMahadev. So the right user of bhang or of ganja, before beginningto drinker smoke, offers the drug to Mahadev saying, lenaShankar, lena Babulnath: be pleased to take Shankar, take itBabulnath. According to the Shiva Parann, from the darkfourteenth of Magh (January-February) to the light fourteenth ofAsbadh (June-July), that is, during the three months of the hotweather, bhang should be daily poured over the Ling of Shivaevery day, bhang should be poured at least during the first andlast days of this period. According to the Meru Tantra on anyMonday, especially on Shravan (July-August) Mondays, on alltwelfths pradoshs, and on all dark fourteenths or shivratrisstill more on the Mahashivratri or Shiva's Great Night on darkfourteenth of Magh (January-February.), and at all eclipses ofthe sun or moon, persons wistful either for this world or for theworld to come should offer bhang to Shiva and pour it over theLing. Not every devotee of Shiva makes offerings of bhang. Suchrites in Bombay are seldom performed except in the Bhuleswar andBabulnath temples and there only on special occasions. The bhangoffered to Mahadev is without pepper or other spice. It is mixedwith water, water and milk, or milk and sugar. It is poured overthe Ling. According to some authorities the offerer should nottouch the offered bhang. Temple ministrants Atits, Tapodhans,Bhojaks, Bhopis, Bharadis, Gutaras alone should drink it. Ifthere are no ministrants the remains of the offering should bepoured into a well or given to cows to drink. Other authoritiesencourage the offerer to the bhang, since by sipping thebhang reaches and soothes the Shiva-Shakti or Shiva-spirit in thesipper. On certain social occasions during failures of rain,during eclipses, and also in times of war libations of bhang arepoured ever the Ling. Vaishnavas as well as Shaivas make offerings of bhang. Theform of Vishnu Or, the Guardian to whom bhang is a welcomeoffering is Baladev, Bainram, or Dauji, the elder brotherKrishna. Baladev was fond of spirits, not of bhang. But Banins,Bhatias, and other high class Hindus, not being able to offerspirits instead of spirits the offering of bhang to Baladev,unlike the special offerings to Shiva, present bhang. In Bombay,without an offering of bhang no worship of Baladev is complete,offerings to Shiva is a common and everyday rite. Unlike theplain or milk and sugared bhang spilt over the Ling, Baladev'sbhang is a richly-spiced liquid which all present, including theofferer, join in drinking. Such social and religious ionsdrinking of bhang is common in Bombay in the temple of Dauji inKalyan' Kirparam lane near Bhuleshwar. As in the higher classworship of Baladev the liquor offering has been refined into anoffering of bhang so it is in the worship of Devi, Shiva'searly and terrible consort. On any Tuesday or Friday, the twoweek-days sacred to Devi, still more during the Navrata or NineNights in Ashwin or September-October, those whose caste rulesforbid liquor make a pleasing spices bhang. And as in, theworship of Baladev all present, worshipper and ,ministrant alike,join in drinking. Shitaladevi, the Cooler, the dread goddess ofsmall-pox, whose nature, like the nature of bhang, is cooling,takes pleasure in offerings of bhang. During epidemics ofsmall-pox the burning and fever of the disease are soothed bypouring bhang over the image of Shitaladevi. So for thefeverishness caused by the heats especially to the old no cureequals the drinking of bhang. Unlike spirits the tempterto flesh bhang the craver for milk is pleasing to the Hindureligion. Even according to the staitest school of the objectorsto stimulants, while to a high caste Hindu the penalty forliquor-drinking is death, no penalty attaches to the use ofbhang, and a single day's fast is enough to cleanse from thecoarser spirit of ganja. Even among those who hold stimulants tobe devil-possessed penalty and disfavor attach to the use of hempdrugs only when they are taken with no religious object andwithout observing the due religious rites. At the other extreme of Hindu thought from the foes tostimulants, to the worshippers of the influences that, raisingman out of himself and above mean individual worries, make himone with the divine force of nature, it is inevitable thattemperaments should be found to whom the quickening spirit ofbhang is the spirit of freedom and knowledge. In the ecstasy ofbhang the spark of the Eternal in man turns into light themurkiness of matter or illusionand self is lost in the centralsoul-fire. The Hindu poet of Shiva, the Great Spirit that livingin bhang passes into the drinker, sings of bhang as the clearerof ignorance, the giver of'knowledge. No gem or jewel can touchin value bhang taken truly and reverently. He who drinks bhangdrinks Shiva. The soul in whom the spirit of bhang finds a homeglides intothe ocean of Being freed from the weary round ofmatter-blinded self. To the meaner man, still under the glamourof matter or maya, bhang taken religiously is kindly thwartingthe wiles of his foes and giving the drinker wealth andpromptness of mind. In this devotion to bhang, with reverence,not with the worship, which is due to Allahalone, the NorthIndian Mussulman joins hymning the praises of bhang. To thefollower of the later religion of Islam the holy spirit in bhangis not the spirit of the Almighty. Itthe spirit of thegreat prophet Khizr or Elijah. That bhang should be sacred toKhizr isnatural. Khizr is the patron saint of water. Still moreKhizr means green, the revered colour of the cooling water ofbhang. So the Urdu poet sings 'When I quaff fresh bhang I likenits colony to the fresh light down of thy youthful beard.' Theprophet Khizr or the Green prophet cries ' May the drink bepleasing to thee.' Nasir, the great North Indian Urdupoet of thebeginning of the present century, is loud in the praises of hisbeloved Sabzi, the Green one. 'Compared with bhang spirits arenaught. Leave all things thou fool, drink bhang.' From itsquickening the imagination Musalman poets honour bhang with thetitle Warak al Khiyall, Fancy's Leaf. And the Makhzan orgreat Arab-Greek drug book records many other fond names for thedrug. Bhang is the Joy-giver, the Sky-flier, the Heavenly-guide,the Poor Man's Heaven, the Soother of Grief. Much of the holiness of bhang is due to its virtue of clearingthe head and stimulating the brain to thought. Among ascetics thesect known as Atits are specially devoted to hemp. No social orreligious gathering of Atits is complete without the use of thehemp plant. smoked in ganja or drunk in bhang. To its devotee bhang is noordinary plant that became , holy from its guardian and healingqualities. According to one account, when nectar was producedfrom the churning of the ocean, something was wanted to purifythe nectar. The deity supplied the want of a nectar-cleanser bycreating bhang. This bhang Mahadev made from his own body, and soit is called angaj or body-born. According to anotheraccountsome nectar dropped to the ground and from the ground thebhang plant sprang. It was because they used this child of nectaror of Mahadev in agreement with religious forms that thee seersor Hishis became Siddha or one with the deity. He who, despitethe example of the Hishis, uses no bhang shall lose his happinessin this life and in the life to come. In the end he shall be castinto hell. The mere sight of bhang, cleanses from as much sin asa thousand horse-sacrifices or a thousand pilgrimages. He whoscandalizes the user of bhang shall suffer the torments of hellso long as the sun endures. He who drinks bhang foolishly or forpleasure without religious rites is as guilty as the sinner of lakhsof sins. He who drinks wisely and according to rule, be heever so low, even though his body is smeared with human ordureand urine, is Shiva. No god or man is as good as the religiousdrinker of bhang. The students of the scriptures at Benares aregiven bhang before they sit to study. At Benares, Ujjain, andother holy places yogis, bairagis and sanyasis take deep draughtsof bhang that they may Centre their thoughts on the Eternal. Tobring back to reason an unhinged mind the best and cleanest bhangleaves should be boiled in milk and turned to clarified butter.Salamisri, saffron, and sugar should be added and the wholeeaten. Besides over the demon of Madness bhang is Vijaya orvictorious over the demons of hunger and thirst. By thehelp of bhang ascetics pass days without food or drink. Thesupporting power of bhang has brought many a Hindu family safethrough. the miseries of famine. To forbid or even seriously torestrict the use of so holy and gracious a herb as the hemp wouldcause widespread suffering and annoyance and to the large bandsof worshipped ascetics deep-seated anger. It would rob the peopleof a solace in discomfort, of a cure in sickness, of a guardianwhose gracious protection saves them from the attacks of evilinfluences, and whose mighty power makes the devotee of theVictorious, overcoming the demons of hunger and thirst, of panicfear, of the glamour of Maya or matter, and of madness, able inrest to brood on the Eternal, till the Eternal, possessing himbody and soul, frees him from the having of self and receives himinto the ocean of Being. These beliefs the Musalman devoteeshares to the full. Like his Hindu brother the Musalman fakirreveres bhang as the lengthener of life, the freer from the bondsof self. Bhang brings union with the Divine Spirit. 'We drankbhang and the mystery I am He grew plain. So grand a result, sotiny a sin.'' NOTE BY BABU ABHILAS CHANDRA MUKERJI. NOTE BY BABU ABHIILAS CHANDRA MUKERJI, SECOND INSPECTOR OFEXCISE, BENGAL, ON THE ORIGIN AND HISTORY OF TRINATH WORSHIP INEASTERN BENGAL,. ' Date of origin.--In 1867 Babu Annnda Chandra Kali orKailai, of Dhamrai, a village in thana Sabhar of the Daccadistrict, first started the worship at the house of hisfather-in- law at Fattehpur in the Atia pargana of the Mymensinghdistrict (sub-division Tangail). Antecedent: of theoriginator.--Dhamrai is an important village in the Daccadistrict for its car festival, which is annually held in honourof a local idol named Madhab Thakur, and which iswitnessed by a large gathering of people. Ananda Chandra receivededucation at the Dacca Normal School. After leaving school heserved for some time as a pundit (schoolmaster), and then enteredthe Police Department, but was there only a short time. He is aBarendra Brahman and belongs to a respectable family. He learntto smoke ganja when he was only a boy. His present age Is 60years. He has the reputation of being a versifier. He smokes twopice worth of ganja every day. He married at Fattehpur in the Mymensingh district. There heintroduced Trinath worship 27 years ago. A panchali (poem)reciting the praises and exploits of Trinath was first publishedat Dacca in 1871 and the first edition (l,000 copies) was sold ina few months. The circumstances under which the worship was firststarted.-Ananda Chandra Kali was at the time living in thehouse of his father-in-law. He was thinking of introducing theworship of a common god, who might be worshipped by all classes,rich and poor, Brahman and Chandal, and by all creeds, Saktas,Baishnavas, and Shaivas, and the idea occurred to him of havingthe present worship at which ordinary and inexpensive things,such as ganja, oil, and betel-leaf, were alone to be used.  Trinath (from Sanskrit Tri, three, and Nath, lord) isrepresented to be Brahma, Bishnu and Shiva, the Hindu Trinity inone. Being a ganja-smoker himself Ananda Kali may have also thoughtthat by introducing the worship he would be able to save theganja-smokers from disrepute, as then ganja could be consumed inthe name of a god and under colour of doing a religious or piousact. Religious aspect of the worship.--The followingtranslation of the Introduction to the Trinath Mela Panchaligives some idea of the subject : The universe consists of the earth, the heaven, and the netherworld, and Trinath is the lord of these three worlds. "There was an incarnation of God in the form of Gour(Chaitanya), who delivered the sinners by preaching the name ofHari, but the Lord was not satisfied with this, and becameconcerned for the created, and soon he became incarnate again.Brahma, Bishnu and Shiva, gods in three forms, manifestedthemselves in one form. The one God, the Lord of the. universe,seeing the miseries of mankind, came to their deliverance. Ananda(Ananda Chandra Kali, the originator)declares that the true andsincere worshippers of Trinath are sure to obtain salvation.Brahma, Bishnu, and Shiva met together and expressed theirdesire, to come to this world in one form to receive worship. . "He is a truly pious man who worships Trinath, andblessings are showered on the worshipper. "The worship should be made in a form in which therich and the poor may equally join and may perform it easily. "Only three things, each worth one pice, arerequired for this puja (form of worship).. The things which please all must be selected. The offeringshould consist of siddhi (ganja),. pan (betel-leaf),and oil, each worth one pice. . "The votaries should assemble at night and worship withflowers. The ganja should be washed in the manner in which peoplewash ganja for smoking. The worshipper must fill three chillumswith equal quantities of ganja, observing due awe andreverence. When all, the worshippers are assembled the lampshould be lit with three wicks, and the praises of Tri- should besung. As long as the wicks burn, the god should be worshipped andhis praises chanted. The god should be reverentially bowed to atthe close of the puja. When the reading of the Panchali isfinished, those that will not show respect to the Prasad (the offering which has been accepted by the god), i.e., chillumof ganja, shall be consigned to. eternal hell, and the sincere worshippers shall go to heaven., How the worship spread.--Anauda Kali commenced the pujawith the aid of some ganja smokers in the village of Fattehpur. Alarge number of people consume ganja in the Dacca and Mymensinghdistricts, and the worship soon became popular. In fact it spreadlike wild-fire from one village to another among theganja-smokers. Those that were not in the habit of consumingganja also followed their example. The following circumstances assisted the spread of the Worship: I.--The puja is open to all classes from Brahmans to Chandalsand to the rich and the poor. Caste does not stand in its way,and it may be performed almost every day and in all seasons. II.--The pup is a Manarik Puja (made in pursuance of avow on the fulfillment of the object desired).. People have beenled to believe that Trinath possesses the power of .healing thesick and fulfilling desires, and .that those who. neglect hisworship meet with disgrace, while those who observe it attain successin life. There are several stories m the Panchali narrated inillustration of this statement. It is also popularly believedthat in the house where Trinath is worshipped cold: fever andheadache do not appear. III.--This is a cheap form of worship. The puja can beperformed by even the poorest, only three pies beingrequired. IV.--People of the lowest class can mix with those above themwithout distinction of caste or creed on the occasion of thesepujas. V.--Ganja eau be consumed by all in the name of a god, and thepractice cannot be looked down upon, because it is done undercertain forms and religious ceremonies. It is also popularlybelieved that those who mock the worshippers of Trinath shall beruined and shall be the victims of misfortune. The worship prevails not only among the poor, but also amongthe well-to-do. The latter often entertain their friends afterthe puja. Women do not take any active part in the worship, but theyoften listen to the reading. of the Panchali. The worship is more or less general in the following districts:--(1) Dacca, (2) Mymensingh, (3) Faridpur, (4) Backergunge, (5)Noakhali, (6) Tippers, (7) Chittagong, (8) Bogra, (9) Sylhet, and(10) Pabna (SerajgaDj side). .,, The worship is on the decline. It is almost dying out amongthe educated ]Jut among the masses it Still exists. . I have ascertained the above facts from Dr. Chandra SekharKali (brother of the originator, Ananda Chandra Kali) and manyother respectable persons, and also from personal inquiries inthe Daces, Chittagong and Rajshahi divisions. Contents | Feedback | Search DRCNet Library | Schaffer Library | Major Studies | IndianHemp Drugs CommissionWT01-B27-54IA031-000653-B005-295http://206.61.184.43:80/schaffer/LIBRARY/studies/op/op1.htm 206.61.184.43 19970122134553 text/html 130112HTTP/1.0 200 OKDate: Wednesday, 22-Jan-97 13:45:43 GMTServer: WebSitePro/1.1f (S/N wpo-0deb)Allow-ranges: bytesContent-type: text/htmlLast-modified: Saturday, 28-Dec-96 06:52:31 GMTContent-length: 129893 The Opium Problem - Chapter 1 - Extent Contents | Feedback | Search DRCNet Library | Schaffer Library | Major Studies | TheOpium Problem THE OPIUM PROBLEM BY CHARLES E. TERRY AND MILDRED PELLENS 1928 CHAPTER I - EXTENT The number of individuals involved is probably what firstbrings any problem to the attention of the public. It bears adefinite relationship to control and if it is demonstrated that aproblem is confined neither to a community nor to a section oftile country, neither to one social group nor even to one race,but is widespread and common to all, such facts should be used asthe basis for eliciting interest, for pointing out the need forremedial measures, and for framing such measures. Likewise theconverse is true. A knowledge, therefore, of the extent of tileproblem with which we are concerned is a matter of importance andshould receive early consideration. The attempts which we have made to secure an accurate estimateof the number of chronic opium users in the United States at thepresent time emphasize an unusual situation. We find estimatesvarying all the way from a few thousand individuals to severalmillions. One states that one hundred thousand to two hundredthousand is the outside limit while another states that twomillion or more is a conservative figure. The lay press, popularmagazines, and even scientific journals vary so widely in theirestimates of the number of sufferers from this condition that oneis justified in accepting none of them unreservedly and inanalyzing afresh all available means for the determination of theactual facts. It will be seen not only that no one is possessed of anaccurate knowledge as to the exact number of individualsregularly using opium in this country today, but also that underpresent conditions it is impossible to obtain such a figure.There are several reasons why this is true. In the first place,the fact that opium-using in any form is regarded by the generalpublic as alone a habit, vice, sign of weak will or dissipationundoubtedly has caused the majority of users to conceal theircondition. This attitude presumably attributes to the individualeither a physical or mental inferiority the concealment of whichis quite natural. This factor applied before the problem everbecame a matter for official and legislative action andundoubtedly became intensified when it was taken up officiallyand the individuals desirous of solving it made their views thebasis of propaganda for control. With the advent of prohibitorylegislation and the consequent fear of legal involvement, it isnatural that even greater efforts were made by individualsaffected to conceal their condition. Quite aside from this individual point of view is the factthat only in cases where large doses of the drug are beingconsumed can casual observation or even a fairly carefulexamination determine the existence of the condition. There is apopular belief extant that practically anyone can detect theso-called "dope fiend," that he is a miserable,emaciated, furtive individual with pinpoint pupils, tremblinghands, sallow complexion and characterized by a varied group ofmoral attributes, needing only to be observed to renderidentification of the condition complete. As a matter of fact noteven one of these alleged characteristics need be present and itis safe to say that in many cases only one or another of themexists and by no means would suffice to give the ordinaryobserver an idea of the true situation. It has been reported thatfor many years husbands and wives, to say nothing of othermembers of a family, have lived in complete ignorance of theexistence of this condition in one or the other and that quitepossibly the average physician, unaccustomed to dealing with thecondition, might have difficulty in determining its existence. In view of what has been said it would seem quite evident thatthere is no accurate knowledge as to the exact number of chronicopium users in the country today, as it is apparent that, if thecondition is considered a physical, mental, or moral stigma andif it is possible to conceal it from any but the mostscrutinizing examination unknown cases inevitably must exist.This may be expected to continue as long as the present attitudetoward the user of these drugs exists with the social andeconomic damage resulting from exposure, and the illicit trafficoffers a means of supply. That the illicit traffic exists to avery marked degree we know; to suppose that the dangers ofdisclosure are not appreciated by individual sufferers would beto consider them lacking in ordinary intelligence. However, inspite of the obvious difficulties in the way of an accuratedetermination of the number of cases of chronic opiumintoxication, startling statements constantly are being made. Although it is apparent that under present conditions thedifficulties in the way of arriving at exact knowledge or even anestimate known to approach the number of opium users in theUnited States are insurmountable, on a superficial examinationthere would appear to be two methods available for attaining atleast a minimal figure. As it is common knowledge that opium isnot produced in this country and that therefore all opium usedmust be imported, it is possible to secure through the properGovernment bureaus the quantity of opium legitimately imported.By suitable calculations apparently it should be possible toarrive at the total number of users, excluding those supplied bythe illicit traffic. Theoretically this could be accomplished bysubtracting from the amount imported for a given period theamount exported and the amount used for therapeutic purposes notconnected with chronic opium intoxication and dividing theresulting figure by the average amount consumed by the chronicuser for that period. This method has been used by some authors,but there are several factors which vitiate the totals arrivedat. First, some writers have neglected to distinguish betweengeneral importation figures and the figures dealing withimportations for consumption.* This at once makes for verydifferent totals as will be seen when it is stated that, for theperiod of ten years 1911-1920 inclusive, these amounts differedby about 400,000 pounds of opium. *'General imports" embrace imported articles entered atthe customs houses for immediate consumption and importedarticles entered for warehouse. "Imports entered forconsumption" embrace imported articles entered for immediateconsumption and imported articles withdrawn from warehouse forconsumption. Another source of error enters in any attempt to allow for theamount of opium and its derivatives employed for therapeuticpurposes not connected with chronic, opium intoxication. Theestimates as to the proportion of imported drug required for suchpurposes have varied very widely and obviously where such largefigures are dealt with the resulting estimates vary considerably.These allowances always seem to have been reached either in anarbitrary fashion or upon a basis of incomplete facts. Further so far as we know there has been made no study of asufficiently large and representative number of individual casesunder suitable conditions to permit of any definite statement asto an average daily dose. For instance, it is well known thatcertain cases continue for years on one or two grains or even afraction of a grain daily while others take such almostunbelievable doses as eighty to one hundred or more grains a day.Also, among a certain type, the amount stated as habituallyconsumed by an individual may include the ration of one or moreother individuals unknown to the investigator. As far as we know then there are two obstacles to thedetermination through importation figures of a minimal figure forthe number of chronic opium users in this country at the presenttime:-(1) the fact that the so-called "legitimatetherapeutic needs" are unknown and (2) the whollyspeculative nature of the "average dose." In view ofthese facts, all estimates as to the extent of this conditionbased on importation figures however used are potentiallyfallacious to such a great degree as to be practically valueless. The second method of determination is the employment of somemeans for the taking of a census of opium users in a givenlocality and adjusting it to the population of the country as awhole. Aside from the fact that it would not include those userswho, by reason of their desire for concealment and consequentdependence on illicit traffic for supply, could not be recordedby such a survey undoubtedly would possessa value not found in estimates based on importation figures in anattempt to reach a minimal figure, inasmuch as it would bedefinite and positive as far as it went. Of course, there ispossibility of error to a greater or less degree in this method.The floating population, for example, cannot be disregarded, yetthis is a source of error common to every method ofcensus-taking. Further, local conditions such as populationcomposition, climate, race distribution, occupation, etc., areinfluencing factors which tend to lessen the value of theindividual surveys as applied to the country as a whole.Unfortunately, there have not been enough of these surveys madein various sections to determine by comparison the degree towhich these factors operate. In what follows, the surveys whichwe have reviewed and which represent investigations made indifferent localities at different periods will be analyzed andthe features which tend to vitiate their application to thecountry as a whole, for the period in which they were made, willbe pointed out. 'This factor does not enter into the early surveys which werecarried on when illicit traffic was unknown or practicallynegligible. Before examining the first definite figures of which we haveknowledge, contained in a survey reported by 0. Marshall in theAnnual Report of the Michigan State Department of Health of 1878,it will be interesting to quote from some of the earliest authorswho refer to the extent of chronic opium intoxication in thiscountry. Their statements, however inexact, at least show thatthe problem is by no means one of recent development but theresult, as we know it today, of a continuous growth probablysince Colonial days. What effect the war of the AmericanRevolution and that of 1812 had upon its spread we have not seenindicated in any record we have consulted, but that the Civil Wargave it a considerable impetus seems definitely established. Fitzhugh Ludlow-1867.3 3 Ludlow, Fitzhugh-Harper's Magazine. August, 1867. "The habit is gaining fearful ground among ourprofessional men, the operatives in our mills, our weary servingwomen, our fagged clerks, our former liquor drunkards, our veryday laborers, who a generation ago took gin. All our classes fromthe highest to the lowest are yearly increasing their consumptionof the drug." Horace Day-1868 .4 4 Day, Horace-The Opium Habit. 1868. "The number of confirmed opium-eaters in the UnitedStates is large, not less, judging from the testimony ofdruggists in all parts of the country as well as from othersources, than eighty to one hundred thousand . . . The events ofthe last few years (Civil War) have unquestionably added greatlyto their number. Maimed and shattered survivors from a hundredbattlefields, diseased and disabled soldiers released fromhostile prisons, anguished and hopeless wives and mothers, madeso by the slaughter of those who were dearest to them, havefound, many of them, temporary relief from their sufferings inopium." Alonzo Calkins-1871.5 Calkins calls attention to the increased use of opium in thiscountry from the year 1840. Basing his computations on theimportations of opium and the population figures for those years,he reaches the following ratios of advance: He gives in some detail the method by which he reaches thesefigures which include "a comparison of opinions given byeighteen prominent apothecaries of New York City." "Such statistics," he asserts, "fully presentedbear no equivocal interpretation." Independent and collateral evidences, he believes, show that"opiummania, far from being restricted . . . to our cities .. . is fast pervading the country-populations." In the evidence he presents he quotes the following: "Thus addresses the writer, a physician and druggist of a New England city, Dr. S. S.: 'In this town I began business twenty years since. The population then at 10,000 has increased only inconsiderably, but my sales have advanced from 50 pounds of opium the first year to 300 pounds now; and of laudanum four times upon what was formerly required. About 50 regular purchasers come to my shop, and as many more, perhaps, are divided among the other three apothecaries in the place. Some country dealers also have their quotas of dependents.' Such is no solitary record. "In the Portland Press, IM, a correspondent sounds the alarm-note in these words: 'Very few of our people are aware how many habitual consumers of opium among us a careful scrutiny would disclose. In the little village of Auburn (of the neighborhood) at least fifty such (as counted up by a resident apothecary) regularly purchase their supplies hereabouts; and the country grocers, too, not a few of them, find occasion for keeping themselves supplied with a stock.' Corroborative accounts dome in from New Jersey and Indiana, from Boston at one extreme and from St. Louis at another, and from the impoverished South as well. In the Mississippi Valley particularly the use of stimuli of every name is fearfully on the increase (Pitcher, Comstock)." F. E. Oliver-1871. In the third Annual Report of the State Board of Health,Massachusetts, for the year 1871, there appears a chapter on theuse and abuse of opium written by this author. The writeraddressed the following questions to the physicians ofMassachusetts: 1. Are preparations of opium used by the people except for the relief of Pain? 2. We would like to know whether the injurious use of opium has increased of late years, and if so, the causes of such increase? Unfortunately, these questions were not so framed as to elicitthe information which the author desired to obtain and, as hehimself states, the data secured are most incomplete althoughsuggestive. Less than one-half of the physicians addressed wereheard from, representing a little more than one-third of thephysicians of the state. In all 125 physicians replied, 40 ofthese stating in answer to the first question that they knew ofno case of opium eating. The remaining 85 stated that the drugwas used to a greater or less extent in their respectivecircuits. In many of the smaller towns where the"habit" existed, the number of users was reported whereit could be ascertained, while in the returns from others suchterms as "few," "many" and"several" alone were given. In others again no mentionwas made of numbers, so that the author was not able to arrive atanything like an accurate computation. From the fragmentary dataso obtained the author states that the inference is unavoidablethat the "opium habit" is more or less prevalent inmany parts of the state and while it is impossible to estimate itthe number of users must be very considerable. The writer further gives the following extract from a letterreceived from Mr. S. Dana Hayes, one of the State Assayers: "'In reply to your inquiries, it is my opinion that the consumption of opium in Massachusetts and New England is increasing more rapidly in proportion than the population. There are so many channels through which the drug may be brought into the State, that I suppose it would be almost impossible to determine how much foreign opium is used here; but it may easily be shown that the home production increases every year. Opium has been recently made from white poppies, cultivated for the purpose, in Vermont, New Hampshire and Connecticut, the annual production being estimated by hundreds of pounds, and this has generally been absorbed in the communities where it is made. It has also been brought here from Florida and Louisiana, while comparatively large quantities are regularly sent east from California and Arizona, where its cultivation is becoming an important branch of industry, ten acres of poppies being said to yield, in Arizona, twelve hundred pounds of opium."' "'That which is not used where it is produced, including the shipments from California and the West, together with inferior and damaged parcels of foreign opium received and condemned at this port, is sent to Philadelphia, where it is converted into morphis. and its salts, and is thus distributed through the country! Pt a In his letter Hayes comments further on the use of opium andmorphin in family remedies such as cough mixtures and linimentsand in the dangerous so-called "cures" or "Relieffor Opium-Eaters" preparations. 'D. M. R. Culbreth in his "Materia Medica andPharmacology", 3rd edition, 1903, states: "During the Civil War opium was cultivated in Virginia,Tennessee, South Carolina, Georgia, being planted in Septemberand collected in May." In the 6th edition of the same work the author states thatthis opium was of high narcotic content. Oliver also quotes extracts from letters replying to hisquestion as to the increase in tile use of opium, some ofwhich are reproduced below: "Clarksburg-'I think it on the increase, because doctorsprescribe it more indiscriminately now than formerly, thusestablishing the habit with the patient! Eastham-2 I think the use of opium has slightly increased,mostly among females.' Swampscott-2 The use of opium in its various forms hasmaterially increased within the last ten years! Westfield---I have reason to believe this practice exceedinglycommon among certain classes of people, who crave the effect of astimulant, but will not risk their reputation for temperance bytaking alcoholic beverages.' Worcester-2 I have talked with some of our most intelligentapothecaries, who tell me that the use of opium has greatlyincreased, especially among women. The reasons which one gave arethese: The doctors are prescribing it more to their patients, andthus the habit is acquired. There is also the desire for Someform of stimulant. Alcoholic stimulants being prohibited, manyhave resorted to the use of opium.' Another gave it as his opinion that 'the use of opium in itsvarious preparations is increasing among the people as astimulant, and is now being used to an alarming extent. I believethis to be due largely to the unpopularity and restricted use ofalcoholic liquors. I believe there is a natural craving for someartificial stimulant with almost every human being, which isgreatly increased by the cares and perplexities of life, andtherefore is more apparent as age advances. This desire should besatisfied by the milder and least injurious drinks, as beer,light wines, etc.' Another states: 'I think opium and its preparation are used toa considerable extent as stimulants, and am inclined to theopinion that such use is increasing and that such increase isdue, in some degree, to the excitements, suffering and mentaldisquietude resulting from the late war! Boston-Among 20 or 30 druggists consulted there was adiversity of opinions many of them not selling opium without aphysician's order. The following statements are among the mostimportant: 'Believes the habit of opium eating diminishing, as he hasfewer calls than formerly! 'Has one customer who buys half an ounce at a time. The numberof calls is less than formerly. Has observed that veteransoldiers who contracted the habit in army hospitals are stilladdicted to opium.' 'In the experience of twenty-five years has observed nodecided increase in the habit of opium eating. Recognizes thecorrelation in the abuse of opium and of alcohol. The opium habitfrequently begins in the use of opium medicinally. Veteransoldiers, as a class, are addicted to it . . . ' 'Thinks the abuse is not uncommon in the community but that itis les,9 in Boston than elsewhere. Would look for it rather amongprofessional men threat among the poorer classes.' 'From his own experiences, believes that the habit of opiumeating has increased within the last five years from 50 to 75 percent. Never sells the drug without physician's prescription buthas on an average five or six daily applications for some one ofits preparations. It is largely taken by prostitutes.' 'Has butone customer and that a noted temperance lecturer.' S. F. McFarland-1877.7 ' McFarland, S. F.-Opium inebriety and the hypodermic syringe.Trans. New York State Medical Society, 1877. "If cases of opium inebriety occur as frequently in theprivate practice of other physicians as they have in my own, itis coining to be a serious matter, and a few words of caution,against the indiscriminate use of so active a drug, may bepardonable. "Since the introduction of the hypodermic syringe,especially, there has been a noticeable increase in thefrequency, as well as the severity, of these cases; and I wish toenter a protest against its imprudent use, and particularlyagainst leaving it in the hands of patients or their friends, tobe used at their discretion, or even allowing them to know thatthey can use it, except in the greatest emergencies; for once intheir possession, and used for any considerable length of time,they will seldom discontinue it, and will soon be inquiring wherethey can get 'one of those things'. It is certainly a mostvaluable instrument in the hands of the discreet practitioner,and will reach cases which nothing else will, with a certaintyand promptness which is very satisfactory; but it is too potentfor evil, as well, to be trusted beyond his grasp. "By the hypodermic use of opium the habit is much morerapidly produced than by taking it into the stomach, or by anyother method-a fact which should not be lost sight of." 0. Marshall-1878.8 'Marshall, O. The opium habit in Michigan. Annual Report MichiganState Board of Health. 1878. Turning to a consideration of the early surveys, the onealready mentioned by 0. Marshall deserves first consideration, asit was the earliest of which we have knowledge. While thesefigures are obviously quite incomplete, they represent at least aminimal extent and apparently can be depended upon as comprisingpositive information as far as they go. For these reasons theyare of great importance to us today in seeking to arrive at atrue conception, first, of the probable influence of factorsother than illicit traffic and, second, of their possiblerelationship to conditions of today. Marshall begins his report with the following paragraph: "At a meeting of the State Board of Health in January,1877, by a written communication, I called its attention to thelarge number of opium-eaters in the vicinity of North Lansing,giving many particulars relating to the opium habit as it existshere. In complying with the request of the Board to prepare anarticle for publication, I have extended the investigation toother parts of the State, the result of which investigation ishere given." From further observations the author realizes how impossibleit is to obtain complete and perfectly reliable informationconcerning this condition. He states: "Those beat acquainted with its extent are the physicianand druggist. As a rule, the physician, although originallyresponsible for many of the cases in his vicinity, is only awareof them through his business relation with the druggist. Thelatter, from whom the drug is obtained, from the fear of low oftrade, or, as some of them term it, a violation of confidentialbusiness, are often unwilling to furnish any information withregard to it." Marshall sent two hundred circulars to prominent physiciansthroughout the state asking for information in regard to theopium "habit" in their localities and enclosing apostal card with printed form for report of the number of men andwomen using opium and morphin in each place. Marshall took careto eliminate duplication of cases by addressing only onephysician in each locality and where reports from a physicianincluded figures from two or more druggists the lists werecompared and repeaters eliminated. To those, ninety-six replieswere received giving the number of morphin and opium users inninety-six cities, villages, and townships of the state. He saysin this connection: "From the supposed impossibility of getting reliableinformation of the numbers in the larger cities, no circularswere sent to Detroit, Grand Rapids or East Saginaw; and probablyfrom this cause no answers were received from many of the largercities of the State where circulars were sent." The majority of the reports received by him include only thosepersons with whom the physician personally was acquainted. This,he points out, resulted in obtaining less complete informationthan had the druggists themselves been addressed. This, he says,is noticeable in the reports from two neighboring cities, one ofwhich gives the large number of one hundred sixteen, which numberwas obtained after considerable effort by particular request,while the other reports only one case. A druggist, however,formerly in business in the latter city estimated the number ofopium users in that city at not less than sixty. From such factsas these Marshall comes to the conclusion that only the minimalnumber was obtained and that the actual number was probablygreater in many instances. We are including the complete table given in Marshall's report.It is of peculiar interest because of the fact that urban, ruraland semirural communities were included and that the largercities of the state, in which the underworld and vicious elementnaturally would be supposed to exist in the greatest degree, wereabsent. The assumption therefore is that, whatever the cause forthe original use of the drug, the influence of viciousassociation was relatively negligible. It is significant thatthroughout his whole report no mention is made of illicit trafficor of any source of supply other than that through physician anddruggist. Marshall summarizes his findings as follows: "The total number of opium caters reported in the placesgiven is 1313; of these 803 are females, and 510 are males ...The population of the cities and villages including the townshipsin which they are situated, according to the State census of1874, was 225,633. The population of the whole State at the sametime was 1,334,031. If the number of opium eaters, includingmorphine eaters, in proportion to the population in the placesgiven holds good for the entire State, the total number of opiumcaters, all classes, in the State would be 7,763. Taking everydegree of the habit into consideration, this estimate of thenumber is probably not too large." The smallest community from which figures were obtained had apopulation of but 315, the largest a population of 10,235, theaverage population of the 96 towns being 2350. In other words,whatever the prevalence of the use of narcotic drugs obtained byMarshall was, his facts were derived from small hamlets and townswhich scarcely could be dignified by the name of city even in thetime in which he wrote. These communities covered every sectionof the state and presumably gave a true picture of it as a whole.Obviously, as alreadk stated, underworld influences such asprostitution, gambling, etc., largely can be eliminated. At thetime of this investigation communication was much more difficultand less rapid than it is today; news was not so widelydisseminated and in an area of such an extent as that of thestate of Michigan, one must conclude that a situation of thisnature was caused by factors of common occurrence, by influencesshared alike by all communities rather than by artificial orunusual influences operating in selected localities. If,therefore, we find that Marshall's figures were based onrepresentative conditions common to all sections of the state, itis reasonable to assume that they may be applied also to thecountry as a whole. We may not assume, for instance, that thedistribution of painful disease, of insomnia, of nervousness, oreven of certain social proclivities and curiosity was peculiar toMichigan and that in 1877 through some mischance its people, morethan those of other states, were subjected to perniciousinfluences of this nature. Nor may we assume that the practice ofmedicine was conducted along widely different lines in Michiganfrom those elsewhere or that the druggists of Michigan were morecareless in the conduct of their business, less prone to make aprofitable sale or more blind to the harm resulting from thistraffic than those of other states. In other words, there wouldseem no valid reason for not applying to the country as a wholesuch figures as Marshall gives us in depicting the extent ofchronic opium intoxication in his state. Also the resultingestimate for the country would be a minimal figure not onlybecause of the incompleteness of Marshall's returns but alsobecause of the absence in Michigan of certain influences whichwould tend to increase the use of opium. At that time, as we knowfrom other sources, there were operating on both the Atlantic andPacific coasts influences that did not operate in Michigan, aninland state. On the west coast there were such influences as themaritime traffic with the Orient and the coolie labor importedfor railroad and other construction undertakings, while in NewEngland we have already seen poppy culture already was beingindulged in and shipments were being made to other states. TABLE I Showing the number of Opium and Morphine Eaters, with theNumber of Each Sex, Reported in 96 Cities, Villages and Townshipsof the State, with the Population of Each Place, Including theTownship in which it is Situated, according to the State Censusof 1874. As a preliminary to the application of Marshall'sfigures to the State of Michigan as a whole, three thingsmust be borne in mind-first, the total omission of returns fromthe larger cities, second, the fact which he himself brings out,that information secured from the stated source, namely,physicians, was less complete than would have been informationsecured from druggists, and, third, the use by Marshall ofpopulation figures for the year 1874 instead of 1877. From the ninety-six communities heard from, as we have seen,there were reported 1313 users of opium or morphin. For someunknown reason Marshall employs in his computation the statecensus figures of 1874 rather than an estimated figure for theyear 1877 in which the survey was made. The population ofMichigan, according to him, was in 1874, 1,334,031. Employingthis figure he comes to the conclusion that if the number ofopium and morphin users holds good for the entire state the totalnumber in the state would be 7,763. Taking into account thenatural rate of increase in population between the years 1874 and1877, this figure would represent a slight overestimate, allother things being equal. However, this is offset by otherfactors such as the relative incompleteness of the informationreceived from physicians as compared with that received fromdruggists and it is fair to assume that this is a minimalfigure. How great the error on the side of underestimation is, wehave no means of telling. The fact that in one town, Monroe, the physician addressedreported but one case while a druggist stated that therewere about sixty, is indicative possibly of a very great error inMarshall's total figure and it must be remembered that thedruggists were in a much better position to know the truth thanwere physicians. They supplied the drugs used and as a rule,especially at the time of Marshall's investigation when countersales were legal and a matter of common practice, physicians werecalled upon only by those opiate users seeking curative treatmentfor their condition. It is, therefore, doubtful if the medicalprofession at any time has been in a position to supply anythinglike a complete list of these cases while the druggists from thevery nature of things in the past could have furnished thisinformation. It is probable, therefore, that Marshall's figures are verymuch more incomplete than even he himself believed and it isquite possible that the actual number of cases in the towns andcities of Michigan from which Marshall received his returns wereseveral times larger than his figures indicated. Be this as itmay, his total of 1313 cases represents definite and positiveinformation indicative of the widespread use of these drugs inthe State of Michigan over fifty years ago, long before thedevelopment of an illicit traffic in opium and its preparationswith its resulting artificial impetus to the formation of newcases. If applied to the country as a whole for the year inquestion, 1874, this figure gives a total of 251,936. This is astartling figure for the period in question and yet in allprobability well below the actual one and deserving of the mostcareful consideration on the part of those who today, with theundoubted existence of new and increasingly powerful factors atwork in the stimulation of the use of these drugs, seek to becomefamiliar with the extent of our present narcotic problem. Further on in his report, Marshall introduces the importationfigures from 1850 to 1877. From these he estimates an averageimportation figure for the year 1877. From information securedfrom drug store sales he comes to the conclusion that the averageuser consumes about three pounds of opium during the year.Allowing one-fifth of the total importation for "legitimatetherapeutic use" and dividing the remainder by three hearrives at a figure of 93,654 as the number of users in thecountry as a whole. From this figure by suitable calculation heobtains for the State of Michigan about 25.50 users. Elsewhere we have pointed out some of the dangers ofcalculating the number of users upon such a basis as this and inMarshall's effort we have a good illustration of the fallaciesthat enter. If we take Marshall's figure of 2550 for the State ofMichigan we obtain, as the proportion of the ninety-six towns andcities from which lie received definite information as to thenumber of opium users, the figure of 421 or but one-third of theactual number of users positively known to exist in theseninety-six communities. It is quite evident that in (Calculationsbased on importation figures there enter very large errors whichit is impossible to determine or correct. It seems, therefore, werepeat, that little or no dependence can be placed on estimatesarrived at in this manner and that fragmentary as have been thevarious actual surveys they furnish data of far greater value forpurposes of generalization. C. W. Earle-1880.9 'Earle, C. W.-Tile opium habit. Chicago Med. Rev. 1880. Earle made a study of the extent of the use of opium inChicago by interviewing a number of druggists in that city.Although the figure of the number of users he obtained may not beused in a statistical analysis, his work is a distinctcontribution as an indication of the prevalence of the use of thedrug at the time. The following is a quotation from his report: "In an article entitled 'The Impending Danger,' Dr.Mattison, of Brooklyn, states that he is assured by both dealersin the crude drug and manufacturers of the alkaloids, thatimportation of opium is increasing rapidly every year, and thatthe supply may become insufficient for the demand. The questionnaturally suggesting itself is: What becomes of the vast amountyearly brought to our shores?" Earle investigated fifty drug stores, asking questions as tothe number of customers, their age, nativity, kind of narcoticused, quantity, etc. He reports: "The three divisions of the city were visited, andlocalities inhabited by the different classes and nationalitieswere thoroughly canvassed. I was greatly surprised to find thatdruggists on the West Side were patronized to a greater extent(excepting a few on Clark Street) than in any other part of thecity. Foreign druggists (German and Scandinavian), seem toexhibit more conscientious scruples in regard to the trade thanour own nationality. I learned from some of these gentlemen thatin Denmark, and, if I mistake not, in Norway and Sweden, thetrade is absolutely forbidden. Fifty druggists have 235customers, or an average of nearly five to each store." J. M. Hull-1885. An account of Hull's findings appears in the Biennial Reportof the State Board of Health of Iowa for 1985. This BiennialReport covers a period of two years ending June 30, 1885, and itis not quite clear from his article whether the investigation wasmade in the latter half of 1883, during 1884 or in the first halfof 1885. In using his figures, therefore, we shall choose themiddle period and base our computations on the population figuresof 1884. Hull begins his report with the following: "Although my paper on the opium habit is brief, and but asmall part of the sad story told, yet I am inclined to believe itcontains some facts regarding this rapidly increasing evil thatcannot fail to astonish even those who are well informed, and farmore those who have given the subject little or no attention. "Opium is today a greater curse than alcohol, and justlyclaims a large number of helpless victims, which have not comefrom the ranks of reckless men and fallen women, but the majorityof them are to be found among the educated and most honored anduseful members of society; and as to sex, we may count out theprostitutes so much given to this vice, and still find femalesfar ahead so far as numbers are concerned. The habit in a vastmajority of cases is first formed by the unpardonablecarelessness of physicians, who are often too fond of using alittle syringe, or of relieving every ache and pain by theadministration of an opiate." To fifteen hundred circulars sent to druggists in the state ofIowa, requesting information on the subject, Hull received 123replies reporting 235 users of opium in some form. Of these 86were men and 129 women.10 The form of drug used was morphin, 129;gum opium, 73; laudanum, 12; paregoric, 6; Dover's Powder, 3;McMunn's Elixir, 4. As to the method of using the drug he states: "While the drug is used less frequently by the hypodermicmethod than by the mouth, the former method is gaining ground.The habit may be formed about as readily one way as the other.Those who use it by the mouth as a rule make the most rapidprogress, as the drug is easier taken, is free from pain, andlarger than the hypodermic dose." He states that there were about 3,000 stores in Iowa whereopium was kept for sale and that if reports had come from all inthe same ratio it would have shown the number of users to havebeen about 6,000. By actual computation on the above basis we get5,732. Hull states, however, that his reports were mostly fromthe small villages, very few coming from the cities where, hestates, the "habit" was far more common. He statesfurther: "From reliable information which I have been able tosecure from various sources, I feel safe in saying that there arein this state over 10,000 people who are constantly under theinfluence of an opiate and who are wholly unable by any effort ofthe will to break the habit or even to abstain for 72hours." The estimated population of continental United States for 1884was according to the U. S. Bureau of the Census 55,379,154 andthat of the State of Iowa for the same year was 1,742,084. Using the lower figure of 5,732 obtained in the mannerdescribed above, as the actual number of users in theState of Iowa, we get 182,215 chronic users for thecountry as a whole for the year 1884. This must be by far anunderestimate as Hull himself states that he had good reason tobelieve that there were over 10,000 in the state. In considering estimates based on Hull's figure several pointsshould be borne in mind. First, Hull does not indicate thepopulation served by the 123 stores reporting the 235cases. Although he does state that there were about 3,000 storesin Iowa where opium was kept, in assuming that the sales averagedthe same in different stores, there is the possibility of error.Second, according to Hull's own statement most of the casesreported were from small villages with very few coming from thecities, where he states the "habit" was far morecommon. With the usual vicious elements of city life eliminated,one may assume that Hull's figures represent a minimal extent. It is worthy of note that here again no mention is made ofillicit traffic. B. H. Hartwell-1888.11 ' Hartwell, B. H. The sale and Use of Opium in Massachusetts.Annual Report, Massachusetts State Board of Health, 1889. Hartwell made a survey in the State of Massachusetts, inthe report of which, unfortunately, he failed to give thepopulation figures on which the study was based. If these figureswere available it might be possible to compute the per capitaconsumption. Although this cannot be done, we are giving below asummary of that part of his survey dealing with extent as aninteresting side-light on conditions obtaining in that period. Hartwell states that the investigation was undertaken inaccordance with the following "resolve" adopted by theLegislature of 1888: "Resolved, That the State Board of Health be requested tomake an investigation concerning the sale and use of opium, invarious forms and preparations, with a view to ascertaining theextent of the evils arising therefrom; whether such use and evilsare increasing, and, if so, the manner and cause thereof, andwhat remedies for such evils may be proposed; and to report theresult of such investigation to the General Court." Hartwell continues his report as follows: "This resolution was presumably an outcome of theprevalent belief that the use of opium is increasing veryrapidly. An expos6 of the opium joints in Boston appeared in oneof the leading dailies in 1885; there have been frequentallusions to the habit in other papers; a recent article,claiming to be the result of years of study of the opium habit inBoston, was published in one of our popular magazines, in whichthe writer says that the habit 'is increasing rapidly! In theseand numerous other ways the public has been taught to believethat the evil is widespread and extending. The large number ofopium habitues which seem to be among us, the novelty of thisform of stimulation, its secret character, the strong hold whichit has upon its victims, the horrible results arising therefrom,especially from the habit of opium smoking,-all tend to keep thesubject prominently before the people, and to magnify the evil inthe public mind. To get at the facts concerning the use of opium(the term opium will include all of its preparations), as far aspossible, is the object aimed at in this inquiry. This is besetwith many difficulties, from the very nature of things. There canbe no reliable statistics of the amount of opium used by themedical profession, the laity, or by habitues, or the proportionused by each. The most rigid inquiry into a habit as secret andas easily practised as is this form of inebriety could not besufficiently accurate for mathematical calculation; approximationonly can be attained. "That a great deal of opium is used besides thatlegitimately required for the relief of pain and treatment ofdisease, is unquestionably true. The unwillingness of people tobear pain, the habit of self-prescribing, the many facilities forobtaining opium and its preparations from the regular dealers aswell as by means of proprietary medicines containing it, thenumerous ways by which a knowledge is gained of the method ofobtaining and taking the drug-all extend its use in the mostdangerous manner. "As the best means for forming an opinion of the amountof opium used, and whether or not its use is increasing,circulars were sent to many of the druggists and physicians ofthe State; the questions asked and a synopsis of the answersreturned are given below. Some allowance must be made inconsidering the returns, for the reason that opium habitues, fromfear of detection or a desire for secrecy, scatter theirpurchases as much as possible; so that a druggist may easily getan impression of an increased or decreased use of the drug, whilein reality the sales are going on elsewhere or have returnedafter the rounds have been completed. So also the same habitualusers might be seen by different physicians, and counted severaltimes, or escape notice altogether, and thus convey a false ideaof the actual number. A circular containing five questions wassent to druggists. Replies were received from about 600druggists, representing 190 cities and towns, and embracingnearly every city and town in the State where a druggist islocated. (There are about 150 towns in which no druggistsreside.) About one-fourth of the answers came from Boston, therest from other parts of that State. Many of the returnedcirculars contained answers to all of the questions, others toonly part of them; hence the number varies in the differentquestions. The questions and answers were as follows:- "I. What amounts of opium are sold by you per month, noton the advice and prescription of a physician?" The answers numbering 512 to 541 showed the following: (a) Crude opium, opium in pill or other solid form? Sixty per cent. none-the remainder a few pills to 4 pounds. (b) Liquid preparations; Tincture? Twelve per cent. none; the remainder one gram to 32 pints;other liquid preparations none to 40 pints. (c) Morphia and its salts, in bulk, pill or powder? Thirty-three per cent. none; the remainder % gr. to 8 oz.morphia 2 to 500 morphia pills, mostly 1/8 grs. (d) Other preparations very little. "2. Is the demand for opium and its salts increasing? 535answers: 85 per cent., no; 8 per cent., yes; 5 per cent.,decreasing; 2 per cent., do not know." "For obvious reasons, circulars were also sent to many ofthe physicians of the State who commenced practice before 1875.About 260 replies were received, from 100 cities and towns out ofabout 250 in which physicians reside. Eight questions weresubmitted, which with the number and character of the answers,were as follows: "1. From your own observation, is the use of opium andits preparations increasing in the community in which you live?225 answers: 66 per cent., no; 28 per cent., yes; 6 per cent., donot know. "2. If such be the case, what is the probable cause ofsuch increase; this question called for answers only from thosewho had answered the first question affirmatively; consequently,but 75 of a miscellaneous character were received. Twenty percent., give the use of opium by physicians as the sole cause; 11per cent., give this as the cause in part. Ease of obtainingopium from druggists, duplication of prescriptions containingopium, increased knowledge of its effects, excessive brain work,desire for stimulation, fast living, comprise most of theremaining answers. "3. Are diseases calling for the use of opium increasing?209 answers: 84 per cent., no; 16 per cent., yes." Although he believes, as can be seen from the above, that agreat deal of opium "is used besides that legitimatelyrequired for the relief of pain and the treatment ofdisease," on the basis of his study, Hartwell concludes that " . . . the use of opium is notincreasing in Massachusetts. In the large centres of populationthere may be a slight increase from year to year. It is here thatexcesses and crime of all kinds, if not increasing, are much morecommon than in less populous districts. The better knowledge ofthe uses and effects of the drug, by means of the greaterintercommunication of the people; the many facilities forobtaining it; the general practice of writing prescriptions,followed by unrestrained reduplication of them; the excitement ofbusiness, leading to overwork and overtaxing of the mentalpowers,-are conditions which are favorable to the increased useof opium." A. P. Ginnell-1900.12 'Grinnell, A. P.-A review of drug consumption and alcohol asfound in proprietary medicine. Med. Leg. Jour., 1905. This author made a study of the consumption of drugs in the Stateof Vermont and while he made no attempt to estimate the number ofopium users from it, a report of his study is interesting as anindication of the use in Vermont at that time. There appears tobe no reason to believe that this report covers a communityinfluenced by any unusual factors but rather it represents anormal distribution of drug users. The author states: "Few people are aware of the enormous consumption ofnarcotics or stimulating drugs. With the development ofpharmaceutical science and the consequent improvement andfacility in preparing drugs and alkaloids the market has grownaccordingly. More widespread knowledge concerning the effects andspecial uses of opium, cocaine, quinine, Cannabis Indica, Chloraland Heroin, ha's further stimulated the demand for these drugs,until today the American people are confronted by a problem whichis only equaled in its magnitude by its terrible and appallingaspects. "When we pause to consider the fearful inroads theexcessive and habitual use of these drugs make on the mentality,physical health and general existence of those addicted to them,we can easily appreciate what a serious menace to society a rapidincrease of drug habitues must inevitably mean. "It is hardly necessary to speak of the results of thehabitual and excessive use of narcotic drugs. Physicians, morethan any other class, realize the fearful ravages made on thehuman system; and the large number of physical, moral and mentalwrecks they are constantly meeting who owe their conditionentirely to drug addiction, tells eloquently how extensive andfar-reaching the drug evil has become. Every alienist is dailybeing brought face to face with the growing influence of certaindrugs on psychic abnormalities and degenerations, and theinsidious onset and progress of such conditions, when soproduced, cannot fail to impress us with the Medico-Legalimportance of the drug habit." In order to secure information as to the consumption ofcertain drugs, Grinnell wrote the druggists of the State askingthem for estimates of their monthly sales of the following drugsand preparations: "Opium (gum or powder) Morphine sulp. (powder or pills) Dover powder Paregoric (tinct. opii. camph.) Laudanuin (tinct. opii) Cocaine Chloral Indian hemp (Cannabis Indica) Quinine (powder or pills)?" Of 130 druggists addressed 116 were heard from. He alsoaddressed 172 general stores which sold drugs in localities whereno drug stores existed and three wholesale druggists, butobtained no satisfactory information from the latter. He states that ninety per cent. of the physicians of Vermontdispense their own drugs and that sales of these drugs tophysicians were not included in the figures supplied bydruggists. He also states that the figures he secured could be multipliedby five and be below the actual consumption inasmuch as theyinclude "nothing in the composition of patent medicines orcough medicines; nothing dispensed by physicians; nothingdispensed by these three large manufactories-simply the regularretail drug store businesses and the sales of the 160 generalstores." From these two sources lie estimated 3,300,000 doses of opiumwere sold every month-enough to supply "one and one-halfdoses of opium to every man and woman in the State of Vermontabove the age of 21 years, every day in the year." The actual amounts sold by druggists as compiled by Grinnellwere as follows: The above figures cover reports from 69 out of 344 towns, andfrom 116 drug stores out of 130, but do not include amounts soldin the general stores. American Pharmaceutical Association-1902 13-1903. 14 A committee of this organization, H. F. Hynson, Chairman,reported on the replies received from pharmacists and physiciansin certain localities in response to queries sent by thecommittee. The conclusion arrived at was to the effect that atleast five users of certain drugs, commonly known as"habit-forming" but not opium alone, were known toevery pharmacist. From this it was estimated that there were atleast 200,000 in the country. 'Hynson, H. P.-Report of Committee on Acquirement of the DrugHabit. Amer. Jour. Pharm. November, 1902. In the following year the same Committee with E. G. Eberle aschairman made a more extensive canvass of the situation throughletters to all sections of the United States and Canada. As aresult of the information so gathered, which dealt with cocaineand other drugs as well as opium preparations, the Committee cameto certain conclusions, the most suggestive of which follow: Eberle, E. G. Report of Committee on Acquirement of DrugHabits. Amer. Jour. Pharm. October, 1903. "General reports indicate that the sale of narcotics isnot restricted to any section of the country, nor confinedexclusively to the fallen and lower class. Information comes fromseveral sources that in callings which demand many hours' work ata time or the hours of night, cocaine is resorted to forstimulation." "We are confident that the use of narcotics is increasingand that evil effects from it will come to succeedinggenerations. While the increase is most evident with the lowerclasses, the statistics of institutes devoted to the cure ofhabitues show that their patients are principally drawn fromthose in the higher walks of life." "Careful study of data personally collected and fromreliable sources forces the conclusion that the habitual use ofopium in its various forms is increasing and that this increaseis confined to no one class or occupation." "While it has not been practicable to obtain exactfigures, it can be stated that the drug habit is alarminglyincreasing among the men of our army and navy. The number of menusing opium in the army has greatly increased since theoccupation of the Philippines, many 'opium smokers' acquiring thehabit there from Chinese or natives. The smoking of opium by themen of the navy does not seem to be as prevalent as in the army,gum opium 'pills' or morphine being the way in which the drug ismostly used by sailors. Quite a number of enlisted men have beendischarged from both army and navy during the last year becauseof their being detected as habitual users of opium ormorphine-probably several hundred per cent. more during the lastfive years than for any ten years previous. To the best of thewriters knowledge-and he has carefully inquired into facts-practically all the cases of drug habitues in both army and navyarise from the men learning the habit from natives of foreigncountries or from lewd women and men in this country. Not asingle case of drug habit coming from the prescribing of anopiate by a medical officer can be recalled, opium and allieddrugs being very guardedly and carefully used by army and navymedical officers. A goodly percentage of the cases are men whohave acquired some drug habit prior to enlistment while a few-sadto say-are from men of the hospital corps who drifted into thehabit from constant opportunity and handling of the baneful drug. "At the present, it is calculated that there are over amillion opium smokers in the United States, the importation ofopium for smoking purposes being double that for medicinal uses,amounting to more than 500,000 pounds last year, valued at$3,000,000 1 " 1 -C. E. Terry-1913.15 'Terry, C. E.-Annual Report Board of Health, Jacksonville, Fla.,1013, In 1913 Terry, Health Officer of Jacksonville, Florida,collected data relating to the extent of the problem in his city.The figures were not dependent upon voluntary cooperation as inthe case of previous collections of such material, but weresecured through the operation of a local law which required,besides the usual prohibition of sale of opium preparations bydruggists without physicians' prescriptions and the keeping ofrecords of all sales, two procedures which resulted in bringingto the health office specific information relating to the extentto which opium preparations were employed. The first of theserequired physicians writing prescriptions containing more thanthree grains of morphin or its equivalent in alkaloids or saltsof alkaloids of opium to send to the office of the healthdepartment copies of such prescriptions together with the namesand addresses of the individuals for whom they were intended.Second, it provided that the city health officer or otherphysician in the employ of the city designated by him might giveto any user, upon the furnishing of satisfactory evidence ofhabitual use, a prescription for as much of such drug as might bedeemed expedient. Records were kept of all duplicate prescriptions sent in andof all those issued at the health office. These prescriptionswere free and were designed to remove from druggists thetemptation of making counter sales on the plea that indigentusers or those of small means could not afford to pay for thewriting of a prescription in addition to the cost of the drug.The law was enforced actively and both druggists and physicianswere watched carefully for violations. No effort was made at this time to limit the use of thesedrugs in the case of habitual users nor were they subjected tosuch treatment as might be calculated to discourage them fromcoming to the health department for a prescription. On thecontrary, during the operation of this law-a period of over twoyears-they were supplied upon application. Treatment was offeredthem from time to time and furnished to such as accepted theoffer. Through the operation of this law there were recorded at thehealth office during the year 1913, 541 persons using opium orsome preparation thereof or about .81 per cent. of the populationof Jacksonville. These were divided into 228 men and 313 women.Of the men 188 were white and 40 colored; of the women 219 whiteand 94 colored. The population of Jacksonville for 1913 asestimated by the U. S. Bureau of the Census was 67,209. Of thisnumber 32,998 were whites and 34,211 colored. Applied tocontinental United States on the basis of the estimatedpopulation for 1913 of 97,163,330, the Jacksonville incidencegives as the total for the country 782,118. In interpreting these figures, however, it should be borne inmind that while the percentage of whites using opium inJacksonville is much greater than that of blacks, the blackpopulation in Jacksonville is very high compared to that of thecountry as a whole. If, as is indicated by the Jacksonvillefigures, the white race is more prone to use opium than thenegro, suitable correction will be necessary in generalizing fromthe Jacksonville figures. As will be seen later, this samepredilection of the whites appears in Brown's figures of theTennessee studies. These two studies, however, are not sufficientin our judgment to assume the establishment of such racialtendencies as many other factors quite possibly may haveinfluenced these findings. If, however, such racial tendencies as the Jacksonville andTennessee findings seem to indicate do exist, then in computingthe distribution of opium use in the country as a whole it willbe necessary to correct for the different race distributionexisting in Jacksonville as compared with continental UnitedStates by applying the figures obtained in Jacksonville to thewhite and black populations separately. In 1913, the white population of continental United States was86,580,278 and colored 10,583,052. Applying the Jacksonvillefigures to the country as a whole, therefore, we get 1,109,340total opium using population. This naturally is a larger figurethan the original crude figure of 782,118. One source of possible error in figures of this kind exists inthe increase which may take place over the normal population ofusers through the registration of transients. In the case ofJacksonville, however, it would not seem that this was a largefactor inasmuch as the registration required either throughapplication to the health office or through the sending ofduplicate prescriptions by physicians was not required in nearbystates and cities at that time so that it was more difficult forstrangers to obtain the drug in Jacksonville than in other nearbypoints. Whatever this error was, however, it is very much morethan offset by the omissions in registration which occurred inthe following ways. It was known to the health officer, forinstance, that certain business and professional men and otherindividuals in high social standing who used the drug were neverregistered but secured their supplies either by mail order fromdistant points or through friendly physicians or druggists whowere willing to risk violating the law for them. Others throughthe nature of their employment in drug stores or drugmanufacturing concerns were able easily to supply themselves,while still others went to nearby points outside of the citylimits and hence beyond the operation of the ordinance to securetheir supply. What part differences in race composition (other than negro),economic, occupational and other sociologic factors may haveplayed in vitiating the Jacksonville figures for purposes ofgeneralization no one is in position to say at the present time,as enough studies of the prevalence of this condition in othersections of the country have not been made to justify claimseither for or against the existence of such influencing factors.In view, however, of the facilities at hand for the collection ofthe Jacksonville data, it is believed that they represent verycomplete information. As in a consideration of Marshall's figuresfor Michigan, it may be assumed that the distribution of painfulmaladies and the methods of medical practice in Jacksonville didnot differ widely from those of other sections. In 1913, however,the influence of prostitution and what is generally termed theunderworld obtained much more prominently in Jacksonville than inthe localities of Michigan with which Marshall's figures deal asthese were, it will be remembered, all small towns and villages.In the case of the Jacksonville figures, therefore, we may assumethat the influence of vicious association was a more markedfactor than in the Michigan figures. The illicit traffic in these drugs was practically negligiblein Jacksonville in 1913. One or two peddlers, it is true,supplied certain women in the restricted district more as amatter of convenience to these customers than because of anylarge profits involved. The traffic could not have been lucrativeas free prescriptions were available to any user asking for themand the price of the drug in the drug stores was in theneighborhood of 60 cents for a drachra of morphin when sold inoriginal bottles or large fractions. With this price it isevident that peddlers could not compete with profit. Lucius P. Brown-1915.16 ' Brown, L. P.-Enforcement of the Tennessee Anti-Narcotic Law.Amer. J. of Public Health, 1915, Vol. 5, No. 4. Brown, the State Food and Drugs Commissioner of Tennessee,reported on the results of the enforcement of the TennesseeAnti-Narcotic Law passed in 1913. The law provided for therefilling of prescriptions for persons using opium productshabitually "in order to minimize suffering among thisunfortunate class, and to keep the traffic in the drug fromgetting into underground and hidden channels." The lawprovided that upon application to the Secretary of the StateBoard of Health and the Pure Food and Drugs Inspector and uponpresentation of a certificate from the attending physician, thename and address of the druggist and certain other data, anindividual might be granted permission to have a prescription foran opium product refilled. This system brought a considerablemass of data to the officials concerned. It should be noted inexplanation that an effort was made at every renewal of permit tolessen the amount of the drug allowed. After twelve months of operation there were on January 1,1915, 2370 individuals registered under this system in the stateof Tennessee. Of these 784 were men and 1586 women. In commenting on the accuracy of the registration Brownstates: "As to what proportion of the total addicts of Tennesseeare registered under this permissive system, guesses only can begiven. It seems safe to say that not over one-half of the addictpopulation is registered-possibly not over one fourth. Taking,however, the lower figure, it would appear that there are in theneighborhood of 5,000 addicts in Tennessee. The state has about2.3 per cent. of the whole population of the United States. It isan agricultural state, and consequently, living conditions appearto be not so exhausting as in more thickly settled communities,nor life as a rule, so intense. In order to get the whole numberin the United States, we may multiply our figure of 5,000 by 43.This gives us about 215,000 addicts. Probably, however, in orderto allow for conditions in cities and, industrial communities, weought to add 25 per cent. to this number, giving not less than269,000 addicts in the whole United States. In my opinion this isa very conservative calculation. It shows by no means so many assensational writers appear to want us to believe, and while itthus shows better conditions it is bad enough." Brown points out that according to figures which he believesto be fairly accurate not over ten per cent. of the cases werecolored. He says: "This is due in part to the fact that the average negroavoids as far as possible any contact with an official, and tothe fact that the negro appears to use relatively less morphine,and more cocaine than the white man." This agrees with the race distribution in Jacksonville. If weshould take Brown's estimate of 5000 cases and distribute themaccording to what he believes to be a race incidence actuallyexisting, namely 9070 white and 1070 negroes, we should reach adifferent total for the country from that reached by Brown.Making this correction and applying, on the basis of Brown'sestimate for Tennessee, the race incidence obtaining to thecountry as a whole, we get 221,818 white users and 11,518 blackusers or 233,336 as a total in the United States for 1913. If wenow add, as Brown suggests, 2517c "in order to allow forconditions in cities and industrial communities," we obtaina total of 291,670 for the United States. Whether or not thiscorrection should be made has already been considered in ourdiscussion of the Jacksonville figures. We give it for what it isworth with no claim that the race distribution of opium use inthese two localities typifies racial characteristics. Such a generalization from the Tennessee figures indicates avery much smaller total for the country than is obtained on thebasis of the Jacksonville figures, although these twoinvestigations were made within a year of each other. Theterritory covered by the Tennessee law was very much larger thanin the case of Jacksonville and the machinery for enforcementdoubtless was less adequate. In Jacksonville, it must beremembered, every physician and every druggist personally wasknown to the health officer as were most of the opium users andit is to be expected that on these accounts more completeinformation could be secured than where, for the most part as inthe case of Tennessee, it was necessary to rely on correspondencewithout the close personal touch possible in the smallerterritory. Brown himself questions the completeness of hisfigures, stating that in his opinion they comprise a veryconservative estimate. Which of these estimates is nearer the truth for the period inquestion no one may state with certainty. It is noteworthy,however, that Brown's figures applied to the country as a wholegive a figure but little in excess of that obtained on the basisof the Michigan figures of 1877, about thirty-five years beforeBrown's work. It scarcely is to be expected that with theinfluences at work, which we shall note in the next chapter,during this period of thirty-five years, there could have failedto be a greater increase than is indicated by these two sets offigures. The estimates resulting from studies heretofore quotedrepresent conditions of opium usage freer from artificialinfluences of one kind or another than any that have been or willbe compiled dealing with later periods. Prior to this time therewas no federal law relating to the distribution of the drug andbut very few state laws which were at all rigidly enforced, sothat peddling of the drugs was not a marked factor in extendingtheir use. The usual causes mentioned, such as the employment ofopium and its products in medicine and self-prescribing for therelief of pain and discomfort, the effect of education throughill-considered articles in the lay press and magazines, fiction,vicious or ignorant associations, and the influence of naturaltendencies to dissipation or to seek refuge under stress andstrain, were operating alone without the additional stimulationof the illicit traffic which was a later development. Wherever,therefore, the exact truth lies as to the number of chronic opiumusers in the United States prior to the passage of the HarrisonNarcotic Act it represents what might be termed the normal forthe United States in contradistinction to an artificial orfortuitous figure resulting in addition to the forementionedcauses from the perniciously active propaganda of the commercialtrader in opium preparations. 'The federal anti-narcotic law passed December 17, 1914. Special Committee of Investigation appointed by the Secretaryof the Treasury-1918P 'Traffic in Narcotic Drugs--Report of Special Committee ofInvestigation appointed March 25, 1918, by the Secretary of theTreasury, June, 1919. Washington. 1919. This Committee was unable to determine the exact number ofaddicts in the United States, 'owing, as stated in the Report,"to the lack of laws and regulations making it compulsoryfor the registration of addicts throughout the country or thekeeping of any records as to their identity." The Committee believed, however, that a fairly accurateestimate of their number can be made from the information whichit has obtained. One source of information was a questionnaire addressed to allphysicians registered under the Harrison Narcotic Act, requestingdata as to the number of chronic users under treatment by them atthe time. The Committee reports as follows: "Replies were received from approximately 30 2/3 per centof the physicians registered in the different States, and theseshowed that there were under treatment at that time a total of73,150 addicts. On the basis of 100 per cent replies, if the sameaverage was maintained, there were under treatment at the timethis questionnaire was sent out a total of 237,655 addicts. Thefollowing table" shows in detail by States the number ofaddicts reported under treatment, the percentage of repliesreceived from physicians, and the estimated number on the basisof 100 per cent replies." Another questionnaire was addressed to state, district, countyand municipal health officers, the results of which are given asfollows: "Questionnaire No. 4 was addressed to 3,023 State,district, county and municipal health officers. To thisquestionnaire 983 replies were received, or 33 per cent of thetotal number sent out. Only 777 of these, or 26 per cent of thetotal, contained any information of value to the committee." The Report summarizes as follows: "The number of addicts reported by the health officialsreplying to questionnaire No. 4 was 105,887. As this numberrepresents the addicts reported by only 26 per cent of the healthofficials, from which this information was requested, it may beassumed that had all the health officials replied the totalnumber would have amounted to approximately 420,000. This number,however, appears to be much too low, in view of the fact that thephysicians of the country are estimated to have had about 237,000addicts under treatment during this same period, and only a smallportion of the total number of addicts present themselves fortreatment. Addicts of the "underworld," for instance,secure most of their supply through illicit channels and rarely,if ever, consult a physician. "It appears that a more accurate estimate of the totalnumber of addicts may be obtained from the data secured by thoseinvestigators who have made an intensive study of drug addictionin certain restricted communities. For example, the healthofficer of Jacksonville, Fla., reported 887 1 addicts in thatcity in 1913. This number represents 1.31 per cent of thepopulation. Upon this basis the total number of addicts in theUnited States, in 1918, taking the estimated population as106,000,000 would be 1,388,600. "In reply to questionnaire No. 4 sent to health officersof States, counties, and municipalities, the health officer ofNew York City reported a total of 103,000 addicts, which isequivalent to 1.8 per cent of the population. On this basis,there would be 1,9W,000 addicts in the United States. "Information in the hands of the committee indicates thatdrug addiction is less prevalent in rural communities than incities or in congested centers. It would, therefore, be unfair toestimate the number of addicts in the entire country on the basisof the figures obtained for New York City. Furthermore, it is theopinion of the committee that an estimate based on the number ofaddicts in a small city like Jacksonville, Fla., would not berepresentative for the entire country. Taking these facts intoconsideration, the committee is of the opinion that the totalnumber of addicts in this country probably exceeds 1,000,000 atthe present time." ' This figure includes 346 cocaine users. In reviewing the estimates arrived at on the basis of thereplies received to these questionnaires, there arises a questionas to what is meant by "treatment." From a laterstatement in the Report "treatment" here meanspresumably the supplying of the drug by physicians, but webelieve that in replying to this question the average physicianwould report only such cases as were under curative treatment. Bethis as it may, the propriety of estimating the number of caseson the basis of 100% replies from physicians registered under theHarrison Narcotic Act is open to question. It is stated in theReport that thirty and two-thirds per cent. of the registeredphysicians queried replied and that 73,150 cases were reported bythem as being under treatment. To assume that the resultingfigure of 237,655 calculated on -such a basis is a correctestimate, is still not warranted. For such an estimate to beaccepted as a logical conclusion on the basis of 100% replies 'itwould have to be assumed that all groups of physicians registeredunder the Harrison Narcotic Law answered in like proportion. Butit is natural to assume that nose and throat specialists,oculists, obstetricians, gynecologists, surgeons and others notoccupied with general practice would not be interested to thesame degree in replying to the questionnaire. In all probabilitythe thirty and two-thirds per cent. physicians reporting includea relatively greater proportion of those treating addiction casesthan those not reporting. Under these conditions the estimated237,655 addicts is too high a figure. As a matter of fact,however, the Committee appears not to accept this figure, anyway,inasmuch as it ultimately reaches a speculative figure of1,000,000, inclusive of cocaine users. As to the estimates based on replies received from state,county and municipal health officers of which the Committeestates only twenty six per cent. replied, we would call attentionto the fact that 103,000 were reported by the health commissionerof New York City, with a balance of the twenty-six per cent.reporting only 2887. This material was gathered in 1918. At thattime also nothing in the nature of a survey of chronic opiumusers in New York City had been made. The narcotic clinic was notopened until 1919 and this clinic disclosed but 7464 cases ofopium users. It is manifest therefore that the 103,000 reportedby the health commissioner in the previous year was whollyspeculative. It is also of interest to note that the healthcommissioner of New York City a year or two later stated that20,000 was an outside estimate for cases of chronic opium usersin New York City. Here again, however, the Committee admits dissatisfaction withthe resulting estimate of 420,000, stating that the figure is toolow and ultimately arrives at an approximate figure of 1,000,000including users of cocain. It is not apparent in the Report howthis figure is reached. New York City Health Department Narcotic Clinic-April, 1919,to January, 1920. 'Hubbard, S. D@The New York City Narcotic Clinic and differingpoints of view on narcotic addiction. Monthly Bulletin, Dept. ofHealth, City of New York, February 1920. Hubbard 21 reports on the findings resulting from the datagathered during the operation of this clinic over a period ofapproximately nine months. This clinic was conducted inco-operation with the New York State Department of Narcotic DrugControl. In regard to the extent of opium usage in New York City,Hubbard states: "The problem of narcotic addiction has been in the publiceye for some time, and the differing points of view regardingnarcotic addiction have been provocative of some very interestingdiscussion. "In the Spring of last year, the Federal authoritieshaving made several raids on trafficking physicians anddruggists, an acute emergency was created whereby it was fearedby some that a panic of these miserable unfortunates would ensue.These conditions caused the New York City Department of Health toopen a narcotic relief clinic in order to study and examine intothe subject of narcotic drug addiction. Number of Drug Addicts in New York City "Many opinions regarding the prevalence and frequency ofdrug addiction have been expressed. No doubt many of thesestatements are far from true. We do not know who the addicts are,nor how many there are of them, either here or elsewhere in thiscountry. Why? From opinions expressed, and from the literature onthis subject, we have been led to believe that addiction wasallocated with certain definite physical stigmata; pallor,emaciation, nervousness, apprehension, sniffing, needle puncturemarkings, and tattoo skin evidences; but in actual experiencewith hundreds of acknowledged drug addicts, persons actuallyseeking their drug supply, we find, like the weather indications,all such signs failing. "There are drug addicts constitutionally inferior, andsuperior; feeble-minded, and strong-minded; physically below, andabove par; morally inferior, and superior. No one class ofsociety seems, in our experience, to enjoy a monopoly in thispractice. Our opinions, therefore regarding the number of drugaddicts, here and elsewhere about this country, have verynaturally had to be revised. While it was the current opinion tothink that they existed in vast numbers estimated by some as oneper cent. of the community, and even two and three per cent byothers--we, today, think that this is greatly over-estimated. "It was formerly held that drug addiction was so generaland so frequent that if the law-the Harrison Act-was enforced, asit should be, a panic would be created by the immense numbers ofaddicts who would seek relief. "The efforts of the New York City Department of Health,actuated and urged by the Commissioner of Health, Dr. Royal S.Copeland, showed that this fear of the production of a panic wasa false one. Our efforts were given wide publicity, and theco-operation of medical and scientific societies earnestly andzealously sought to help solve this problem. It might be addedalso that the raids initiated by the Federalauthorities--arresting illicit prescribers anddispensers-together with the New York State Narcotic Commissionrequiring registration of all addicts in this locality, have notoccasioned any undue excitement among these individuals. We,naturally, must infer that the enormous number of drug addictssupposed to exist, in this vicinity at least (and it was supposedto be greater here than anywhere else) are mythical and untrueand that therefore the fear of a panic of these miserableunfortunates was negative." In his conclusion, Hubbard states: "The estimate of 1% of our population addicted to the useof narcotic indulgence as a habit-addiction-is very likelygreatly exaggerated." In his general statistics Hubbard gives as the number of usersregistered during the operation of the clinic (about ninemonths), 7464 of which 5882 were men and 1582 were women.Applying the incidence indicated for New York City by the numberregistered at the clinic, we obtain for the country as a whole140,554 for the year 1919. A number of factors combined to make the registration at theNew York City clinic incomplete. In the first place attendancewas voluntary. Further in New York City it was required that notmore than a twenty-four hour supply be furnished the addict, sothat it was necessary for individuals to visit their physiciansor the clinic daily in order to secure the drug legitimately.This requirement tended to influence those for whom it wasimpossible or too inconvenient to leave their business or work toseek their supply from the illicit traffic or from legitimatesources outside of the jurisdiction of this ruling. The numberregistered, therefore, represents only those who, because ofdifficulties in securing their supply by reason of the cost ofprescriptions or because the drug was sold more cheaply at theclinic than at the retail drug store in spite of the twenty-fourhour ruling chose to attend the clinic. Also there were several other factors operating, to keepcertain classes of users away from the clinic. First there wasthe inconvenience of the crowded condition of the clinic whereapplicants were required to stand outside in lines a block ormore long in any weather waiting their turn to be examined andotherwise attended to. Second, there was the fixing of anarbitrary dosage and then the enforced reduction by an arbitraryamount. Third, it was required that a considerable amount ofpersonal information having nothing to do with their addiction,such its the name of their employers and their addresses, besupplied and that the photograph of the patient be attached tothe registration card. Drug peddling in New York City was very rife at the time ofthe operation of the clinic, and every opportunity was offeredthose who could afford to pay the prices charged by the illicittraffickers in drugs to secure their supplies without submittingto the requirements of the twenty-four hour supply provisions orregistration at the clinic. Narcotic Drug Control Commission-New York-1920 .22 'Second Report of the Narcotic Control Commission. 1920. Referring to the number of users in New York State,Commissioner Herrick says: "I think a safe and conservative approximation would be39,000. The records of the Department show in round numbers13,000 registered addicts. This number is composed of those whoobtain habit-forming drugs through legitimate sources, that is,directly from a doctor or on prescriptions issued by a doctor,filled by a druggist, or from the different clinics establishedthroughout the State. To these figures should be added twice thenumber, which is an approximation of the users who obtain drugsfrom peddlers, or other illicit sources. Of course, this latterfigure, as I have stated, is only an approximation. I base it onthe percentage of addicts among the great number with whom I havepersonally conferred, who have admitted that they obtained theirdrugs from peddlers or other illicit sources. Between four-fifthsand two-thirds of the registered addicts are located in the cityof Greater New York, and the remaining fraction is scatteredthroughout the rest of the State. The larger the center ofpopulation the greater the percentage of addicts." When applied to the country as a whole, Herrick's estimate of39,000 addicts in New York State yields a figure of 396,978. If Commissioner Herrick's statement that between four-fifthsand two-thirds of the registered users were located in the cityof Greater New York is correct, we have from 10,400 to 8,666 inthe Greater City by using his figure of "in round numbers13,000" for the state as a whole or several thousand morethan were registered at the clinic. It should be pointed out that however far Hubbard's figurefalls short of the actual number of users in New York by reasonof the forementioned factors, it is at least 500 too low if ourinterpretation of the Commissioner's report is correct. Accordingto his statement, the Department of Narcotic Drug Control issuedexemptions for certain individuals who were not required toregister. The number of these exemptions was 500 in thebeginning, but later was reduced to 300. In attempting togeneralize, therefore, from the New York City clinic figures wemust bear in mind the apparently marked incompleteness of thesefigures. The figure of 7,464 however, as a minimum, is a figureof importance and of itself presents a serious problem, howeverfar it may come from indicating the actual conditions. Los Angeles Clinic-1920. In Los Angeles a narcotic clinic was operated from March 8 toAugust 17, 1920-a period of a little over five months-at whichtime, according to the report of the medical head, W. H. Bucher,the clinic was closed by federal orders. During this brief periodthere were registered at the clinic 582 persons-389 men and 193women. In addition, knowledge was had of 37 individuals who werenot registered and given the drug because they were not working,had previous undesirable records or gave insufficient evidence ofbeing chronic users. The exact number, therefore, of users wasunknown to the clinic authorities. In the case of Los Angeles asin New York all opium users were not required to come to theclinic and register nor were records kept of cases handled byoutside physicians. Another factor which tended to influence thesituation in Los Angeles and which did not obtain in like degreein other localities where clinics were operated was the proximityof this city to Mexico. Tile constant smuggling of the drugfurnished easy sources of supply to those who wished to avoidregistration at the clinic. Taking, however, the Los Angeles figures as indicated by theclinic registration for what they are worth, we find at least aminimum of 564 known chronic opium users, giving an incidencerate of about .1 70'. On the basis of the Los Angeles figurethere would be in the United States a total of 102,005 for 1920.It will also be remembered that the Los Angeles clinic was inoperation for but five months, while in Jacksonville andTennessee registration of narcotic users covered a much longerperiod. 'In using the phrase "normal incidence" asindicating the cases of chronic opium usage caused throughmedical practice, self-medication and constitutional make-up butexclusive of cases stimulated by such artificial influences asunderworld association, illicit traffic, etc., we would not beunderstood as meaning that the normal as at present existing isan irreducible figure. We believe only that it is an actualfigure existing as of this time-the present period in medicalpractice and lay knowledge-that with better medical education anda more widespread dissemination among the laity of the facts ofchronic opium intoxication this "normal" in the futurematerially will be lessened. Shreveport, Louisiana, Clinic-1919-1923. In many respects the next figures to be considered possess aunique value. They were supplied by W. P. Butler, medicaldirector of the narcotic clinic at Shreveport, Louisiana, andinclude the cases of chronic opium intoxication in the city ofShreveport and Caddo Parish in which Shreveport is located,comprising thus a territory including both urban and ruralpopulation. Further they represent only resident cases.Transients, non-residents or those who were induced possibly toseek Shreveport because of the opportunity for attending a clinicand profiting by treatment have all been eliminated by Dr. Butlerthrough his intimate personal knowledge of the circumstancessurrounding each case. The size of Shreveport, its relativeisolation from populous centres, the absence of large industriesand manufactories would all tend to minimize underworldinfluences as etiologic factors of importance. For the most partthese cases represent those arising from the prescribing of thesedrugs by physicians, from self-medication and that element whicheverywhere, even without unusual opportunity or artificialincitement, tends to seek adventure, stimulation or solacethrough the use of narcotics. In other words, Butler's figuresrepresent more nearly than any others in our possession whatmight be termed a normal incidence 23as existing in a communitywhere unusual exciting causes have not existed. Further it should be remembered in considering these figuresthat the operation of this clinic continued without interruptionfor a period of nearly four years, from May 3, 1919, to February10, 1923. This is a longer period of existence than has beencomprised in the life of any other narcotic clinic. The methodsemployed by Butler, differing in several particulars from thoseemployed elsewhere in similar work and the support from localofficials, physicians and public combined to make this unusualperiod of existence possible in view of the attitude of theBureau of Internal Revenue in regard to the operation of narcoticclinics. The local educational influence of the clinic undoubtedly wasvery great in Shreveport and the adjoining rural districts, whichfact must not be lost sight of in attempting to generalize fromthe Shreveport figures. Not only the very great majority of allcases were handled personally by Dr. Butler and his staff-only avery few remained in the hands of private physicians-but thenature of the work was so thoroughly understood and so widelyendorsed by the local medical profession that it could not havefailed to have a deterrent effect upon the ill-advised, carelessor unnecessary prescribing and administering of opiumpreparations in the ordinary practice of medicine. Therefore,there must have been an influence during the operation of theclinic tending to lessen rather than to increase the number ofnew cases usually arising from and attributable to the unwise useof opium by the practicing physician at large. In other words,there appear to have been no artificial stimulating influencestoward narcotism but, on the contrary, there were presentinfluences which tended distinctly to lessen the formation of newcases. Also it should be noted that . during the operation of theclinic the illicit traffic was reduced to the minimum if notwholly eradicated. This matter received the particular attentionof the Bureau of Internal Revenue whose agents repeatedly visitedShreveport and noted the conditions under which the clinicoperated. According to Butler, they stated to him as theirpersonal opinion that the drug was very scarce on the streets ofShreveport; one agent made several attempts at different times tobuy the drug or to have it bought, but was unsuccessful. It would-appear, therefore, that one may generalize with lesschance of error, at least on the side of exaggeration, from theShreveport figures than from those of any other locality. Furtherin such generalizations we have a more nearly accurate portrayalof the extent of the use of opium preparations in this countryarising from what we may term the more natural causes,-causesinherent in all communities in which medicine is practiced,painful illness is experienced and predisposing constitutionaltendencies do not exist in excess or are not influenced unduly byartificial conditions-than in other generalizations. In other communities, especially in the metropolitan centresand industrial cities where racial, social and economic factorslead to congested living conditions and tend to stimulate thevicious employment of opium preparations for purposes solely ofdissipation, where prostitution is considerably more prevalentand where peddling is highly profitable, we should expect a verymaterial increase in the underworld or vicious element among thedrug-using population as a whole. In addition to this, wherepublic and professional attention has not been continuously andfor a relatively long period directed at constructive efforttoward the elimination of this evil, we should not look for n decreasein the drug-using population resulting from an increased cautionon the part of members of the medical profession. Whatever theeffect of these two influences in the causation of chronic opiumintoxication in such large centres as we have referred to here orelsewhere, the cases attributable to them must be considered asan increment in excess of those normally existing in thesecommunities and resulting from such widespread and omnipresentcauses as those apparently responsible and chiefly operative inShreveport. The Shreveport incidence, therefore, of opium users for thepopulation at large may well be considered a minimum. Had Butler not eliminated the non-resident and transientcases, the cases recorded at the Shreveport clinic since itsinception would be 1,237. This figure, Dr. Butler states,includes transients, residents, non-residents, and all thosedispensed to one time or more and comprises all cases handled bythe clinic from the date of its opening to February, 1923. In thecase of Shreveport, however, where the collection of informationhas been made with unusual care and over a considerable period,it has been possible for those in charge of the work to eliminateartificial or unusual conditions and to determine with exactnessthe true resident incidence. Butler reports this figure to be371, which covers exclusively those residents registered andcared for during a period of nearly four years. This figure,however, cannot be used for the determination of the addictionincidence in Shreveport, and for purposes of comparison withother surveys for three reasons: First, it covers a period ofmore than one year, while in the Tennessee, Jacksonville, LosAngeles and other figures heretofore considered the numbers dealtwith surveys made during one calendar year; second, the figure isa strictly resident figure, whereas the figures of the othercities deal with the crude population; third, in Shreveport thenarcotic clinic and the hospital facilities for treatmentundoubtedly attracted addicts from other sections of the country,as the figure of 1,237 given above indicates. Therefore, DoctorButler has supplied us with the number of addicts treated andregistered during one calendar year of the clinic, 1920. Thetotal number of cases treated in this year was 542, but into thisfigure enters the error incident to the fact that numbers ofindividuals came to Shreveport throughout the period of theclinic because of the clinic and its facilities. In an attempt tocorrect for this source of error, it was possible for DoctorButler to subdivide these 542 cases into residents andnon-residents, the basis for the former being residence in CaddoParish for a period of one year prior to registration at theclinic. The resident figure for 1920 is 211, the non-residentfigure is 331. None of these figures unfortunately permits ofcomparison with the figures dealing with addiction incidence inother communities, inasmuch as these latter figures have includedthe general run of population usually present in a community,residents and transients, but they did not include-and there wasno reason why they should include-individuals especiallyattracted because of a local situation having to do with thespecial handling of opium addicts. The true number which would betypical of Shreveport lies somewhere between the strict residentfigure of 211 and the exaggerated figure of 642. The residentfigure gives to Shreveport an opium user rate of .25%. Applied tocontinental United States it would furnish a total of 264,276 for1920. From what already has been said of the conditions underwhich the Shreveport figures were obtained-the elimination ofnon-residents, transients, drug traffickers-and from the absenceof unusual exciting causes which would lead to theformation of any considerable percentage of vicious or underworldcases, it is at once apparent that this figure represents aminimum and must be considerably below the real number. For wemay not minimize without danger of serious underestimation what,is so often reported by local and federal authorities throughoutthe country as a powerful influence in the causation of thiscondition in the younger age groups of both sexes, particularlyof males, namely, the etiologic factor comprised in under-worldassociations and the instinct of the illicit trafficker. In the preceding pages we have utilized such figures as wehave found available in an effort to show the extent of thisproblem. These figures have been in sonic cases incomplete, andin others, for one reason or another, subject to doubt orcontroversy. Unfortunately a sufficient number of local surveysat any given period has not been made to furnish material for areliable cross-section of the country. Conditions existing in onesection may be attacked with at least a show of justice whenapplied to others. Population composition, occupation, and evenclimate, to say nothing of many other sociologic influences, tendto vitiate generalizations made from local data of this kind. For comparison we are giving in the following table thefindings of the surveys suitable for purposes of generalizationtogether with certain computations based thereon. The othersurveys of which we have record are too incomplete or for onereason or another too inconclusive to warrant their use as basesfor general estimates. A more recent estimate 24 of the number of addicts inthe United States is that of Lawrence Kolb and A. G. Du Mez ofthe United States Public Health Service. While not based on anoriginal survey of a community or section of the country, theestimate of these authors is of interest as a result of theiranalysis of certain recent surveys and other data. In theirintroduction they state: 'Kolb, Lawrence, and A. G. Du Mez---'The Prevalence and Trendof Drug Addiction in the United States and Factors InfluencingIt." Public Health Reports--May 28, 1924. "It is realized that it is impossible at the present timeto make an exact count of the persons addicted to narcotics inthe United States in an individual State, or even in one of ourlarger cities, because of the social and legal factors tending tomake addiction a secret practice. It is believed, however, thatit is possible, by utilizing all of the information nowavailable, to delimit the number by certain maximum and minimumfigures. With this object in view, a number of the more importantnarcotic surveys made in recent years were analyzed; also thereports made by agents of the Bureau of Internal Revenue andother persons on the narcotic clinics conducted in differentparts of the country; statistics on the dose of addiction, worldproduction of narcotics, and the quantities imported into thiscountry were compiled and studied; and numerous physicians indifferent parts of the country were interviewed in person toascertain the number of addicts they were treating in the courseof their practice. The results of these analyses and studiesfollow:" After their analysis of the surveys and clinic reports, theyconclude as follows: "In summing up it may be stated that according to Brown'ssurvey, 215,000 was approximately the number of addicts in theUnited States in 1915. The New York City, the TreasuryDepartment, and the clinic surveys were made four or five yearslater. An objection to making a general application of the NewYork City survey is that the sex and age distribution of addictsshown by it does not obtain throughout the country. This wasprobably due in part to the fact already referred to, namely,that young addicts are attracted to large cities, and conditionsexist in them which cause a delinquent type of addiction; and itis also due in part to the fact that some of the older addictswere being taken care of by physicians and were not counted whenthe survey was made. Just how far these two factors balance eachother is not known, but the 140,600 indicated by the New YorkCity survey in 1920 shows a reduction over the 1915 figures. Theclinic surveys made at the same time or a year later took innearly all sections of the country and comprised a morerepresentative group of population. These surveys show 104,300addicts.' The Pennsylvania figures, collected over a period offive years and ending about a year after the clinics were closed,show approximately 109,250 addicts in the United States in 1922when the actual count of 9,000 is used. The Army rate isundoubtedly too low for the particular group surveyed, and forreasons already given for estimating addiction in the populationas a whole. The 1918 Treasury Department survey shows 237,655addicts and apparently contains an indeterminate error ofexaggeration, as already pointed out. The highest estimate basedon any unrevised survey is 269,000; the lowest, exclusive of theArmy survey, is 104,300. These figures may therefore be acceptedas the maximum and minimum numbers for the period 1915 to 1922;but from what has been brought out relative to the surveys itwould seem that somewhat less than 215,000 is more nearly correctfor the beginning and about 110,000 the approximate number forthe end of the period." The second part of their report is a consideration of theestimated number of addicts "based on dosage and availablesupplies." Using as a basis for their computations anaverage daily dose of six grains of morphin sulphate, which theystate they obtained as a result of their studies, the authorsshow in tabular form in ten-year periods in the next table thenumber of addicts who would be supplied if all of the opiumentered for consumption were used for addicts. They state: "These figures are given for a period prior to the timewhen restrictions were placed on the traffic in opium, and therewas no incentive to the smuggling trade as there is to-day. It istherefore believed that at no time have there been more than246,000 opium addicts in the United States." ' A press release from the Narcotic Division of theProhibition Unit, Bureau of Internal Revenue, dated May 4, 1924,states: "It is estimated that there are upwards of 500,000drug addicts in the United States . . . . .. Following the same reasoning in regard to the total worldproduction of opium these authors conclude that at this rate"the total annual production of opium, exclusive of thatproduced in the countries of the Far East, if used entirely forthe satisfaction of addiction, would supply only about 566,000addicts." It is necessary to emphasize, as the authors themselves havepointed out, how impossible it is to obtain accurate statisticson the world opium production. The data upon which the aboveestimate of 566,000 was based were obtained from statisticscompiled by the Advisory Committee on Traffic in Opium of theLeague of Nations who the authors state, "admits that thefigures given are only estimates in the majority of cases."Further it should- be remembered that the annual productionfigures vary from year to year and an estimate based on thefigures for one year-the above estimate of 566,000 is based onthe production figures of 1922-is true for that year alone,granting that the figures are correct, and may be quite differentfrom those based on figures of other years. They continue: "It has been shown that at no time have the annualimportations of narcotic drugs into this country been greaterthan would be necessary to supply 264,000 addicts, assuming thatthey were used in their entirety for the satisfaction ofaddiction. No one contends that they were so used, but it hasbeen asserted that at least 75 per cent of the quantitiesimported are used for this purpose. It is believed that a fairlyaccurate estimate of the amounts used for the satisfaction ofaddiction subsequent to 1909, when the entry of smoking opium wasprohibited, can be obtained by using the import statistics givenin Tables 2 and 3. "For the four-year period, 1920-1923, the importations ofopium amounted to 144,805 pounds annually. For this same period5,282 ounces of opium alkaloids were imported annually. Thenarcotic division of the Bureau of Internal Revenue estimatesthat not over 15 per cent of these quantities get intoillegitimate channels. Making these deductions it may be assumedthat 123,084 pounds of opium and 4,490 ounces of opium alkaloidsare required annually to supply the legitimate medicinal needs ofthe country, including the needs of many old and incurableaddicts now being supplied by physicians, which number isconstantly decreasing. By subtracting these amounts from theamounts imported annually for the decade 1910 to 1919 we obtain242,971 pounds of opium and 22,653 ounces of opium alkaloids. "These quantities would supply approximately 100,000addicts for a year. Making similar computations for coca leavesand coca leaf alkaloids, it is found that approximately 9,000addicts could be supplied with the quantities which were formerlyimported in excess of what has been imported in recent years.This would make a total of 109,000 addicts who, prior to 1915,could have obtained their supplies of narcotics from thequantities imported legally. In view of the limited supplies ofmedicinal opium available in the world and the rigid control ofnarcotics exercised by this country, it is highly improbable thatthe combined quantities available to addicts in 1919 and 1920from smuggled sources and from leakage through legitimatechannels were more than sufficient to supply the number(109,000). This is probably too high, in view of the reductionwhich has been shown, but if we add to this figure the number ofaged and incurable addicts who received their supplies throughlegitimate channels, the total number of addicts in this countryfor the period stated was probably somewhere between 120,000 and140,000, which is in keeping with the figures arrived at from thesurveys and clinic reports. "That the quantities of narcotics smuggled into thiscountry are in all likelihood not as great as is believed bysome, is shown by the quantities reported as falling into thepossession of the Bureau of Internal Revenue in the enforcementof the narcotic laws. For the year ending June 30, 1922, thetotal quantity, including opium and coca leaves, preparationscontaining opium and coca leaves, the alkaloids of opium andcocaine, and preparations containing these alkaloids, was only4,447 pounds. In 1923 it was 542 pounds." In connection with the above statements, we should like topoint out that in our opinion a decrease in the amount of drugconfiscated does not necessarily indicate a decrease insmuggling. The report of the Special Committee of the TreasuryDepartment, 1918, states that "in recent years, especially since the enactment of theHarrison law, the traffic by 'underground' channels has increasedenormously, and at the present time it is believed to be equallyas extensive as that carried on in a legitimate manner!" Howmuch of this traffic found its source of supply in smuggling andto what extent the activities of the federal bureau charged withthe enforcement of the law have diminished smuggling operationssince 1918, we are unable to say. However, we believe that thesignificance of the above statement should be considered. Earlier in this chapter we have. pointed out theundesirability of attempting to make an estimate of the number ofaddicts based on the amount of the drug available for consumptionand the average daily dose. We again wish to point out thepresent lack of data, at least in our experience, which wouldwarrant the acceptance of any figure as a representative averagedaily dose for addicts. From their interviews with physicians the authors conclude asfollows: "Confirmation of the estimates based on the supplies ofnarcotics available and on the findings of the various surveys asto the number of addicts and the trend of narcotic addiction inthe United States is furnished by the experience of physicians asrelated to us. We have interviewed physicians from all parts ofthe United States and it is unusual to find one who has an addictamong his patients. Few besides those who have contact with penalinstitutions and sanitariums meet any great number. Manyphysicians still occasionally see a transient addict who drops inand begs for a dose, but this, too, is growing rare. Some of thephysicians who have been practicing for years in small towns andrural communities speak of addicts they have cured by the aid ofthe Harrison law or who have, without outside assistance, curedthemselves. Some of them are taking care of one or more old orincurable cases but from the information they give it seems thatnew cases of addiction are not arising to take the place of theold ones who die. "The accuracy of our observation is Supported by thefindings of Dr. Carleton Simon, special deputy policecommissioner in charge of the narcotic division of the policedepartment of New York City, who sent out a questionnaire to thephysicians in New York State. Of the 7,599 physicians whoreplied, only 52 per cent reported that they were treatingaddicts in 1922." Two questions arise as to the justification of the abovedeductions based on interviews with physicians throughout thecountry; first, were a sufficient and representative number ofphysicians interviewed to portray a fair picture of existingconditions; and second, is it reasonable to expect that themajority of addicts under present conditions place themselves inthe hands of physicians? In regard to the latter question webelieve that for reasons pointed out in the following chapter thetendency of the physician is to avoid contact with the problem ofaddiction. As a final conclusion in regard to the present number ofaddicts, the authors state: "The evidence seems to show that a maximum estimate forthe number of addicts in the United States at the present timewould be 150,000. The estimates based on actual counts and on theavailable supplies of narcotics, together with conditionsreported by the physicians interviewed, point to about 110,000,which number is believed to be nearly correct." In general, a review of the material already covered in thischapter will show it in the above study in the first placecertain surveys have not been taken into consideration and in thesecond place, incorrect deductions have been drawn from two ofthe official reports cited. Among the first may be named theJacksonville, Fla., survey made in 1913, about a year before theTennessee study. A consideration of the earlier surveys may havebeen omitted because of the supposed existence of differentinfluencing factors by reason of time. In regard to this point webelieve that however different conditions may be at the presenttime, the changes have not been great enough to eliminatecompletely the significance of these early figures. In regard to the second point, namely the incorrectdeductions, it is true that there actually were reported only73,150 addicts in the survey made by the special committee of theTreasury Department, 1918, which on the basis of 100 per centreplies would yield 237,655 addicts under treatment in the entirecountry. The report from which they take this figure has alreadybeen considered above. The figure which they quote is not givenin the original report as the committee's estimate of the totalnumber of addicts in the country, but only as the estimatednumber of addicts under treatment by physicians during the periodwhen the survey was made, as the report states, I............only a small portion of the total number of addicts presentedthemselves for treatment. Addicts of the 'underworld', forinstance, secure most of their supply through illicit channelsand rarely, if ever, consult a physician." Further, had Kolband Du Mez employed the figures resulting from queries sent tohealth officials they would have reached a total for the countryof 420,000 addicts, which figure, the committee's report states,"appears to be much too low in view of the fact that thephysicians of the country are estimated to have bad about 237,000addicts under treatment during the same period." Further onthe report of the Treasury Department, after considering theerrors potentially residing in all of the -figures presented,both from general and local sources, reaches the followingconclusion: "Taking these facts into consideration, thecommittee is of the opinion that the total number of addicts inthis country probably exceeds 1,000,000 at the present time,'-astatement which Kolb and Du Mez did not take into account. Again,these authors quoted only the lower figures and lost sight of thefinal estimate of the number of addicts in the state of New Yorkmade by Commissioner Herrick in his report of the work of theNarcotic Control Commission when he states: "I think a safe and conservative approximation would be39,000. The records of the Department show in round numbers13,000 registered addicts. This number is composed of those whoobtain habit-forming drugs through legitimate sources, that is,directly from a doctor or on prescriptions issued by a doctor,filled by a druggist, or from the different clinics establishedthroughout the State. To these figures should be added twice thenumber, which is an approximation of the users who, obtain drugsfrom peddlers, or other illicit sources. Of course, this latterfigure, as I have stated, is only an approximation. I base it onthe percentage of addicts among the great number with whom I havepersonally conferred, who have admitted that they obtained theirdrugs from peddlers or other illicit sources." The importance of these estimates in relation to their use asa basis for further estimates or comparisons is obvious. Finally in view of the various considerations pointed out inregard to the above study, we cannot agree that the ultimateestimate of 110,000 is warranted. While we on the one handdeplore unjustifiable, sensational exaggerations, on the other,we recognize the danger of basing maximal estimates on selecteddata. One other method of arriving at a satisfying conclusion as tothe extent of this problem exists. It is quite remote from whatwe may terra the mathematical procedure, and, while neitherspecific in its application nor concerned with actual numbers,includes presumptive evidence of such importance and brings intoconsideration such deeprooted human attributes and suchwell-known characteristics as to render it, perhaps, the mostimportant method of all, while, parodoxical as it may seem, theleast definite. We refer to a review of the growth in the use of opium through the many and varied motives aspresented and revealed by available historic record. That therehas been a continuous, marked increase in the consumption ofopium and its products in the United States, at least through1915, is shown in the following table of importations. The supplyhas but filled the demand. Tile conclusion is inevitable that thenumber of chronic users, for one reason or another, steadily hasbeen increasing, as upon the basis of the therapeutic use ofthese drugs alone-in the treatment of disease other than that ofchronic opium intoxication-such an increase would have beenimpossible. In 1915 two things occurred simultaneously, theimportations decreased and the illicit traffic began to develop.This doubtless was due chiefly to the fact that chronic users,because of the restrictions placed upon physicians andpharmacists in the handling of these drugs, sought their suppliesfrom underworld sources. It does not mean necessarily that theconsumption of opium has decreased. Inasmuch as this comprises a study of the development of theproblem of chronic opium intoxication we shall take it up in aseparate chapter, tracing its progress through the earlyunrestricted use and popularity of opium to relieve pain in thatperiod of medical enlightenment when attention was directed atsymptoms rather than cause, the ignorance of the dangers ofcontinued use, the discovery of its value for therapeutic uses,the influence of such writings as De Quincey's and others of hisday, the introduction and widespread use of the hypodermicsyringe, the influence of the Civil War and other wars, thepractice of opium smoking, the influence of the patent medicineindustry, the discovery and use of heroin, the illicit trafficwhich has grown up since the enactment of anti-narcotic laws andthe general lack of interest and laxness in medical teachings andpractice in the employment of opium preparations. RESUME The period covered in the foregoing material dates from theearliest time in which this problem in the United States appearsto have received individual or public recognition up to thepresent time. From beginning to end the material is fragmentary.Altogether very few surveys have been made and those that doexist are more or less imperfect due to one or another vitiatingfactor. Incompleteness seems to be an outstanding feature ofpractically all surveys. This may be explained by the nature ofthe problem and the prevailing early and present attitudes towardthe individuals affected, as a result of which they are notinclined to reveal their condition. Other influences tending torender the surveys already made inapplicable to generalizationare community variations such as race composition, method ofconducting survey, method of registration, classes represented insurvey, attitude and experience of investigators, etc. Moreover,singularly enough, in spite of a growing interest evinced in theproblem as a result of the enactment of the Harrison NarcoticAct, the results of several of the earlier investigations appearbetter adapted to generalization than most of those made publicsince the enforcement of this law. In consideration of the abovefactors it must be concluded that we do not know the total numberof opiate users in the United States today. Whatever their inaccuracies, these surveys and estimatesindicate sufficiently clearly the existence of a majormedico-social problem to make the denial of the existence of ageneral situation far more dangerous than its affirmation. As amatter of fact, it is not necessary to know the exact number ofusers or even the minimal extent, to realize that there are alarge number in the country and that the problem is serious. CliffSchaffer's Home Page Contents | Feedback | Search DRCNet Library | Schaffer Library | Major Studies | TheOpium ProblemWT01-B27-55IA031-000653-B006-24http://206.61.184.43:80/schaffer/LIBRARY/studies/lag/foreword.htm 206.61.184.43 19970122134608 text/html 4414HTTP/1.0 200 OKDate: Wednesday, 22-Jan-97 13:45:56 GMTServer: WebSitePro/1.1f (S/N wpo-0deb)Allow-ranges: bytesContent-type: text/htmlLast-modified: Saturday, 28-Dec-96 07:03:11 GMTContent-length: 4197 La Guardia Report on Marijuana - Foreword Contents | Feedback | Search DRCNet Library | Schaffer Library | Major Studies | LaGuardiaCommittee Report The LaGuardia Report FOREWORD by Fiorello LaGuardia As Mayor of the City of New York, it is my duty to foresee andtake steps to prevent the development of hazards to the health,safety, and welfare of our citizens. When rumors were recentlycirculated concerning the smoking of marihuana by large segmentsof our population and even by school children, I sought advicefrom The New York Academy of Medicine, as is my custom whenconfronted with problems of medical import. On the Academy'srecommendation I appointed a special committee to make a thoroughsociological and scientific investigation, and secured funds fromthree Foundations with which to finance these studies. My own interest in marihuana goes back many years, to the timewhen I was a member of the House of Representatives and, in thatcapacity, heard of the use of marihuana by soldiers stationed inPanama. I was impressed at that time with the report of an ArmyBoard of Inquiry which emphasized the relative harmlessness ofthe drug and the fact that it played a very little role, if any,in problems of delinquency and crime in the Canal Zone. The report of the present investigations covers every phase ofthe problem and is of practical value not only to our own citybut to communities throughout the country. It is a basiccontribution to medicine and pharmacology. I am glad that thesociological, psychological, and medical ills commonly attributedto marihuana have been found to be exaggerated insofar as theCity of New York is concerned. I hasten to point out, however,that the findings are to be interpreted only as a reassuringreport of progress and not as encouragement to indulgence, for Ishall continue to enforce the laws prohibiting the use ofmarihuana until and if complete findings may justify an amendmentto existing laws. The scientific part of the research will becontinued in the hope that the drug may prove to possesstherapeutic value for the control of drug addiction. I take this occasion to express my appreciation and gratitudeto the members of my committee, to The New York Academy ofMedicine, and to the Commonwealth Fund, the Friedsam Foundation,and the New York Foundation which supported these importantinvestigations so generously. F. H. LaGuardia Mayor Contents | Feedback | Search DRCNet Library | Schaffer Library | Major Studies | LaGuardiaCommittee ReportWT01-B27-56IA031-000653-B006-42http://206.61.184.43:80/schaffer/LIBRARY/studies/lag/intro.htm 206.61.184.43 19970122134617 text/html 11661HTTP/1.0 200 OKDate: Wednesday, 22-Jan-97 13:46:08 GMTServer: WebSitePro/1.1f (S/N wpo-0deb)Allow-ranges: bytesContent-type: text/htmlLast-modified: Saturday, 28-Dec-96 07:03:08 GMTContent-length: 11443 La Guardia Committee Report on Marijuana - Introduction Contents | Feedback | Search DRCNet Library | Schaffer Library | Major Studies | LaGuardiaCommittee Report INTRODUCTION E. H. L. Corwin, PhD, Secretary On September 13, 1938, The New York Academy of Medicine wasinformed of Mayor LaGuardia's concern about the marihuana problemand of his desire "that some impartial body such as The NewYork Academy of Medicine make a survey of existing knowledge onthis subject and carry out any observations required to determinethe pertinent facts regarding this form of drug addiction and thenecessity for its control." The Mayor's request was referredto the Committee on Public Health Relations of the Academy, whichCommittee on October 17, 1938, authorized the appointment of aspecial subcommittee to study the Mayor's request. This Subcommittee, consisting of Dr. George B. Wallace,Chairman, Dr. E. H. L. Corwin, Secretary, and Drs. McKeenCattell, Leon H. Cornwall, Robert F. Loeb, Currier McEwen, B. S.Oppenheimer, Charles Diller Ryan, and Dudley D. Shoenfeld,reviewed the existing literature on the subject. On the basis ofthis review, the Subcommittee could come to no conclusionregarding the effect of marihuana upon the psychological andphysiological functions of the human being. Nor were attempts tolearn the extent of the use of marihuana in New York City anymore successful. A conference with representatives of the PoliceDepartment, the Department of Education, the Department ofCorrection, the Psychiatric Division of the Department ofHospitals, the Court of Domestic Relations, the DistrictAttorney's office, and the Citizens Committee on the Control ofCrime served to emphasize the existing differences of opinionregarding the extent of the use of marihuana in this city and itsrelationship to crime. The Subcommittee therefore came to the conclusion that, inview of the possibility that marihuana smoking might constitutean important social problem, it was time that a study of itseffects be made based upon well-established evidence, andprepared an outline of methods of procedure for the study of theproblem. It recommended that such a study should be divided intotwo parts: ( 1 ) a sociological study dealing with the extent ofmarihuana smoking and the methods by which the drug is obtained;in what districts and among what races, classes or types ofpersons the use is most prevalent; whether certain socialconditions are factors in its use, and what relation there isbetween its use and criminal or antisocial acts; and (2) aclinical study to determine by means of controlled experimentsthe physiological and psychological effects of marihuana ondifferent types of persons; the question as to whether it causesphysical or mental deterioration; and its possible therapeuticeffects in the treatment of disease or of other drug addictions. The Committee on Public Health Relations adopted the report ofits Subcommittee and recommended to Mayor LaGuardia that heappoint a special committee to carry out the proposed study.Accordingly in January 1939 he appointed the Mayor's Committee onMarihuana, composed of the members of the Subcommittee of theCommittee on Public Health Relations which recommended the studyand four ex-officio members: Dr. Peter F. Amoroso, First DeputyCommissioner (later Commissioner) of Correction; Dr. Karl M.Bowman, Director of the Psychiatric Division of the Department ofHospitals; Dr. S. S. Goldwater, Commissioner of Hospitals- andDr. John L. Rich, Commissioner of Health. Upon his accession tothe commissionership of the Department of Hospitals, Dr. WillardC. Rappleye succeeded Dr. Goldwater as a member of thisCommittee. This Committee studied the broad outlines of theproposed plans for about a year before work was actually begun. At its first meeting in March 1939 two subcommittees wereappointed; one, consisting of Drs. Shoenfeld, Ryan, and Corwin,to plan the sociological study, and the other, composed of Drs.Cattell, Bowman, Cornwall, and Loeb, to work out the details ofthe clinical study. Drs. Bowman and Wechsler were appointed asspecial advisers for the clinical study and Dr. J. Murray Steeleand Dr. S. Bernard Wortis as the supervisors of this study. The studies were made possible by the financial support ofthree Foundations, the Friedsam Foundation, the New YorkFoundation, and the Commonwealth Fund, each of which donated$7,500. The whole amounts granted by the Friedsam Foundation andthe Commonwealth Fund and $5,000 of the New York Foundation'sgrant were to be applied to the clinical study- the remaining$2,500 given by the New York Foundation was earmarked for thesociological study. The Research Council of the Department ofHospitals undertook the financial supervision of the clinicalstudy and The New York Academy of Medicine that of thesociological study. The sociological study proceeded under the active direction ofDr. Dudley D. Shoenfeld and was carried out by six policeofficers who were trained by Dr. Shoenfeld as socialinvestigators. In acknowledgment of the great help rendered tothe Committee by these officers, the Committee passed thefollowing resolution at its meeting on March 18, 1941. Now that the sociological study of the marihuana problem inNew York City has been completed, the Mayor's Committee onMarihuana wishes to record its appreciation of the Mayor'sinterest in this problem and his placing at the disposal of theCommittee the services of the Narcotic Squad Division of thePolice Department. Without the cooperation of CommissionerValentine, Inspector Curtayne, Lieutenant Cooper, SergeantBoylan, and Detective Loures, this study would have beenimpossible. They helped in planning it and assigned to theCommittee six members of the Force, four men and two women, whoseintelligence, interest in the work, and desire to obtain thefacts of the situation were of invaluable aid in obtaining theinformation on which the sociological report is based. The fourmen and two women assigned to us made painstaking observationsand reports, acted as investigators and social workers and not aspolice officers, and brought to the performance of this task anative intelligence, specialized training, and civic interest.The thanks of the Committee are due to them and through them totheir superiors. The clinical study consisted of two parts; the medical,including psychiatric, and the psychological. Dr. Karl M. Bowmandirected the medical and psychiatric part of this study and Dr.David Wechsler the psychological part. The members of theCommittee closely supervised the work during the course of thestudy. The staff of the clinical study included: Samuel Allentuck, MD, Psychiatrist, who was in charge. Louis Gitzelter, MD Frank Anker, MD Assistant Physicians Robert S. Morrow, PhD Florence Halpern, MA Adolph G. Woltmann,MA Psychologists Miss Rose Horowitz, who was the secretary-stenographer and bookkeeper. The Committee is indebted to the Department of Hospitals formaking available two small wards and office space in the WelfareHospital (now known as the Goldwater Memorial Hospital), to Dr.Chrisman G. Scheri, the Superintendent of the hospital, and tothe laboratory staff of the Third Medical Division for theirassistance in the conduct of laboratory experiments.Acknowledgment should also be made of the services of Dr. RobertC. Batterman who interpreted the electrocardiograms and Dr. HansStrauss for the electroencephalographic work. Professor Walter R.Miles of Yale University assisted in the planning of thepsychological part of the study. This whole undertaking wouldhave been impossible without the help and cooperation of Dr.Peter F. Amoroso, of the Department of Correction, who, asidefrom his services as a member of the Committee, was responsiblefor arrangements for volunteers from among the prisoners of theRiker's Island Penitentiary. Thanks are due also to the medicalstaff of the Riker's Island Hospital for their assistance in thenarcotic addiction study. At the suggestion of Dr. Cattell a pharmacological study wasdone in the Department of Pharmacology of Cornell Medical Schoolby Dr. S. Loewe. Dr. W. Modell collaborated in this work. We areindebted to Dr. Roger Adams, Professor of Chemistry at theUniversity of Illinois, and to Dr. H. J. Wollner, ConsultingChemist of the United States Treasury Department, who suppliedsome of the active principles of marihuana which were used in thestudy. The names of those who conducted the investigations are givenunder the different chapters. Those sections of the report forwhich no author is indicated have been written by the Chairman ofthe Committee. The tremendous task of compiling, editing, and revising thereports was undertaken by Dr. George B. Wallace, the chairman ofthe Committee, and Miss Elizabeth V. Cunningham of the staff ofthe Committee on Public Health Relations of The New York Academyof Medicine. They had the assistance of Dr. Dudley D. Shoenfeld,who prepared the sociological report, Dr. David Wechsler, whorevised the psychological reports, and Dr. McKeen Cattell, whoedited the pharmacological report. In the judgment of the Committee, this painstaking studyshould be of considerable value from a scientific and socialviewpoint. Contents | Feedback | Search DRCNet Library | Schaffer Library | Major Studies | LaGuardiaCommittee ReportWT01-B27-57IA031-000653-B006-70http://206.61.184.43:80/schaffer/LIBRARY/studies/lag/socintro.htm 206.61.184.43 19970122134628 text/html 19224HTTP/1.0 200 OKDate: Wednesday, 22-Jan-97 13:46:19 GMTServer: WebSitePro/1.1f (S/N wpo-0deb)Allow-ranges: bytesContent-type: text/htmlLast-modified: Saturday, 28-Dec-96 07:02:54 GMTContent-length: 19006 La Guardia Committee Report, The Sociological Study Contents | Feedback | Search DRCNet Library | Schaffer Library | Major Studies | LaGuardiaCommittee Report The LaGuardia Committee Report, THE SOCIOLOGICAL STUDY Dudley D. Shoenfeld, MD INTRODUCTION In order to understand fully the purpose and scope of thisparticular part of the survey conducted by the Mayor's Committeeon Marihuana, a brief digest of the history of the growth andusage of this drug is essential. Indian hemp, from which marihuana (the American synonym forhashish) is obtained, has been known to man for more than threethousand years. This plant, although originally indigenous toCentral Asia, is now found in practically every section of theworld, growing either wild or cultivated, legally or illegally. When originally discovered, the use to which this plant wasprincipally put was the conversion of its fiber for commericalpurposes in the production of cord, twine and textiles. Shortlythereafter its pharmaceutical properties were employed in thepractice of medicine and surgery. Authoritative proof isavailable that the Chinese found it valuable as an effectiveanesthetic in surgery as far back as two thousand years. It wasnot until approximately the tenth century that the peoples ofAfrica and Asia began to use it in a rather indiscriminate mannerfor its intoxicating effects. Very shortly after its usage became popular, this drug engagedthe attention of the various African and Asian governments, aswell as of lay persons interested in medical, religious andsociological problems. Some of these very early investigatorspropounded the theory that physical and mental deterioration wasthe direct result of smoking hashish. Others extolled itsbenefits, deeming it actually essential to life, and urged peopleto indulge in it. During this early period, the peoples of Europe were aware ofthe use of hashish in Africa and Asia, and considered it a viceparticularly common to the peoples of those continents. In thenineteenth century their interest was raised to a high pitchbecause of the fictional reports of the smoking of hashish givenby the romanticists of that period. These individuals, who hadthe power of the pen, experimentally indulged in the smoking ofhashish, and described in an expansive, subjective manner theeffects the drug had upon them. A review of the fancifulliterature reveals that in most instances these writings referredto the authors' experiences with toxic doses. Summed up, theconclusions were that hashish could cause psychotic episodes andeven death and that prolonged use would result in physical andmental deterioration. The exalted position held by theseromanticists tended to influence the Europeans to accept theirconclusions as scientific monographs on the subject of hashish,so that the smoking of hashish did not become popular with them.However, in recent years there has been a fairly wideparticipation on the part of Europeans in smoking hashish ormarihuana, but it is referred to as an American vice. This allowsone to infer that whereas the knowledge pertaining to this habitwas very early recognized in Europe, at the present timeparticipation in it is from their point of view the direct resultof its introduction into Europe not from Africa and Asia, butfrom America. In America, Indian hemp was planted in the New Englandcolonies, solely for commercial purposes, as early as theseventeenth century. At the present time it can be found growingeither wild or cultivated, legally or illegally, in practicallyall our states. Lawful cultivation is confined principally to thestates of Kentucky, Illinois, Minnesota, and Wisconsin. It hasbeen estimated that not more than ten thousand acres are devotedto its legal production. It is of value commercially in themanufacture of rope, twine, and textiles. The seed is used forbird- food, and the oil extracted from the seed is occasionallyused as a substitute for linseed oil in the preparation ofartists' paints. A rosin extracted from the plant is used in theproduction of pharmaceutical preparations. Since the history of hemp cultivation in America dates back tothe seventeenth century, it is exceedingly interesting, butdifficult to explain, that the smoking of marihuana did notbecome a problem in our country until approximately twenty yearsago, and that it has become an acute problem associated with agreat deal of publicity only in the past ten years. The origin of the word "marihuana" is in doubt. Someauthorities are of the opinion that it is derived from thePortuguese word "mariguano," meaning intoxicant. Othersare of the opinion that it has its derivation in the Mexicanwords for "Mary and Jane." The introduction into theUnited States of the practice of smoking marihuana has been thesubject of a great deal of speculation. The most tenablehypothesis at the present time is that it was introduced byMexicans entering our country. It is accepted that in Mexico marihuana smoking is an old,established practice. Therefore, it would appear logical toassume that Mexican laborers crossing our border into theSouthwest carried this practice with them. Having used marihuanain their native land, they found it natural to continue smokingit in the new country, and planted it for personal consumption.Once available, it was soon made use of by our citizens. At thepresent time, the smoking of marihuana is widespread in thisnation. Believing that marihuana smoking might be deleterious, andknowing it to be widespread, federal and municipal governments,private individuals, and such agencies as the Opium AdvisoryAssociation, the International Narcotic Education Association,and others investigated the subject. These investigativeorganizations have contributed a great deal of data and pertinentinformation to the knowledge of the use of marihuana. The mass ofinformation so obtained when untangled can be summed up with thegeneral statement that a majority of investigators are of theopinion that marihuana smoking is deleterious, although aminority maintain that it is innocuous. The majority believe thatmarihuana smoking is widespread among school children; that thedispensers of the drug are organized to such an extent that theyencourage the use of marihuana in order to create an ever-increasing market; that juvenile delinquency is directly relatedto the effects of the drug; that it is a causative factor in alarge percentage of our major crimes and sexual offenses; andthat physical and mental deterioration are the direct result ofthe prolonged habit of smoking marihuana. As a result of these official and semi-official conclusions inregard to the disastrous effects produced by this habit, thenewspapers and magazines of our country have given it widepublicity. At this point it may be profitable to give theconclusions of some of the investigators and quote the publicityassociated with it. In a pamphlet "Marihuana or Indian Hempand Its Preparations" issued by the International NarcoticEducation Association, one finds: (quotation) Marihuana is a most virile and powerful stimulant. Thephysiological effect of this drug produces a peculiar psychicexaltation and derangement of the central nervous system. Thestage of exaltation and confusion, more marked in some addictsthan in others, is generally followed by a stage of depression.Sometimes the subject passes into a semi- conscious state,experiencing vivid and extravagant dreams which vary according tothe individual character and mentality. In some the stage is oneof self-satisfaction and well-being. In others, it is alarming,presenting the fear of some imminent and indefinite danger or ofimpending death. Later the dreams are sometimes followed by astate of complete unconsciousness. Sometimes convulsive attacksand acute mania are developed. The narcotic content in marihuana decreases the rate of heartbeat and causes irregularity of the pulse. Death may result fromthe effect upon the heart. Prolonged use of marihuana frequentlydevelops a delirious rage which sometimes leads to high crimes,such as assault and murder. Hence marihuana has been called the"killer drug." The habitual use of this narcotic poisonalways causes a very marked mental deterioration and sometimesproduces insanity. Hence marihuana is frequently called"loco weed." (Loco is the Spanish word for crazy.) While the marihuana habit leads to physical wreckage andmental decay, its effects upon character and morality are evenmore devastating. The victim frequently undergoes such degeneracythat he will lie and steal without scruple; he becomes utterlyuntrustworthy and often drifts into the underworld where, withhis degenerate companions, he commits high crimes andmisdemeanors. Marihuana sometimes gives man the lust to killunreasonably and without motive. Many cases of assault, rape,robbery, and murder are traced to the use of maribuana.(1) (end quotation) (1) International Narcotic Education Association."Marihuana or Indian Hemp and Its Preparations." LosAngeles, 1936. In an article published in the New York Daily Worker, NewYork, Saturday, December 28, 1940, there appeared under thecolumn headed "HEALTH ADVICE": (start quoted article) A DRUG AND INSANITY. Bill Wilson was strolling by his favorite soda joint on theway home from high school when he heard a familiar voice whisperloudly, "Hey, Bill, c'mere." Behind the Texacobillboard, he found his side-kick Jim, who said excitedly,"I got some reefers!" "Reefers, what'rethey?" Mysteriously, Jim reached into his pocket and pulled out twolarge cigarettes. "Marihuana!" Jim's pupils dilated."Come on over to the club and we'll smoke 'em. Boy, that'sfun!" Bill is only one of thousands of new marihuana smokerscreated yearly among boys and girls of high school age. What is this drug? It is a narcotic in the same class as opiumand is derived from a plant, which grows wild, extensively insome parts. For this reason, it is hard to control and the drugis easy to obtain at very little cost. Smoking of the weed ishabit-forming. It destroys the willpower, releases restraints,and promotes insane reactions. Continued use causes the face tobecome bloated, the eyes bloodshot, the limbs weak and trembling,and the mind sinks into insanity. Robberies, thrill murders, sexcrimes and other offenses result. When the habit is first started, the symptoms are milder, yetpowerful enough. The smoker loses all sense of time and space sothat he can't judge distances, he loses his self-control, and hisimagination receives considerable stimulation. The habit can be cured only by the most severe methods. Theaddict must be put into an institution, where the drug isgradually withdrawn, his general health is built up, and he iskept there until he has enough willpower to withstand thetemptation to again take to the weed. The spread of this terrible fad can be stopped only when theunscrupulous criminals trafficking In the drug are rooted out. (end quoted article) Dr. Robert P. Walton, Professor of Pharmacology of the Schoolof Medicine of the University of Mississippi, has written a mostcomprehensive book on the subject of marihuana, embodying indetail pharmacological and social studies.(2) A chapter on the"Present Status of the Marihuana Vice in the UnitedStates" was prepared by Dr. Frank R. Gomila, Commissioner ofPublic Safety of New Orleans, and C. G. Lambou, Assistant CityChemist. They refer to New Orleans as being possibly the firstlarge city in the United States where the drug habit becamewidely established among the native population, and theytherefore believe that the authorities in this city had a decidedopportunity to observe the progress of the smoking of marihuanaas a social problem. Referring specifically to the use ofmarihuana among school children, they state that reporters in NewOrleans not only heard about but observed large numbers of boysof school age actually buying and smoking marihuana cigarettes.One peddler was so brazen as to keep his stock under the streetstairs to a girls' high school. Inquiries further revealed that school children of forty-fourschools in New Orleans (only a few of these were high schools)smoked marihuana. As a result of exposure and widespreadagitation, (start quotation) Verifications came in by the hundreds from harassed parents,teachers, neighborhood pastors, priests, welfare workers and clubwomen. Warrington House for boys was full of children who hadbecome habituated to the use of cannabis. The superintendent ofthe Children's Bureau reported that there were many problemchildren there who had come under the influence and two who hadrun away because they couldn't get their "muggles" atthe Bureau. The Director of Kingsley House for boys received manypleas from fathers of boys who had come under the influence andwere charged with petty crimes. After personally seeing these boys in an hysterical conditionor on the well-known "laughing jags," the directortermed the situation decidedly grave. The Waif's Home, at thistime, was reputedly full of children, both white and colored, whohad been brought in under the influence of the drug. Marihuanacigarettes could be bought almost as readily as sandwiches. Theircost was two for a quarter. The children solved the problem ofcost by pooling pennies among the members of a group and thenpassing the cigarettes from one to another, all the puffs beingcarefully counted.... The result of these investigations ended in a wholesale arrestof more than 150 persons. Approximately one hundred underworlddives, soft-drink establishments, night clubs, grocery stores,and private homes were searched in the police raid. Addicts,hardened criminals, gangsters, women of the streets sailors ofall nationalities, bootleggers, boys and girls, -- many flashilydressed in silks and furs, others in working clothes -- all wererounded up in the net which Captain Smith and his squad had set. . . . Notwithstanding the thoroughness with which this policeroundup was carried out, it did not entirely eradicate in onestroke a vice which had already become so well established.During the next few years New Orleans experienced a crime wavewhich unquestionably was greatly aggravated by the influence ofthis drug habit. Payroll and bank guards were doubled, but thisdid not prevent some of the most spectacular holdups in thehistory of the city. Youngsters known to be"muggle-heads" fortified themselves with the narcoticand proceeded to shoot down police, bank clerks and casualbystanders. Mr. Eugene Stanley, at that time District Attorney,declared that many of the crimes in New Orleans and the Southwere thus committed by criminals who relied on the drug to givethem a false courage and freedom from restraint. Dr. GeorgeRoeling, Coroner, reported that of 450 prisoners investigated,125 were confirmed users of marihuana. Dr. W. B. Graham, StateNarcotic Officer, declared in 1936 that 60 per cent of the crimescommitted in New Orleans were by marihuana users.(3) (end quote) The Mayor's Committee on Marihuana decided to confine itsinvestigations to a limited area. For a number of reasons theBorough of Manhattan seemed to be the most profitable section ofthe city in which to concentrate. In order to crystallize ourparticular project we deemed it advisable to direct our effortsto finding answers to the following questions: 1. To what extent is marihuana used? 2. What is the method of retail distribution? 3. What is the general attitude of the marihuana smoker towardsociety and toward the use of the drug? 4. What is the relationship between marihuana and eroticism? 5. What is the relationship between marihuana and crime? 6. What is the relationship between marihuana and juveniledelinquency? In the course of our investigations, we have made extensiveuse of subjective data obtained from those who were actualsmokers of marihuana and directly acquainted with its effects andthose who were not smokers, but, because of residence, occupationor other interests, were acquainted with the general subject. (2) Walton, R. P. Marijuana: America's New Drug Problem. J. B.Lippincott Co., Philadelphia, 1938. (3) Ibid. Contents | Feedback | Search DRCNet Library | Schaffer Library | Major Studies | LaGuardiaCommittee ReportWT01-B27-58IA031-000653-B006-85http://206.61.184.43:80/schaffer/LIBRARY/studies/lag/organiz.htm 206.61.184.43 19970122134639 text/html 13319HTTP/1.0 200 OKDate: Wednesday, 22-Jan-97 13:46:28 GMTServer: WebSitePro/1.1f (S/N wpo-0deb)Allow-ranges: bytesContent-type: text/htmlLast-modified: Saturday, 28-Dec-96 07:03:00 GMTContent-length: 13101 LaGuardia Committee Report - Organization of Staff Contents | Feedback | Search DRCNet Library | Schaffer Library | Major Studies | LaGuardiaCommittee Report Organization of Staff In October 1939 Police Commissioner Lewis J. Valentinedesignated Deputy Chief Inspector Daniel Curtayne, LieutenantEdward Cooper, Sergeant Bernard Boylan and Detective JosephLoures of the Narcotic Squad of the Police Department of the Cityof New York to cooperate with the Mayor's Committee on Marihuana.These police officials submitted a list of intelligent youngofficers with a suitable background. From this list six officerswere selected: two policewomen, and four policemen, one of whomwas a Negro. They were: Mr. James Coen, Mr. William Connolly, Mr.Benjamin Weissner, Mr. John Hughes, Miss Adelaide Knowles andMiss Olive Cregan. These police officers were encouraged to readliterature on the subject of marihuana and to familiarizethemselves with some of the characteristics of the plant, as wellas of marihuana cigarettes. They became expert in detecting thearoma of burning marihuana, and were thus able to recognize itand to identify its use in a social gathering. Regular assignments were made by the director of the survey.At intervals each officer dictated a general report on hisactivities and findings to a stenographer engaged by theCommittee. Frequent conferences were held in the office of thedirector of the survey, at which time individual reports werediscussed in detail and evaluated. An attempt was made to give the "marihuana squad" apsychological approach to the performance of their duties. At notime were these officers permitted to make known their activityto other members of the police force, or to make arrests. Thisarrangement was considered essential in order that they mightmaintain an effective role of investigator without being in anyrespect recognized as police officers. Although they were membersof the police force and constantly in contact with violators oflaw, their immediate superiors cooperated to an extreme degree byallowing the "marihuana squad" to report directly tothe director of the survey. While on duty the squad actually "lived" in theenvironment in which marihuana smoking or peddling was suspected.They frequented poolrooms, bars and grills, dime-a-dance halls,other dance halls to which they took their own partners, theatres-- backstage and in the audience -- roller-skating rinks,subways, public toilets, parks and docks They consorted with thehabitues of these places, chance acquaintances on the street,loiterers around schools, subways and bus terminals. They posedas "suckers" from out of town and as students incolleges and high schools. We highly commend these officers individually for theirexceptionally good performances. The aid given by Deputy ChiefInspector Daniel Curtayne, Lieutenant Edward Cooper, SergeantBernard Boylan and Detective Joseph Loures throughout deservesmention and appreciation. At times we must have been a source ofannoyance to them, but our requests were always cheerfully metand assistance heartily extended. Method of Retail Distribution In general, marihuana is used in the form of a cigarette.Occasionally some individuals chew the "weed" and seemto get the same effect as do others through smoking. The commonnames for the cigarettes are: muggles, reefers, Indian hemp,weed, tea, gage and sticks. Cigarettes made of marihuana differin size as do cigarettes made of tobacco: they are long, short,thick or thin. The price varies in accordance with the accepted opinion as tothe potency of the marihuana used in the cigarettes, and thisappears to be determined by the place of origin. The cheapestbrand is known as "sass-fras," and retails forapproximately three for 50 cents. It is made of the marihuanathat is grown in the United States. Smokers do not consider suchmarihuana very potent. They have found that they must consume agreater number of cigarettes in order to obtain the desiredeffect colloquially termed as "high." This opinion,expressed by smokers in the Borough of Manhattan, is at variancewith that of some authorities who believe that marihuana grown inthe United States is as potent as the marihuana grown in othercountries. The "panatella" cigarette, occasionally referred toas "meserole," is considered to be more potent than the"sass-fras" and usually retails for approximately 25cents each. The hemp from which the "panatella" is madecomes from Central and South America. "Gungeon" is considered by the marihuana smoker asthe highest grade of marihuana. It retails for about one dollarper cigarette. The "kick" resulting from the use ofthis cigarette is reached more quickly than from the use of"sassafras" or "panatella." It appears to bethe consensus that the marihuana used to make the"gungeon" comes from Africa. The sale of this cigaretteis restricted to a clientele whose economic status is of a higherlevel than the majority of marihuana smokers. A confirmed marihuana user can readily distinguish the qualityand potency of various brands, just as the habitual cigarette orcigar smoker is able to differentiate between the qualities oftobacco. Foreign-made cigarette paper is often used in order toconvince the buyer that the "tea is right from theboat." There are two channels for the distribution of marihuanacigarettes-- the independent peddler and the "tea-pad."From general observations, conversations with "pad"owners, and discussions with peddlers, the investigatorsestimated that there were about 500 "tea-pads" inHarlem and at least 500 peddlers. A "tea-pad" is a room or an apartment in whichpeople gather to smoke marihuana. The majority of such places arelocated in the Harlem district. It is our impression that thelandlord, the agent, the superintendent or the janitor is awareof the purposes for which the premises are rented. The"tea-pad" is furnished according to the clientele itexpects to serve. Usually, each "tea-pad" hascomfortable furniture, a radio, victrola or, as in mostinstances, a rented nickelodeon. The lighting is more or lessuniformly dim, with blue predominating. An incense is consideredpart of the furnishings. The walls are frequently decorated withpictures of nude subjects suggestive of perverted sexualpractices. The furnishings, as described, are believed to beessential as a setting for those participating in smokingmarihuana. Most "tea-pads" have their trade restricted to thesale of marihuana. Some places did sell marihuana and whisky, anda few places also served as houses of prostitution. Only one"teapad" was found which served as a house ofprostitution, and in which one could buy marihuana, whisky, andopium. The marihuana smoker derives greater satisfaction if he issmoking in the presence of others. His attitude in the"tea-pad" is that of a relaxed individual, free fromthe anxieties and cares of the realities of life. The"tea-pad" takes on the atmosphere of a very congenialsocial club. The smoker readily engages in conversation withstrangers, discussing freely his pleasant reactions to the drugand philosophizing on subjects pertaining to life in a mannerwhich, at times, appears to be out of keeping with hisintellectual level. A constant observation was the extremewillingness to share and puff on each other's cigarettes. Aboisterous, rowdy atmosphere did not prevail and on the rareoccasions when there appeared signs indicative of a belligerentattitude on the part of a smoker, he was ejected or forced tobecome more tolerant and quiescent. One of the most interesting setups of a "tea-pad,"which was clearly not along orthodox lines from the businesspoint of view, was a series of pup tents arranged on a roof-topin Harlem. Those present proceeded to smoke their cigarettes inthe tents. When the desired effect of the drug had been obtainedthey all merged into the open and engaged in a discussion oftheir admiration of the stars and the beauties of nature. Because of the possibility of spreading disease, note shouldbe taken of what seems to be a custom known as"pick-up" smoking. It is an established practicewhereby a marihuana cigarette is lit and after one or twoinhalations is passed on to the next person. This procedure isrepeated until all present have had an opportunity to take a puffor two on the cigarette. Occasionally a "tea-pad" owner may have peddlers whosell their wares in other localities and at the same time serveas procurers for those who wish to smoke marihuana on thepremises. One also finds other methods of retail distribution. Afterproper introduction, one may be able to purchase the cigarette incertain places. This is not an easy procedure, but it can beaccomplished. In some bar-and-grills, restaurants, and bars ourinvestigators were able to establish contact with someone who inturn, would introduce them to a peddler who apparently maderegular rounds of these places in order to sell cigarettes. Itappears that the owners of such places are not aware of thispractice, and in many instances they would discharge any employeeknown to be directly or indirectly associated with the sale ofmarihuana. On rare occasions public guides, if properly approached wouldrefer one to a place where the "reefer" could bebought. There was no evidence that the guide received money whenacting as go- between. Terminal porters, mainly Negroes, appearedto be more directly connected with the traffic of marihuana. Theywere more conversant with the subject and it was easier for themto establish contact between purchaser and peddler. Marihuana smoking is very common in the theatres of Harlemaccording to the observations of the investigators. We havereason to believe that in some instances, perhaps few in number,employees actually sold cigarettes on the premises. In the Harlemdance halls smoking was frequently observed either in thelavatories or on the main floor. The patrons as well as themusicians were seen in the act of smoking. There was no evidenceof sales being made by employees on the premises, or that therewas any gain on the part of the owners or employees in permittingthis practice. Whereas the smoking of marihuana was notencouraged, nothing was done to prohibit such practice. There are specific sections in the Borough of Manhattan wherethe sale of marihuana cigarettes appears to be localized: 1) theHarlem district; 2) the Broadway area, a little east and west ofBroadway and extending from 42nd Street to S9th Street. While itis true that one may buy the cigarette in other districts, it isnot as easily obtainable as in the two localities mentioned. Contents | Feedback | Search DRCNet Library | Schaffer Library | Major Studies | LaGuardiaCommittee ReportWT01-B27-59IA031-000653-B006-112http://206.61.184.43:80/schaffer/LIBRARY/studies/lag/attitude.htm 206.61.184.43 19970122134650 text/html 16531HTTP/1.0 200 OKDate: Wednesday, 22-Jan-97 13:46:41 GMTServer: WebSitePro/1.1f (S/N wpo-0deb)Allow-ranges: bytesContent-type: text/htmlLast-modified: Saturday, 28-Dec-96 07:03:22 GMTContent-length: 16313 The Mental Attitude of the Marijuana Smoker Toward Societyand M Contents | Feedback | Search DRCNet Library | Schaffer Library | Major Studies | LaGuardiaCommittee Report The LaGuardia Committee Report on Marihuana The Mental Attitude of the Marihuana Smoker Toward Societyand Marihuana Most of the smokers of marihuana coming within the scope ofour survey were unemployed, and of the others most had part-timeemployment. Occasional, as well as confirmed, users were all aware of thelaws pertaining to the illegal use of the drug. They did notindulge in its use with a spirit of braggadocio or as a challengeto law as has been reported by some investigators in otherdistricts. They did not express remorse concerning their use ofmarihuana, nor did they blame this habit as a causative factor inthe production of special difficulties in their personal lives.Except for musicians there appeared to be no attempt atsecretiveness on the part of the habitual smoker. This attitudeis in marked contrast to that usually taken by those addicted tomorphine, cocaine, or heroin. The consensus of marihuana users is that the drug is notharmful and that infrequent or constant use of marihuana does notresult in physical or mental deterioration. In describing the most common reaction to the drug they alwaysstated that it made them feel "high." Elaboration ofjust what the smoker meant by "high" varied with theindividual. However, there was common agreement that a feeling ofadequacy and efficiency was induced by the use of marihuana andthat current mental conflicts were allayed. Organic illness wasnot given as a cause for smoking "reefers." A person may be a confirmed smoker for a prolonged period, andgive up the drug voluntarily without experiencing any craving forit or exhibiting withdrawal symptoms. He may, at some time lateron, go back to its use. Others may remain infrequent users of thecigarette, taking one or two a week, or only when the"social setting" calls for participation. From time totime we had one of our investigators associate with a marihuanauser. The investigator would bring up the subject of smoking.This would invariably lead to the suggestion that they obtainsome marihuana cigarettes. They would seek a "tea-pad,"and if it was closed the smoker and our investigator would calmlyresume their previous activity, such as the discussion of life ingeneral or the playing of pool. There were apparently no signsindicative of frustration in the smoker at not being able togratify the desire for the drug. We consider this point highlysignificant since it is so contrary to the experience of users ofother narcotics. A similar situation occurring in one addicted tothe use of morphine, cocaine, or heroin would result in acompulsive attitude on the part of the addict to obtain the drug.If unable to secure it, there would be obvious physical andmental manifestations of frustration. This may be consideredpresumptive evidence that there is no true addiction in themedical sense associated with the use of marihuana. The confirmed marihuana smoker consumes perhaps from six toten cigarettes per day. He appears to be quite conscious of thequantity he requires to reach the effect called "high."Once the desired effect is obtained he cannot be persuaded toconsume more. He knows when he has had enough. The smoker determines forhimself the point of being "high," and is everconscious of preventing himself from becoming "toohigh." This fear of being "too high" must beassociated with some form of anxiety which causes the smoker,should he accidentally reach that point, immediately to institutemeasures so that he can "come down." It has been foundthat the use of such beverages as beer, or a sweet soda pop, isan effective measure. Smokers insist that "it does somethingto the stomach" and that it is always associated with"belching." A cold shower will also have the effect ofbringing the person "down." Smokers have repeatedly stated that the consumption of whiskywhile smoking negates the potency of the drug. They find it isvery difficult to get "high" while drinking whisky, andbecause of that smokers will not drink whisky while using the"weed." They do, however, consume large quantities ofsweet wines. It is their contention that this mild alcoholicbeverage aids the drug in producing the desired effect. Mostmarihuana smokers insist that the appetite is increased as theresult of smoking. We have been unable to confirm the opinion expressed by someinvestigators that marihuana smoking is the first step in the useof such drugs as cocaine, morphine, and heroin. The instances areextremely rare where the habit of marihuana smoking is associatedwith addiction to these other narcotics. Marihuana and Eroticism In the popular agitation against the use of marihuana, itserotic effects have been stressed repeatedly. As previouslystated in this report, our investigators visited many"tea-pads" in the Borough of Manhattan. It is true thatlewd pictures decorated the walls but they did not find that theywere attracting attention or comment among the clientele. In factone of the investigators who was concentrating his attention onthe relation between marihuana and eroticism stated in his reportthat he found himself embarrassed in that he was the only one whoexamined the pictures on the wall. Numerous conversations with smokers of marihuana revealed onlyoccasional instances in which there was any relation between thedrug and eroticism. At one time one of our investigators attendeda very intimate social gathering in an apartment in Harlem,having succeeded in securing the position of doorman for theoccasion. There was a great deal of drinking, and the dancing was of themost modern, abandoned, "jitter-bug" type. This form ofdancing is highly suggestive and appears to be associated witherotic activity. The investigator made careful observation ofthose who were dancing, and found that there was no differencebetween the ones who were and the ones who were not smoking"reefers." Similar impressions were received aftercareful observations in public dance halls, places where theyknew that some persons were under the influence of marihuana. Visits to brothels which occasionally also served as"teapads" revealed that the use of marihuana was notlinked to sexuality. These observations allow us to come to theconclusion that in the main marihuana was not used for directsexual stimulation. Crime One of the most important causes of the widespread publicitywhich marihuana smoking has received is the belief that thispractice is directly responsible for the commission of crimes. During our investigation many law enforcement officers,representing various federal, state and local police bureaus,were interviewed and asked for a confidential expression ofopinion on the general question of crime and marihuana. In mostinstances they unhesitatingly stated that there is no proof thatmajor crimes are associated with the practice of smokingmarihuana. They did state that many marihuana smokers are guiltyof petty crimes, but that the criminal career usually existedprior to the time the individual smoked his first marihuanacigarette. These officers further stated that a criminalgenerally termed as a "real" or"professional" criminal will not associate withmarihuana smokers. He considers such a person inferior andunreliable and will not allow him to participate in thecommission of a major crime. In the period beginning October 1939 and ending November 1940,the Police Department made 167 arrests for the possession and useof marihuana. Classified according to race they were: white, 33men, 4 women; Latin-American, 26 men, 2 women; Negro, 83 men, 6women; Latin-American (colored) 9 men, 1 woman- British EastIndies 1, Filipino 1, Chinese 1. Classified according to age, 12per cent were between the ages of 16 and 20, 58 per cent betweenthe ages of 21 and 30, 24 per cent between the ages of 31 and 40,and 6 per cent between the ages of 41 and 50. During the period under discussion, the Police Departmentconfiscated approximately 3,000 pounds of marihuana. The sale and use of marihuana is a problem engaging thevigilance of the New York Police Department. However, the numberof officers available for such duty is limited. Officersspecifically assigned to the Narcotics Division of the PoliceDepartment are acquainted with the problem, but the majority ofthe officers are fundamentally without authoritative knowledgeregarding this subject. The relation between marihuana smoking and the commission ofcrimes of violence in the city of New York is described by Dr.Walter Bromberg, psychiatrist-in-charge of the Psychiatric Clinicof the Court of General Sessions, in an article published in theJournal of the American Medical Association: (start quotation) In the south of this country (New Orleans) the incidence ofmarihuana addicts among major criminals is admittedly high.Sporadic reports from elsewhere in the country of murders andassaults due to marihuana appear in the press frequently. It isdifficult to evaluate these statements, because of theiruncritical nature. The bulletin prepared by the Foreign PolicyAssociation lists ten cases "culled at random from the filesof the U.S. Bureau of Narcotics" of murder and atrociousassault in which marihuana was directly responsible for thecrime. Among the ten patients, the second, J. O., was described ashaving confessed how he murdered a friend and put his body in atrunk while under the influence of marihuana. J. O. was examined in this clinic; although he was apsychopathic liar and possibly homosexual, there was noindication in the examination or history of the use of any drug.The investigation by the probation department failed to indicateuse of the drug marihuana. The deceased, however, was addicted toheroin. Our observations with respect to marihuana and crime were madein the Court of General Sessions over a period of five and a halfyears. The material in that court is limited as to residence toNew York County, although it must be remembered that theoffenders come from many sections of the country and are of manyracial types. This is important, because the Britishinvestigators have noted in India that cannabis does not bringout the motor excitement or hysterical symptoms in Anglo-Saxonusers that occur in natives. There are several other difficultiesin collecting reliable material, one being the completedependence on the history and statements of the prisoners withoutan opportunity for objective tests or other corroborative check,as in the case of other drugs, e.g., heroin or morphine. During routine interviews of some 17,000 offenders in six anda half years, several hundred have been found who had directexperience with marihuana. Their testimony checks withexperimental results and clinical experiences with regard to thesymptoms of intoxication, the absence of true addiction, and thenegative connection with major crime. Especially is thisnoteworthy among sexual offenders and in cases of assault ormurder. The extravagant claims of defense attorneys and the pressthat crime is caused by addiction to marihuana demands carefulscrutiny, at least in this jurisdiction.... Most of the narcotic cases in New York County are heard in theCourt of Special Sessions, where misdemeanants are handled andwhere indictments on charges of the possession of drugs for useare returned. In the Court of Special Sessions in the samesix-year period, of approximately 75,000 indictments for allcrimes, 6,000 resulted in convictions for the possession and useof drugs. Since neither the law, the district attorney nor the policedepartment makes any distinction between the several kinds ofnarcotics in arraignments or indictments, there were no figuresfrom which to estimate the number of users of marihuana asdistinguished from the number of users of other drugs. A systemof sampling the 6,000 cases was therefore adopted in order tofurnish an approximate estimate of the total number of marihuanausers who came into conflict with the law. In this sampling the records of 1,500 offenders, or 25 percent of the 6,000, were examined. Of these, 135 were charged inconnection with marihuana. From this fact it was estimated thatabout 540 offenders, or 9 per cent of all drug offenders comingto the Court of Special Sessions in six years, were users ofmarihuana. In analyzing this sample of 135 cases, it was foundthat 93 offenders had no previous record, the previous charges orcharges of 8 concerned only drugs, 5 had records including drugcharges and 29 had records not including drug charges. Amongthose with longer records, that is, from four to seven previousarrests, none showed progression from the use of drugs to othercrimes. As measured by the succession of arrests and convictions inthe Court of General Sessions (the only method of estimation) itcan be said that drugs generally do not initiate criminalcareers. Similarly, in the Court of Special Sessions, only 8 percent of the offenders had previous charges of using drugs and 3.7per cent had previous charges of drugs and other petty crimes. Inthe vast majority of cases in this group of 135, then, theearlier use of marihuana apparently did not predispose to crime,even that of using other drugs. Whether the first offenderscharged with the use of marihuana go on to major crime is amatter of speculation. The expectancy of major crimes followingthe use of cannabis in New York County is small, according tothese experiences.(4) (end quotation) Bromberg, W., "Marihuana: a psychiatric study." J.A.M.A. 113: 4, 1939. Contents | Feedback | Search DRCNet Library | Schaffer Library | Major Studies | LaGuardiaCommittee ReportWT01-B27-60IA031-000653-B006-135http://206.61.184.43:80/schaffer/LIBRARY/studies/lag/children.htm 206.61.184.43 19970122134721 text/html 22493HTTP/1.0 200 OKDate: Wednesday, 22-Jan-97 13:46:57 GMTServer: WebSitePro/1.1f (S/N wpo-0deb)Allow-ranges: bytesContent-type: text/htmlLast-modified: Saturday, 28-Dec-96 07:02:48 GMTContent-length: 22275 La Guardia Committee Report -- Marijuana and SchoolChildren Contents | Feedback | Search DRCNet Library | Schaffer Library | Major Studies | LaGuardiaCommittee Report The LaGuardia Committee Report on Marijuana Marihuana and School Children One of the most serious accusations leveled against marihuanaby special feature writers has been that it is widely used by theschool children of this nation. These authors have claimed thatit has so detrimental an effect on development that it is a majorfactor in juvenile delinquency. This phase of the marihuanaproblem was deemed serious enough to merit primary considerationin our study of the marihuana problem in New York City --specifically in the Borough of Manhattan. We decided to attackthis aspect of the problem along the following lines: To observe schools in order to see if pupils bought marihuana cigarettes from any peddlers operating in the neighborhood. To investigate thoroughly complaints made by parents to school and police authorities relative to marihuana and its use by school children. To interview principals, assistant principals, and teachers of many of the schools in New York City with reference to our project. To gather relevant statistics from various city bureaus and private agencies. Unknown to the school authorities, our investigators had undersurveillance many of the schools in the Borough of Manhattan.They would observe a particular school for a number ofconsecutive days, watch loiterers and suspicious characters inthe locality, and, under certain circumstances, follow some ofthe children. This procedure was repeated at varying intervals indifferent localities. From time to time the investigators wouldreturn to some of the schools which they previously had keptunder surveillance. Attention was naturally concentrated uponthose schools from which emanated the most numerous complaintsand which were located in suspected neighborhoods. We must admitthat it would have been possible for such sales to have takenplace during the time that our investigators were not on duty,but we came to the conclusion that there was no organized trafficon the part of peddlers in selling marihuana cigarettes to thechildren of the schools we observed. Certain of the school authorities deserve special commendationfor their alertness in singling out suspicious charactersloitering in the vicinity of their schools. While investigatingone of the suspected schools, our investigators who wereloitering in the neighborhood were suspected and treated as"suspicious characters" by the school authorities. During the period of this survey the Police Department whileengaged in an entirely separate criminal investigation received alead indicating the sale of marihuana to children in a certainhigh school. As a result, one pupil was arrested and convictedfor selling cigarettes to his classmates. In the Harlem district we discovered a few places where schoolchildren gathered during and after school hours for the purposeof indulging in smoking ordinary cigarettes, drinking alcoholicbeverages, and engaging in homosexual and heterosexualactivities. One of our investigators, having gained entrance to such aplace, ostentatiously displayed marihuana cigarettes which he hadwith him. The madam of the place promptly cautioned him againstusing the "weed" and insisted that at no time did shepermit any person to smoke it on her premises. A surprising number of school children smoking ordinarycigarettes were noted. A checkup revealed that these cigaretteswere being illicitly sold by men on the street and in candystores in the "loose" form. It is possible that thistrade in ordinary cigarettes is occasionally misinterpreted astrade in "reefers." Interviews with school authorities were very significant, andit is of value to summarize briefly some of the statementsactually made by them. The locations of the schools and the namesof the persons quoted are in our official files. High School. Predominantly white. The principal stated, "The school has never had any connection with marihuana, not even a rumor." High School. Predominantly white. The principal at first appeared to be evasive and did not readily volunteer information, but after repeatedly being pressed with the question stated that the school "had not had any difficulty with the subject of marihuana." High School. Predominantly white. The principal emphatically stated, "I have had no trouble with marihuana in my school." A vocational school in the Borough of Queens. Mixed. "I have never heard the slightest thing about marihuana in connection with this school." High School. Queens. Mixed. "We never had the slightest connection with marihuana in any way." Junior High School. Harlem. Predominantly Negro and Latin-American. The principal stated that there had been a few marihuana cases among the boys about eighteen months ago. His assistant volunteered the information that there had been some boys in the school who had "reefers" in their possession. On other occasions some of the boys appeared to be intoxicated and when examined confessed to having smoked "reefers." He further stated, "It was difficult to be sure if sleepy, perspiring, pallid-looking boys were feeling the effects of marihuana or were just recovering from too much 'partying' or drinking." He volunteered the opinion that since marihuana was an acute problem among the adult population in that particular district, it could be assumed that marihuana could occasionally become a problem in the school. Junior High School. White and Latin-American. On the fringe of Harlem. Principal and assistant principal stated that they have never had the slightest difficulty arising from marihuana. Junior High School. White and Negro. Bordering on Harlem. The principal, because of his short tenure of office, was unable to express his opinion on the subject. The chief clerk stated that marihuana had never been a problem in the school. She was certain, however, that it was sold in the neighborhood. Junior High School. White, with a high percentage of Negro and Latin-American. The principal stated, "As yet we have had no contact with marihuana although, considering the neighborhood, it would not be unlikely." Junior High School. Latin-American, Negro, and some white. The principal stated, "We have had no trouble with marihuana." He was of the opinion that because of the locality it would be possible for some older boys to smoke it without anybody being cognizant of it. He added that he would let us know if any boys were detected smoking. During the period of the survey no such report was made. Junior High School. Latin-American predominating. The principal stated that she had not had any trouble with marihuana. Junior High School. White predominating. The principal stated, "I have had no contact with it." However, due to the location of the school, which was near Harlem, she stated she would notify the Juvenile Aid Bureau if such a problem arose. During the period of the survey no such report was received. Junior High School. White. The principal stated that no information concerning the use of any narcotics had ever come to his attention and was equally insistent that teachers would have reported any such information to him. Junior High School. White. The principal stated that she had never found anything to indicate the use of any drug in the school. Junior High School. White and mixed. The principal stated that last year he had suspected that a group of chronic truants were using marihuana but he was unable to obtain any direct evidence. Junior High School. White. The principal and his assistant stated that they had no real evidence of any marihuana problem in the school, and they do not believe that the drug is used to any extent. Junior High School. White. The principal stated that although she had no tangible evidence of marihuana smoking among the students, she has problem groups that gather in premises where she is inclined to think that marihuana could be obtained if they wished to get it. She is certain no marihuana is used in the school itself. We investigated thoroughly the suggestions made by the principal as to premises where marihuana might be sold but we were unable to gather any evidence of its sale. Junior High School. White. The acting principal and a teacher in the school who had been there for a number of years stated that there had never been any evidence of the use of marihuana or any other drugs in the school. Junior High School. White. The health director of this school stated that any evidence concerning the use of narcotics by pupils would have been called to his attention, but none had been. Junior High School. White. The authorities stated that there had been no traces of marihuana smoking. Junior High School. White. The authorities stated that there had never been the slightest suggestion of marihuana smoking in the school. Junior High School. White. The assistant principal stated that he knew of no marihuana problem in the school. Junior High School. White. The principal stated that because of the publicity given to marihuana smoking she had been on the alert to discover indications of its use in her school but had found no evidence of marihuana in the school or of anything that would lead her to believe that any one of her students used marihuana outside of the school. Junior High School. White. The principal stated that nothing pertaining to the use of narcotics had been reported to him in all the years he had been there. High School. Predominantly white. Authorities, including the medical department, stated that no student had ever been reported for being under the influence of marihuana. High School. Predominantly white. The principal stated, "There is no indication of a marihuana problem in the school." Grammar School. The principal stated that anonymous letters had been received from time to time from pupils in the school in reference to marihuana. One letter was actually signed by a pupil of the school, who reported the sale of marihuana in a candy store in the vicinity. The principal with held the name of the pupil but requested us to investigate the report. We kept this school, the immediate neighborhood, and all candy stores in the vicinity under strict surveillance, but were unable to gather any evidence which would indicate that the pupils of this school were obtaining marihuana. Junior High School. Negro. Queens. The assistant principal stated that he had never heard anything about marihuana being a problem in his school. We had received a complaint about this school and one of our investigators had an informal chat with one of the teachers of this school who, because of her interest in the school children, appeared to be more conversant than anyone else with general problems at the school. She stated that she was certain marihuana was used by some of the students. She elaborated on the subject and recalled that a few months prior to the interview she had sent home five students (three Negroes and two Italians) whom she had noticed acting "dopey" in the classroom after the noon recess. She was not positive they were under the influence of marihuana but was fairly certain that they were under the influence of some drug. A student had told her that these boys used "reefers" and, noticing their stupor, she had concluded that they were under the influence of marihuana. Superficial examination showed her that their condition was not due to drinking whisky or any alcoholic beverage. In this school it was not necessary to notify the principal if a student was sent home. The teacher did so on her own account, arriving at a diagnosis without informing the principal of the condition. There was no doctor or nurse to examine the students. Grammar School. Negro. The principal and the social worker attached to this school stated that some time prior to the interview they had heard that cigarettes were being sold to children in Harlem. We were told of a certain man who was suspected of selling them to the children. The social worker was certain that a year before the interview marihuana cigarettes were sold on a certain street in Harlem to school children, but she had no knowledge as to whether the condition existed at the time of our investigation. While working on another part of the survey, we interviewed a young Negress, approximately 20 years of age, who was a marihuana smoker. She stated that she and another girl started to smoke marihuana cigarettes while attending this particular school. High School. Mixed, predominantly white. The principal stated that he was positive that there was no marihuana problem in his school. High School. Predominantly white. A student was arrested for selling marihuana cigarettes to other pupils. We kept this school under surveillance after the arrest. Although we heard rumors that the sale of marihuana would start again, we were unable to gather any evidence of this. Our investigators attended the dance of the graduating class of this school at one of the hotels in the city. The dance was well conducted and had a large attendance. There was no evidence of smoking at this affair. The principal was cooperating with the Juvenile Aid Bureau of the Police Department in conducting the investigation of the marihuana problem in his school. High School. White and Negro. Although rumor is widespread that "reefer" smoking is common at this school, thorough investigation did not produce evidence of it at the time of our investigation. We did obtain information, which we consider authoritative, that in 1935 a man was offered the concession to sell marihuana cigarettes to the students of this school. He refused the offer. The principal of this school stated that there had never been any trouble as a result of marihuana smoking and he knew of no actual cases. High School. White, Negro, and Latin-American. The director of health education, who was conversant with the subject, stated that the school had no problem with regard to marihuana smoking on the premises but that a Puerto Rican student who lived in Harlem had informed him that he could obtain marihuana cigarettes in his locality. College. White, some Negroes and Latin-Americans. We did not interview the authorities. Observation of the be havior of and conversation with students did not reveal any marihuana problem. College. White, some Negroes and Latin-Americans. This college is located near one of the famous "tea-pads" of Harlem. Many of the students pass the house regularly. Continued observation did not reveal any student attendance. Junior High School. Negro. Most of the boys of this school were familiar with the subject of marihuana. The pupils of the school are incessant smokers of ordinary cigarettes. We were unable to obtain any information which would indicate that they used "reefers." Some students were observed entering a house in which there was a "tea-pad," but we never found any of the occupants of this "tea-pad" to be pupils of the school. The counselor at the school stated that during the previous term there were suspicions regarding the use of marihuana. Junior High School. Negro. The principal, who is considered qualified to discuss this subject, stated that for the three months prior to the interview there had been no marihuana problem. She ventured the opinion that a few cases do arise in the spring and summer. Observation of this school reveals that practically every day young boys between the ages of 18 and 20 loitered near the gates of the schoolyard at the close of the session. Some of these boys were known to our investigators as "reefer" smokers, and they associated with the girls of the school. Two young girls known by our investigators to be "reefer" smokers stated that they started to smoke marihuana while at that school. High School. White, many Negroes and Latin-Americans. Many students smoked ordinary tobacco cigarettes. Numerous complaints and rumors were associated with this school. The principal stated that in 1934 they had an acute marihuana problem but that at the present time they did not think it existed. They are constantly on guard, especially at the beginning of a term, because they get many new students from the Harlem district. We are of the opinion that there are definite signs indicating that there is some marihuana smoking in the school. High School. Negro and white. The principal of this school stated that they did not have a marihuana problem. We are certain, however, that this school does to some extent present an acute problem for we have observed a few students smoking "reefers" away from the school. We have reason to believe that some of them smoke it while at school. The girls attending this high school have a very low moral standard. On the basis of the above statements and findings, we feeljustified in concluding that although marihuana smoking may beindulged in by small numbers of students in certain schools ofNew York City, it is apparently not a widespread or largescalepractice. In the belief that actual facts concerning the roleplayed by marihuana in the production of juvenile delinquencycould best be revealed in the records of the Children's Court ofNew York City, we interviewed the proper authorities on thissubject. On the basis of the Children's Court records for 1939,marihuana is not an important factor in the development ofdelinquency. Contents | Feedback | Search DRCNet Library | Schaffer Library | Major Studies | LaGuardiaCommittee ReportWT01-B27-61IA031-000653-B006-155http://206.61.184.43:80/schaffer/LIBRARY/studies/lag/conc1.htm 206.61.184.43 19970122134730 text/html 3760HTTP/1.0 200 OKDate: Wednesday, 22-Jan-97 13:47:21 GMTServer: WebSitePro/1.1f (S/N wpo-0deb)Allow-ranges: bytesContent-type: text/htmlLast-modified: Saturday, 28-Dec-96 07:02:35 GMTContent-length: 3543 LaGuardia Committee Report Sociological Study --Conclusions Contents | Feedback | Search DRCNet Library | Schaffer Library | Major Studies | LaGuardiaCommittee Report The LaGuardia Report - Sociological Study Conclusions From the foregoing study the following conclusions are drawn: Marihuana is used extensively in the Borough of Manhattan but the problem is not as acute as it is reported to be in other sections of the United States. The introduction of marihuana into this area is recent as compared to other localities. The cost of marihuana is low and therefore within the purchasing power of most persons. The distribution and use of marihuana is centered in Harlem. The majority of marihuana smokers are Negroes and Latin-Americans. The consensus among marihuana smokers is that the use of the drug creates a definite feeling of adequacy. The practice of smoking marihuana does not lead to addiction in the medical sense of the word. The sale and distribution of marihuana is not under the control of any single organized group. The use of marihuana does not lead to morphine or heroin or cocaine addiction and no effort is made to create a market for these narcotics by stimulating the practice of marihuana smoking. Marihuana is not the determining factor in the commission of major crimes. Marihuana smoking is not widespread among school children. Juvenile delinquency is not associated with the practice of smoking marihuana. The publicity concerning the catastrophic effects of marihuana smoking in New York City is unfounded. Contents | Feedback | Search DRCNet Library | Schaffer Library | Major Studies | LaGuardiaCommittee ReportWT01-B27-62IA031-000653-B006-170http://206.61.184.43:80/schaffer/LIBRARY/studies/lag/clinic1.htm 206.61.184.43 19970122134739 text/html 12011HTTP/1.0 200 OKDate: Wednesday, 22-Jan-97 13:47:30 GMTServer: WebSitePro/1.1f (S/N wpo-0deb)Allow-ranges: bytesContent-type: text/htmlLast-modified: Saturday, 28-Dec-96 07:03:16 GMTContent-length: 11793 LaGuardia Committee Report -- Clinical Study Contents | Feedback | Search DRCNet Library | Schaffer Library | Major Studies | LaGuardiaCommittee Report The LaGuardia Report THE CLINICAL STUDY PLAN AND SCOPE Interest in the effects of marihuana on the human subjectfollows two main lines: first, concerning what may be calledpleasurable effects which account for its widespread use- andsecond, regarding undesirable effects, including those leading tocriminal and other antisocial acts. In his monograph on marihuana, Walton has reviewed at lengththe literature on hashish experience. He has grouped thesedescriptions as retrospective accounts by professional writersand physicians who have taken the drug through curiosity orscientific interest, reports by physicians concerning patientswho have taken excessive doses, and observations by psychiatristson subjects under marihuana influence. In all of these instancesa dose toxic to the individual had been taken and the effectsdescribed correspond to psychotic episodes of greater or lessdegree. In the literature there are commonly described two basic typesof effect, one of excitation, psychic exaltation, and innerjoyousness, with divorcement from the external world; the other astate of anxiety with fear of consequences, such as death orinsanity. Either one of these types of reaction may beexperienced alone, but usually both are present during theintoxication. They occur in no regular sequence but replace eachother in rapid succession. The euphoric and anxiety states aregenerally accompanied by mental confusion, a rapid flow ofdissociated ideas, and a feeling of prolongation of time andspatial distortion. Sexual desires or phantasies may also occur. The detailed descriptions of the experience vary. Those givenby trained writers, such as Ludlow and Bayard Taylor, are vividand dramatic, embodying sensual, visual, and auditoryillusions-phantasies of overpowering splendor and beauty, on theone hand, and intense suffering and horror on the other. Theauthors, familiar with stories of hashish effects and gifted withstrong imaginative powers, undoubtedly were expectant of muchthat happened. The account given by the eminent Philadelphiaphysician, H. C. Wood, while following the same general pattern,has much less embellishment. He describes a feeling of well-beingand inner joyousness and buoyancy and the performance of anticswhich he knew to be foolish but was unable to control. He wasable to recall no illusions or hallucinations. Later a state ofanxiety came on, developing into an overpowering fear of death. A number of studies by psychiatrists on selected subjects havebeen reported. An excellent example is that of Kant and Krapf.Each acted as subject for the other and the effects of marihuanaare described and analyzed at length. In general, the objectivein such studies is the interpretation of the reactions in termsof disturbances in psychological processes and functionings. Thedescriptions referred to have been given by persons of a highersocial class, well educated and accustomed by training to act inconformity with conventional social behavior. Although a state ofirritability may occur and threats of suicide be made byindividuals of this type under toxic doses of marihuana, it isnoteworthy that in none of the descriptions is there found anexpression of antagonism or antisocial behavior which led to actsof violence or what would be called criminal conduct. Of more direct interest are the publications of WalterBromberg, psychiatrist, Bellevue Hospital,Psychiatrist-in-Charge, Psychiatric Clinic, Court of GeneralSessions of New York County. Marihuana users who are broughtbefore the court or admitted to the hospital come under hisobservation and he has reported at length on the psychiatricobservations of 29 of these who showed psychotic reactions. Hedescribes two types of reactions, one an acute marihuanaintoxication with a psychotic syndrome, the other a toxicpsychosis. Acute intoxication occurs in any individual if themarihuana is taken in sufficiently large doses. It comes onpromptly and passes off some hours later. In marihuana psychosis,the symptoms are much more severe and of longer duration. Hedescribes a number of cases in which the psychotic statecontinued for a number of days and required hospitalization. The toxic psychosis seen in marihuana users occurs at any timeand is of indefinite duration. Bromberg states that therelationship between cannabis and the onset of a functionalpsychotic state is not always clear. The personality factor is ofundoubted importance and other toxic agents, such as alcohol andother drugs, as well as endogenous elements, may be involved. Thesymptoms, except for the longer duration, resemble those observedin persons under marihuana intoxication, but often take on thecharacteristics seen in schizophrenic or manic- depressivepsychosis. A description of 11 cases admitted to Bellevue Hospital isgiven for illustration. The marihuana was taken in the form ofcigarettes. In this group were 5 Negroes, 2 of whom were women, 1Puerto Rican, and 5 whites, one of whom was a Mexican and anothera boy of 16. Except for one of the whites, a homosexual, theywere all of a low intellectual and social order. One of theNegroes was arrested for following women in Central Park. Theothers were admitted at their own request, or were sent in by thepolice or family. Three of the group had definite sexualstimulation but in none was there an outburst in the form of anattack on women. The Puerto Rican became confused and excited andbegan chasing people with an ice pick. Shortly after hisdischarge he was readmitted to the hospital, was diagnosed asdefinitely psychotic, and was transferred to a state hospital asa schizophrenic. The majority of the group, 8 in fact, hadpsychopathic personalities and 3 of these were transferred tostate institutions for further care. The group as a whole isrepresentative of those who come into the hands of the policebecause of abnormal conduct and who are the source of thesensational newspaper and magazine stories. Bromberg's findings concerning the lack of a positiverelationship between marihuana and crime are described in thesociological section of this study. In marihuana literature, the action of the drug is usuallydescribed from retrospective observation of the effects on asingle individual. Relationship to varying dosage, to thesubject's personality and background, to environmental conditionswhen the drug was taken, is given little if any attention. It isthe lack of information concerning these and other factorsinvolved in marihuana reaction which has given rise to thepresent confusion regarding its effects. The clinical study here described was designed to affordinformation not found in marihuana literature but necessary forany comprehensive view of marihuana action. For obtaining thisinformation there were these requisites: an adequate number ofsubjects for the study, a clear understanding of the mental andphysical make-up of each subject, a uniformity of environmentalfactors, accurately graded dosage of marihuana, and standardizedmethods of obtaining and recording marihuana effects. In additionto defining the usual and unusual effects of marihuana, as shownby subjective and objective symptoms and alterations in behaviorand in physical reaction, the study was expected to answerquestions which must arise in consideration of the problem as awhole. Of special importance are these: Do marihuana users showfundamental traits differentiating them from non-users? Do userspresent evidence of psychological or physical damage directlyattributable to the drug? What are the pleasurable effects whichaccount for the widespread usage of marihuana? To what extentdoes it lead to antisocial or dangerous behavior? The sections covering the clinical study are under thefollowing headings: A. Medical Aspects 1. Symptoms and Behavior 2. Organic and Systemic Functions B. Psychological Aspects 1. Psychophysical and Other Functions 2. Intellectual Functioning 3. Emotional Reactions and General Personality Structure 4. Family and Community Ideologies C. Comparison Between Users and Non-Users from theStandpoint of Mental and Physical Deterioration D. Addiction and Tolerance E. Possible Therapeutic Applications Organization for the Study The clinical studies were carried out at the Welfare Hospital(1) a New York City hospital for chronic diseases on WelfareIsland. The quarters assigned to the study consisted of a ward ofeight beds for the group to be studied at any one period, anadjoining ward of two beds for the study of individuals of thegroup, three additional rooms with equipment for specialexaminations, and a diet kitchen for the preparation of thesubjects' meals. Four female nurses were employed and the subjects in thelarger ward were under constant supervision. In addition toroutine records, each nurse reported the behavior of the subjectswhile she was on duty. Guards were assigned from the Departmentof Correction and the New York City Police Force for the subjectsdrawn from the Riker's and Hart Island penitentiaries and theHouse of Detention for Women. The facilities of the Third Medical Division laboratory wereused for general clinical laboratory examinations and for moredetailed study of organ functioning. For measurement ofpsychological reactions, special apparatus was provided. Adescription of equipment used for each division of the study isgiven under its proper section. Contents | Feedback | Search DRCNet Library | Schaffer Library | Major Studies | LaGuardiaCommittee ReportWT01-B27-63IA031-000653-B006-194http://206.61.184.43:80/schaffer/LIBRARY/studies/lag/subjects.htm 206.61.184.43 19970122134752 text/html 12296HTTP/1.0 200 OKDate: Wednesday, 22-Jan-97 13:47:42 GMTServer: WebSitePro/1.1f (S/N wpo-0deb)Allow-ranges: bytesContent-type: text/htmlLast-modified: Saturday, 28-Dec-96 07:01:52 GMTContent-length: 12078 LaGuardia Committee Report - Subjects Selected for theStudy Contents | Feedback | Search DRCNet Library | Schaffer Library | Major Studies | LaGuardiaCommittee Report Subjects Selected for the Study For the purpose of establishing a uniform plan of procedure tobe followed throughout the study, a test group of 5 individualswho had had no previous experience with marihuana was selected.These were volunteers who were paid for their services. They wereof a low socio-economic level, but classified as of better thanaverage intelligence. Only one of the group came within the rangeof what is considered normal personality. They represented thetype of person who would readily take to marihuana were theopportunity offered. The main group, 72 subjects, was drawn from the inmates of thepenitentiaries at Riker's and Hart Islands and the House ofDetention for Women, all of which are under the supervision ofthe Department of Correction of New York City. There were twoadvantages in selecting subjects from this particular group;first, they could be kept under continuous observation throughoutthe period desired, and second, they constituted an excellentsample of the class in New York City from which the marihuanauser comes. The subjects all volunteered for the study afterhaving its purpose and the part they were to take in it fullyexplained to them. Race, Sex and Age. Of the group, 65 were males and 7 were females; 35 were white,26 were Negroes, and 11 were Puerto Ricans. The ages ranged from21 to 37 years except for one who was 45 and another who was 43.Of the women, 6 had been opium addicts for a number of years. Previous Experience with Marihuana. Forty-eight of the group, including 6 of the women, gave ahistory of marihuana smoking. The extent of the usage wasvariable- for some it was occasional, while others had indulgedin the habit fairly steadily over a period of years. Of the 48users, those who were sellers of marihuana were probably the mostconsistent smokers, as in carrying on the traffic they wouldendeavor to keep a stock on hand. But in any instance, the numberof cigarettes smoked during any stated period would varyaccording to circumstance. Thus one user stated that he smokedfrom 2 to 6 marihuana cigarettes a day, another from 10 to 15 aday, another 3 or 4 a week, and another 5 or 6 a month. Those whosmoked daily are here classified as steady users, those whosmoked when opportunity was offered but not daily, as occasionalusers. (TABLE 1) The users had all been deprived of marihuana from the time oftheir arrest, the shortest period being two weeks, the longest,one year and ten months. They all stated that the habit had oftenbeen interrupted voluntarily and the enforced discontinuation ofit had caused no discomfort. Health Record. The subjects were individually selected by Dr. Allentuck assuitable for the study. A physical and neurological examinationat the hospital showed no evidence of disease. However, theWassermann and Kline tests gave positive results for 6 subjectsand the Kline test alone was positive for 2 and doubtful for 2.These figures are consistent with those of the population fromwhich the group was selected. Of the 12,000 inmates of theRiker's Island Penitentiary in 1940 and the 8,000 in 1941, 10 percent reacted positively to serological tests. Intelligence Record. Sixty subjects (40 users and 20 nonusers ) to whom theBellevue Adult Intelligence Test was given had an average I.Q. of99.3, range 70 to 124. The average I.Q. of the user group was96.7, range 70 to 124, while that for the non-user group was104.5, range 93 to 114. When analyzed according to racial distribution, the two groupswere even better equated intellectually than the total resultsindicate. Of the 28 white subjects examined, the average I.Q. ofthe 13 users was 106.1, range 77 to 124, and that of the 15non-users was 106.3, range 96 to 114. The 19 Negro users had anaverage I.Q. of 92.6, range 70 to 112, and the 5 Negro non-usersaveraged 98.8, range 93 to 101. Although in the colored group thenon-users averaged 6.2 points higher than the users, it must betaken into account that the number of Negro non-users tested wassmall. The average I.Q. of the 8 Puerto Rican users was 91.0,range 72 to 100; that is, they were very similar in mentalability to the Negro users. From the results obtained from theBellevue Adult Intelligence Test, one may conclude that neitherthe users nor the nonusers were inferior in intelligence to thegeneral population. Marihuana Used The marihuana that was used for oral administration wassupplied by Dr. H. J. Wollner, Consulting Chemist of the UnitedStates Treasury Department. It was in the form of an alcoholfluid concentrate, the alcohol content ranging from 55 to 67.3per cent and the content of solids from 22.9 to 33.6 Sm. per 100cc. According to the bio-assay made by Dr. S. Loewe of theDepartment of Pharmacology of the Cornell University MedicalSchool, the strength of the fluid concentrate was found to befrom 71 to 90 per cent of that of the U.S.P. fluid extract forcannabis marketed by Parke, Davis and Company. The fluid extractwas not miscible with water and had a characteristic,disagreeable taste which made it easily recognized. For thesereasons the concentrate was evaporated to a viscid consistencyand made into pill form, with glycyrrhiza as the excipient. Eachpill was equivalent to 1 cc. of the concentrate. For controls, glycyrrhiza pills without marihuana were used.Several products prepared by Dr. Roger Adams in his investigationof the chemistry of marihuana were used. A comparison of theiraction with that of the concentrate will be found below. Inaddition to the concentrate, marihuana cigarettes were used.These were obtained from supplies confiscated by the New YorkCity Police. Each contained approximately from .4 to .8 gm. ofmarihuana. As the quality of the marihuana varied and the amountof active principles taken in with the smoke was unknown, therewas no exactness in dosage. In general, however, it appeared thatsmoking 2 cigarettes was equivalent to taking 1 pill. The minimal dose of the concentrate which produced clearcuteffects was 2 cc. During the repeated observations on each memberof the group larger doses were given, commonly up to around 8 cc.and in one instance up to 22 cc. For smoking, from one to as manyas eleven cigarettes were used. The Active Principles. Determination of relative potencies of drugs having similaraction can be made on human beings to a limited extent only. Thecomparison is based on easily measurable effects on some organ orsystem on which the drug has a highly selective action, but theexisting state of the system influences greatly the ensuingresult. Marihuana effects come mainly from action on the centralnervous system. The type and degree of response of this system tostimuli of various origins vary in different individuals and inthe same individual at different times. When marihuana is giventhe pre-existing state cannot be classified but it has influencein determining the response, and the same dose of marihuana doesnot produce identical effects in different subjects or in onesubject at different times. In general, however, when the dosegiven is definitely effective the responses are of a fairlyuniform character. For this reason the relative potency of the active principlessupplied by Dr. Roger Adams could be determined onlyapproximately. The principles used were the naturaltetrahydrocannabinol, the synthetic isomer, and the synthetichexylhydrocannabinol. These all brought on effects similar tothose of the marihuana concentrate. The estimate of theirrelative potency is as follows: 1 cc. of the concentrate,representing the extraction from 1 Gm, of marihuana, had as itsequivalent 15 mg. of the natural tetrahydrocannabinol, 60 mg. ofthe synthetic hexylhydrocannabinol, and 120 mg. of the synthetictetra compound. In explaining the differences in the estimatedpotencies, the rates of absorption must be taken into accountsince the action of marihuana depends on the amount of activeprinciple absorbed and its concentration in the brain at acertain time. The main conclusion is that the action of the marihuanaconcentrate is dependent on its tetrahydrocannabinol content andthat the synthetic compounds retain the action of the naturalprinciple. Procedure The procedure for examining the main group of subjects wasadopted in the light of the experience gained from thepreliminary study. The subjects were brought to the hospital in groups of fromsix to ten, and they stayed there from four to six weeks. Eachsubject had his history taken and was given a physicalneurological, and psychiatric examination on the day ofadmission. Since it has been shown that pulse variation is the mostconstant index of marihuana action, the pulse rate was recordedevery half hour during the day with the subjects at rest for fiveminutes before each reading. During the following days, through careful observation by theDirector, the general make-up of the subject, his personality,the character of his responsiveness, and his behavior in newsurroundings were determined both before and while he was underthe influence of marihuana. Additional information came throughthe nurses' reports. In addition, each subject was given a series of tests beforeand after the administration of marihuana in order that thechanges brought about by the drug might be measured. Includedamong these tests were psychological tests for mental functioningand emotional reactions, psychomotor tests for both simple andcomplex psychophysical functions, tests to determine suchabilities as musical aptitude and the perception of time andspace, and laboratory examinations to test the functioning of thevarious organs and systems of the body. Contents | Feedback | Search DRCNet Library | Schaffer Library | Major Studies | LaGuardiaCommittee Report WT01-B27-64IA031-000653-B006-229http://206.61.184.43:80/schaffer/LIBRARY/studies/lag/symp.htm 206.61.184.43 19970122134803 text/html 13070HTTP/1.0 200 OKDate: Wednesday, 22-Jan-97 13:47:52 GMTServer: WebSitePro/1.1f (S/N wpo-0deb)Allow-ranges: bytesContent-type: text/htmlLast-modified: Saturday, 28-Dec-96 07:01:41 GMTContent-length: 12852 LaGuardia Committee Report on Marijuana -- Symptoms andBehavior Contents | Feedback | Search DRCNet Library | Schaffer Library | Major Studies | LaGuardiaCommittee Report LaGuardia Committee Report on Marihuana Medical Aspects SYMPTOMS AND BEHAVIOR Samuel Allentuck, MD IN PRELIMINARY GROUP The preliminary study of the 5 volunteer subjects had for itspurpose the establishment of methods of procedures to be followedfor the main group, and the obtaining of a general picture of thephysical and mental effects induced by the drug. Having noknowledge of the safe limits of marihuana dosage, the dosagegiven to this group was restricted to from 1 to 4 cc. of theconcentrate, and for smoking from 1 to 3 cigarettes. When ingested, 1 cc. of marihuana was slightly effective, themultiples of this more so. There was noted in all subjects someincrease in pulse rate and in blood pressure, dilated andsluggish pupils, dryness of the mouth and throat, ataxia, andsome clumsiness and incoordination of movement. Symptomsdistinctly disagreeable were dizziness in 3 subjects, a sense ofheaviness of the extremities in 2, nausea in 2 and faintness in2. Three showed motor restlessness. A state classed as euphoria,characterized by laughter, witticisms, loquaciousness, andlowering of inhibitions occurred in 3 subjects. This was notsustained but alternated with periods during which disagreeablesymptoms were dominant. In one of the subjects (V.C.) there wasno euphoric state, but a feeling of discomfort and depressionthroughout. Finally in one of the 5 (A.V.) with 2 cc. There was astate of depression with anxiety and with 4 cc. a psychoticepisode with fear of death. With the exception of the one individual during his psychoticepisode, the subjects gave no evidence of abnormal mental contentat any stage of the drug action, the only change noted being adelay in focusing attention on questions asked and difficulty insustaining mental concentration. While there was objection attimes to carrying out repetitious tests, there was no definiterefusal. There was no sexual stimulation giving rise to overtexpression. With the cigarette smoking, ataxia and charges in the pulserate, blood pressure, and pupils corresponded to those followingoral administration. In only one of the subjects, however, wasthere definite euphoria. The common symptoms were dizziness anddrowsiness. Two of the subjects found it difficult toconcentrate. The duration of the effects of marihuana was variable. When itwas ingested, the effects usually passed off in from two to fourhours, but in one instance persisted for seven hours and inanother for fourteen hours. After smoking, the duration ofeffects was from one to three hours. IN MAIN GROUP The evidence of the effects of marihuana was obtained by thesubject's statement of symptoms and sensations, by the nurses'reports and by the examiner's observations and interpretation ofchanges in the subject's mental state and behavior. The dosage of the marihuana concentrate ranged from 2 to 22cc. and in each subject the effects of more than one dose werestudied. Dosage ranging from 2 to 5 cc. was used for the largestnumber of subjects, and that from 14 to 21 cc. on only sevenoccasions. It is known that marihuana intoxication may bringabout a comatose state, but no attempt was made to determine thedosage required for this. The number receiving each of theselected doses is shown in Table 2. (TABLE 2) While the duration of action and its intensity tended toincrease with dosage, this was not always the case and equaldoses did not bring about uniform effects in all those receivingthem. Thus, 3 cc. produced a striking effect in one individual,much less in another in still another, 10 cc. produced lesseffect than S cc. Such variations are to be explained bydifferences in the mental make-up of the subject, and theparticular state of his responsiveness at the time when marihuanais taken. The number of cigarettes smoked ranged from one to eleven. Thesmoking of a single cigarette took about ten minutes and up toeight could be smoked in an hour. In smoking, increasing thenumber of cigarettes usually increased the sensation described as"high," but here also there was no uniformity inindividuals or groups. When marihuana was ingested, in dosages from 2 cc. up, itsactions became evident in from one half to one hour. The maximumeffects were seen in from two to three hours. These subsidedgradually, but the time of disappearance was variable, usuallythree to five hours, in some instances twelve hours or more. When marihuana cigarettes were used the effects appearedalmost immediately. After one cigarette, these had usuallydisappeared in an hour. After several cigarettes had been smokedthe effects increased progressively in intensity and reached amaximum in about an hour. In most instances they disappeared infrom three or four hours. The Concentrate Behavior Symptoms. The effects on the general behavior of the subjects taking theconcentrate were variable. If left undisturbed some remainedquietly sitting or lying, showing little interest in theirsurroundings. Others were restless and talkative. Under theheading "Euphoria" there are listed those marihuanaeffects which give rise to pleasurable sensations or experiences.These are a sense of well-being and contentment cheerfulness andgaiety, talkativeness, bursts of singing and dancing,daydreaming, a pleasant drowsiness, joking, and performingamusing antics. The drowsiness, daydreaming and unawareness ofsurroundings were present when the subject was left alone. Othereuphoric expressions required an audience and there was muchcontagiousness of laughing and joking where several of thesubjects under marihuana were congregated. The occurrence of aeuphoric state, in one or another form, was noted in most of thesubjects. But except for those who were allowed to pass the timeundisturbed, the pleasurable effects were interrupted from timeto time by disagreeable sensations. Quite commonly seen, as with the preliminary group, was adifficulty in focusing and sustaining mental concentration. Thus,there would occur a delay in the subject's answers to questionsand at times some confusion as to their meaning. There was,however, except in a few isolated instances, no abnormal mentalcontent evident and the responses brought out by the examinerwere not different from those in the pre-marihuana state. Altered mental behavior which would give rise to more concernwas seen in a relatively small number of subjects. In some thistook the form of irritation at questioning, refusal to complywith simple requests and antagonism to certain of the examiners.There was, however, only verbal and no active opposition in anyof these behaviors, caused by the subject's desire to be leftundisturbed and his disinclination to carry out certain testswhich in his pre-marihuana period he had considered tiresome andmeaningless. With this came antipathy to those conducting thetests. The occurrence of the disagreeable physical symptomsaccompanying marihuana action would naturally lead to a feelingof disquietude and some alarm as to significance andconsequences. This, however, was a prominent feature in relatively fewinstances. A pronounced state of anxiety reaching a panic stage,associated usually with fear of death or of insanity, wasobserved only in those subjects experiencing psychotic episodesand here the anxiety state led to pleas for escape and not toacts of aggression. Even in the psychotic states there were nouncontrollable outbursts of rage or acts of violence. Some evidence of eroticism was reported in about 10 per centof the 150 instances in which marihuana was administered to thegroup. The presence of nurses, attendants and other womenassociated with the study gave opportunity for frank expressionof sexual stimulation, had this been marked. There was no suchexpression even during the psychotic episodes. In some isolated instances there was evidence of markedlowering of inhibitions such as loud discharge of flatus,urinating on the floor instead of in the vessels supplied, and inone instance frank exhibitionism. In the last instance thesubject, who was not a regular marihuana user, had been arrestedon three occasions for indecent exposure. The frequency with which significant changes in behavioroccurred is indicated in Table 3 (TABLE. 3) As used in Table 3, anxiety means the subject's expressedworry concerning what might happen to him. Excitement, shown byphysical restlessness, muscular twitchings and jerky movements,and loud talking, and some degree of antagonism are known to beexpressions of an "alarm" or "fear" state. It is seen from this table that, except for euphoria, theeffect of marihuana was definitely more pronounced on thenonusers. This might be taken as evidence of a persistingtolerance to the drug in the user group, but, on the other hand,it may have as its basis a feeling of greater apprehension in thenonusers. Such a feeling would undoubtedly arise among those whohave had no previous experience with marihuana and are in a stateof uncertainty as to its possible harmful effects. Physical Symptoms. Of the subjective symptoms, a feeling described as lightness,heaviness, or pressure in the head, often with dizziness, was oneof the earliest and occurred in practically all subjects,irrespective of dose. Dryness of the mouth and throat werereported by over half of the subjects as was also a floatingsensation. Unsteadiness in movement and a feeling of heaviness inthe extremities were commonly experienced as was a feeling ofhunger and a desire for sweets especially. Less commonly notedwere nausea, vomiting, sensations of warmth of the head or body,burning of the eyes and blurring of vision, tightness of thechest, cardiac palpitation, ringing or pressure in the ears, andan urge to urinate or defecate. From observation by the examiner, tremor and ataxia werepresent in varying degrees in practically all instances and inall dosages used, as were also dilatation of the pupils andsluggish response to light. These effects were often present on the day followingmarihuana administration. The frequency of the more common subjective symptoms and theirrelation to dosage is shown in Table 4. The figures are takenfrom the subject's reports. There is a tendency for the symptoms to be more frequent inthe non-users than in the users but the differences are variableand in general not striking. Contents | Feedback | Search DRCNet Library | Schaffer Library | Major Studies | LaGuardiaCommittee ReportWT01-B27-65IA031-000653-B006-249http://206.61.184.43:80/schaffer/LIBRARY/studies/lag/jackb.htm 206.61.184.43 19970122134818 text/html 14017HTTP/1.0 200 OKDate: Wednesday, 22-Jan-97 13:48:08 GMTServer: WebSitePro/1.1f (S/N wpo-0deb)Allow-ranges: bytesContent-type: text/htmlLast-modified: Saturday, 28-Dec-96 07:02:10 GMTContent-length: 13799 La Guardia Committee Report - The Marijuana Cigarette Contents | Feedback | Search DRCNet Library | Schaffer Library | Major Studies | LaGuardiaCommittee Report The LaGuardia Committee Report on Marihuana The Marihuana Cigarette (Look for the Jack Benny Jello Hour) The Cigarette Smoking. When marihuana is smoked, there is, as has beenstated, no such accuracy in dosage as is the case when it isingested. The marihuana user acquires a technique or art insmoking "reefers." This involves special preparation ofthe cigarette and regulation of the frequency and depth ofinhalations. In a group of smokers, a cigarette circulates fromone to another, each in turn taking one or more puffs. Theperformance is a slow and deliberate one and the cigarette, heldin a forked match stick, is smoked to its end. When the smoke comes in contact with the respiratory mucousmembrane, the absorption of the active principle is rapid and theeffects are recognized promptly by the subject. He soon learns todistinguish the amount of smoking which will give pleasanteffects from the amount which will give unpleasant ones and soregulates his dosages. Providing there are no disturbing factors,as is the case in gatherings of small friendly groups or partiesin "tea-pads," the regulated smoking produces aeuphoric state, which accounts for continued indulgence. (TABLE 4) The effect from smoking marihuana cigarettes was studied in 32subjects. Of these, 20 were classed as users, that is, prior totheir arrest they had had more or less extensive experience insmoking. In the study the smoking was repeated by each subjectseveral times, the number of cigarettes smoked within an hourranging from one to eight. In all of the user group the smoking produced a euphoric statewith its feeling of well- being, contentment, sociability, mentaland physical relaxation, which usually ended in a feeling ofdrowsiness. Talkativeness and laughing and the sensation offloating in the air were common occurrences. These effects wereof short duration, from one to three or four hours after thesmoking was concluded. In none of these subjects was there anexpression of antagonism or antisocial behavior. In the non-user group the effects were similar except that inone subject a state of mental confusion occurred and in anotherthe main effect was a feeling of dizziness, unsteadiness, andmuscular weakness. Finally one subject showed effects entirelydifferent from the others. He smoked one cigarette and becamerestless, agitated, dizzy, fearful of his surroundings, afraid ofdeath. He had three short attacks of unconsciousness. At oneperiod he had visions of angels, and for a few minutes a euphoricstate. The entire episode lasted a little over an hour, afterwhich he went to sleep. This subject had a similar psychoticepisode after taking 120 mg. of tetrahydrocannabinol. On sevenother occasions he had been given the marihuana concentrate ortetrahydrocannabinol with no unusual effects. Of the physical symptoms occurring with smoking, dryness ofthe mouth and throat, dizziness, and a sensation of hunger werethe most common. None of these or other symptoms seemed to lessenmaterially the pleasurable effects. The effect of smoking on the 7 females, 6 of whom were classedas users, corresponded to that on the male group. All showedeuphoric effects. One of the subjects was nauseated and anotherwas restless, irritable, and contrary. These effects wereobserved in both of the subjects when marihuana was taken bystomach. One of the users, euphoric after smoking 6 and 10cigarettes, had a psychotic episode after 8 cc. of marihuanaconcentrate. Tea-Pad Parties. (This section on "Tea-Pad Parties"was prepared by Mrs. Halpern.) In addition to the quantitativedata regularly obtained from the subject during the course of thetesting program, the examiner had opportunity to make diverseobservations of the subject's global reactions, which threwinteresting light on the general effect of the drug on theindividual personality. When the subject became "high," his inclination wasto laugh, talk, sing, listen to music, or sleep, but therequirement that he solve problems, answer questions, or rememberdrawings created an artificial situation, tending to bring him"down" and spoil his pleasure. In order, therefore,that the influence of the drug might be observed in less formalcircumstances and in a set-up more nearly like the customary"tea-pad," two groups of men were given"parties" on the last night of their hospital sojourn.The men were consulted beforehand, and the stage was setaccording to their desires. They requested that nothing be doneuntil it was really dark outside. They brought the radio into theroom where the smoking took place and turned it to soft dancemusic. Only one shaded light burned, leaving the greater part ofthe room shadowy. The suggestion was made that easy chairs orfloor cushions be procured but the party progressed withoutthese. The men were allowed as many cigarettes as they wanted. Whenthe "reefers" were passed out they crowded around withtheir hands outstretched like little children begging for candy.The number of cigarettes the men smoked varied, the range beingfrom two to twelve or thirteen. There were both users andnon-users in these two groups. The users of course were highlyelated at the prospect of getting much free "tea," andsome of the non-users also smoked with genuine enjoyment. In the beginning the men broke up into little groups of twosand threes to do their smoking, or in some instances went off bythemselves. Smoke soon filled the atmosphere and added to thegeneral shadowy effect. After the initial smoking there was somemoving about- some men laughed and joked, some becameargumentative, while some just stared out of the window. Thearguments never seemed to get anywhere, although they often dealtwith important problems, and the illogical reasoning used wasnever recognized or refuted by the person to whom it wasaddressed. Gradually, as though attracted by some force, allrestlessness and activity ceased, and the men sat in a circleabout the radio. Occasionally they whispered to one another, laughed a little,or swayed to the music, but in general they relaxed quietly intheir chairs. A feeling of contentment seemed to pervade, andwhen one man suddenly got a "laughing jag" they wereannoyed at the interruption. In general, they gave the impression of adolescent boys doingsomething which was forbidden and thereby adding spice to theindulgence. Many of the adolescent personality patterns as theyappear in group activities were clearly observable here. Therewas the eternal "wisecracker," the domineering"important" individual who tried to tell everyone whatto do, the silly, giggling adolescent and the shy, withdrawnintrovert. One forgot that these were actually adults with allthe usual adult responsibilities. One could not help drawing theconclusion that they too had forgotten this for the time being. Although urged to smoke more, no subject could be persuaded totake more than he knew or felt he could handle. After about anhour and half of smoking, the men were given coffee and bread andjam and the party broke up. They all went to bed and reported thenext day that they had slept very well. Another attempt at evaluating the effect of marihuana in lessformal situations was made in the following manner. The examiner,one of the police officers and the subjects listened to JackBenny on the Jello Program at 7 o'clock Sunday evening. Thepolice officer noted the number of times the audience laughed,and the length of time the laughter lasted. The examiner checkedthese items for the subjects. The first time this was donewithout marihuana; the following week the subjects were givenseveral "reefers" about fifteen minutes before theradio program started. The results were as follows: Without drug, the subjects laughed 42 times as against 72laughs in the radio audience. The total time for all laughs was63 seconds as compared with 139 seconds for the radio audience.With cigarettes the subjects laughed 43 times as compared with 47laughs in the audience, the total laugh time being 129 seconds ascompared with 173 seconds of laughter in the audience. Withoutdrug, the subjects laughed, roughly speaking, only half as oftenand as long as the audience- while under the drug they laughedalmost as often and the laugh time was about 75 per cent that ofthe audience. It is obvious that under marihuana the subject laughs morereadily and for longer time intervals. This is probably due bothto the fact that things seem funnier to him and because whenunder the influence of the drug he is less inhibited. Differences Between Concentrate and Cigarette When marihuana was ingested, it was in the form of theconcentrate, containing all the active principles which aresoluble in the medium used. The relative proportions of theprinciples present are unknown, and the effects can be assumed togive a composite picture of different actions, the dominating onebeing that of tetrahydrocannabinol. There is no informationavailable concerning the principles present in marihuana smoke,and it is possible that some of those found in the concentratehave been destroyed by the heat of combustion. The effects fromsmoking correspond to those induced by tetrahydrocannabinol takenby stomach, so it may be assumed that this principle is presentin the smoke. The rapidity with which effects occur after smokingdemonstrates the quick absorption of the cannabinol from therespiratory tract and the short duration of these effectsindicates its prompt excretion or detoxification. When theconcentrate is taken, the absorption from the intestinal tract isslower and more prolonged. For these reasons it is not possibleto make a precise comparison between the effects of the two formsof administration. In general the subject's consciousness of unpleasant symptomsis more marked when the concentrate is taken and this mayinterrupt or obscure the pleasant effects. The long duration ofaction and the inability of the subject to stop it serve toaccentuate the physical symptoms and to cause apprehensionconcerning what may happen. The result of all this readily accounts for the irritability,negativism and antagonism occurring. The lessening of inhibitionsis not peculiar to marihuana, for in a few subjects who weregiven alcohol in intoxicating doses the behavior corresponded tothat induced by marihuana. After smoking the main effect was of a euphoric type. Somedizziness and dryness of the mouth were generally present butwere not pronounced enough to distract from the pleasantsensations. The condition described as "high" came onpromptly and increased with the number of cigarettes smoked, butit was not alarming or definitely disagreeable, and did not giverise to antisocial behavior. On the contrary it prompted sociability. The marihuana wasunder the subject's control, and once the euphoric state waspresent, which might come from only one cigarette, he had noinclination to increase it by more smoking. When a considerablenumber of cigarettes were smoked, the effect was usually one ofdrowsiness and fatigue. The description of the "tea-pad parties" brings outclearly the convivial effect on the groups and the absence of anyrough or antagonistic behavior. Contents | Feedback | Search DRCNet Library | Schaffer Library | Major Studies | LaGuardiaCommittee ReportWT01-B27-66IA031-000653-B006-264http://206.61.184.43:80/schaffer/LIBRARY/studies/lag/psycho.htm 206.61.184.43 19970122134828 text/html 20678HTTP/1.0 200 OKDate: Wednesday, 22-Jan-97 13:48:17 GMTServer: WebSitePro/1.1f (S/N wpo-0deb)Allow-ranges: bytesContent-type: text/htmlLast-modified: Saturday, 28-Dec-96 07:01:58 GMTContent-length: 20460 La Guardia Committee Report - Psychotic Episodes Contents | Feedback | Search DRCNet Library | Schaffer Library | Major Studies | LaGuardiaCommittee Report The LaGuardia Committee Report on Marihuana Psychotic Episodes Psychotic Episodes What has been referred to as psychotic episodes occurred in 9subjects, 7 men and 2 women. A description of the happenings ineach instance is given. (2) (2) Throughout this section fictitious initials are used toavoid any disclosure of the subjects' identities. A.V. Male. Non-user. Given 4 cc. of marihuana concentrate.About three hours later he became restless, tremulous, agitated,fearful of harmful effects, suspicious of examiners. For shortperiods he was euphoric. At one time he had visual hallucinationsof figures making gestures suggesting harm. He talkedcontinuously, mainly expressing fear. His answers to questionswere delayed but intelligent. W.P. Male. Occasional user. Given 3 cc., repeated two hourslater. At first there was a euphoric state; later he becameresistant and negativistic. He showed antagonism to the examiner,demanding to be left alone. He vomited twice. Throughout he washighly excited and talked to himself. The effects in generalresembled those seen in a maniacal state. He returned to hisnormal state in about three hours after the second dose. F.D. Male. Occasional user. Given 4 cc. Five hours later hebecame confused, disoriented and slow in answering questions.There were periods of elation and depression with laughter andweeping. The effects passed off in six hours. R.W. Male. Non-user. Given 5 cc. Three hours later he becamedisoriented with continued talkativeness and rapid shifting ofthought. He had fits of laughter and weeping, grandiose ideas,some paranoid trends. He answered questions clearly but withoutperseveration. He returned to normal after six hours. I.N. Female. Occasional user. Also heroin addict for manyyears. Given 8 cc. Three hours later she became confused andanxious with periods of laughing and weeping. There were severalshort episodes resembling hysterical attacks and dyspnea, pallorand rapid pulse during which she felt that she was dying andscreamed for the doctor and for a priest. Throughout, herresponse to questioning was intelligent but delayed. There was areturn to her normal state in three hours. E.C. Male. Non-user. Given 6 cc. Two hours later he developeda marked state of anxiety accompanied by a sensation ofdifficulty in breathing. This began during a basal metabolismtest. In the Sanborn equipment used there is a nose clipoccluding nasal breathing and a rubber mouthpiece through whichthe air is inspired and expired. During the test the subjectbecame confused, panicky and disoriented as to time. The anxietyover breathing continued for four hours but could be interruptedby distraction. He was then given 4 cc. more. The breathingdifficulty lasted five hours more. The condition here hadfeatures seen in claustrophobia. Before the episode, the subjecthad taken marihuana on five occasions in 2, 4, 5, 5, and 2 cc.dosage, without any symptoms of respiratory distress. However,after the episode he took marihuana on three occasions in 2, 5,and 6 cc. dosage and each time the respiratory symptoms occurred.A certain degree of nervousness was present but there was nomental confusion. The subject realized that there was no physicalobstruction to his breathing and had learned that byconcentrating his thought on other lines he could keep hisrespiratory difficulties in abeyance and would not suffer fromreal anxiety. Smoking up to as many as thirteen marihuanacigarettes did not bring about the respiratory effect. Itappeared then that the respiratory symptoms were precipitated bythe wearing of the apparatus while under the influence ofmarihuana, and through suggestibility there resulted aconditioning to the marihuana concentrate which was givensubsequently. The description of these six psychotic episodes fits in withmany others found in marihuana literature. They are examples ofacute marihuana intoxication in susceptible individuals whichcomes on shortly after the drug has been taken and persists forseveral hours. The main features of the poisoning are the restlessness andmental excitement of a delirious nature with intermittent periodsof euphoric and an overhanging state of anxiety and dread. Three other subjects presented the features of marihuanapsychosis. R.H. Male. White. Age 23. Non-user. In prison for the offenseof living on prostitution. The family history was bad. His fathernever supported his wife or family and there was continualdiscord at home. When the subject was 9 years old the fatherdeserted the family. Three brothers received court sentences, onefor stealing a taxi, one for rape, and one for striking ateacher. R.H. was a problem child at school and on account oftruancy and waywardness he was sent to the Flushing ParentalSchool. He ran away from this school several times and was transferredto the House of Refuge on Randall's Island. At the age of 16 hewas discharged. Since that time he had had two jobs, one forthree months in a factory, the other for four and one-half monthsin the W.P.A. When he was 16 he was run over by a truck and wasunconscious for a time. After his return to the Riker's IslandPenitentiary from Welfare Hospital further questioning concerninghis past revealed that he was subject to "fits"occurring once or twice every two months. During the attacks hisbody became rigid and his mouth felt stiff. The subject was admitted to Welfare Hospital for the marihuanastudy on February 20th. After the usual program of examinationshe was given 2 cc. of the concentrate on February 27th andFebruary 28th. These doses brought on the symptoms of dizzinessand tremor and heaviness of the head and the state called"high" which is characterized by periods of laughterand talkativeness. These effects passed off in a few hours andwere followed by drowsiness and a sense of fatigue. On March 1stat 1 p.m. he smoked one marihuana cigarette. Immediatelyafterwards he became agitated and restless and suddenly lostconsciousness. He recovered quickly and stated that he had hadvisions of angels and had heard choirs singing. Later he had asecond short period of unconsciousness. During the afternoon hecontinued to be agitated and restless and had periods of laughingand weeping. After he was given phenobarbital he went to sleep.On the next day his only complaint was that he felt dizzy.Following this episode he was given 4 cc. Of marihuanaconcentrate on March 3rd and 2 cc. on March 10th and 2 cc. oftetrahydrocannabinol on March 5th and 4 cc. on March 8th. Theeffects corresponded to those seen after the earlieradministrations of 2 cc. doses of the concentrate. On March 11th R.H. was given 5 cc. (75 mg.) of thetetrahydrocannabinol at 11 a.m. and 3 cc. at 2 p.m. No unusualeffects were noted during the afternoon and he ate his supperwith appetite at 4:30 p.m. At 6 p.m. he became restless,apprehensive and somewhat belligerent. He felt that something hadhappened to his mother, that everybody was acting queerly andpicking on him. He continued to be agitated and fearful, refusedmedication and slept poorly. This condition persisted and onMarch 13th he was returned to Riker's Island. After four daysthere he became quiet and composed. The psychotic state clearedup completely. The resident psychiatrist's report was: Impression1. Psychosis due to drugs. (Marihuana experimentallyadministered.) Acute delirium, recovered. 2. Convulsive disorder,idiopathic epilepsy. Petit mal on history. H.W. Female. White. Age 28. Non-user. Drug peddler, servingthree years' indefinite sentence for unlawfully possessing adrug. Her parents died when she was about 10 years old and shewas raised in an orphanage. At the age of 19 she entered atraining school for nurses, but gave this up after four monthsand supported herself by prostitution. Her sister and hersister's husband were drug addicts and through them she begantaking morphine and heroin, being, according to her account,depressed and dissatisfied at the time. She continued using thesedrugs up to the time of her arrest, a period of eight years. In1938 she married a man who was also a drug addict, and engaged inthe drug traffic. On May 7th she was given 2 cc. of marihuana. Aside from aheadache and a feeling of muscular weakness and uncoordination,the effect was to make the subject feel gay and very good-naturedOn May 8th she was given 3 cc. Of the concentrate and becamesomewhat confused and unsteady, irritated and upset at carryingout tests, and greatly worried about the physical symptoms. Fivehours after she had taken the drug the effects had largely passedoff. Six hours later, however, she became restless and agitated,moving about constantly, and worried about past conduct. Thisstate continued for a few hours. On other occasions the subjectwas given marihuana in doses of 2, 3, and 4 cc. Twice after theadministration of 3 cc. The general effect was of a euphorictype, and after 4 cc. Had been given a state of sadness set in ontwo occasions and one of euphoria on a third. Toward the end ofher stay the subject became depressed and moody, constantlydwelling on the belief that she had committed unpardonable sins. She was returned to the House of Detention on June 2nd,transferred to the Psychiatric Division of Bellevue Hospital onJune 9th, and from there was sent to Matteawan State Hospital onJuly 10th. On admission to the State Hospital she appearedconfused, retarded, apprehensive, and depressed. She had a markedfeeling of guilt. She began to improve in September and wasdischarged, cured, in January. Since her return to New York shereports at frequent intervals to the parole officer. She hassecured employment in a food shop and is to be promoted to theposition of manager of the shop. The diagnosis made at the State Hospital was: Psychosis, dueto drugs and other exogenous poisons (morphine and heroin). D.P. Male. Colored. Age 23. Occasional user. Sentenced forunlawful possession of drugs. Since graduation from high schoolat the age of 16 he had had no occupation. His criminal recorddated from his graduation. He was arrested in 1934 for disorderlyconduct and in the same year sentenced to Elmira Reformatory forfive years for second-degree assault. He was paroled in 1936, butduring the same and the following year was arrested three timesfor assault or robbery. He was returned to Elmira where heremained until his discharge in 1940. In August 1940 he wasarrested for the possession of drugs and sentenced to athree-year indefinite term. He had served eight months of thissentence when he was admitted to Welfare Hospital as a subjectfor the marihuana study. During his stay at Welfare Hospital, D.P. was given marihuanain the form of a concentrate and as cigarettes on numerousoccasions. His symptoms and behavior corresponded to thoseusually seen, lasting a few hours with no after-effects. When thetime came for his return to Riker's Island he urged that he beallowed to stay at the hospital and assist in the study. Twoweeks after his return to the penitentiary he developed apsychosis characteristic of schizophrenia. He was transferred toMatteawan where the diagnosis made was: Psychosis withpsychopathic personality. These three cases are of special interest from the standpointof the relationship of marihuana to the psychosis. The firstsubject, R.H., had a definite history of epileptic attacks. Aftersmoking one marihuana cigarette he experienced an acuteconfusional state which lasted a few hours. In the second episodewhich lasted six days there was a more prolonged confusionalstate. Epileptics are subject to such attacks, epileptic orepileptic equivalents, which may be brought on by any number ofupsetting circumstances. In this case marihuana is the only knownfactor which precipitated the attack. The second subject, H.W., was a heroin addict of longstanding. During her stay in the hospital, in her retrospectivereports on her marihuana experiences there were usually includedexpressions of worry and remorse at her failure to answerquestions or perform tests honestly, informing on the other womenin her group, and denials concerning a syphilitic infection shethought she had had. Prior to this incarceration she had had noprison experience. The mental picture developed from the study atthe hospital and at Matteawan and the subject's subsequenthistory represent a fairly typical example of what is termed aprison psychosis. The third subject, D.P., did not develop his psychosis untiltwo weeks after he had been returned to the Riker's IslandPenitentiary. He had shown no unexpected effects from marihuanaand had hoped to be allowed to stay on at the hospital instead ofgoing back to prison to complete more than two years of anunexpired sentence. At Matteawan this subject was considered tohave an underlying psychopathic personality. His case also may betaken as an example of prison psychosis. With both the second andthird subjects, the exact role of marihuana in relation to thepsychosis cannot be stated. Dr. Peter F. Amoroso, Commissioner of Correction of the cityof New York, has given us information concerning the prisonerssentenced to the penitentiary at Riker's Island from whom oursubjects were drawn. During the year beginning July 1, 1941, andending June 30, 1942, there were 1,756 inmates in thisinstitution. They had received an indeterminate sentence, thatis, from a minimum of a few months to a maximum of three years.Of this group, 175 were subjected to intensive study by thepsychiatrist because they were considered possible psychoticcases, 117 were sex offenders, and 200 were miscellaneous casesreferred for mental observation, making a total of 492.Twenty-seven of these cases were committed to state institutionsfor the criminal insane, namely, 25 to Matteawan and 2 toDannemora. Commissioner Amoroso, after reviewing these cases, writes asfollows: "The prison atmosphere may place a most severe strain onthose who are physically or mentally abnormal upon commitment . .. Emotionally unstable persons find themselves duringincarceration denied the assertion and enjoyment of the basichuman urges and impulses and it is natural to expect, therefore,that prison life may result in various types of explosions, suchas psychoses, neuroses, sex perversion, and even physical andmoral deterioration.' "I am indeed surprised that we had so little trouble withour volunteers upon completion of their study and sojourn atWelfare Hospital, and the few psychotic episodes that occurredare exactly what we would expect in the whole group withoutconsidering the administration and effects of excessive doses ofmarihuana." Summary In the study of the actions of marihuana in respect tosubjective and objective symptoms and behavior, the marihuana wasgiven a number of times to each of the subjects in the form ofthe concentrate taken by stomach. The amount given ranged from 2to 22 cc., in most cases from 2 to 5 cc. After marihuana wastaken, the systematic action became evident in from one- half toone hour and the maximum effects were seen in from two to threehours. They passed off gradually, usually in from three to fivehours, although in some instances they did not completelydisappear until twelve or more hours. Of the symptoms occurring, a feeling of lightness in the headwith some dizziness, a sensation of floating in the air, drynessof the throat, hunger and thirst, unsteadiness and heaviness inthe extremities were the most frequent. Tremor and ataxia,dilation of the pupils and sluggishness in responsiveness tolight were observed in all subjects. From observations on the behavior and responses of thesubjects, it was found that a mixture of euphoria andapprehension was generally present. If the subjects wereundisturbed there was a state of quiet and drowsiness, andunawareness of surroundings, with some difficulty in focusing andsustaining mental concentration. If they were in company,restlessness, talkativeness, laughter and joking were commonlyseen. A feeling of apprehension, based on uncertainty regardingthe possible effects of the drug and strengthened by anydisagreeable sensations present, alternated with the euphoria. Ifthe apprehension developed into a state of real anxiety, a spiritof antagonism was shown. However, any resistance to requests madeto the subjects was passive and not physical and there was noaggressiveness or violent behavior observed. Erotic ideas orsensations when present took no active expression. Six of the subjects developed toxic episodes characteristic ofacute marihuana intoxication. The dosage varied from 4 to 8 cc.of the concentrate, and the episodes lasted from three to sixhours, in one instance ten hours. The effects were mixtures ofeuphoric and anxiety states, laughter, elation, excitement,disorientation and mental confusion. The doses given were toxic to the individuals in question butnot to others taking the same or larger ones. Once the drug hadbeen taken the effects were beyond the subject's control. Theactions described took unusual expression because for theparticular subject at a particular time the dose was unusuallyeffective. A corresponding toxicity did not occur from cigarettesfor here the effects came on promptly and on the appearance ofany untoward effects, the smoking was stopped. In three of the subjects a definite psychotic state occurred,in two shortly after marihuana ingestion, in one after a two weekinterval. Of the first two, one was an epileptic and the otherhad a history of heroin addiction and a prepsychotic personality.The third was considered a case of prison psychosis. Theconclusion seems warranted that given the potential personalitymake-up and the right time and environment, marihuana may bringon a true psychotic state. Contents | Feedback | Search DRCNet Library | Schaffer Library | Major Studies | LaGuardiaCommittee ReportWT01-B27-67IA031-000653-B006-287http://206.61.184.43:80/schaffer/LIBRARY/studies/lag/organic.htm 206.61.184.43 19970122134838 text/html 18172HTTP/1.0 200 OKDate: Wednesday, 22-Jan-97 13:48:27 GMTServer: WebSitePro/1.1f (S/N wpo-0deb)Allow-ranges: bytesContent-type: text/htmlLast-modified: Saturday, 28-Dec-96 07:02:05 GMTContent-length: 17954 LaGuardia Committee Report -Organic and Systemic Functions Contents | Feedback | Search DRCNet Library | Schaffer Library | Major Studies | LaGuardiaCommittee Report LaGuardia Committee Report on Marihuana ORGANIC AND SYSTEMIC FUNCTIONS Samuel Allentuck, MD The functions of the body organs and systems were studied inthe manner common to hospital practice according to the methodsand with the equipment in use at Welfare Hospital. The study wasdesigned to show not only the effects of varying doses ofmarihuana but also whether subjects who had long been users ofthe drug gave evidence of organic damage. The tests were madebefore the drug was administered, during its action, and often inthe after period. The heart and circulation, blood composition, kidney, liverand gastro-intestinal function, and basal metabolism receivedspecial consideration. SUMMARY The most consistent effect of marihuana observed in thisdivision of the study was an increase in pulse rate which beganshortly after the taking of the drug, reached a peak in about twohours, and gradually disappeared. In-a few instances a temporarysinus tachycardia or sinus bradycardia was noted, but except forthese there were no abnormalities in rhythm. The increase inpulse rate was usually accompanied by a rise in blood pressure. There was in general an increase in the blood sugar level andin the basal metabolic rate, quite marked in some subjects, butin the majority the levels reached did not exceed the high normallimits. An increase in the frequency of urination was often observed. There was, however, no appreciable increase in the totalamount of urine passed during the drug action. Hunger and an increase in appetite, particularly for sweets,was noted in the majority of the subjects, and the taking ofcandy or sweetened drinks brought down a "too high"effect of the drug. Nausea and vomiting occurred in a number of instances,diarrhea only during psychotic episodes. On the other hand, the blood showed no changes in cell count,hemoglobin per cent, or the urea nitrogen, calcium and phosphorusfigures. The figures for the circulation rate and vital capacityand the results of the phenolsulfonphthalein test for kidneyinfection and the bromsulfalein test for liver function were notdifferent from those of the control period. Theelectrocardiograms showed no abnormalties which could beattributed to a direct action on the heart. In the fewobservations on gastric motility and secretion no evidence ofmarihuana action on these functions was obtained. The positive results observed, increase in pulse rate andblood pressure, increase in blood sugar and metabolic rate, urgeto urinate, increased appetite, nausea and vomiting, anddiarrhea, were not intensified by an increase in dosage, for theycould occur in an equal degree after the administration of any ofthe effective doses within the range used. All the effectsdescribed are known to be expressions of forms of cerebralexcitation, the impulses from this being transmitted through theautonomic system. The alterations in the functions of the organsstudied come from the effects of the drug on the central nervoussystem and are proportional to these effects. A direct action onthe organs themselves was not seen. Psychological Aspects PSYCHOPHYSICAL AND OTHER FUNCTIONS Robert S. Morrow, PH.D. In this phase of the study an effort was made to determine theeffect of marihuana on various psychomotor and some specialmental abilities. Appraisal of these effects was made whereverpossible through the use of standardized tests. A number ofdifferent tests were originally tried under varying experimentalconditions on the group of 5 volunteer subjects who had neverbefore taken marihuana. Only those tests were retained which, inthe course of this preliminary investigation demonstrated thegreatest potentialities. With the tests finally selected it washoped to measure the effect of marihuana on the followingfunctions. FUNCTIONS AND CAPACITIES TESTED Static Equilibrium This was measured by means of the MilesAtaxiameter, which is an instrument for recording body sway. Thesubject remains stationary in the ataxiameter with his hands athis sides and his feet together while a system of pulleysattached to a helmet on his head records the direction and degreeof movement. The subject's score is the cumulative sway in alldirections measured in millimeters. This test was applied to eachsubject for two minutes with his eyes open and two minutes withhis eyes closed. Each trial was followed by a rest period of fiveminutes. Hand Steadiness Hand steadiness was measured by means of theWhipple Steadiness Tester which consists of a metal disk with ahole 3/16 of an inch in diameter, connected in series with drycells, an electric counter, and a stylus. The subject wasinstructed to hold the stylus in the hole for two minutes withouttouching the metal sides. Each contact with the side of the holewas recorded and the total number of contacts gave an index ofunsteadiness of hand. Speed of Tapping Speed of tapping was measured in somewhat thesame manner as was hand steadiness. The Whipple Apparatus wasused, the tapping board replacing the steadiness disk and athicker and heavier stylus replacing the steadiness stylus. Thesubject tapped repeatedly on the metal plate for two minutes andthe total number of taps was recorded on the counter, therebygiving a measure of motor speed. Strength of Grip The Collins Dynamometer was used to measurethe subject's strength of grip. Three trials were made for eachhand and the scores averaged. Simple and Complex Hand and Foot Reaction Time Specialapparatus was constructed to measure simple and complex hand andfoot reaction time. To measure simple hand reaction time, thesubject was instructed to press down on a telegraph key andremove his hand as quickly as possible when a red light appearedon the board which stood directly before him. A Cenco counterrecorded the reaction time, that is, the time which elapsedbetween the presentation of the stimulus and the response. For the measurement of simple foot reaction time, the subjectpressed down on a pedal with his foot, removing it as quickly aspossible when the red light appeared. For the measurement of complex (choice or discrimination) handand foot reaction time either a red or a blue light served as astimulus. The subject had no advance knowledge as to which colorlight would appear. For measuring the response with the hand, thesubject pressed down on the telegraph key with the right handand, at the sight of the red light, moved the peg from the redcompartment into the center (neutral) compartment with the lefthand, then removed the right hand from the key; at the appearanceof the blue light, he moved the peg from the blue to the neutralcompartment. For measuring complex foot reaction time, theprocedure was similar to that for estimating the hand reactiontime except that the right foot and the pedal were substitutedfor the right hand and the telegraph key. Each subject made fifteen trials for each of the fourvariations. Musical Aptitude Musical aptitude was determined by means ofthe Kwalwasser- Dykema Music Tests. The eight tests administeredwere the tonal memory test, the quality discrimination test, theintensity discrimination test, the tonal movement test, the timediscrimination test, the rhythm discrimination test, the pitchdiscrimination test, and the melodic taste test. The sum of thescores for these separate tests was used to give a total scorefor musical aptitude. Auditory Acuity By means of the Galton Whistle, the subjects'limits of auditory acuity were gauged for both ascending anddescending frequencies. The final score was the average of the results of three trialsin each direction. Perception of Time An attempt was made to appraise thesubject's facility in estimating time by asking him to statewhen, after a given signal, he thought the following intervalshad elapsed - fifteen seconds, one minute, and five minutes.Several trials were given for each time interval and the averageof the results of the trials was taken as the final score. Perception of Length Subjects were asked to estimate thelength of lines which were 3 inches, 5 inches, and 8 inches inlength and to draw lines of 3 inches and 7 inches. The Subjects Fifty-four subjects were used in this part of theexperiment, 36 marihuana users and 18 non-users. The two groupswere equated approximately for the following factors: age,height, weight, years of formal education, and number of arrests.The age range for the user group was from 21 to 45 years with27.9 years as an average, the age range for the non-user groupwas from 22 to 43 years with 29.8 years as an average. The rangein height for the users was from 54 to 75 inches with a mean of67.5 inches- for the non-users the range was from 60 to 71 incheswith a mean of 66.8 inches. Range in weight for the users wasfrom 123 to 178 pounds with 151.3 pounds as the mean, for thenon-users from 115 to 180 pounds with 149.5 pounds as the mean.The schooling of the user group ranged from no education at allto 10 years with a mean of 7.1 years, that of the non- usersvaried from 6 to 12 years with a mean of 8.3 years. As regardsthe number of arrests, the range for users was from 1 to 20 witha mean of 5.1 and for the non-users from 1 to 15 with a mean of5.3. The two groups differed radically with respect to race. Of the36 marihuana users, 11 (31 per cent) were white, 18 (50 per cent)were Negroes, and 7 (19 percent) were Puerto Ricans. Of the 18non- users, 12 (67 per cent) were white, 6 (33 per cent) wereNegroes, and none were Puerto Rican. In addition, the user group was analyzed with respect to theage when the marihuana habit was begun, the duration of thehabit, the number of marihuana cigarettes generally smoked perday, and the period of deprivation. The variation of the habit asalready described for the entire group of users applies to the 36subjects studied here. Procedure The tests were first administered to the subjectsbefore they had taken marihuana, then about a week later whenthey were under the influence of 2 cc. of marihuana, and finallyanother week later after 5 cc.(1) of marihuana had beenadministered. On each occasion the psychomotor tests for staticequilibrium, hand steadiness, tapping, strength of grip, andreaction time were repeated at hourly intervals for eightsuccessive hours in order that the time-effects of marihuanamight be determined.(2) The other tests, that is, those measuringmusical ability, auditory acuity, visual ) memory, and perceptionof time and length were given to the subjects while in theundrugged condition and from three to four hours after the drughad been administered. The music tests were given under normalconditions and after 5 cc. of marihuana had been administered,but not under 2 cc. dosage. In almost all instances the marihuana was given in the morningshortly after breakfast and generally after a day when no drughad been taken in order that "hangover" effects mightbe avoided. For the most part the subjects rested and did littleor nothing except the prescribed tests on days when marihuana wastaken. The equilibrium, steadiness, tapping and strength of griptests were given together on one day and the different forms ofthe reaction- time test on another day. Ordinarily four or fivedays elapsed between retests. In addition to being tested after standard doses of themarihuana concentrate had been ingested, 11 users and 9 non-userswere tested after smoking marihuana cigarettes.(3) The cigarettesweighed from 4 to 8 grains each. Most of the subjects smoked fivecigarettes, two non-users smoked only three, and one nonusersmoked four. The tests with cigarettes were given atquarter-hour, half-hour and hour intervals. (1) A dose of 5 cc. of marihuana proved "too much"for many non-user subjects in the sense that ingestion of thisamount was often followed by nausea and general symptoms ofmalaise which interfered with further testing. For this reason the higher dose for non-users was sometimesreduced to 3 cc. or 4 cc. In all, only 6 of the non-user subjectstook the S cc. dose. Accordingly, although the higher dosage isreferred to as S cc. it should be noted that the actual amountused varied from 3 cc. to 5 cc. (2) The scores for the first 25 users and 6 non-users wereobtained every half hour, but since there was little differencebetween the half-hourly and hourly results it was decided torecord hourly scores only, except for the first half hour. (3) A short experiment in which placebos were employed wasalso tried on these subjects. An attempt was made to have theplacebos simulate the marihuana as much as possible butunfortunately the placebo pills had a distinctive taste whichrendered them easily identifiable. The subjects referred to themas the "licorice" pills or the "blanks."While the experiment was completed and resulted in someinteresting findings, the factors which might have invalidatedthe results were so serious that these experiments are notreported at this time. Summary and Conclusions 1. The effect of marihuana on the psychomotor functionsdepends primarily on the complexity of the function tested.Simpler functions like speed of tapping and simple reaction timeare affected only slightly by large doses (5 cc.) and negligibly,if at all, by smaller doses (2 cc.). On the other hand, the morecomplex functions like static equilibrium, hand steadiness, andcomplex reaction time may be affected adversely to a considerabledegree by the administration of both large and small doses ofmarihuana. 2. The function most severely affected is body steadiness andhand steadiness. The ataxia is general in all directions ratherthan predominant in any particular axis. 3. The effects produced by larger doses (5 cc.) aresystematically, though not necessarily proportionately, greaterthan those brought about by small doses. 4. The time required by the drug to exert its maximum effectvaries somewhat with the function and size of dose, but, on thewhole, time curves for both functions and dosages have similarityof form The effect of the drug begins from one to two hours afteringestion and reaches its peak at the fourth hour, after which itdeclines so that by the eighth hour most of it is dissipated. 5. When marihuana is taken in cigarette form the psychomotoreffects are similar in character and trend to those observedafter the ingestion of the drug but they occur much sooner andtaper off more quickly. 6. The effects seem to be essentially the same for women asfor men, except that women are sometimes affected maximally atthe second or third hour after the drug is administered. In womenthe return to the normal condition is in some instances quickerand more abrupt than it is in the men. 7. Non-users generally seem to be more affected by the drugwhen it is ingested than are users. 8. Auditory acuity is notaffected by marihuana. 9. There is no evidence that musical ability, of non-musiciansat least, is improved by marihuana. The ability to estimate short periods of time and short linear distances is not measurably affected by the ingestion of marihuana. Contents | Feedback | Search DRCNet Library | Schaffer Library | Major Studies | LaGuardiaCommittee Report WT01-B27-68IA031-000653-B006-305http://206.61.184.43:80/schaffer/LIBRARY/studies/lag/intell.htm 206.61.184.43 19970122134848 text/html 44975HTTP/1.0 200 OKDate: Wednesday, 22-Jan-97 13:48:37 GMTServer: WebSitePro/1.1f (S/N wpo-0deb)Allow-ranges: bytesContent-type: text/htmlLast-modified: Saturday, 28-Dec-96 07:02:21 GMTContent-length: 44757 LaGuardia Committee Report on Marihuana -- Intellectualfunction Contents | Feedback | Search DRCNet Library | Schaffer Library | Major Studies | LaGuardiaCommittee Report LaGuardia Committee Report on Marihuana INTELLECTUAL FUNCTIONING Florence Halpern, MA In this phase of the study investigation was directedprimarily toward establishing the effect of marihuana on thesubject's intellectual functioning. An attempt was made todetermine what changes in mental ability occur under differentamounts of the drug, what direction these changes take, when theyare first measurable, and how long they persist. TESTS Bellevue Adult Intelligence Test This test was used tomeasure the general mental level of all the subjects. It waschosen in preference to other available scales because it is theonly individual test of intelligence which has been standardizedon an adult population, takes into account both verbal andperformance abilities, and compares the individual with standardsestablished for his particular age group. It consists of tentests, five verbal and five performance. The verbal tests coverthe fields of general information and general comprehension, drawon the individual's capacity for abstract reasoning and test hisarithmetical ability and his rote memory. The performance testsalso evaluate the subject's comprehension of social situations,but here the results are independent of language. There are alsotests of the individual's ability to carry out a routine task, toorganize parts into a meaningful whole, to distinguish betweenessential and unessential details, and to analyze and synthesize.Army Alpha (Bregman Revision, Forms A, B. 5, 7 and BellevueRevision) This is a group test first used in the United StatesArmy in 1917 and 1918 when it was given to more than a millionrecruits. It consists of eight tests: test 1, a direction testwhich was not used in this study since the item does not appearon all forms; test 2, a test of arithmetical reasoning; test 3, atest of common sense in which the subject indicates which heconsiders the best of three possible responses to a givenquestion; test 4, a.modified vocabulary test; tests. in which thesubject must mentally reorganize disarranged sentences and thenindicate whether the resultant statement is true or false; test6, a test of numerical relations in which the subject must supplythe last two numbers in a numerical series on the basis of therelationship between the first six numbers; test 7, a test ofanalogies in which the subject determines the relationshipbetween two given words and then underlines one of four wordswhich is related to a third word in the same way; and test 8,which on Forms A and B and on the Bellevue Revision is a test ofgeneral information in which the subject is given a choice offive answers to a question. On Forms 5 and 7, this test is a testof directions. Because this test has five alternate forms which are roughlyof equivalent difficulty it could be repeated many times within ashort time interval. It was therefore used to establish a curveshowing at what time following ingestion the marihuana has aneffect on general intelligence and on individual higher mentalprocesses. Pyle's Digit Symbol Test In this test each number from1 through 9 is associated with a specific symbol, as, forexample, number 1 is associated with a square and number 2 withan asterisk. The numbers and their associated symbols appear atthe top of the sheet of paper. Below the sample are rows ofsymbols, five symbols to a row, followed by five blank squares.The subject is expected to fill in each square with the numberassociated with the respective symbol. With practice theassociation bond between the number and the symbol becomesstronger and the subject depends less and less on the model atthe top of the sheet. He is therefore able to work faster and hislearning rate is reflected in the increased number of squaresfilled. Cancellation Test The subject is required to cross out aspecific geometric form wherever it appears on a sheet which iscovered with rows of geometric figures. This measures theindividual's capacity for carrying out a routine task. Form Board Test The measurement of the ability to manipulateconcrete material in contrast to the verbal or abstract abilitydetermined by the Army Alpha test required the introduction ofcertain form board tests. These were the Seguin Form Board, theTwo Figure Board, the Casuist Board, - the Five Figure Board,Healy A, Triangle Test, Diagonal Test, all administered andscored according to the Pintner-Patterson Performance Series. TheSeguin Form Board has ten blocks of various goemetric forms, tobe put in their appropriate places as rapidly as possible. Threetrials are given. The Two Figure Board has nine pieces which,when placed correctly, form a large cross and a large square.Time and the number of moves are recorded. The Casuist Board hastwelve pieces which, when correctly placed, form three circlesand an oval. Time and errors are recorded. The Five Figure Boardhas five geometrical figures which are formed by the correctplacement of two or three pieces for each figure. Time and errorsare recorded. Healy A has five small rectangular pieces which,when placed correctly, form a large rectangle. Time and thenumber of moves are recorded. The Triangle Test consists of fourtriangular pieces which are fitted together in a board. Time anderrors are recorded. The Diagonal Test has five pieces of variousshapes which must be fitted together in a rectangular frame. Timeand moves are recorded. Kohs Block Design Test This is aperformance test which is less a test of manual dexterity andmore dependent on abstract intelligence than are the form boardtests. It correlates more highly with intelligence than do mostperformance items and yet it is entirely independent of language.Therefore, the individual who cannot express himself well or whosuffers from a language handicap is not penalized as he is onverbal scales. The test consists of sixteen cubes each with ared, a white, a blue, a yellow, a red-and- white, and ablue-and-yellow side. A colored design which can be reproducedwith the cubes is placed before the subject and he is expected tomake it. Results are rated numerically, depending upon the timeconsumed in execution. In this experiment two sets of designs ofequivalent difficulty were required- Designs IV, VI, and XIV wereselected for one series and V, VII, and XII for the other. Memory Tests Although memory in itself cannot be considered ameasure of intelligence, it is essential to any intelligentfunctioning and must therefore be included in any estimate ofintelligence. Three aspects of memory, namely rote memory, theability tof recall presented objects, and visual memory weretested. The rote memory test requires the repetition of digits inforward and reverse order as given on the Bellevue IntelligenceTest. Object memory was tested by exposing ten small objects forthree seconds and recording the number of articles the subjectwas able to recall. Visual memory or the ability to reproducedesigns after a ten-second exposure was estimated by using thedesigns and scoring technique from the Army Performance Test.PROCEDURE The Bellevue Adult Intelligence Test Each subject wasgiven the Bellevue Adult Intelligence test within two or threedays after his admission to the hospital and before any marihuanahad been administered. The Army Alpha, Pyle's Digit Symbol, and Cancellation TestsThese tests were given as group tests to a total of 20 subjects.The Army Alpha and Pyle's Digit Symbol tests were given everyhalf-hour, beginning a half-hour after drug ingestion. The ArmyAlpha was continued for seven hours and Digit Symbol for fivehours. The Cancellation test was given every hour for six hours,beginning one hour after drug administration. Eleven users and 9non-users took the Army Alpha and the Digit Symbol tests, while 9users and 11 non-users took the Cancellation test. Tests 2through 8 of the Army Alpha require twenty and a half minutes foractual performance while such preparations as the distribution ofpapers and the reading of directions consume almost ten minutesmore, so that had the entire Alpha been given at each half-hourlysession, the subjects would have gone from test to test with nointermittent rest period. For this reason the tests were dividedand the following schedule arranged: (table a) Each subject took three test series, one without the drug, onewith 2 cc. and one with 3, 4, 5, or 6 cc., depending on individual tolerance. A test series consisted of fourteen half-hoursessions for the Alpha, ten half- hour sessions for the DigitSymbol and seven hourly sessions for the Cancellation tests.Because of the time factor, a series required two days for itscompletion. The halves of a series were given on successive days,and the different series a week apart. Thus for example, asubject might take his first test series with 2 cc. on Monday andTuesday of one week; the following Monday and Tuesday the serieswould be repeated with the subject in a different drug state (nodrug or S cc.); and a final series would be given the third weekwith the subject in still another drug condition. An effort was made to obviate practice effect by giving thefirst test series to one third of the subjects without drug, toone third with 2 cc., and to one third with 3, 4, or 5 cc.However because of the necessity of increasing dosage graduallythis ideal presentation was not actually obtained. The followinggives the amount of drug administered to users and non-users ateach test series. (table b) Since the various forms of the Army Alpha are notabsolutely equivalent in difficulty, their order of presentationfor any one group had to be identical in each of the three drugstates. However, for each of the three groups tested the order ofpresentation was different so that all the difficult forms didnot come at the same interval, as is shown on the following page.Kohs Block Design, Form Board, and Memory Tests Administration ofthese tests differed markedly from those discussed above in thatno attempt was made to give them at regular successive timeintervals. Rather, they formed part of a battery of individualtests given to various subjects under specific drug conditions.For example, 5 cc. of marihuana would be ordered for a patientfor 8:00 A.M., and testing began as soon thereafter as thepatient appeared "high," the state of"highness" being judged by the subject's own statement,his pulse rate, the condition of his pupils and otherphysiological signs. (table c) Kohs Block Design was given to each subject twice,once without the drug and once with 5 cc. The test was taken by atotal of 21 subjects, 10 users and 11 non-users. Five users toolsthe test first without the drug, S had their first trial with 5cc. Of the non-user group 8 had their first trial withoutmarihuana, 3 with 4 cc. The average time at which the test wasgiven to the user group was three and a half hours after drugadministration, with range from two to five and a half hours. Forthe nonuser group, the average time of administration of the testwas also three and a half hours after the drug was given, rangetwo and a half to five and a half hours. The two series of designs (one series being Designs IV, VI andXIV, the other V, VII and XII) were presented in such manner thathalf of the subjects were tested on one series and half on theother series while they were under the influence of marihuana.Thus any difference in degree of difficulty between the two setsof designs was canceled out. The weighted scores given on theArthur Point scale were used in evaluating the results. Form Board Tests were divided into three batteries, eachbattery consisting of the Seguin Form Board, one of the threelarger boards (Two Figure, Five Figure, or Casuist) and one ofthe three smaller boards. Various combinations of boards wereused under various drug conditions in order to make the resultsas comparable as possible. The following indicates the number oftimes the various boards were used with different dosages ofmarihuana. From the results it appears that Gwyn Triangle was used toooften with 5 cc. and Healy A was not used often enough. (table d) Aside from the Triangle and the Healy A, the distribution ofboards in different drug stages was such as to obviate anydifferences in degree of difficulty. Nineteen subjects, 10 usersand 9 non- users, took this test. The results were scored fortime and errors according to the Pintner-Patterson Performanceseries. Memory tests. The first digit span test was always givenbefore marihuana had been administered, since the Bellewe Scalewas given each patient during the first two or three days of thestudy. The trials under 2 cc. and 5 cc. were alternated. In all,28 subjects, 17 users and 11 non-users, took this test before andafter the ingestion of marihuana. The final score equaled thenumber of digits recalled. To test Object Memory, ten small articles such as a key, aring, a pill box, and a crayon were placed on a flat, neutralsurface and exposed for three seconds. An attempt was made tovary some of the articles at each presentation so that six orseven were the same and three or four were different. Twenty-sixsubjects, 11 users and 15 non-users, took this test. They were sodivided that 10 of them took the test the first time withoutdrug, 10 with 2 cc., and 6 with 5 cc. To test Visual Memory, Army designs were given each subjectthree times, once prior to the administration of marihuana, onceunder 2 cc., and once under 5 cc. The test was riven to a totalof 28 subiects. 16 users and 12 non-users. Because there is noalternative form for this test, results were definitelyinfluenced by practice. Here, therefore, more than with any other test, it becameimportant to arrange the order of administration. The followingindicates the dosage of marihuana at the first test. (table e) It is obvious that the initial examination was given slightlymore often when the subjects were not under the influence of thedrug. Improvement derived from practice is therefore more of afactor in the tests which were performed under marihuana. FINDINGS Bellevue Adult Intelligence Test General Intelligence. Theresults of the Bellevue Adult Intelligence Test which wasadministered to 60 subjects, 40 users and 20 non-users, are shownin Table 5. As has been pointed out elsewhere, these findingsindicate that both the user and the non-user groups may beclassified as of average intelligence. (Table 5) Mental Deterioration. Studies of mental deterioration due totoxic, organic or psychotic factors, as given in the literature,reveal that in such cases the subtest scores on the BellevueAdult Intelligence Test show marked irregularity, depending uponthe functions involved in the deteriorative process. As a group,the marihuana users tested show very even functioning, and whatlittle irregularity occurred can be explained on the basis oflanguage and racial factors.(4) From this we may conclude thatthe marihuana users had suffered no mental deterioration as aresult of their use of the drug. The age factor does not affectthe result since the groups were well equated in this respect. Army Alpha Test Total Mental Functioning. The total scoresobtained from this test at the successive testing periods areshown in Table 6. Those recorded before the administration of thedrug give a picture like that seen in any learning curve, thatis, there is a gradual increment in test scores at each testinginterval, interspersed with plateau periods. Thus, without drug the test score for the second testinginterval showed a 2 per cent gain over the initial score, thescore for the third testing interval showed a 4 per cent gainover the initial score, and so on up to the last testing periodwhen there was a 13 per cent gain over the initial test score. Between two and a half and three hours after ingestion of 2cc. of the drug there appeared to be a possible very slightfalling off in mental ability. Otherwise the results paralleledthe findings obtained in the undrugged condition except thattoward the end of the day the increments were larger than thosewhich occurred when the subjects were undrugged. This may be dueto complications in the experimental procedure or may be anindication of accelerated mental functioning resulting from drugingestion. This point is discussed more fully when the effect ondifferent mental functions is considered. Deleterious effects were apparent an hour after the ingestionof 5 cc. of marihuana. There was a 3 per cent drop from theinitial score at this one-hour period and this first attainmentis not surpassed until four and a half hours after drugingestion. From the four-and-a- half- hour period on to the endof the testing there were gradual increments in score. Different Mental Functions. A very elaborate study was made ofthe scores made on the subtest (Table 7). Some irregularitiesoccurred even in the undrugged state, and these may be attributedprimarily to chance factors, as, for example, the difference indifficulty of the various test forms. On the whole, the findingswere in line with those which one would expect in any situationwhere constant repetition increases efficiency. The effects of 2 cc. of marihuana on the different mentalfunctions were variable. Tests involving number concepts gaveclear-cut, consistent findings and revealed that impairmentoccurred an hour after the drug was taken and continued for fromtwo and a half to three hours after ingestion. Results of othertests showed that there was little if any loss in ability, andsome of them, especially those done toward the end of the day,showed gains which exceeded the ones made in the undrugged state.It is not possible on the basis of the present data to ascertainwhether these large increments indicate that small amounts of thedrug serve as stimulants in situations dependent primarily uponverbal facility or whether they are due to certain complicationsin the test technique. The former theory coincides with theincreased verbosity noted on other tests as well as with theclinical impression, but the latter also cannot be overlooked. Further investigation of this point is definitely indicated. The effect of the 5 cc. dosage on each function was in linewith that reported for total scores, that is, there was a fallingoff in efficiency one hour after the drug was taken and thisimpairment continued for anywhere from three and a half to sixand a half hours after ingestion. Here too the scores on testsinvolving number concepts were most severely affected, recoveryfor them taking place from six to six and a half hours after drugadministration. Degree and Duration of Drug Effect. In general it may bestated that marihuana has a deleterious effect on mentalfunctioning, the extent, time of onset, and duration of theimpairment being related to the amount of drug taken. The adverse effect of the 2 cc. dosage on global intelligencewas slight (about 3 per cent to 4 per cent impairment inefficiency) and of sort duration, occurring at about two and ahalf hours after ingestion and lasting little longer than ahalf-hour or an hour. Certain mental functions, especially thosedealing with number concepts, appear to have been affected muchearlier than others, the effect on the number test scores beingmeasurable as early as one hour after ingestion and continuinguntil two and a half hours after ingestion. For other functions,in particular those involving verbal facility, the results werevariable, in some instances showing no adverse effect and even aslight acceleration. The effect of 5 cc. of marihuana on global intellectualfunctioning was apparent within an hour from the time the drugwas taken and was operative until four and a half hours afteringestion. All mental functions showed this early impairment butfor some of them recovery from the adverse effect was earlierthan for others. Those most severely impaired from point of viewof duration were the ones dealing with number concepts. (Table 6) The testing program was continued for only seven hours afterthe drug was taken and, therefore, any estimate of the effect ofmarihuana after this time is purely a subjective one. However,both the subject and the examiner felt that the drug produced a"hang- over" which in most cases continued into thefollowing day. The subject complained of being headachy, sleepy,and unable to work at his usual level, and the examiner alsonoted that the subject did not work as well or as quickly whencalled upon to do something on a day following marihuanaingestion. The impairment reported here is not entirely representative ofthe maximum impairment which occurs under the influence ofmarihuana. Two opposing variables account for the resultsobtained in the drugged condition. One variable is practiceeffect which tends to increase test scores with each succeedingtrial. The other variable, the drug, tends to lower test scores.In the earlier sessions there was evidence that the marihuana,especially when given in large doses, is the more potent force,as seen by the continuing downward trend of the curve during thefirst few hours. In these earlier phases, in spite of repetition,results were lower with each succeeding trial, or if there was noactual loss, the increments made were never comparable to thosemade in the undrugged state. Three or four hours after drugadministration there was a general trend toward rising scores.Some of this gain must be attributed to increased practice effectwhich was counteracting, in part at least, the deleterious effectof the marihuana. For this reason it is not certain that the drugwas less effective at later points in the curve than it was atthe moment of seemingly greatest impairment. This seemsparticularly plausible because, beginning with the third hour,the subject was no longer working on new tasks but was actuallyrepeating identical tasks that he performed earlier in the day.Thus, at the third hour the test form used was the same as theone given at the initial session; at the end of thethree-and-a-half-hour period the form was the same as theone-hour examination, and so on. What is shown in the curves isthe effect of marihuana on intellectual tasks with which thesubject has become very familiar. For practical purposes the testsituation has the advantage of being comparable with daily livingsince the tasks performed in daily routine are usually relativelyfamiliar ones. (Table 7) Speed Versus Power. Intellectual impairment under theinfluence of marihuana resulted from a loss in both speed andefficiency. There was a slowing up in output indicated by thedifference in the number of items done before and after theadministration of the drug. On the whole the number of test itemsattempted tended to increase at each succeeding examinationperiod even when the subject was under the influence ofmarihuana, but the percentage of increase in the drugged statepractically never equaled that attained for the correspondingtime interval when the subject had not ingested the drug. Thefindings for the number of items done in the drugged andundrugged condition follow very closely the findings in respectto the number of items correctly done. From this it may beconcluded that under the influence of marihuana an individualfunctions less rapidly and also less efficiently than when he hashad no drug. Careful analysis of what causes the loss in efficiency revealsthat certain factors not necessarily related to mental abilityper se were accountable for the reduced scores in the druggedstate. For example, under the influence of the drug the subjectfelt dizzy, had blurred vision, or exhibited other handicappingphysiological disturbances. These impeded his efficiency inputting his answer on the correct line, or marking a cross in theright box. Men were observed running their fingers across thepage in an effort to keep their place. On the other hand, much ofthe intellectual loss can be ascribed to an impairment in thethinking processes, and there seemed to be a general confusion ofideas and inability to maintain a fixed goal. Some subjectsreported that the reason they accomplished so little was that, bythe time they had finished reading a question, they no longerremembered what their purpose in reading it had been.Occasionally perseveration of a form of response specific to onetest was found in a subsequent test. For example, some forms ofthe Same-Opposite test require the subject to mark the answer Sor O. In a later test requiring a plus or minus responseoccasional irrelevant S's or O's appeared. Comparison of the Effect of Marihuana on User and Non-User. When the group is divided into marihuana users and nonuserscertain interesting and suggestive differences are revealed(Table 8). Although the general findings for total intelligence scoresfor the two groups follow similar curves, the deleterious effectswere not as great on the user as on the non-user. Thus under 2cc. of marihuana the user showed no real intellectual impairmentexcept for a very short interval beginning about two and a halfhours after ingestion and lasting for an hour or an hour and ahalf. In contrast to this he made gains both at the beginning ofthe testing and toward the end of the day which exceeded thosemade in the undrugged state. The non-user who had ingested 2 cc.of marihuana showed a definite drop in score beginning about twoand a half hours after ingestion, and for a period from one and ahalf to two and a half hours after this time he did not makeincrements comparable to those which he made in the undruggedstate. Following this, during the last two hours of testing he,like the user, obtained scores which showed an acceleration notparalleled in the undrugged state. (Table 8) Under 5 cc. of marihuana both the user and the non-user showeda 3 per cent loss in efficiency within an hour of the time thatthe drug was taken. Although recovery was slow for both groups,the user was less severely affected, as is indicated by the factthat at the next testing interval his score was only 1 per centbelow his initial score as compared with a 7 per cent loss on thepart of the non-user. The disparity in the degree of impairmentfor the two groups continued for several hours. The more markeddrug effect in the case of the non-user was further evidenced bythe fact that the user showed recovery four or four and a halfhours after ingestion (as measured by the time when his scoresapproach those made when in the undrugged state) while thenon-user, even at the end of seven hours of testing, did notapproximate his undrugged performances. No simple explanation of this difference is available. Themost probable reason seems to be that previous use of the drug insome way serves to ameliorate that anxiety and inevitabledisorganization which the use of any drug may have on anindividual who has never taken it before. Another explanation maylie in possible physiological adaptation to the drug which,though not identical with tolerance in the ordinarypharmacological sense, seems to act in the same direction. Variability. The results reported here are all in terms ofaverages. A study of individual scores indicates that there was markedvariability in the effect of the drug on different subjects. Inone case the drug action came early and soon disappeared. Anothersubject experienced no reaction until after he had eaten hislunch, at which time a very definite effect was apparent. A thirdsubject showed impairment late in the day when the drug effect onalmost all the other subjects had worn off. There were some hardysouls who did not appear to be affected by even large quantitiesof marihuana, while a few (mainly non-users) became so ill thatthey could not continue with the examinations. Pyle's Digit Symbol Test Comparison of the results obtained onthis test when the subject was in the undrugged condition andwhen he had had 2 cc. of marihuana reveals that small amounts ofthe drug did not interfere with his ability to carry out theappointed task (Table 9). In fact, as was noted above for certainother tests, the improvement in score at the end of two and ahalf or three hours was greater after the ingestion of 2 cc. ofmarihuana than it was when no drug had been administered, and atthe end of the five-hour testing period there was a 32 per centincrease in score as against a 22 per cent increase in theundrugged condition. Under the influence of 5 cc. of marihuana, however, there wasa decrease in ability occuring within an hour after the time thedrug was administered. Although the scores show no actual loss ascompared with the initial score, the increments did not equalthose made in the undrugged condition until from four to four anda half hours after ingestion. It may therefore be concluded that certain types of learningability are not affected by small amounts (2 cc.) of marihuana,but are impaired when larger amounts (5 cc.) are ingested. (Table 9) (Table 10) Cancelling a Geometric Form The results of this test are shownin Table 10. With 2 cc. of marihuana, there was a slight falling off in thesubject's efficiency occurring about three hours after drugingestion. At that time he was 3 per cent less efficient than he had beenan hour previous. With S cc. of marihuana there was a slowing upin the subject's ability to carry out the appointed task, whichwas apparent two hours after drug ingestion (and possiblyearlier). At that time there was only a 4 per cent increment overhis initial score as compared with a 10 per cent increment in theundrugged state and a 12 per cent increment when the 2 cc. dosagehad been administered. He improved only slightly at the three- and four-hour testinginterval, and only at the five-hour interval did he show anappreciable improvement. Apparently, the carrying out of a simple routine task isadversely affected to a slight degree and for a short period oftime as the result of the ingestion of 2 cc. of marihuana whilethe ingestion of S cc. of the drug produces adverse effects whichare more severe and more lasting. Performance Tests Seguin Form Board. For adults of averageintelligence this test is primarily one involving speed ofreaction time. The average time taken by the subjects when theywere not under the influence of marihuana was 12.8 seconds. Thiswas increased to 14.0 and 14.1 seconds under doses of 2 cc. and 5cc. respectively. Thus, ingestion of marihuana in 2 cc. and 5 cc.doses caused a 9 per cent delay in performance time. Form Boards. The time scores for this test remainedpractically the same whether no drug, 2 cc. or 5 cc. of marihuanahad been administered, the average scores in terms of mental agebeing respectively 11.7, 11.7 and 11.9 years. The error scoresalso showed little change as a result of drug ingestion, theaverages in terms of mental age being 9.7 years (no marihuana),9.9 years (2 cc.) and 10.2 years (5 cc.), and what changeoccurred was in a positive direction, that is, there was a veryslight improvement in the subject's performance when he was underthe influence of marihuana. Kohs Block Design. This test correlates more highly withabstract intelligence than do any of the other performance tests.Here the drug had a definitely deleterious effect when it wasadministered in large amounts. The average score was 17.6 whenthe subjects were not under the influence of marihuana and 14.8after they had ingested the drug; that is, under S cc. ofmarihuana there was a 16 per cent loss in score as compared withundrugged results. In general it appears that those functions most closely associated with higher intellectual processes are more impaired bythe drug than are the simpler functions. Memory Tests Rote Memory. As measured by the ability to repeatdigits forward there were no changes in rote memory as a resultof drug ingestion, the average scores under no drug, 2 cc. ofmarihuana, and 5 cc. of marihuana being in each case 7.1. Digits Reversed. Although the giving of digits in reverseorder is always grouped with memory testss this task actuallyrequires something over and above mere recall. It demands amental control not necessary in tests dependent purely upon rotememory. Although simple rote memory, as measured by the abilityto repeat digits forward, was not affected by the ingestion ofmarihuana, the repetition of digits reversed was affectedadversely. In the undrugged state the average for the group was5.4, with 2 cc. the average was 5.0, and with S cc. it was 4.8.The impairment was comparatively small but it seems to have beenrelated to the amount of drug taken. Object Memory. The average scores under no drug, 2 cc. ofmarihuana, and 5 cc. of marihuana were respectively 6.2, 5.6, and5.9- that is, there was a loss of about 9 per cent in thesubject's ability to recall objects which had been exposed to hisvision for three seconds when he took the test under theinfluence of 2 cc. of marihuana, while after the ingestion of 5cc. the impairment was less, being only about 5 per cent. Thisseemingly contradictory result is probably due to the fact thatby the time the subjects took the test under the influence of 5cc. most of them had already had it two times previously. Theloss in terms of absolute number of remembered articles wasslight. Visual Memory. In this test as in the case of digits reversedsomething over and above simple memory function is involved. Acapacity for analysis and synthesis which correlates well withintelligence is required for the successful execution of thistask, and it is this function which is adversely affected by theingestion of marihuana. The average scores were 10.3 (no drug),9.7 (2 cc.) and 7.8 (5 cc.); that is, after the ingestion of 2cc. of marihuana there was a 6 per cent drop in score, whileunder 5 cc. there was a 24 per cent drop. In general one may conclude that simple memory functions arenot affected by the administration of marihuana while the morecomplex memory functions are affected adversely, the extent ofthe impairment being related to the amount of drug taken. Throughout the examination of subjects on individual tests,the same difference was observed in intensity of the effect uponuser and non-user as was noted in group tests. Experiments with Marihuana cigarettes In addition to the testsmade to determine the effect of the ingestion of marihuana onvarious intellectual functions, several experiments were triedwith marihuana cigarettes. The tests used in this part of thestudy were the Bellevue Adult Intelligence Test; the Woody McCallMixed Fundamentals Test, Form I, which consists of thirty-fiveexamples requiring addition, subtraction, multiplication ordivision; a cancellation test in which the subject is required tocross out a specific number (in this instance the number 8)wherever it appears on a sheet covered with rows of numbers; theKohs Block Design Test; and the test for rote, object, and visualmemory. The subjects took the test series and individual tests twice,once without the drug and once after having smoked marihuanacigarettes. They were not given a specific number of cigarettesbut were told to smoke until they felt "high." Thenumber of cigarettes smoked to produce this effect ranged fromtwo to seven. The Mixed Fundamentals and cancellation tests were given asgroup tests and were repeated at half-hour intervals for two anda half hours. In the series given when the subjects were"high," the first test was taken as soon as thecigarettes had been smoked. Time limit on each test was one and ahalf minutes. The Bellevue Adult, Kohs, and memory tests were given asindividual tests and were administered only twice, once beforethe subject had smoked marihuana cigarettes and once after he hadbecome "high" from smoking them. If during the courseof the examination he wanted another cigarette or the examinerhad reason to suspect that he was no longer under the influenceof the drug, more cigarettes were smoked. The number ofcigarettes used during a three-hour testing period ranged fromsix to twelve. In the cancellation, Kohs, and memory tests the subjects wereso divided that half took the tests for the first time beforethey had smoked and half after they had smoked. In the WoodyMcCall Mixed Fundamentals Test more non-users had their firsttests before they had smoked. The Bellevue Adult IntelligenceTest was always given first without the drug during the two orthree days immediately following the subject's admission. Fourweeks later the test was repeated on 10 subjects while they wereunder the influence of marihuana cigarettes. Bellevue Adult Intelligence Test Ten subjects, 5 users and 5non-users, repeated this test under the influence of marihuana.The results are shown in Table 11. (TABLE 11) Since the test taken when the subject was "high" wasalways his second experience with it, some allowance must be madefor practice effect. Without drug the average I.Q. of thesesubjects was 101.6, while after they had smoked cigarettes it was104.4. This increase of only 2.8 points is smaller than one wouldprobably get with repetition occurring after such a short timeinterval. It may be concluded, therefore, that smoking marihuanacigarettes has some negative effect on intellectual functioning,in that the subject benefits less from previous experiences thanhe would if he had not smoked. Woody McCall Mixed Fundamentals Test, Form 1 This test was givento 24 subjects, 10 users and 14 non-users. >From the results which are shown in Table 12 it may beconcluded that when the subject was "high" aftersmoking marihuana cigarettes there was a slowing up in hisability to do simple arithmetic calculations. This lag occurredwithin the first half-hour after smoking and continued for atleast an hour. The deleterious effect was not such as to cause anactual loss in ability but the increments resulting from repeatedpractice were never as great in the drugged as in the undruggedstate. Thus, the initial increment was 10 per cent in the testgiven before smoking and only 4 per cent in the one administeredafter the subject had become "high." The finalincrement at the end of two and a half hours was 20 per centwithout drug, 13 per cent with drug. This test measures the subject's ability to use acquiredknowledge. Under the influence of marihuana cigarettes the capacity forusing such an acquired skill is not lost but is slowed down. Theadverse effect of smoking marihuana in cigarette form occursalmost immediately in contrast to the delayed action of thepills. (TABLE 12) Cancelling 8's Sixteen subjects, 8 users and 8 non-users, tookthis test, the results of which are shown in Table 13. As aresult of smoking marihuana cigarettes the subject worked alittle slower in his execution of a routine task than he did whenhe had not smoked. The increment over the initial score in thetest score made a half-hour after he became "high" wasonly 7 per cent as against an increment of 9 per cent when thecigarettes had not been smoked. His performance was slowed up forone hour after smoking and possibly longer. (TABLE 13) Kohs Block Design Test This test, which measures performanceability, was given to a total of 9 subjects, 6 users and 3non-users. The average score without the drug was 18.5, and aftercigarettes had been smoked 14.7. This difference in score of 3.8points indicates a loss in efficiency of 21 per cent. Memory Tests Rote Memory. Thirteen users and 9 non-users tookthis test. Neither in repeating digits forward nor in giving them inreverse did the subjects show any disadvantageous effects fromthe use of marihuana cigarettes, the average scores before andafter smoking being 6.9 and 7.1 respectively for the digitsforward test and 5.2 and 5.1 for the digits reversed test. Theonly explanation for this deviation from the results obtainedwhen marihuana was taken in pill form is the inability to controlthe dosage when marihuana is given in cigarette form. Object Memory. Thirteen subjects took this test. Object memorywas not impaired by the smoking of marihuana, the average scoresbeing 6.8 before the cigarettes were smoked and 7.1 when thesubjects were "high." Visual Memory. There was an .8point loss (from 10-5 to 9.7) in the average score of the 20subjects, 11 users and 9 non-users, who took this test. Thisrepresents an impairment of about 8 per cent. Effect of Marihuana Cigarettes on Users and Non-Users Thedifference in intensity of effect of marihuana cigarettes on theuser and on the non- user was not the same as the difference inthe effect of the marihuana concentrate on these two groups. Theuser was usually more affected by smoking marihuana than was thenon- user, probably because the nonuser did not smoke as much oras intensely as the user and was not as much under the influenceof the drug. Contents | Feedback | Search DRCNet Library | Schaffer Library | Major Studies | LaGuardiaCommittee Report WT01-B27-69IA031-000653-B006-324http://206.61.184.43:80/schaffer/LIBRARY/studies/lag/findings.htm 206.61.184.43 19970122134857 text/html 39701HTTP/1.0 200 OKDate: Wednesday, 22-Jan-97 13:48:47 GMTServer: WebSitePro/1.1f (S/N wpo-0deb)Allow-ranges: bytesContent-type: text/htmlLast-modified: Saturday, 28-Dec-96 07:02:32 GMTContent-length: 39483 LaGuardia Committee Report on Marijuana - Findings Contents | Feedback | Search DRCNet Library | Schaffer Library | Major Studies | LaGuardiaCommittee Report The LaGuardia Committee Report on Marijuana FINDINGS Rorschach Test Table 14 gives the Rorschach findings for 45 subjects both inthe undrugged and drugged states. The measurable changes on thetest which occurred during the period of drug intoxication werefew and not far-reaching. They may be considered indications oftendencies rather than of significant alterations of thepersonality. (TABLE 14) When the subjects were under the influence of marihuana(either 3- 6 cc. or cigarettes, the number of cigarettes being atthe discretion of the smoker) there was a slightly freer flow ofassociations than there was when they were in the undruggedstate, an increased productivity which coincided with theimpressions obtained from general observation of the subjectswhen they were "high." Without drug the average numberof interpretations made was 20.0, with drug 23.3. This increasednumber of responses was due primarily to the subject's greaterawareness of small, extraneous details which in his undruggedstate he overlooked. Thus, while 17 per cent of the subjects'answers were small or rare detail responses when no marihuana hadbeen administered, with marihuana this increased to 21 per cent.Coincidental with his increased absorption in the irrelevantthere was a slight decrease in the subject's drive to organizeand synthesize. Whereas without drug 40 per cent of the responsesinvolved the entire blot, with drug this was true of only 36 percent of the interpretations. Under the influence of marihuanathere was a mild tendency for the subject to become preoccupiedwith minutiae rather than to concern himself with the larger,more important aspects of a situation, and this implies somefalling off in meaningful constructive behavior. When the subject had taken marihuana there was some decreasein the objectivity with which he sized up situations. This wasindicated by the fact that without drug 92 per cent of hisinterpretations were good form, that is, they corresponded to theform of the blot, while with drug this percentage fell to 86 percent. The drug had an adverse effect on the individual's criticalfaculty and he was more prone to jump to erroneous conclusionsthan he was when he was in the undrugged state. The only other change that occurred on the Rorschach testafter the ingestion of marihuana was the decrease in thesubject's ability to think in line with the group. This showeditself in the decreased number of popular interpretations made,the drop being from 27 per cent without drug to 20 per cent withdrug. In other words, during the period of drug intoxication anindividual is somewhat less likely to see the obvious and thecommonplace than he is in his normal state. As important, or possibly even more important, than thechanges which occurred on the Rorschach after ingestion orsmoking of marihuana, is the fact that some of the most basicpersonality attributes remained unchanged. Thus it appeared that33 per cent of the subjects in the undrugged state were what isdescribed as introversive, that is, they were individuals whotend to withdraw somewhat from the world about them and dependprimarily on their own inner resources for emotional stimulation;20 per cent were extraversive, depending mainly on theirenvironment for affective satisfaction; 20 per cent wereambivert, showing equal potentialities in both directions; and 27per cent were emotionally constricted to the point where theygave little or no evidence of emotional response of any type.With drug 36 per cent were introversive, 22 per cent wereextraversive, 20 per cent were ambivert, and 22 per cent wereconstricted. Marihuana ingestion or smoking served to dilate theemotional life of only 2 of the subjects and shifted the type of1. In all 3 cases the change was actually a very slight one. Thefact that the emotional trends remain essentially unchanged underthe influence of marihuana was further revealed by the fact thatthe ratio for evaluating the individual's emo tional type, thatis, the ratio of movement to color, remained roughly the samebefore and after he had taken the drug, being 2.3:1.6 when he wasin the undrugged state and 2.9:2.1 when he was in the druggedphase. Although the quantitative changes occurring with marihuanaingestion or smoking were not large, there was a qualitativedifference in the protocols obtained from the subjects in theundrugged and drugged stages. Not only was there a slightincrease in the actual number of interpretations made, but theamount of talking and extraneous comment increased. The subjectplayed around with answers and often repeated them. He seemedanxious to get his every thought clearly across to his audience.More than this, he was much freer in the type of interpretationhe allowed himself. For example, one interpretation on Card II read: "Twodogs. Now wait a minute. I don't want to jump to conclusions butit looks as if the dogs were having intercourse and there was arupture." This response was not repeated when the subjectwas retested in the undrugged state. Nor was this individualunique in showing this qualitative difference. The disinhibitionand lessening of restraint which was a definitely observableeffect of the drug was also reflected in the assured explanationsand lengthy tirades which the subject offered on topics which inhis undrugged state he would undoubtedly feel were beyond him.Thus one subject interpreted Card X as "old bark of trees,roots dried up. It's thousands of years old; it takes thousandsof years to do that. I got to tell you that. I got to cover foryou. You wouldn't know about a thousand years ago. I'm smartnow." In some instances the "cockiness" induced byhis drugged condition produced an entirely new attitude in thesubject. Instead of the customary deferential, almostingratiating approach there was now a confident"know-it-all" manner. The effects of marihuana ingestion on user and non-user wereessentially the same, as indicated by the findings in Table 14,except that on the whole the alterations which did occur weremore marked for the non-user than for the user. Thus, forexample, while the average number of responses given by the userincreased only 11 per cent, those of the non-user rose 26 percent. Again, the user when drugged gave only 6 per cent fewerwhole answers as against a decrease of 15 per cent in the wholeresponses of the non-user in the drugged state. The user showed a29 per cent increase in small detail interpretations, thenon-user 31 per cent. There was only a 2 per cent drop in goodform interpretation by the user as against a 12 per cent drop forthe non-user. Only in the loss of popular interpretations did theuser exceed the non-user, his falling off being as great as 31per cent as compared with 24 per cent for the non-user. While thenumber of subjects in both groups was too small to allow ofdefinite statements, the trend seemed to indicate that theingestion or smoking of marihuana has a greater adverse ordisorganizing effect on the neophyte than on the experiencedsmoker, again, as was the case in the study of mentalfunctioning, suggesting the possibility of psychologicalhabituation. When the protocols obtained from these marihuana users intheir undrugged state are compared with those of the nonusers orwith the norms postulated for average adults of this age level,certain deviating personality traits in these users may be noted.The most striking deviation is the small percentage of users whoshowed an extraversive personality. Only 15 per cent of themarihuana users used in this study responded primarily toemotional stimuli in the world about them as compared with 28 percent of the non-users. While no definite figures are given in the literature for thedegree of extraversion in the general population, it seemsdefinitely more than 15 per cent. Altogether the personalitytypes among the non-users show a much more even distribution thanthose among the users as seen in Table 15. Judging by thepersonality types the majority of marihuana users lack socialease and adroitness and are likely to find it difficult to makegood outgoing social contacts. (TABLE 15) Sixty-two per cent of the marihuana users' interpretationswere determined by the form or outline of the blot. Suchresponses require an objective critical attitude unmodified byemotional factors. However, when this attitude is maintained tothe point where more than 50 per cent of the answers are of thisnature the individual has a constricted affective life the degreeof constriction being in proportion to the increase in forminterpretations Thus, as was previously noted, there was morethan average emotional inhibition evident among the marihuanausers studied in this experiment. Since emotional inhibitionfrequently causes intellectual constriction it is not surprisingto find that the stereotypy in these records was slightly aboveexpectancy, as indicated by the fact that 59 per cent of theresponses were animal or animal detail interpretations ascompared with a norm of from 25 to 50 per cent. Finally the marihuana users (as well as the non-users in thisexperiment) showed a depressive outlook in that more of theirresponses were determined by the gray and black colors than bythe vivid colors. In interpreting this fact it must be borne inmind that the subjects were all prisoners and their depressiveattitude may have been a reflection of their present situationrather than of a basic trait. Goodenough Test (Drawing of a Man) This test is helpful in studying each individual both in thedrugged and undrugged state, but group results are not meaningful(except for one finding given below) because of a lack ofsimilarity both in the drawings obtained in the undrugged stateand in the direction of change which occurred after drugingestion or smoking. However, certain qualitative findingsproved interesting and are therefore reported here. In a numberof cases the identical drawing was produced in the undrugged, 2cc., 5 cc., and cigarette state, but the size of the figureincreased consistently with the amount of marihuana taken. Thisincrease in size may have been a reflection of a physicalsensation induced by the drug, rnay have been due to a tendencyto macrographia which was noted in the writing of some subjects,or may have been the psychological representation of increasedfeelings of confidence and security. With marihuana there was an increase in the percentage ofsubjects who remembered to give their man ears. This again mayhave been due to a heightened awareness of ears because ofphysical or auditory sensations or might denote a greaterreceptivity to what others have to say. In some cases the amount of time consumed in execution of thedrawings was considerably greater when the subject was"high." This additional time was rarely used forelaborating the picture but was caused by the subject's alteredmood. In many instances the laughter and joking in which heindulged kept him from completing the job with dispatch. In othercases depression or nausea slowed him up. Although aware of thedetails which should be included, the subject was often satisfiedto indicate such items by a single line or dash rather thandiscipline himself to the point where he could make a carefulpicture. In some of these cases the drawing had attributes whichresemble the findings sometimes seen in productions ofindividuals in a manic mood. When a person is given a sheet of paper and is asked to draw aman on it, the paper and the figure he draws become the situationhe must manipulate. If the figure is well centered so that thefinished product gives a balanced composition, the subject hashandled the circumstance in adequate fashion. The one consistentfinding for this test was the fact that the subject's ability tohandle situations was not improved by drug ingestion or smoking.In the case of both user and non-user the percentage of balancedcompositions produced in the various drug states did not changefrom the results obtained in the undrugged condition. It is,however, interesting to note that 59 per cent of the marihuanausers made "unbalanced" drawings in the undrugged stateas compared with only 29 per cent of the non-users. It may beinferred from this that fewer users than non-users are inclinedto come out into the center of the scene. This carries with itimplications of poor adjustment and insecurity. Level of Aspiration Test In the undrugged state the majority of the subjects manifestedreactions which are usual in the experience of other experiments,namely, the tendency to place their estimate just a little abovetheir actual performance. This was demonstrated by the fact thatwhile the average performance time needed for carrying out a settask (putting sixteen blocks in a box, red side up) was 23.6seconds, the subjects' average estimate for accomplishing thiswas 21.9 seconds. As their performance improved with practice,the subjects tended to allow themselves less time for the job.Such statements as, "I should do better this time," or"I'll take a chance," were not infrequent. Somesubjects wanted to know the best score ever made, and workedenergetically to attain it. With 2 cc. of marihuana there was a slight increase in theaverage estimated time for the entire group although there was noconcomitant increase in performance time. Under this dosage theestimated time was 23.1 seconds, performance time 23.4 seconds.Although the subject actually took no longer to do the job hethought he would work more slowly and in predicting hisachievement gave himself more time. His attitude during the testwas a much easier, more happy go-lucky one. He occasionallystopped in the middle of the experiment to discuss something withthe examiner or call out to someone passing in the hall. Therethus appeared to be a small loss in drive which, though notrevealed by significant statistical differences, was indicated bythe numerical trend and by the subject's attitude toward thetest. After the ingestion of 5 cc. of marihuana the averageestimated time was 23.2 seconds and the performance time 24.4seconds. Here the relationship between estimated and performancetime was similar to that found in the undrugged phase, that is,there was a 1.2 second gap between them. During this drug phasethe subjects seemed less relaxed than they were under 2 cc., andtheir main interest seemed to be to get back to bed and be leftundisturbed. Under the influence of marihuana cigarettes the trend wassimilar to that found with 2 cc., the difference between theestimated time and the performance time being only 0.3 second. Aswith 2 cc., subjects behavior was generally happy and relaxed. When the group was divided into users and non-users the trendwas the same for both. (TABLE 16) On the whole it appears that small doses of marihuana and ofmarihuana cigarettes tend to lower the individual level ofaspiration, that is, there is a slight lessening in the subject'sdrive and his will to achieve. Larger doses (5 cc.) do notproduce this effect. Frustration Test The results of the frustration experiment indicated nostatistically significant differences between the subject'sreactions before and after he had taken marihuana. Again, afterthe ingestion of marihuana there was a slight trend towardlowering the level of aspiration (Table 17), but the over-allchange was not startling when compared with results on the Levelof Aspiration Test when no frustrating experience was introduced. (TABLE 17) Binet Lines Binet's interpretation of this test was based upon theprinciple that suggestible individuals, once embarked on aparticular form of activity (in this instance, drawing lines ofincreasing length), ale more prone to continue this activity whenthe stimulus is altered than are less suggestible people. Judgingby the results as given in Table 18, small doses of marihuana (2cc. and cigarettes) induced thus type of perseverative behaviorin the users but not in the non- users. In other words, themarihuana user when under the influence of the drug tended tocontinue an activity he had started without being toodiscriminatory or controlled about it. The non-user, on the otherhand, showed a curtailment in activity and responsiveness. Onepossible explanation of this difference in effect on user andnon-user appears to lie in the fact that the drug made the usermore relaxed and easy-going and less controlled in motor activitythan he was in his undrugged state, while the non-user was oftenmore tense and disturbed. As was so often the case in thepersonality tests, the effect on the user of large doses of thedrug (S cc.) was contrary to that of the small ones, probablybecause in many cases he was made physically uncomfortable andintellectually disorganized. (TABLE 18) The lack of consistency in the findings seems to suggest thatthe individual's psychological and physiological "set"toward the drug affects his reaction and behavior. Thus smalldoses, which the marihuana user anticipates with pleasure makehim more easy-going and therefore probably more suggestible thanhe would be in his undrugged state, while large doses have acontrary effect. The non-user, on the other hand, appears to beless suggestible as a result of drug ingestion than he ordinarilyis. Wechsler Vocational Interest Blank The average number of positions chosen by the subjects whenthey were in the undrugged state was 13.2. With 2 cc. ofmarihuana the average was 12.9; with 5 cc., 12.7; and withcigarettes, 11.8. There was a very slight but not statisticallysignificant trend toward a decrease in job interest. However, theabsence of any appreciable change in the number of positionsliked after the ingestion or smoking of marihuana indicates thatno real withdrawal is implied. Analysis of the type of position chosen shows that under theinfluence of marihuana there was no swing to the more feminineoccupations, but in the case of some subjects, especiallymarihuana users, there was a falling off in the popularity ofsome jobs which require considerable activity. For example, underthe influence of 2 cc. of marihuana or of marihuana cigarettesthe jobs of detective, policeman and taxi driver were found amonghis least desired occupations though they were not in this placewhen he was in the undrugged state. The trend was the same for the user and the non-user in boththe drugged and undrugged phase. For the user the jobs ofaviator, gymnasium teacher, newspaper reporter, sailor andsoldier were most frequently chosen; for the non-user aviator,doctor, explorer, forest ranger, newspaper reporter and prizefighter were most popular. Loofbourrow Personal Index: Test I Before taking marihuana, the user and non-user on an averageindicated familiarity with an identical number of words, 65.2.After he had smoked marihuana cigarettes, the user's vocabularyshowed a gain of 6 words, the non-user's 5 words. In both casesthe subject's confidence in his verbal capacity was enhanced bythe use of marihuana. Wechsler Free Association Test In the undrugged state the user and non-user were disturbed bythe same stimulus words, namely "lonely,""passionate," "insult," and "sin."The only differences were the disturbance the user showed inresponse to the words "wish" and "murder" andthe delayed reaction of the non-user to the word"pity." Under the influence of 5 cc. of marihuana or of marihuanacigarettes the user was less disturbed by all these words withthe possible exception of "insult," but there was asharp increase in the agitation aroused by the words"suicide" and "death." It appears that thefeeling of well-being produced by the drug tended to alleviatethe loneliness, guilt, and frustration which the subject felt,but it was also accompanied by a fear of death. This may be tiedup with the anxiety the marihuana user always experiences inregard to the amount of drug he is taking, the always presentfear of his "blowing his top," or it may be areflection of the problems which were most disturbing to him. The non-user, after taking marihuana, was also less disturbedby the words "lonely," "passionate," and"sin." His reaction to "pity" was alsodiminished but he, too, was still upset by the word"insult." The new disturbing stimulus words were notthose which upset the user but those which were more closelyrelated to his own immediate problems namely "honest,""money," and "sex." Since the non-user in ourgroup was generally an individual who had been sent to prisonbecause of stealing or a sex offense, it seems it was theseproblems which the disinhibiting action of the drug brought tothe fore. Pressey X-O Test This test was taken by only 10 subjects, 5 users and 5nonusers. In general, the smoking of marihuana brought about someincrease in the number of words which had an unpleasant meaningto the subject and in the number of things about which he hadworried. There was some decrease in the number of things forwhich the drugged subject thought a person should be blamed. Thenumber of his associations with any one word remained roughly thesame in the drugged and undrugged state. Although less inclined to censure when under the influence ofmarihuana, the subject was nevertheless more readily disturbedand worried. This undercurrent of irritability and anxiety seemedto be a concomitant of the more obvious feeling of generalwell-being which is the predominant effect of the drug. Twopossible explanations can be given here for this finding: thephysiological changes occurring with the smoking -of the druggave the subject a feeling of anxiety, and the disinhibitionwhich occurred at this time released the restraints which hadbeen imposed not only on the happier reactions but on all therepressed unpleasantness as well, and things which the subjecthad repressed because he wished to forget them now came to thefore. This was noted when at least two of the subjects had"crying jags" when drugged, reproaching themselves forwhat they had done to their mothers and wives. Downey Will-Temperament Test: Test I The changes in the subjects' responses on this test showed ashift in their attitude toward themselves as a result ofmarihuana ingestion. On the whole, more subjects appeared tothink better of themselves when they were "high" thanthey did in their undrugged state. This is indicated by the factthat there was an increase in the number of individuals who underthe influence of 5 cc. of marihuana or of marihuana cigarettesbelieved themselves to be careful, cautious, ambitious, accurate,industrious, impulsive, enthusiastic, and possessing superiorcharacters. There was also a decrease in the number whoconsidered themselves suggestible or extravagant. The onlynegative traits which the subject admitted to more frequentlywhen he was "high" than he did in his normal state weresuggestibility, poor memory and aggression. The change inattitude in regard to aggression was most striking among themarihuana users, 88 per cent of whom considered themselvesaggressive after they had had the drug as compared with only 42per cent in the undrugged state. This increase in the feeling ofaggression was not paralleled by the findings of the other testsnor by the behavior of the subjects when they had taken the drug.Like the increased vocabulary noted on the Loofbourrow it canbest be interpreted as an indication of the subject's increasedfeelings of confidence and self-assurance. (Table 19) In general the changes which occurred on this test after thesubject had had marihuana were not consistent for the user andthe non-user or for different amounts of the drug. They merelyserved to indicate that when the subject was under the influenceof marihuana there were shifts in his feelings about himselfwhich reflected a prevailing mood of confidence and self-satisfaction. Thematic Apperception Test Without cigarettes the needs most frequently expressed in thesubjects' stories were "affiliation,""aggression," "sex," "dominance,""succorance," "self-abasement," and"play." These terms may be defined as follows:(1)Affiliation: to be sociable, to make friends, to love.Aggression: to fight, to criticize, to blame, to accuse orridicule maliciously, to injure or kill, sadism. Sex: to seek sexobjects, to court, to enjoy intercourse. Dominance: to influenceor control others, leadership. Succorance: to seek aid,protection or sympathy. Selfabasement: to comply, to surrender,to accept punishment, to apologize, to condone, to atone, todepreciate ego, masochism. Play: to relax tension and alleviatestress by pleasurable and humorously irresponsible activity,motor, verbal or mental. In general the frequency with which all needs were expressedfell off after the subjects had smoked marihuana cigarettes. Themost striking drops were in the need for self-abasement andaggression where the frequency of occurrence changed from 2.4 to1.1 for the former, and from 2.7 to 1.7 for the latter. Contraryto the general trend there was an increase in the need fordominance. When the subjects were not "high" the environmentalinfluences most frequently mentioned in their stories wereillness and death and accepting parents. After smoking marihuanathe general trend was similar to that noted for the"needs," that is there was a falling off in thefrequency with which the subjects used most of the concepts. There was, however, no diminution in the number of times thatillness and death played a part in their tales, the averagenumber being 2.1 before smoking and 2.2 after smoking. Likewisethe awareness of restraint and imprisonment remained constant,occurring 1.1 times before smoking and 1.2 after. Contrary to thegeneral trend there was an increased awareness of an acceptinglove object. This concept appeared in the stories on an averageof .8 time before smoking and 1.2 after. The decrease in the number of times both needs andenvironmental pressures were expressed in the stories given afterthe subjects had had cigarettes was not due to a curtailment inthe length of the story. The tales were often more wordy in thedrugged than in the undrugged state, but their length wasfrequently due to embellishment and repetition, and there waslikely to be less meaningful material. In general the storiesobtained from the subjects after smoking indicated that they hadless capacity for expressing themselves directly and clearly, andalso less concern with self-abasement and aggression. As definedon this test these needs represent a conflict between aggressionagainst the self and against others and appear to stem frominsecurity and feelings of guilt and inadequacy. In the druggedstate the subjects appeared less disturbed by this conflict andhad less need to harry themselves and others. They had a greaterneed for dominance, a desire for leadership. This ties in withthe greater self-assurance demonstrated by other tests and withthe increased awareness of acceptance by a love object found onthis test. It is interesting to note that these subjects showed nofalling off in their awareness of illness and death or ofrestraint and imprisonment after smoking. The frequency of thelatter concept was undoubtedly related to their status asprisoners, while the former ties in with the findings on the FreeAssociation Test where the word "death" remained adisturbing factor even after marihuana had been smoked oringested. (1) Directions for Thematic Apperception Test prepared byRobert W. White and R. Nevitt-Sanford, Harvard PsychologicalClinic, February 1941. FINDINGS ON WOMEN SUBJECTS As in the case with the men, when the female subject was underthe influence of marihuana her basic personality structure didnot change and only some relatively superficial emotionalreactions were different. As a group, the women used in thisstudy showed a somewhat constricted personality, and thisconstriction was not lessened when the subject was"high." The emotional reactions revealed in theRorschach Test showed that the subjects in this particular groupwere primarily extraversive, and this remained unchanged afterthe administration of marihuana. Again, like the men, when underthe influence of the drug the women lowered the achievementlevels they set for themselves. However, they did not show anyincreased self-confidence as did the men, either by an increasein the number of words they claimed to know in the LoofbourrowTest or in their appraisal of themselves as indicated in theDowney Will-Temperament Test. In general, the women exhibited aloss of drive for participation in anything requiring effort.This is inferred from their performance in the Level ofAspiration Test, the Vocational Interest Blank, and the BinetLines Test, as well as from their behavior. BEHAVIOR DURING THE TEST PERIOD OF SUBJECTS UNDER THEINFLUENCE OF MARIHUANA The findings reported here have all been in terms ofobjective, quantitative measures. Some effects of the drug,observable during examinations, cannot be quantified but arenevertheless important to the understanding of the drug action.These effects were reflected in those reactions of the subjectswhich were not directly related to the test situation Behaviorwas somewhat different when the subject had ingested marihuanaconcentrate than it was when he had taken the drug in cigaretteform. With pills gastrointestinal disturbances were morepronounced and drowsiness and fatigue seemed greater and moreenduring. Some individuals were so overcome by fatigue that theyworked for a few seconds only, and then sat with their heads onthe table. If spoken to, they made a great effort to do the workbut rarely continued for very long. When summoned to take thetest, especially toward the end of the day when they were almostinvariably lying on their beds, the subjects were overcome withfatigue and were aroused only with the greatest difficulty. Insome instances there was definite resentment of this disturbanceand the impression was that only the presence of the policeofficer and all the implications in the prison set-up prevented adefinite refusal to continue cooperatively. With both pills andcigarettes many of the men had difficulty in concentrating andmaintaining a fixed goal. Subjects often stared vacantly for longperiods and when addressed came back to the test with a start.Many burst into uncontrollable laughter over a test which intheir undrugged state had evoked no merriment. The laughterfrequently affected the entire group and most markedly those whohad been given marihuana. The behavior of the user and non-user with marihuanacigarettes was somewhat different. The user was pleasantlyexcited at the thought of smoking, selected his cigarettes withthe manner of a connoisseur, and criticized or praised theproduct offered him. His smoking took on something of aritualistic ceremony and was done in a careful and prearrangedfashion which varied slightly from individual to individual. Ingeneral the men first opened the end of the cigarette to examinethe marihuana, then wet the "stick" by inserting it intheir mouths to prevent the paper from burning too rapidly. Whenthe cigarette was ignited the men took several short puffs, atthe same time inhaling as much air as possible. This caused thetip of the "stick" to glow and resulted in a successionof low gasping sounds from the subject The smoke was retained aslong as possible, occasionally causing severe paroxysms ofcoughing. Although eager to be "high" the user wasconsistent in his fear of "blowing his top," and therewas always a point beyond which no amount of talking or cajolingcould make them continue smoking. As a rule, the user liked to smoke in company. He wasgenerally satisfied if one friend, a "kick partner,"could be with him. To this friend he would explain his thoughtsand feelings which to the objective observer were verysuperficial. In trying to make a point, and usually a minor oneat that, the user, when smoking, would talk on endlessly and soonlose his goal. He cracked many "jokes" which wereuproariously funny to him. In some instances "leaping"or involuntary jerking of the arms, head, shoulders or legsoccurred The subject described his sensations as floating,leaping, rocking or most often as being "in thegroove." He was obviously enjoying pleasant physicalsensations and wanted to be left to himself to lie on his bed,listen to soft music and dream or carry on "deep"conversations. The test questions were frequently called a"bring down" in that they forced the subject to facereality and abandon his pleasurable feelings. Several subjectsconcurred in describing part of their drug experience ascomparable to the twilight state between sleeping and waking inwhich the individual floats pleasantly and does not allow outsidestimuli to impinge. Just as strong extraneous sensations willbring the sleeper face to face with reality, so the insistence ofthe examiner that the subject perform certain tasks served todestroy his general feeling of well-being. Aside from the testsituation any unpleasant circumstances can serve as a "bringdown." This "bring down" apparently only resultsin destroying the subject's pleasure but cannot do away with thedisadvantageous effect on intellectual functioning. When testing was completed the subject generally lay on hisbed and dozed or listened to the radio. His drowsiness persistedfor many hours. Most non-users approached the smoking with apprehension. Theywere instructed by the users in the art of lighting and inhaling,but they rarely cooperated to the fullest extent? though this wasundoubtedly unconscious on their part. The effects of marihuana on the non-users were variable. A fewof them enjoyed the results so much that they claimed they wouldcontinue to smoke whenever they had a chance. They described suchsensations as "lying in fur," and "floating inspace." Some became acutely nauseous and could not continuewith their work, while others experienced little or no change infeeling, undoubtedly because they never smoked correctly. When the subjects were "high," particularly in thecase of the non- user, there was a general loss of inhibition andlessening of many social restraints which had previously beenexercised. Thus, all the men talked much more freely, confrontedeach other more directly, and manifested a state of well-being attimes amounting to euphoria. They were much more confiding?talked spontaneously about love and sexual affairs, and in twoinstances exposed themselves and masturbated. Although there was an undeniable increase in overt sexinterest following the ingestion of marihuana, it seems probablethat this interest was not the result of direct sexualstimulation but rather a manifestation of a falling off ininhibiting factors. This sex interest seems to have been dueprimarily to the fact that these men had been imprisoned forvarying periods and had not had access to women. It is not at allcertain that under free conditions or with different subjectsthis behavior would have been manifested. In any case, thebehavior of these prisoners was more like that which any mandeprived of sexual activity for a long period of time woulddisplay under a releasing stimulus and not at all like thebehavior shown at marihuana "tea-pads." Contents | Feedback | Search DRCNet Library | Schaffer Library | Major Studies | LaGuardiaCommittee Report WT01-B27-70IA031-000653-B006-355http://206.61.184.43:80/schaffer/LIBRARY/studies/lag/sumdis.htm 206.61.184.43 19970122134919 text/html 20025HTTP/1.0 200 OKDate: Wednesday, 22-Jan-97 13:49:06 GMTServer: WebSitePro/1.1f (S/N wpo-0deb)Allow-ranges: bytesContent-type: text/htmlLast-modified: Saturday, 28-Dec-96 07:01:47 GMTContent-length: 19807 LaGuardia Committee Report on Marihuana -- Summary andDiscussion Contents | Feedback | Search DRCNet Library | Schaffer Library | Major Studies | LaGuardiaCommittee Report The LaGuardia Committee Report on Marihuana SUMMARY AND DISCUSSION Under the influence of marihuana changes in personality asshown by alterations in test performance are slight. They are notstatistically significant and indicate only tendencies or trends.Moreover, the drug effect is not always in proportion to theamount taken, nor are the changes consistently in one direction.In many instances the effect of small doses (2 cc.) or ofmarihuana cigarettes is the opposite of the effect of largerdoses (5 cc.) (2) (2) While sufficient experimentation has not been made tovalidate the finding, it should be noted that the personalitychanges produced by 2 cc. or marihuana cigarettes are almostalways in agreement in contrast to the changes resulting from theingestion of 5 cc. The 2 cc. Dosage apparently more nearlyapproximates the amount a person would take if left to his owndevices. The personality changes observed when the subject is under theinfluence of 2 cc. of marihuana or marihuana cigarettesdemonstrate that the subject experiences some reduction in drive,less objectivity in evaluating situations, less aggression, moreself-confidence and a generally more favorable attitude towardhimself. These reactions can be ascribed to two main causes,namely, an increased feeling of relaxation and disinhibition andincreased self-confidence. As the drug relaxes the subject, therestraints which he normally imposes on himself are loosened andhe talks more freely than he does in his undrugged state. Thingswhich under ordinary circumstances he would not speak about arenow given expression. Metaphysical problems which in theundrugged state he would be unwilling to discuss, sexual ideas hewould ordinarily hesitate to mention, jokes without point, areall part of the oral stream released by the marihuana. At the same time that he verbalizes more freely, there is areduction in the individual's critical faculty. This is probablydue both to the intellectual confusion produced by the drug andto the less exacting attitude his feeling of relaxation induces.He holds himself less rigidly to the standards of his undruggedphase and does not drive himself to achieve. He is satisfied withhimself and willing to accept himself as he is. Thisself-satisfaction undoubtedly helps produce the feeling ofself-confidence which allows the subject to come out more freelyin fields which he formerly avoided. This increased confidenceexpresses itself primarily through oral rather than physicalchannels. Physically the subject reports pleasant sensations of"drifting" and "floating" and he allowshimself to become enveloped in a pleasant lassitude. After the administration of larger doses of marihuana (5 cc.)the pleasurable sensations appear to be outweighed by concomitantfeelings of anxiety'and, in some cases, of physical distress,such as nausea. Under these circumstances, for many subjectsthere is little increase in confidence but rather heightenedinsecurity which precludes outgoing reactions and tends to evokegenerally negativistic attitudes to most stimuli. It is important to note that neither the ingestion ofmarihuana nor the smoking of marihuana cigarettes affects thebasic outlook of the individual except in a very few instancesand to a very slight degree. In general the subjects who arewithdrawn and introversive stay that way, those who are outgoingremain so, and so on. Where changes occur the shift is so slightas to be negligible. In other words reactions which are nativelyalien to the individual cannot be induced by the ingestion orsmoking of the drug. Although in most instances the effects of the drug are thesame for the user and the non-user, there are some differencesboth in kind and extent. Where the effects for the two groups arein the same direction they generally are more marked in the caseof the non-user. This is not unexpected in view of the non-user'slack of habituation to the drug action. For the nonuser hispresent experience is a strange, even hazardous one, and theuncertainty and anxiety attendant upon this impairs the sense ofwell-being which the drug produces in the user. Thus the non-userfrequently feels-less secure when he is "high" than hedoes normally and is less well adjusted than he is in ordinarycircumstances. When the productions of the undrugged marihuana user arestudied, certain personality traits which serve to differentiatehim from the non-user and from the "average" individualcan be discerned. As a group the marihuana users studied herewere either inhibited emotionally or turned in on themselves,making little response to stimuli in the world about them. Peoplewith this type of personality generally have difficulty adjustingto others and are not at ease in social situations. Thiswithdrawal from social contacts apparently finds littlecompensatory or sublimating activity elsewhere. These subjectsdid not have a desire or urge to occupy themselves creatively ina manner which might prove socially useful. They showed atendency to drift along in passive fashion and gave a goodportion of their attention to relatively unimportant matters.These men were poorly adjusted, lonely and insecure. As indicatedby their history they seldom achieved good heterosexualadjustment. CONCLUSIONS Under the influence of marihuana the basic personality structure of the individual does not change but some of the more superficial aspects of his behavior show alteration. With the use of marihuana the individual experiences increased feelings of relaxation, disinhibition and self-confidence. The new feeling of self-confidence induced by the drug expresses itself primarily through oral rather than through physical activity. There is some indication of a diminution in physical activity. The disinhibition which results from the use of marihuana releases what is latent in the individual's thoughts and emotions but does not evoke responses which would be totally alien to him in his undrugged state. Marihuana not only releases pleasant reactions but also feelings of anxiety. Individuals with a limited capacity for effective experience and who have difficulty in making social contacts are more likely to resort to marihuana than those more capable of outgoing responses. Family and Community Ideologies Adolph G. Woltrnann, MA At the outset of the study it seemed worth while to supplementthe quantitative data by some qualitative procedures of theprojective type which might throw light on the social reactionsof the individuals who were being studied. One of the methodsthat has shown its possibilities, particularly in its use withchildren, is the play technique in which the individual ispermitted to give free expression to some of his unconsciousmotivations in a way that is not immediately apparent to him. Thelimitation of this technique is the fact that it is highlyinterpretive, but it has the advantage of permitting observationsof the subject's personality reactions in problem situations. Such a study was accordingly carried out on 18 subjects in theearly part of the investigation. METHOD Two situations were studied: one, subsequently to be referredto as the family set-up, in which toys were used to build anapartment or home, and another, subsequently to be known as thecommunity set- up, in which a second variety of toys were used toconstruct a town setting. The Family Set-up The equipment used in this part of the study consisted of abox of household toys of the type available in the ten-centstore, including beds, dressers, chairs, tables, sinks, a stove,a bathtub, a wash basin, a piano, lamps, flower boxes, atelephone, doll sets of a man, woman, boy, girl, and maid, and,in addition, several small wooden slats which were intended to beused as room partitions. The box of toys and materials was presented to the subjectwith the following directions: "Here are a number of toyswhich can be placed in such a manner that a house can be builtfrom them. You are supposed to be this doll (man). Go ahead andbuild yourself a house or apartment. You may use as few or asmany toys as you wish. You may also make believe you are abachelor or a married man with or without a family." The Community Set-up In studying the community set-up the following items wereemployed: eighteen wooden houses, trees, cars, trucks, fireengines, an ambulance, a radio police car, a railroad train,airplanes, and numerous figures representing men, women, andchildren from different walks of life. All these toys were handedto the subject at the same time with the instruction to build atown or city. As in the family set-up, no further help orsuggestions were given. The actual method of handling these materials allows for twoapproaches. In the free method the subject is encouraged to playwith any toy and to create and act out any situation that thenature of the toy suggests to him. No help, clues, or hints aregiven. In the controlled methods either the subject is told tocreate a specific pattern or his responses and reactions to apredetermined particular situation are elicited. Both methodswere used in this study. After the subject had completed either his family or hiscommunity set-up and answered questions regarding certainsituations about which the examiner had questioned him thefollowing points were investigated: ( 1 ) subject's maritalstatus, both real and assumed; (2) type of home he built forhimself (number of rooms, type of furnishing); (3) subject'sassumed occupation; (4) monthly income and rent which he posited;(S) his reaction to attempted burglary; (6) his reaction to hiswife's and his own infidelity; and (7) the attitude he would taketoward civic problems if given a position of responsibility suchas mayor. In addition, the examiner appraised the subject'sneatness and orderliness in his home and community setup. Theexperiment was given first when the subject was undrugged andthen when he was under the influence of marihuana. FINDINGS Results were collated in terms of the type and frequency ofresponses to different situations both before and after takingmarihuana and in terms of number of items (toys) employed in theset- up, as, for example, in the case of the home situation, thenumber of rooms the subject thought necessary for his apartmentand the amount of rent he thought he ought to pay and itsrelation to the income he posited for himself; in the case of thecommunity set- up, the number of times the subject provided forambulances, firemen, and policemen; in the case of the subject'sreaction to burglary, whether he took a passive or a resistantattitude toward the burglary and whether he assumed the burglarhad absconded with most of the property and so on; in the case ofhis attitude toward his wife's adultery, whether he thought heought to divorce her or try for reconciliation; and, when thesubject was unfaithful, whether he thought his wife ought toforgive his delinquency. In most cases comparisons between responses or reactionsshowed little difference in attitude before and after theingestion of marihuana and therefore it would not be tooprofitable in this short summary of the work to present all thedata obtained. However, by way of illustrating the type ofmaterial procured, the following tables are given: (TABLE 20) (TABLE 21) The majority of the patients, though unmarried in real life,assumed families and responsibilities in the play situation, andin a free situation acted out family activities and ideologies.These figures reveal that, on the average, the subjects whenunder the influence of the drug tended to build apartments withsomewhat fewer rooms. The impression of the examiner was thatthis was due primarily to the subject's desire to get throughwith the task as quickly as possible in order to return to hisroom to rest and sleep. (TABLE 22) A "make-believe" sickness or accident necessitatingthe use of an ambulance was the most frequently observed playpattern. When the subjects were under the influence of the drugthe incidence of the ambulance and the police was considerablyless than it was when they were in the undrugged state. (TABLE 23) The most frequent form of passive reaction to his wife'sinfidelity was that the subject would pack up and leave home. Theaggressive reactions consisted of ordering the wife out of thehome in three instances, jailing the wife and lover in oneinstance, throwing the wife out in one instance, killing thelover but leaving the wife unmolested in one instance, andbeating up the lover and leaving the wife unharmed in oneinstance. The following are examples of subjects' responses to theadultery situation. When he was facing the pretended situationbefore taking marihuana, one subject immediately left his house,borrowed money from his employer, and traveled to the West Coast.After he arrived there he proceeded to drink and in due timebecame a derelict on the Barbary Coast. When asked about hischildren he said, "That's closed with the rest of thechapter. Let her ardent lover support the children. I take on anassumed name. Others might get a divorce and custody of thechildren but in my case my home life would be a closedchapter." After the administration of marihuana he stillshowed a passive attitude, but, having assumed the role of apsychologist, he felt obliged to act accordingly. At first heconsidered divorce action, but since that would deprive thechildren of a home, he finally forgave his wife. Then he stoppedin his contemplations, looked at the examiner and said, "Whydo I become altruistic? . . . That's beyond me . . . Maybe Ibecome a martyr . . . I commit an act of martyrdom." Anothersubject, when in the undrugged condition, ordered his wife out ofthe house and later divorced her. In the drugged state customaryprocedures were reversed. The subject went to his parents andremained passively at home while his mother unsuccessfully triedto bring about a reconciliation. The subject's attitude toward adultery did not change in thedrugged state. The data in Table 24 illustrate the fact thatingestion of marihuana generally does not alter the subject'sbasic attitude. (TABLE 24) Practically all the subjects approved of saloons. Gambling wasrejected because it deprives wives and children of money andleads to trouble. A heavy loser may try to recoup his lossesthrough holdups, and fights and homicide may develop fromquarrels. Prostitution was condoned by about 5O per cent of thesubjects both before and after the ingestion of the drug, but theuse of marihuana was frowned upon more often when the subject wasundrugged than when he was in the drugged state. (TABLE 25) SUMMARY AND CONCLUSIONS Eighteen subjects who participated in the marihuana study weresubjected to the play situation with the idea of seeing whetherthe pattern of play or the ideas investigated were materiallyaltered in consequence of the ingestion of the marihuana. Amongthe ideologies which were appraised were: (1) attitude towardfamily set-up; (2) attitude toward different occupations; (3)attitude toward income; (4) attitude toward situations ordinarilycalling for aggression, namely an attempted burglary of his homeand sexual infidelity on the part of his wife; (5) attitudetoward authority. In general the subject's attitude toward family and communityideologies as manifested in play did not change markedly as aresult of the ingestion of marihuana. The subjects (in play) werenot intolerant of infidelity or aggressive toward lawbreakerseither before or after the ingestion of marihuana. On the wholethe initial passive reactions already observed in other parts ofthe study were likewise observed in the play situationexperiment. The only very definite change as a result of theingestion of marihuana was in their attitude toward the drugitself. Without marihuana only 4 out of 14 subjects said theywould tolerate the sale of marihuana while after ingestion 8 ofthem were in favor of this. Another significant manifestation in the play situationpertains to the construction of the community set-up. In generalthe community was less orderly and well organized when thesubjects had had marihuana. It is probable that this poororganization may be ascribed to the generally indifferentattitude and lack of motor coordination already observed in themore controlled studies. On the whole, the experiment with play technique gave lessinformation as to the effect of marihuana on subjects than hadbeen hoped for. This may have been due to the incompleteness ofthe method employed or possibly to the fact that this techniqueis designed to give data about the basic personality of theindividual rather than such alterations in it as might be causedby pharmacological agents. Contents | Feedback | Search DRCNet Library | Schaffer Library | Major Studies | LaGuardiaCommittee Report WT01-B27-71IA031-000653-B006-386http://206.61.184.43:80/schaffer/LIBRARY/studies/lag/compare.htm 206.61.184.43 19970122134939 text/html 17806HTTP/1.0 200 OKDate: Wednesday, 22-Jan-97 13:49:30 GMTServer: WebSitePro/1.1f (S/N wpo-0deb)Allow-ranges: bytesContent-type: text/htmlLast-modified: Saturday, 28-Dec-96 07:02:41 GMTContent-length: 17588 La Guardia Committee Report - Comparison Between Users andNon-Users Contents | Feedback | Search DRCNet Library | Schaffer Library | Major Studies | LaGuardiaCommittee Report LaGuardia Committee Report on Marihuana Comparison Between Users and Non-Users from the Standpoint ofMental and Physical Deterioration A careful testing of the motor and sensory functions of thenervous system was included in the general physical examinationof each subject. Of motor functions, reflex activity and muscularresponse and coordination were determined; of sensory functions,perception of touch, pain and temperature stimuli; of specializedfunctions, taste, hearing and vision. In the eye, the corneal andlight reflexes were tested and a retinal examination was made. Inthis neurological examination no pathological conditions werefound in any of the subjects. In the psychiatric examination attention was paid to generalintelligence and knowledge in relation to the subject'sbackground, to relevancy of talk in conversation, to orientationas to time, place and situation, to memory of past and recentevents, to ability in simple arithmetic, to judgment in reachingdecisions, and to the presence of abnormal mental content shownby delusions, hallucinations, obsessions, and ideas ofpersecution. There was no evidence of disordered cerebralfunctioning in any of the group. As would be expected, differences in grades of intelligenceand in orderliness in thinking and reasoning were noticeable. TheBellevue Adult Intelligence Test was administered to a total of60 male subjects, 40 marihuana users and 20 nonusers. The averageI.Q. for the user group was 96.7, range 70 to 124, and for thenon-user group the average I.Q. was 104.5, range 93 to 114. Bothgroups may therefore be classified as of average intelligence. When analyzed according to racial distribution the two groupswere even better equated intellectually than the total resultsindicate. For the 28 white subjects examined (13 users and 15non-users) the average I.Q. for the users was 106.1 range 77 to124, and for the non-users the average I.Q. was 106.3, range 96to 114. There were 24 Negro subjects, 19 users and 5 non-users.The average I.Q. for the users was 92.6, range 70 to 112, whilefor the non-users the average I.Q. was 98.8, range 93 to 101.Although the non-users averaged 6.2 points higher than the users,it must be taken into account that the number of Negro non-userstested was small. In any event, the disparity in results wouldnot be considered significant.. The average I.Q. of the 2 PuertoRican users was 91.0, range 72 to 100. Reports on mental deterioration due to toxic, organic orpsychotic factors as given in the literature reveal that in suchcases the individual scores on the Bellevue Adult IntelligenceTest show marked irregularity, depending upon the functionsinvolved in the deteriorative process. As a group, the marihuanausers tested in this study showed very even functioning, and whatlittle irregularity occurred can be explained on the basis oflanguage and racial factors. The physical and psychiatric examinations were of aqualitative rather than a quantitative nature. In the specialexaminations and tests of organ and system function, quantitativemeasurements were obtained for 17 marihuana users. These subjectswere selected for the reason that they had smoked marihuana forthe longest period of time. The figures for years of usage andnumber of cigarettes smoked daily were taken from each subject'sstatement. Marihuana users accustomed to daily smoking for a period offrom two and a half to sixteen years showed no abnormal systemfunctioning which would differentiate them from the non-users. There is definite evidence in this study that the marihuanausers were not inferior in intelligence to the general populationand that they had suffered no mental or physical deterioration asa result of their use of the drug. Addiction and Tolerance A drug addiction is characterized by a compelling urge to usethe drug for the prevention or relief of distressing mental andphysical disturbances which occur when the necessary dose isdelayed or omitted. A drug habit is also characterized by an urgeto use the drug, but this is not compelling. The abstinencesymptoms, which are expressions of nervous states, are notparticularly distressing and do not occur as long as the person'sattention is placed on other matters. Drug tolerance in the narrower sense used here means thatlarger doses than those originally used are required to bringabout the effects desired by the subject. In the case ofmorphine, tolerance develops because of addiction, but in otherinstances tolerance may be present without addiction andaddiction without tolerance. When both are present the mattertakes on greater importance because of the extremes to which theaddict goes to obtain the drug constantly and in increasingquantities. As our group of subjects included 48 users of marihuana,opportunity was afforded for some conclusions concerningmarihuana addiction and tolerance. Practically all of our groupof users stated that they could and often did voluntarily stopthe smoking for a time without any undue disturbance from thedeprivation. In the sociologic study reported by Dr. Schoenfeldit was found that smokers had no compelling urge for marihuana.If "reefers" were not readily available there was nospecial effort made to obtain them from known sources of supply.Dr. Walter Bromberg, Psychiatrist-in-Charge, Psychiatric Clinic,Court of General Sessions in New York, states: "The factthat offenders brought up on marihuana charges do not requestmedical treatment on their incarceration (with its cessation ofdrug supply) argues for the absence of with drawal symptoms.''(1)From interviews with several hundred marihuana users he concludesthat true addiction was absent. (1) Bromberg, W. "Marihuana: a psychiatric study."J.A.MA. 113:4, 1939.=20 The evidence submitted here warrants the conclusion that asfar as New York City is concerned true addiction to marihuanadoes not occur. The evidence concerning acquired tolerance is less clear-cutTolerance develops during the periods when the drug is beingtaken and accounts for the necessity of increasing the dosage tobring about the desired effects. How long the tolerance persistsafter the drug administration is stopped has not been definitelyestablished in any instance. The statements of marihuana usage and time since stoppagegiven by eight of our subjects are summarized in Table 26. (TABLE26) On one or more of the numerous occasions on which marihuanawas administered each of these subjects received what wasconsidered a minimal effective dose. One (J.B.) was given 1 cc.,another (A.B.) 3 cc., the others 2 cc. In all instances thecustomary physical effects, conjunctival injection, dilated andsluggishly reacting pupils, tremors and ataxia, were observed.With these doses the subjects also experienced the sensationdescribed as "high." The only conclusion warranted hereis that if acquired tolerance does occur it persists for alimited period only. Further evidence, though indirect, was brought out by Dr.Shoenfeld's investigation and by personal interviews with our 48users. There is agreement in the statements that among users thesmoking of one or two cigarettes is sufficient to bring on theeffect known as "high." When this state is reached theuser will not continue smoking for fear of becoming "toohigh." When the desired effects have passed off and thesmoker has "come down," smoking one cigarette bringsthe "high" effect on again. This could not be the casehad a steadily increasing tolerance developed. The evidence available then=AD-the absence of any compellingurge to use the drug, the absence of any distressing abstinencesymptoms, the statements that no increase in dosage is requiredto repeat the desired effect in users-=ADjustifies the conclusionthat neither true addiction nor tolerance is found in marihuanausers. The continuation and the frequency of usage of marihuana,as in the case of many other habit-forming substances, depend onthe easily controlled desires for its pleasurable effects.Possible Therapeutic Applications If a drug has well-marked pharmacological actions and lowtoxicity, as appears to be the case with marihuana, aconsideration of special interest is its possible therapeuticapplication. In the older clinical literature marihuana wasrecommended for use in a wide variety of disorders, but in recentyears it has almost disappeared from the materia medica and itwas dropped from the United States Pharmacopeia twenty years ago. In view of the laboratory and clinical findings obtained inthis study the question of the therapeutic possibilities of thedrug was considered. Marihuana possesses two qualities whichsuggest that it might have useful actions in man. The first isthe typical euphoria- producing action which might be applicablein the treatment of various types of mental depression- thesecond is the rather unique property which results in thestimulation of appetite. In the light of this evidence and inview of the fact that there is a lack of any substantialindication of dependence on the drug, it was reasoned thatmarihuana might be useful in alleviating the withdrawal symptomsin drug addicts. At the Riker's Island Penitentiary observations were made on56 inmates who were addicted to morphine or heroin. Two groupswere selected, the addicts in each being matched with those inthe other group as to age, physical condition, duration andintensity of habit, and number of previous attempts at cure. Thesubjects in one group received no treatment or were givenMagendie's solution according to the usual hospital regimen whilethose in the other group were treated with 15 mg. oftetrahydrocannabinol three times daily with or without placebo(subcutaneous water injection). An attempt was made to evaluatethe severity of the withdrawal signs and symptoms. The impressionwas gained that those who received tetrahydrocannabinol had lesssevere withdrawal symptoms and left the hospital at the end ofthe treatment period in better condition than those who receivedno treatment or who were treated with Magendie's solution. Theones in the former group maintained their appetite and in somecases actually gained weight during the withdrawal period. Since psychological factors play a large part in thewithdrawal symptoms of at least a certain proportion of morphineaddicts, there are grounds for the assumption that a drug havingthe properties of marihuana might be of aid in alleviating mentaldistress during the withdrawal period. However, the studies heredescribed were not sufficiently complete to establish the valueof such treatment, and before conclusions can be drawn theproblem must be investigated under completely controlledconditions. PHARMACOLOGICAL STUDY (1) S. Loewe, MD (2) (1) Fromthe Department of Pharrnacology, CorneU University MedicalCollege. (2) Part of the experimental work here reported wasconducted in collaboration with W. Modell SUMMARY 1. This review of the pharmacology of marihuana is centeredaround the chemical and pharmacological identification of theactive principles of hemp. Coordination of chemical andpharmacological investigations as a prerequisite to success inthe search for unknown principles and of the analysis of thestructure-activity relationship of these compounds is discussed. 2. In a survey of the sources of preparations with marihuanaactivity, hemp seeds are disclosed as a heretofore unknown sourceof active substances. 3. Varieties of hemp can be distinguished according togenotypic differences of the content of active principles whichpersist over generations independently of soil and climate. 4. The pharmacological actions of marihuana are analyzed withregard to their specificity and their usefulness as indicators ofspecific components. 5. Sixty-five substances from the new class of cannabinols andrelated classes are reviewed, among which are the essentialcomponents of the marihuana-active hemp oils. The discovery ofthis class, the synthesis of these representatives, and theirstructural elucidation led the way to the discovery of the activesubstances. 6. Quantitative assay procedures are described for the mostimportant marihuana effects that are observed in the animalexperiment. The assay of the ataxia effect in the dog and of thesynergistic hypnotic effect in the mouse with refined proceduresare shown to be reliable expedients for measuring these twomarihuana actions, whereas the areflexia effect in rabbits failedto show the reproducibility required for quantitative purposes. 7. With the aid of these methods the naturaltetrahydrocannabinols are shown to be active principlesresponsible for ataxia in dogs and psychic action in man. Theyare intermediate products between the two ineffective substanceswhich compose the bulk of hemp oil: a labile excretion product ofthe plant, cannabidiol, and a stable end- product, cannabinol.The conversion of cannabidol into active tetrahydrocannabinol bya natural environmental influence has been paralleled byultraviolet irradiation in vitro. 8. Numerous isomers, homologs and analogs of tetra- andhexahydrocannabinol are shown to possess the specific marihuanaaction. The potency varies enormously and is highest in natural,optically active=ADlaevogyrous=ADtetrahydrocannabinols. 9. The significance of many of the structural details of thetetrahydrocannabinol molecule for marihuana activity iselucidated by quantitative determinations of relative potency.Special attention was devoted to a study of the importance ofvariations in the length of the 3- alkyl side chain oftetrahydrocannabinols. In studying methyl to nonyl homologs ofthe original amyl derivative occurring in nature, it was foundthat the maximum potency is not at the amyl, but at the hexylhomolog, and in two out of four homologous series at therepresentatives with still longer side chains. 10. In addition to the ataxia and the psychic action, otherpharmacological attributes of the tetrahydrocannabinols are adecrease in the respiratory and an increase in the pulse rates inthe non-narcotized dog. 11. The synergistic hypnotic action of marihuana in the mouseis to be attributed to the otherwise inert cannabidiol. 12. The corneal areflexia action in the rabbit was muchstronger in impure distillate oils than in pure tetrahydrocannabinols, which leads to the conclusion that this action iseither poorly reproducible or must be attributed to a different,as yet unknown, principle. 13. Only one among the numerous cannabinol derivatives, 7-methyltetrahydrocannabinol, was found to produce a motorstimulant=AD-convulsant=AD-action concomitant with ataxia action.A cannabidiol derivative, tetrahydrocannabidiol, was found tohave specific convulsant action in the dog. A central stimulant (benzedrine) considerably increased the ataxia action of marihuana, whereas a hypnotic (amytal) had no influence. Contents | Feedback | Search DRCNet Library | Schaffer Library | Major Studies | LaGuardiaCommittee Report WT01-B27-72IA031-000653-B006-410http://206.61.184.43:80/schaffer/LIBRARY/studies/wootton/soma1.htm 206.61.184.43 19970122134950 text/html 98658HTTP/1.0 200 OKDate: Wednesday, 22-Jan-97 13:49:37 GMTServer: WebSitePro/1.1f (S/N wpo-0deb)Allow-ranges: bytesContent-type: text/htmlLast-modified: Saturday, 28-Dec-96 06:45:56 GMTContent-length: 98440 Hashish Fudge - The Times Advertisement and the WoottonReport Contents | Feedback | Search DRCNet Library | Schaffer Library | Major Studies | WoottonReport Hashish Fudge THE TIMES ADVERTISEMENT AND THE WOOTTON REPORT by Steve Abrams 7 April 1993 revised May 10th draft HASHISH FUDGE Soma and the Wootton Report by Steve Abrams In 1967 my organization Soma published afull paged advertisement in The Times which called for reform ofthe law on cannabis. Sixty-five people were persuaded to signthis document, including leading figures in the arts and sciencesand eminent medical men. our proposals for reform stopped shortof outright legalization. However, legalization was clearly along term prospect if they were implemented. The advertisementdeclared the existing law "immoral in principle andunworkable in practice." The advertisement was immediately debated inthe House of Commons, where the Minister of State, Alice Bacon,announced an expert inquiry headed by Baroness Wootton ofAbinger. In January 1969 the so-called "Wootton Report"on Cannabis endorsed the position taken in the advertisement,that "the long asserted dangers of cannabis wereexaggerated, and that the related law was socially damaging, ifnot unworkable."* The Home Secretary of the day, JamesCallaghan (now Lord Callaghan) put up a smokescreen. He denouncedthe Report, claiming its authors had been"overinfluenced" by the "lobby" responsiblefor "that notorious advertisement." However, afterwaiting for a year, he quietly introduced legislation toimplement the recommendations of the Wootton Report. The legislation expired with the 1970 generalelection, but it was immediately reintroduced by the Torygovernment and became law as the Misuse of Drugs Act 1971. Thelaw implemented the unanimous view of the Advisory Committee onDrug Dependence that end users of cannabis should no longer facethe prospect of imprisonment. This was spelled out by the LordChancellor, Lord Hailsham, in his advice to magistrates onsentencing. After a prolonged debate Britain had decided tocondone the use of cannabis. Today the law is scarcely enforcedagainst end users, and the majority of arrests are dealt with bythe procedure of cautioning, without a conviction beingrecorded.** *Home Office Advisory Committee on DrugDependence - Report on Cannabis, 1968, p. 1 ** "The law banning cannabis saleand use is all but unenforced." Times leader, "Overduefor Repeal", 24 July 1992 This interpretation of the history of cannabislaw reform has been consistently denied in the media.* A fullpaged article in The Independent on July 22, 1992("Twenty-five years gone up in smoke") was summarised:"On the 24th July 1967 sixty-five of the famous liberalgreat and good signed an advertisement in The Times calling forcannabis to be legalized and ... nothing happened." LordDeedes, writing in The Telegraph on December 15, 1992 said thesame thing about the Wootton Report. The last public debate on the subject took place in 1969, when Baroness Wootton, then chairman of a sub-committee of the Government's advisory body, recommended a lightening of penalties for possession of cannabis. As a member of the same body, I remember that I thought her arguments persuasive but politically unattainable. We discussed this amicably until Jim Callaghan, the Home Secretary, denounced her proposals in the House of Commons, and that was that. Lord Deedes is at least willing to admit theexistence of the Wootton Report. However, when Lady Wootton diedin 1988, at the age of 91, the work for which she was best knownwas not considered worthy of mention in obituaries, notably inThe Independent and the Guardian.** The Telegraph was the onlynewspaper which got it right: In 1967 her Report on soft drugs caused a considerable furore by its recommendation of more lenient sentences for offences involving cannabis, and was dismissed patronizingly by James Callaghan as "overinfluenced by a lobby in favour of legalizing pot." In 1970, however, Callaghan introduced legislation broadly in line with the Wootton proposals. The press celebrated the twentieth anniversaryof many trivial events of the 'sixties, but there does not seemto have been a single reference in 1989 to the controversy whichdominated the news in January and February 1969. When a longtelevision interview with Lady Wootton was shown posthumously,the subject of drugs was not raised, but a voice-over made theastonishing claim that "in the 'sixties she campaigned forthe legalization of cannabis." *The Times did, finally, print a letter from meon 24 July 1992. It is interesting to compare this letter withanother which Rees-Mogg refused to print in February 1969. Thatletter in included in my article. "Cannabis Law Reform inBritain" in The Marijuana Papers by David Soloman, PenguinBooks, 1970, pp. 69-79 (UK edition only). ** So far as I know, the Wootton Reporthas never been mentioned in The Independent. The authors of thepage published on July 22, 1992, Dina Rabinovich, Emily Greeneand Andrew Brown, listed forty events following on after theadvertisement but pointedly ignored the existence of the Reportand the reduction in penalties under the Misuse of Drugs Act. In a letter to the Times on February 5th,1969 in the aftermath of the Parliamentary debate on the WoottonReport, Lady Wootton and the Chairman of the Advisory Committee,Sir Edward Wayne, noted that none of the members of thesub-committee supported the legalization of cannabis. On theSunday following publication of the Report, Lady Wootton said inan article in The Sunday Times : "Even those who wanted tolegalize (cannabis), even the people who signed the Timesadvertisement, admit that immediate legalization is notpractical."* The Wootton Report did contemplate the eventuallegalization of cannabis, but the so-called "cannabislobby" refused to jump the gun. The 1969 Prospectus of theSoma Research Association, Ltd. said: A Soma delegation gave oral evidence to the sub-committee. We took the view that prohibition appeared to be an ineffective and socially damaging method of controlling the misuse of cannabis. However, we argued that realistic decisions about the long term control and possible legalization of cannabis could not be made on the basis of existing knowledge. Additional research was required, but could not be undertaken because the law prohibited research in which cannabis was smoked. The advertisement said, "The Governmentought to welcome and encourage research into all aspects ofcannabis smoking, but according to the law as it stands, no oneis permitted to smoke cannabis under any circumstances, andexceptions cannot be made for scientific or medicalresearch." Lady Wootton made the same point in her SundayTimes article: "People have not been able to undertakeserious research because smoking is forbidden on allpremises." Research was prohibited because it was anoffence to have charge of premises where cannabis was smoked. Theliability was absolute; guilty knowledge was not required. Noexceptions were judged possible. Cannabis could not even besmoked by a machine on government premises. The law contained aterm which made it impossible to challenge its own premisses ofthe harmfulness of cannabis smoking. The advertisement asserted that cannabis was"the least dangerous of pleasure-giving drugs." Theargument was rehearsed at some length, and those persuaded by itmight well have been inclined to experiment. It came close tosaying that the main danger of cannabis smoking was the prospectof being arrested. But any criticism of an unjust law is likelyto breed disrespect for the law. The text said, "Theprohibition of cannabis has brought the law into disrepute andhas demoralized police officers faced with the necessity ofenforcing an unjust law." * Barbara Wootton, "Time and theDrug Scene," Sunday Times, 12 January 1969. At the 1967 Tory party conference, the ShadowHome Secretary, Quintin Hogg (now Lord Hailsham), denounced theorganizers and signatories of the Soma advertisement. He saidthat the editor of The Times, William Rees-Mogg (now LordRees-Mogg), would never live down the scandal caused by itspublication. Hogg was "profoundly shocked by theirresponsibility of those who wanted to change the law. Theirarguments were "casuistic, confused, sophistical andimmature:" There is no half-way house in this matter. There can be no encouraging the drug up to a point. You either sell it over the counter or in the shops or you prohibit it altogether. Rees-Mogg replied in a Times leader, "TheRight to Dissent," on October 23rd: We believe that people who want to change the law have a right to put their case to the public. We do not accept advertisements from people who want to break the law. But there is a vital difference between wanting the law to be broken and wanting it to be changed. ... Mr. Hogg thinks that the subject of drugs is so dangerous that free discussion cannot be allowed, that those who disagree with him have no right to be heard. Our view would be that his rhetorical approach is more likely to repel than to persuade. In January 1969, following publication of theWootton Report, Hogg wrote in the Daily Express that it wasnecessary to "pursue the addicts of hashish and marijuanawith the utmost severity the law allows." When the reportwas debated in Parliament, on the 27th of January, Hogg insistedthat cannabis was a dangerous addictive drug, the cause ofmadness and mayhem. He opposed any reduction in the maximumpenalty of ten years' imprisonment because, in this event,"the conclusion drawn by the public, by traffickers in thedrug and by potential victims of it would be that the governmentwere on their way to legalizing its use. The penalties under the Dangerous Drugs Act didnot distinguish between supply and use. The maximum penaltieswere one year on summary conviction and ten years on inditement.Reducing the penalties for possession of cannabis would involveputting down the maximum penalty on summary conviction to sixmonths or less. This would mean, in practice, that users ofcannabis would no longer face the prospect of imprisonment. Themain deterrent to consumption would thus be removed and use wouldincrease. The stigma of a criminal conviction would soon belessened. The police would no longer have much incentive toenforce the law and in due course they would be unable to enforceit. Finally, legalization would come, after a generation. The issue of cannabis law reform was raised ata crucial time. In 1967 the drug laws were in disarray. TheDangerous Drugs Act applied to drugs controlled under the UNSingle Convention on Narcotic Drugs, namely heroin, cocaine andcannabis, including their derivatives and analogues. Amphetamineand LSD were subject to more moderate penalties under the Drugs(Prevention of Misuse) Act 1964. LSD had only just become illegaland barbiturates were not controlled at all. Meanwhile somecannabis users were punished more severely than heroin users.Cannabis smoking was regarded as a crime but heroin addiction wastreated as an illness. Doctors had the right to prescribe heroin.The Court might send a cannabis smoker to prison and send aheroin user to a doctor. The formation of Soma was announced in anarticle published in Cherwell, the Oxford student newspaper, onFebruary 1st, 1967. The national press became involved in acontroversy about the prevalence of cannabis at Oxford, arisingout of an article by myself in an anthology, The Book 21 Grass,edited by George Andrews and Simon Vinkenoog.* The publisher soldthe "story" to The People, who brought it out intwo inch headlines on January 29th. This article was quoted atlength by President Clinton's drugs adviser, Professor NormanGrinspoon in his book, Marihuana Reconsidered (Harvard UniversityPress, 1971; pp. 311-312. It was also described in the TimesLiterary Supplement (June 15th, 1967) as "a sane andbalanced piece of writing that does much to implement the ...view that harm rather than good is done by the existing state ofthe law." * "The Oxford Scene and theLaw", The Book of Grass, Peter Owen 1967, pp. 235-42 Following a press conference on February 2nd tolaunch the Book of Grass, an article by Peter Fiddick appeared inThe Guardian, prophetically entitled, "Pot lobby moves intogear." (February 3rd) Follow up articles, debating theprevalence of cannabis smoking at Oxford, appeared The Times, TheTelegraph and the Guardian. There were also several articles inThe Oxford Mail, and the story dominated Cherwell (then edited byJulian Norridge) for the remainder of the term. The page one lead in Cherwell was accompaniedby a double paged spread, "The Pot Plot", a kind of dryrun for the Times advertisement which served as a fact sheet forthe media. "The Pot Plot" was noticed by the popularpress. "Smoke more pot. It's safer than beer," wroteArthur Smith in the Daily Mirror on January 31st. "Make itlegal to take marihuana urges Oxford student" was theheading for an article in the Mail the following day by NicholasLloyd (former Cherwell editor, now Sir Nicholas, editor of theDaily Express). On the 6th of February I took part in atelevision discussion with the Chief Constable of Oxford C. G.Burroughs and a psychiatrist from the Littlemore Hospital, Dr.O'Gorman, on the television program "Today", fromBirmingham. On the same day, The Telegraph printed thefollowing letter from me: May I make myself clear? Drug addiction is extremely rare within the University of Oxford. I do not know of any resident member of the University who is addicted to narcotics such as heroin and cocaine. There are probably a number of addicts to amphetamines and barbiturates, drugs which are widely and indiscriminately prescribed under the National Health Service. There is no reason to believe that the widespread use of cannabis (marijuana or hashish or hemp) constitutes a problem at the University. Cannabis is nonaddictive and there have been no cases at Oxford of disorderly behaviour attributable to its influence. The consensus of informed medical opinion is that cannabis is probably less harmful than alcohol. The civil authorities and the press have indiscriminately confused the non-addictive and relatively harmless herb cannabis with addictive and harmful drugs such as amphetamines and heroin. When challenged on this point they argue that cannabis is indirectly harmful because its use leads to heroin addiction. There is little or no evidence in support of this view. One might as well argue that sex leads to prostitution. The effects of cannabis and heroin are opposite in character. Heroin users are disturbed individuals who need to escape from reality; cannabis has the effect of enhancing reality. My qualified estimate that five per cent of Oxford students use cannabis when it is available has been challenged by authorities who have a strong vested interest in minimising the extent of the situation. Students go out of their way to conceal information from these authorities, but they go out of their way to reveal information to me. My estimate was based on four years direct observation, in the course of which I observed hundreds of people smoking and conducted and cross-checked many careful interviews. Perhaps I have sources of information which are unavailable to the Chief Constable, the proctors and various anonymous university officials. * According to press reports, "moneychanged hands for The People article." Cf. "Our Man inFleet Street", Drugs and Society, vol. 1, no. 3 (December1971, pp. 34-35) and the response, a letter from me, in vol. 1,no. 4, January 1972, p. 37 I was not paid. I had no contract withthe publisher, who sold the story without my permission andagainst my protests, which are documented. I had been playing the numbers game. Five percent of junior members of the university translates to fivehundred Oxford students. I felt no compunction about using theimage of the University to challenge the traditional stereotypeof the anti-social drug taker. Following publication of thePeople lead, an article in The Times said that my claim that"at least 500 undergraduates and a few dozen dons"smoke pot "has been rejected by police, proctors anddons." The Times quoted the view of the SeniorProctor, Dr. Robin Fletcher, that my figures were "grosslyexaggerated." : "The article could create a very badimage of the University. It is unfortunate for a number ofreasons." A similar article in The Telegraph quoted the viewof "a senior member of the university who is concerned withinvestigations into student health problems" : "I wouldbe surprised if the number of people using drugs habitually inthe University is more than about twenty." This official waspresumably D. C. M. Yardley, (now Local Ombudsman) who was Dr.Fletcher's predecessor. The Telegraph stated that Dr. Yardley hadled an investigation of undergraduate drug use the preceding yearand concluded that no more than fifty students were involved. Nomore than thirty took drugs with any degree of regularity. In theCherwell lead on February 1st, Dr. Yardley's view of the dangerof cannabis is quoted: "The nervous system of regular potsmokers is shot to bits. They are mental wrecks." In ThePeople he is quoted: "All but those with the strongest mindswill end up seeking bigger and better 'kicks' from heroin andlike drugs. Within the university and nationally, any move tobring about the acceptance of hemp must be fought." The matter was resolved by the UniversityCommittee on Student Health, which included several heads ofcolleges. I was invited to give evidence to the Committee onFebruary 15th. They accepted my claim that as many as fivehundred undergraduates had used cannabis. I made the point thatthe problem was hardly confined to Oxford and asked the Committeeto press the Home Secretary to institute a government inquiryinto the status of cannabis and LSD. The Chairman of theCommittee was the Head of my college, St. Catherine's, AlanBullock (now Lord Bullock, formerly Vice Chancellor of theUniversity). He told me that my suggestion that the Universitypress for a Home Office inquiry had been accepted and invited meto assist him in drafting the letter to this effect, which wassent to the then Vice Chancellor, Kenenth Turpin on February28th. The first account of the Student Health Reportappeared in a Cherwell exclusive on the 1st of March. On the sameday things looked as if they might be getting out of hand.Cherwell had announced a "happening" in WellingtonSquare, sponsored by International Times. It was to be filmed forGerman television. John Hopkins, the organizer, promised toprovide Suzie Creamcheese of the "Mothers of Invention"pop group on a white horse. The front page of the Oxford Mail forMarch 2nd has a photo of hundreds of students pouring out ofBalliol College and another of them marching along the High.There were signs and banners with legends such as "Deathpenalty for pot" and "God moves in a mysteriousway." The Deputy Chief Constable stated that "more than500 students disorganized the city centre for over twohours."* The Oxford Mail account says that the policetried to clear Wellington Square, whereupon the"happening" reformed as a procession down St. John'sStreet. They moved straight across Beaumont Street and St. Giles,without pausing for traffic, in through Balliol College backentrance (where the police could not follow) and out againthrough the front entrance in Broad Street. The processioncontinued on through the Turl and the High to Carfax. The"happening" was also covered in the national press. TheSun called attention to six undergraduates tied together with aplastic rope crawling along the High Street, insisting they wereclimbing a mountain. The Sun also remarked on the presence of agirl on horseback carrying a sign which said, "Free SuzieCreamcheese!" The Report of the Committee on Student Healthwas published on April 3rd and reviewed in The Times thefollowing day. The Times article says, "At the HealthCommittee's suggestion, the Vice Chancellor of Oxford University,Mr. K. C. Turpin, is to ask the Home Secretary for an urgentnational enquiry into the dangers of drug taking." It saidthe university was concerned at the numbers which might beexperimenting with cannabis. The following article by NicholasLloyd appeared in the Daily Mail: The pot takers. 500 Oxford students use marijuana About 500 Oxford undergraduates smoke marijuana,, says a committee of dons. The Committee was set up to report on the health of students at the university. In a letter to Kenneth Turpin, the Vice Chancellor, it say that an independent claim that about five per cent of the 10,000 students take drugs is probably correct. But it maintains that the situation at Oxford is not exceptional and that a similar proportion of students at other universities take drugs. The committee, headed by Mr. Alan Bullock, Master of St. Catherine's College, says that drug taking is a national problem. It calls for a full investigation into the effects of different drugs and says that public policy could then be based on scientific fact instead of prejudice. On Tuesday students at St. Catherine's College passed a motion by 24 votes to 4 in favour of making marijuana - known as 'pot' - legally available. * In fact the numbers were swelledbecause students from the Oxford Polytechnic, in their "ragweek", joined the proceedings. On the 7th of April, the Home secretary, RoyJenkins, announced the appointment of an investigation led byBaroness Wootton. She was to head a "sub-committee onhallucinogens" of the Advisory Council on Drug Dependence,appointed in December 1966, enacting a recommendation of theSecond Brain Report the previous year. We hoped for something earth shaking from theWootton Committee. We hoped for a published report on cannabisthat would bear comparison with the New York Mayor's Report onMarihuana (the La Guardia Report) of 1944 and the East IndianHemp Drugs Report of 1893-94. The first stage of the campaign hadbeen concluded. The chain of events leading to the appearanceof the advertisement involved an interaction with the affairs ofthe Rolling Stones, the Beatles and the so-called"underground." One of the reasons for raising thesubject of cannabis with urgency in the favourable context of itsuse at Oxford was the need to combat what a Times leader ("ADangerous Press Camapign") soon called "the deliberatesensationalism that underlines the present campaign against"drugs." The Soma advertisement said "The crime atissue is not drug abuse but heresy." Traditionally, the use of cannabis had beenlargely confined to Blacks, Indians and Arabs.* Muslims broadlytolerated the use of cannabis but prohibited alcohol, which is,literally, sacred to Christians, and also to Jews. The new rockmusic could be represented as a fusion of black rhythms andEastern spirituality. The gentle undulations of the music werealso explicitly sexual. For decades the Americans, in particular,had portrayed the use of cannabis as degenerate. The News of the World replied to the article inthe People by accusing the Rolling Stones of abusing drugs.(February 3rd) The same night Mick Jagger appeared with Hogg onthe Eamon Andrews talk show. Jagger told Hogg that he too hadbeen to university, and seemed to get he better of him. Then, Ithought, he got above himself and announced, impulsively, that hewould sue the News of the World for libel. The newspaper panickedand went to the Scotland Yard Drug Squad. The head of the DrugSquad, Chief Inspector Lynch later told me that he refused toact. He said that he was not expected to stamp out cannabis, butto keep its use under control. If he arrested Mick Jagger everylad in the country would want to try some pot. He was, after all,head of the drug squad, not head of the Lynch mob. * The statistics published with the WoottonReport show that 1964, the first year in which white offendersoutnumbered blacks, was also the first year in which a minority(48 per cent) of cannabis offenders were sent to prison. As is well known, the News of the World hadmore success with the local police in West Wittering, where KeithRichards lived. In the subsequent trial, Jagger's counsel,Michael Havers (later Lord Havers, also Mrs. Thatcher's attorneygeneral in the "Spycatcher" case) alleged that thenewspaper used an agent provocateur. The arrests were made onFebruary 12th, but the story did not break until the 19th. Onlythe Telegraph named those arrested, Keith Richards, charged withthe absolute offence of permitting premises to be used forsmoking cannabis, and Mick Jagger, charged with possession ofamphetamine. George Harrison has said that the Beatles were atthe party that was raided, but the police waited until theyleft. Perhaps the beginning of the entire sequence ofevents was the arrest on cannabis charges on December 30th 1966of the aforementioned John Hopkins (Hoppy), a member of theeditorial board of the underground newspaper "InternationalTimes."* The "underground" was a literary andartistic avant garde with a large contingent from Oxford andCambridge. Hoppy, for example, was trained as a physicist atCambridge. The underground had found an enemy in Lord Goodman,Chairman of the Arts Council, who went over the head of the HomeSecretary, Roy Jenkins, and appealed directly to the Director ofPublic Prosecutions to mount a police raid on the Indica bookshopwhere International Times was edited.** Goodman had an animusagainst (Barry) Miles, co-proprietor of the bookshop with PeterAsher, and also a member of the Editorial Board of IT. InDecember 1966 Eric Whitte nominated Miles to serve on the ArtsCouncil Literary Advisory Panel. Goodman had been infuriated whenhis appointment was announced to the press on January 30th, andhad him thrown off.*** Hoppy, who was on bail, organized the greatestof the underground events, the "24 Hour TechnicolourDream" at Alexandra Palace on April 29th, to raise funds forthe defence of the paper. When his trial came up, he insisted onpleading not guilty though he had no defence. He had a previousconviction for possession of cannabis but insisted on a jurytrial, which meant going before a judge of the Crown Court andrisking a longer sentence than one year. Hoppy completed aclassical recipe for self-imprisonment by lecturing the court onthe need to legalize cannabis. Sentencing him to nine monthsimprisonment on June 1st, the Deputy Chairman of Inner LondonSessions, A. Gordon Friend, said: I have just heard what your views are on the possession of cannabis and the smoking of it. This is not a matter I can overlook - You are a pest to society. * Lord Thompson, proprietor of The Times,obtained an injunction to stop the use of the word"Times" in the title. The paper then became"IT" until Max Handley restored its correct name in themid seventies. Incidently the girl in the logo is not Clara Bow.Its Theda Bara. ** According to Tom Driberg. *** Peter Fryer - "A Map of theUnderground", Encounter, October 1967, pp. 9-10 A sympathetic account of the casewas published by Clive Goodwin in Tribune and Christopher Loguecontributed a poem "For John Hopkins, imprisoned inWandsworth Jail", which appeared in the New Statesman onJuly 7th. The next day, June 2nd, Hoppy's friends met atIndica. I raised my idea of advertising in The Times.* Miles saidhe thought he knew where the money might be found. He had been toschool with his partner, Peter Asher, who was half of the pop duo"Peter and Gordon", a "one-hit wonder." PeterAsher's sister, Jane, was Paul McCartney's girlfriend. McCartneyhad several times contributed small sums to keep IT going. By theend of the day he had offered to guarantee the cost of theadvertisement, which was #1800. I was not as surprised as I might have been atthis turn of events. I had gone to the meeting thinking about theplight of the Beatles and their record company, EMI. "SgtPepper" had been officially released the preceding day. Ihad purchased a copy from the HMV Shop in Notting Hill on the27th of May and had been listening to it continuously. Earlier inthe year the single Strawberry Fields/Penny Lane suggested thatthe Beatles had become enthusiastic proponents of LSD. "SgtPepper" reinforced this impression. McCartney had also givenan ill-advised interview to Life magazine. The Beatles had"pissed" on their clean image as explicitly as theRolling Stones had "pissed" on a garage forecourt inJune 1965. The establishment was ready to send the RollingStones to prison. Now it looked as if the Beatles would be next.Something had to be done to get them off the hook. Nobody wantedthem arrested, but it was difficult to see an alternative. Iproposed, in effect, to change the issue from LSD to pot and toassociate the Beatles with leading figures in the arts andsciences in a legitimate protest from 'within the system.' It isnot in any way surprising that McCartney was willing to back theadvertisement or that Rees-Mogg was willing to publish it. I went along with Miles to discuss theproject with McCartney. Unless my memory is playing tricks on me,McCartney thrust a copy of Sergent Pepper into my hands and said,"Listen to it through headphones on acid." Theconversation that followed was, however, sedate. McCartney waswell aware of the power of public statements coming from theBeatles. He realized that if they spoke out on too many issues,their influence would be diluted. But pot was going to be anexception. McCartney said that the Beatles and their managerBrian Epstein would all put their names to the advertisement andhe agreed that the project would be left entirely in my hands. Hehoped that his participation in the funding could be kept quiet.It came to the attention of the Evening Standard the next day. Ireceived a call from the Diary, from Max Hastings or JulianNorridge translated from Cherwell. "How could you possiblyknow?" I asked. The source, I was immediately told, was theeditor, Charles Wintour. Later I spoke to McCartney on the phone. Weagreed that Phillip Oates could say in his first"Atticus" in the Sunday Times (eventually published onJuly 9th) that all four Beatles would be among those contributingto the cost of the advertisement. Then, on the eve ofpublication, when I attended The Times to inspect the proofs, theadvertising manager, R. Grant Davidson, got cold feet.Publication had been delayed for a week whilst he checked all thenames. Now he asked for payment in advance. I rang the onlyperson I had met in the Beatles organization, Peter Brown of themusic publishing company, Northern Music (NEMS). He sent roundhis personal cheque for #1800. Someone later told me that he hadbeen reimbursed from a Beatles advertising account. Probably noneof the Beatles was out of pocket. As the advertising manager's caution indicates,the publication of the advertisement was a near thing. Thedeciding factor in persuading the Times to publish and theBeatles to meet the cost was probably the sensational case of theRolling Stones, which began on the 27th of June. The verdictscame on Thursday the 30th. Richards was sentenced to a year inprison on the premises charge and Jagger was given three monthsfor possession of four amphetamine tablets known as 'blackbombers.' Both were first offenders. They were released on bailthe following day. That night there was a spontaneousdemonstration outside the News of the World building in Fleetstreet. No one had cared enough to demonstrate in Fleet Streetsince the first world war, and no one would ever care enough todo so again. The police turned dogs on the demonstrators and sixpeople were arrested. The demonstrations continued into the earlyhours of the morning. The next day, Richards and Jagger werereleased on bail. It being Friday, the members of the undergroundclub, UFO, over a thousand persons in extravagant dress, marchedat midnight from Tottenham, Court Road to the statue of Eros atPiccadilly Circus, where they were joined by several hundredmembers of other West End clubs. I remember Pat Arrowsmith of CNDwringing her hands in anguish, being quite unable to comprehendour tactics. We then formed up and marched to Fleet Street.Again the police turned dogs against us, and one demonstrator wasbitten. On Saturday the News of the World demonstrationscontinued for the third night running. A picture of part of thecrowd, myself among them, appeared on the front page of the Newsof the World. Mick Farren, a future editor of IT and lead singerof the Social Deviants, was beaten by the police and a number ofothers were arrested, including Suzie Creamcheese. Rees-Mogg's celebrated leading article,"Who breaks a butterfly on a wheel?" appeared in TheTimes on the same day, Saturday the 1st of July. My admirationfor it is subject to qualification. The editor did not addressthe issue squarely. He was moved by the spectacle of Jagger inhandcuffs, but said nothing at all about the twelve monthssentence meted out to Keith Richards, who was convicted of beingin control of premises used for the purpose of cannabis smoking.The leader did not question the justice of this charge, which wasan "absolute" offence that did not require guiltyknowledge on the part of the offender. Rees-Mogg did not mentioncannabis at all. The last "event" precedingpublication of the Times advertisement was the famous"Legalize Pot Rally" at Speakers Corner in Hyde Park onSunday the 16th of July. This was one of a series of"be-ins" which had been taking place at monthlyintervals at Primrose Hill and Hampstead Heath. "Vastpublicity for legalize pot rally. Steve Abrams appears ontelevision with amazing regularity," wrote InternationalTimes. In the event, several thousand people turned up, manywearing flowers and bells and many smoking pot openly. Most ofthe national newspapers gave "flower power" a doublepaged spread the next day. I presided at the meeting and introduced AlanGinsberg. When a policeman asked him to stop playing hisharmonium, which went against the by-laws, he was filmed givingthe policeman a flower. I decided to break up the meeting intosmall groups. I remember Stokely Carmichael, Alexis Korner,Carolyn Coon, Spike Hawkins, Clive Goodwin and Adrian Mitchellspeaking simultaneously, each mounted on a soap-box andsurrounded by a few hundred people. I was surprised to findmyremarks used in a schools program on "The Right toProtest" that seemed to be repeated on television mostafternoons. Everyone had a good time in Hyde Park. No one wasarrested. We had struck another blow against the image of theunkempt and violent drug addict. The aim of the advertisement was to influencethe Wootton subcommittee on hallucinogens. They had restrictedthemselves to pharmacological and medical studies on bothcannabis and LSD. We wanted them to report on cannabis alone, toemphasize the social aspect of its use and to make specificrecommendations for law reform. Crude attempts were made to discredit theprofessional competence of the sub-committee. Followingpublication of the Report on Cannabis, Quintin Hogg was quoted inThe Times, on January 9th, 1969: "A less suitable committeeis impossible to imagine. Half the subcommittee are doctors andthere is not a judge, or anybody practising at the criminal bar,among them." The eleven members of the sub-committee were K.J. Barraclough, a stipendiary magistrate and Chairman of thePoisons Board; Dr. Thomas Bewley, a psychiatrist in charge of theaddiction clinic at Tooting Bec Hospital, the Secretary and laterPresident of the Society for the Study of Addiction; PeterBrodie, Assistant Commissioner of Scotland Yard in charge of theC.I.D., also Vice President of Interpol; Dr. P. H. Connell, apsychiatrist at the Maudsley Hospital; Dr. J. D. P. Graham,professor of pharmacology; Dr. C. R. B. Joyce, Head of theDepartment of Pharmacology at London Hospital Medical College,later Director of Research at Ciba, Switzerland; Sir AubreyLewis, Emeritus Professor of Psychiatry at the Maudsley; Dr.Nicholas Malleson, a psychiatrist, Reader in Student Problems andHead of Student Health at London University, also the mostexperienced LSD therapist in Britain; H. W. Palmer of the GlaxoPharmaceuticals Company; Timothy Raison, Editor of New Society,later Tory MP, Minister of State for Home Affairs; MichaelSchofield, a sociologist who had conducted several studies forthe Home Office; and Baroness Wootton, a distinguished socialscientist, a serving magistrate, Governor of the BBC, veteran ofseveral Royal Commissions. I decided that Dr. Malleson was the key memberof the subcommittee. Had it been a jury, he would probably havebeen the foreman. I approached him and offered to rewrite thetext of the advertisemnt until it satisfied him. In return, Iasked to use his name privately in soliciting signatures. I hadmet Michael Schofield as a fellow member of the committeepreparing a Report on Drugs and Civil Liberties for the NationalCouncil on Civil Liberties (NCCL). I asked him to sign theadvertisement. The sub-committee met 17 times between April1967 and July 1968. At the first meeting the plan was to reportto the main committee in October. The report was to be restrictedin scope and to treat both cannabis and LSD. Before theadvertisement appeared, the committee limited its enquiries topharmacological and medical questions. According to Michael Schofield, thesub-committee were not favourably disposed to begin with. At thefirst meeting one member said that research was not necessary andthat all the sub-committee had to do was to work out ways to"stop the spread of this filthy habit." During theearly meetings, six members wanted to take a hard line, four wereundecided and two felt that the penalties for possession were toosevere.* The two liberals were probably Schofield and Malleson.It follows that Lady Wootton took some persuading. If there was a consensus of informed medicalopinion on cannabis, the sub-committee would have to recognizeit. The important thing was to do what could be done to persuadethem to report on cannabis alone and to broaden the scope oftheir enquiry, to give proper consideration to the social aspectsof cannabis use and to make specific recommendations for lawreform. My endeavour in the text of the advertisement was todefine the issues for a public debate. The debate began immediately. The advertisementwas mentioned in Parliament on the day of its appearance. Fourdays later, the headlines were about the savage sentence of fiveyears' imprisonment and a 10,000 fine or an extra year whichJudge Argyle passed on a black man charged with"possession" of cannabis. He did this, he said toexpress his disapproval of the Soma advertisement.** He alsoclaimed that 69 of 70 heroin addicts in Birmingham had"started on cannabis." On the same day, Friday the 28th, the Somaadvertisement was the subject of an adjournment debate in theHouse of Commons proposed by Paul Channon. The Minister of State,Alice Bacon (Later Baroness Bacon), claimed that 97 per cent ofheroin addicts known to the Home Office had "started oncannabis." She seems to have invented this figure. Herspeech was racist in tone and credited cannabis and LSD with theimportation of negro music and Indian spirituality. She comparedMcCartney unfavourably with a now forgotten singer called"Lulu." However, she said that the issues raised in theadvertisement would be considered by the Wootton sub-committee,and she committed the Government to taking their Report intoconsideration in framing new legislation. * Michael Schofield - The Strange Case of Pot,Pelican Books, 1971. Schofield has a chapter about"Reactions to the Wootton Report" but he ignoresCallaghan's assertion that the sub-committee had been"overinfluenced" by the "lobby" responsiblefor the Soma advertisement. He also fails to mention the factthat he was a signatory to the advertisement. ** The man was regarded by the Court as a majorsupplier. Press reports did not specify the quantity of cannabisfound in his possession. The sentence was reduced onappeal. In this debate William Deedes outdid himself.He was under the illusion that hashish is far more dangerous thanmarijuana. Does anyone believe that if we were to end the black market in cannabis leaf by legalizing it, a black market in resin would not begin. That could undermine the nation. That is why I believe that those who sign public announcements assume very grave responsibilities unless they can back what they say with more knowledge than most of us,believe we have. Tom Driberg, who signed the Soma advertisement,read from his father's evidence to the East Indian Hemp DrugsCommission in 1892. I briefed Driberg and Channon and got to sitin the strangers box on the floor of the house during the debate. On Monday the 31st of July, a week followingthe publication of the advertisement, the conviction of KeithRichards was quashed and Jagger's prison sentence (for possessionof amphetamine tablets) was reduced to a conditional discharge.The Soma advertisement had asked for the abolition of thepremises offence and included a plea for the release of all thoseimprisoned for possession of cannabis. Soma was an informal organization when theadvertisement appeared. Later, it was incorporated as the SomaResearch Association, Ltd. There was a very distinguished Boardof Directors, including the most eminent living scientist,Francis Crick, F.R.S., who won a Nobel prize for his discoverywith James Watson of the structure of DNA. The Board includedfour psychiatrists: Professor Norman Zinberg of Harvard, whoseexperiment published in 1968 was the first authorised by the USgovernment and became the strongest affirmation of the relativelyharmless character of cannabis smoking; Dr. Anthony Storr, aleading establishment figure and author; Dr. R. D. Laing, theleading radical analyst of the day; and his colleague at thePhiladelphia Association, Dr. David Cooper. The other directorswere The Revd. Kenneth Leech, the leading authority on drug abusewithin the Church of England, an early advocate of the"legalization" of cannabis; Francis Huxley, the Oxfordanthropologist, and myself. Cooper, Crick, Huxley, Laing andStorr were signatories to the advertisement. Soma had five employees, including Don Aitken,the Secretary and Archivist; Derek Blackburn, Psychologist; andAdam Parker-Rhodes, Pharmacologist. Premises were at 438, FulhamRoad, SW6 and 4, Camden High Street, NW1. Soma had activeresearch and medical programs, the latter in collaboration withthe doctors at an affiliated NHS surgery in Notting Hill. Dr. IanDunbar was Medical Director of Soma and Dr. Sam Hutt was MedicalCorrespondent. Aitken and Blackburn prepared a bibliography ofcannabis. We did the first human experiments with the activeprinciple of cannabis, tetrahydracannabinol (THC), synthesized inour laboratory. We compared the action of the isomers of THC andtried to distinguish euphoria from intoxication by measuring theapparent tridimensionality of visual perception, the extent towhich the world appeared, as it were,"spaced-out." We could work with THC because its structurehad not been determined when the Dangerous Drugs Act was lastrevised. It had not been placed under UN control. Before we madeTHC, we obtained supplies of a purified form of cannabis, thealcoholic extract, which was made available on prescription.Extracts and tinctures of cannabis had been removed from thePharmacopoeia but were still listed in theExtrapharmacopoeia. Dr. Dunbar wrote a prescription for me on the18th of August 1967. I finally encashed it at an obscure branchof Boots in the East End. The prescription came with a letterthat said: "This is an historical document. I suggest youframe it." Later a pop group, the Aynesley DunbarRetaliation brought out a famous LP called "Dr. Dunbar'sPrescription." I put it to the Home Office Drugs Branch thatmost of the distinguished signatories to the advertisement andmany of those who commented on it had openly declared their useof cannabis. For example, the following paragraph ended a letterto The Guardian published on July 8th and shown on television in"What the Papers Say" : ... If anyone remains unconvinced by this mass of expert advice then I can only offer them the evidence of my own experience having smoked marijuana for many years without ill effects whatsoever. Yours faithfully Clive Goodwin 79 Cromwell Road London SW7 The Home Office obtained a legal opinionthat the part of the law which made it an absolute offence tokeep premises for the purposes of cannabis smoking did not applyto the smoking of purified cannabis; that is to say, smokingpreparations based on "extract of cannabis," BPC. Anapproach was then made to the UN drugs control apparatus, whoincreased the nominal UK quota of cannabis imports from 15 kilosper annum to 254 kilos. (Five hundredweight) Ganja was importedfrom India and made up by the botanical firm, Ransoms of Hitchen. One of the early debates was a seventy minutetelevision special on September 1st, 1967, a mock trial in theseries "Your Witness" in which Sir John Foster, Q.C.was to argue the case for cannabis against Leon Brittan. Sir Johndropped out and was replaced by Jonathan Aitken, a signatory tothe advertisement (now a minister in the Government).* Aitkenproposed to call me as a witness. I had in mind smoking pot as Igave evidence and presented myself for cross examination. The BBCresearcher, Esther Rantzen, agreed that this would be goodtelevision, and so I approached Dr. Dunbar for the firstprescription. * Sir John was at a meeting at the House ofCommons in June at which he, Jonathan Aitken, Humphry Berkeley,Tom Driberg and Brian Walden all agreed to sign theadvertisement. He later atoned for withdrawing from theadvertisement and the debate by joining Soma. Indeed, he sentalong his friend Princess Feuzy, who was a subject in ourresearch program. Leon Brittan was fully aware thatextracts and tinctures were controlled separately from cannabisand cannabis resin and that the prohibition on the use ofpremises for smoking cannabis did not apply to these purifiedforms. However, he was also aware that my live appearance wouldundermine his case. He therefore fudged the issue and insistedthat if I appeared the BBC would be liable to prosecution. It wascompromise in the end. I was not permitted to appear live, butthe BBC filmed me smoking at home, passing any risk onto mylandlord. The corporation thus obtained some stock film that wasreused a number of times. On the 10th of October, 1967 Jonathan Aitkenand I successfully argued a cannabis law reform motion againstProfessor Francis Camps and Robert Pitman at the London HospitalMedical College. The next day The Telegraph reported the warningthat Professor Camps had given about the alleged dangers ofcannabis, without noting the fact that his opinion had beenrejected by a large audience of doctors and medical students. I came up against Professor Camps again at aconference on drugs of the Student Humanist Federation atNottingham University on January 5th to 7th, 1968. The problemwas to get in the way of the newspapers reporting his remarks. Mysolution was to announce at the beginning of my talk that I wouldbe speaking under the influence of a prescribed form of cannabis.The Times, The Telegraph and The Guardian reported this event asif it had been a high wire act. On the 21st of November 1967, I had spokenagainst Leon Brittan at a Teach In at Guys Hospital. I did notlike his arrogance or his willingness to pontificate on a subjectof which he knew nothing. Fate was kind to me. After thepublication of the Wootton Report in 1969, I had a uniqueopportunity to flatten him. We debated the Report at BristolUniversity. Leon Brittan recalled the "Your Witness"television program. He told the Bristol Union I had insisted onbeing filmed at home because I knew I could not speak in publicunder the influence of cannabis. I rose to my feet, Leon Brittangave way. I turned to the president of the Union, and beingadvised that smoking was permitted, I resumed my seat, removed anenormous joint from my pocket and lit up. I went through anelaborate pantomime to distract the audience during his speech. Ipretended to be "zonked." Then it was my turn to speak.I was in my best form, and I think the Union voted unanimouslyfor the motion. Afterward, Brittan refused to believe I had beensmoking. He said I had pretended to inhale. Inevitably, the debate that gave me thegreatest satisfaction was at the Oxford Union on October 19th,1967. In my article in "The Book of Grass" I had saidthat the one place in Oxford where cannabis was not smoked wasthe Union society. Now, just months later, the Union voted infavour of changing the law. Dr. Laing and I were opposed by AnnMallalieu and the Revd. John McNicoll. William Paton, theProfessor of Pharmacology, spoke against cannabis from the floor,Earlier in the evening a motion of censure was passed against theProctors, who had suspended Cherwell because of its coverage ofdrugs. Dr. Yardley spoke from the floor in this debate. He and Ihad threshed out this matter on the television program "24Hours" on the 11th. During the Thatcher period, every attempt wasmade to blame the permissive society" of the 1960s on thepolitical left. In fact, the left was left out, at least in 1967.Cannabis was a libertarian issue which became very popular withthe Young Conservatives. When I spoke at a teach-in organized bythe Young Communists League, I faced a hostile audience for thefirst time. Speaker after speaker rose to say that cannabis was acapitalist plot. I was "intent on distracting the workers from their revolutionaryduties." John McNicoll, who also spoke in this debate, hadaccused me, in the Evening Standard diary, of being acrypto-communist. He said I had taken up drugs when lecturing atLeningrad University. Now, with a delicious political instinct,he accused me of being an American. In a long interview withPenthouse magazine, published in December 1968, I said thatthough Tariq Ali and Clive Goodman had signed the Somaadvertisement, "We want nothing to do with theirrevolution." I added: "You can't smokeMarxism." I think the decisive event in the debate aboutcannabis may have been a meeting of the Society for the Study ofAddiction at the premises of the British Medical Association onNovember 7th 1967. The press were barred from this meeting, whichwas attended by officials from the Home Office, senior policeofficers, most of the Advisory Committee and many of the leadingmedical authorities. Dr. Storr and I spoke on behalf of Soma. Wewere opposed by Dr. Cedric Wilson of Liverpool University, whomade a great fool of himself by including gangrene among thesymptoms of chronic abuse of cannabis. He also repeated the claimmade by William Deedes in the House of Commons on 28 July, thatthere were seven million hashish addicts in Egypt and that theGovernment there was at its wits end to know what to do about it.I quoted an article published the preceding year in the U.N.Bulletin on Narcotics, a study sponsored by the Egyptiangovernment, which said there were 180,000 "habitues" ofcannabis in Egypt and that a study of matched groups of users andnon-users did not reveal any significant differences between thegroups. The discussion from the floor was the importantpart of the meeting. One expert after another rose to affirm theinnocuous status of cannabis. They seemed to vie with one anotherin devising new arguments. It may not have reached the height ofa religious revival, but I was left with the feeling that aconsensus had been realized, that the Djinn was well out of thebottle. In November 1967 the reforming Home Secretary,Roy Jenkins, exchanged places with James Callaghan, the disgracedChancellor of the Exchequer, who had devalued the pound. Inopposition, Callaghan had been the paid Parliamentary lobbyistfor the police federation. He was "Sunny Jim, thepoliceman's friend." His agenda was not that of the Labourparty; indeed, it is difficult to find a more destructiveinfluence in the history of that party. Through his opposition tovital trade union reforms, his failure at the Treasury and hispointing up what he called the "permissive society" asthe legacy of his predecessor at the Home Office, he probablycost Labour the 1970 general election. Later his incompetence asprime minister cost Labour the 1979 election, and in 1983 and1987 he intervened against his own party because of hisopposition to nuclear disarmament. Jenkins defended the non-partisan socialreforms of the decade and insisted that Britain was a"civilized society," rather than a permissive one.* Irecall taking part in a Third Program discussion of perhapsunprecedented length (from 8:45 pm until past midnight)on November 9th, 1969, in which Warden Sparrow of All Souls,Michael Foot, Professor Alasdair MacIntyre (a signatory to theadvertisement) and I discussed the question, "Is BritainCivilized." Bernard Levin was in the Chair. I am nowinclined to the view that Britain has over the past quartercentury become intolerant of dissent and especially ofdissenters, that it has many and various means of denying themthe "oxygen of publicity", so that the question mightseem to be not whether Britain is a "civilized"society, but whether, as a prime minister seemed to imply, itaspires to be a "society" at all. * Transport House distributed the text ofJenkins' remarks to the Abingdon Constituency Labour Party onJuly 19th, 1969 At the Home Office, Callaghan was intent onsalvaging his popular reputation, and happy to take the low road.He made known his opposition to the Wootton Report. He made anumber of public interventions which could be interpreted asattempts to sabotage the Report, or to dictate terms to theCommittee. He was not obliged to publish the Report, formallysubmitted to him on November 1st, 1968 and he must have realizedthat the publication of an expert report which exoneratedcannabis would do everything to undermine the existinglegislation, since it virtually said that the only reason torefrain from smoking cannabis was the fact that it remained,"for the time being," illegal. There were reports inthe papers that some members of the Committee were prepared toresign if the Report was not published. I was myselfcontemplating a pirated edition of the Report. Printed copies of the Wootton Report weredelivered before Christmas and distributed on January 7th, 1969.The press were advised that Callaghan intended to denounce thefindings and recommendations of the Report. The Wootton Report went further than the Somaadvertisement in affirming the relative harmlessness of cannabis.An often quoted summary (paragraph 29) allied the conclusions ofthe Wootton Report with those of the great reports of 1893 and1944: Having reviewed all the material available to us we find ourselves in agreement with the conclusions reached by the Indian Hemp Drugs Commission appointed by the Government of India (1893-4) and the New York Mayor's Committee on Marihuana (1944) that "the long term consumption of cannabis in moderate doses has no harmful effects." Paragraph 67, introducing the Section onGeneral Conclusion and Recommendations states: The evidence before us shows that: An increasing number of people, mainly young, in all classes of society are experimenting with this drug, and substantial numbers use it regularly for social pleasure. There is no evidence that this activity is causing violent crime or aggressive anti-social behaviour, or is producing in otherwise normal people conditions of dependence or psychosis, requiring medical treatment. The experience of many other countries is that once it is established cannabis-smoking tends to spread. In some parts of Western society where interest in mood-altering drugs is growing, there are indications that it may become a functional equivalent of alcohol. In spite of the threat of severe penalties and considerable effort at enforcement the use of cannabis in the United Kingdom does not appear to be diminishing. There is a body of opinion that criticises the present legislative treatment of cannabis on the ground that it exaggerates the dangers of the drug and needlessly interferes with civil liberty. The Committee proposed that new legislation bedrafted that would distinguish between hard and soft drugs andbetween drug trafficking and drug taking. It proposed that thepenalties for cannabis be reduced to the point where minoroffences would not merit imprisonment. The key recommendation wasto reduce the maximum penalty on summary conviction forpossession to four months imprisonment. The committee alsoproposed to abolish absolute offences (i.e., the liability inrespect to the use of premises) and called for a legal frameworkfor cannabis research and medical treatment using cannabis andits variants. The Government's expert advisors had confirmedthe apparently surreal assertions of the cannabis lobby. Thiscompletely knocked the pins from under any attempt to enforce orjustify the law. It discharged the burden of proof that the"cannabis lobby" had assumed. Whatever was said againstus could also be said against the Advisory Council and againstCallaghan, who had not been bound to publish the Report. Theterms of the debate were now changed. If the Government wanted tosend people to prison for smoking cannabis, they had to show thatits use was harmful and socially damaging. But the further stepof legalizing cannabis depended on amassing proof, over a periodof time, that cannabis was not a social menace. The Report went out of its way to credit theinfluence of the Times advertisement. I quote from an article inthe Guardian diary which was planted with a view to facilitatingCallaghan's denunciation of the Report. It was a set up,illustrated by a photograph. Soft Sell LOBBYISTS are the great unseen, the great unhonoured, not least by Government enquiries. But Steve Abrams' pot-boilers have never been that kind of lobby, and the Wootton Committee isn't that kind of enquiry. The Cannabis report out this morning delivers a rare and specific testimonial: "Our first enquiries were proceeding - without publicity - into the pharmacological and medical aspects when other developments gave our study new and much increased significance. An advertisement in the Times on the 24th of July 1967 represented that the long asserted dangers of cannabis were exaggerated and that the related law was socially damaging, if not unworkable. This was followed by a wave of debate about these issues in Parliament, the Press and elsewhere, and reports of enquiries e.g. by the National Council for Civil Liberties. This publicity made more explicit the nature of some current "protest" about official policy on drugs; defined more clearly some of the main issues in our study; and led us to give greater attention to the legal aspects of the problem. Government spokesmen made it clear that any future development of policy on cannabis would have to take account of the Advisory Committee's report. Accordingly, we decided to give first priority to presenting our views on cannabis." Publication of the Wootton Report provoked anorganized campaign of vilification in the popular press. A famousheadline in The Daily Express described the Report as a"junkies charter." Some people in high places and somevested interests were getting worried. Until then, the issue oflegalizing cannabis had seemed to be a joke. In the Parliamentary debate on the WoottonReport on January 29th, 1969, Callaghan gave his reasons forrejecting, or ostensibly rejecting, the Wootton Report: I think it came as a surprise, if not a shock, to most people when that notorious advertisement appeared in the Times in 1967 to find that there is a lobby for legalizing cannabis. The House should recognize that this lobby exists, and my reading of the Report is that the Wootton sub-committee was overinfluenced by this lobby. I had the same impression as the Rt. Hon. and learned gentleman (Quintin Hogg) that it was compromise at the end; that those who were in favour of legalizing 'pot' were all the time pushing the other members back, so that eventually these remarkable conclusions emerged, that it would be wrong to legalize it but that the penalties should be reduced. The existence of this lobby is something that the House and public opinion should take into account and be ready to combat, as I am. It is another aspect of the so-called permissive society, and I am glad that my decision has enabled the house to call a halt in the advancing tide of so-called permissiveness. Articles in the Evening Standard(February 3rd) and other newspapers said that the Chairman of theAdvisory Council, Sir Edward Wayne and Lady Wootton were bothcontemplating resignation to mark their protest against the HomeSecretary's insulting remarks in Parliament. On February 5th theTimes published a joint letter from them, which said, inpart: We regard this statement as offensive to our distinguished colleagues and to ourselves, and particularly to the eminent medical men who signed our Report, and we particularly deprecate the implication of the emotive word 'lobby' in this context. We would also point out that after hearing the evidence no member of the sub-committee recommended legalization. In October I wrote in the Soma Newsletter (np.3, pp. 4-5) that Callaghan, for all his blustering, had littleoption other than to change the law: The Government is now drafting comprehensive new legislation on psychotropic drugs, including cannabis. The legislation aims at introducing more flexible control of drugs and consolidating the control presently exercised in respect of the Dangerous Drugs Act and the Drugs (Prevention of Misuse) Act. Apparently the new legislation will distinguish between drugs by introducing a two tiered system of penalties for what may, for convenience, be termed "hard" and "soft" drugs. Our understanding is that the problem of whether to classify cannabis as a hard or soft drug has not yet been faced. It is felt, however, that because the Home Secretary has asked the Wootton Committee to continue in its advisory capacity, it will be very difficult to justify the continued classification of cannabis as a hard drug in the context of new legislation. ... It should be recalled that despite his posturing the Home Secretary did not refuse to implement the Wootton Report. He merely refused to legislate unilaterally and immediately on cannabis at a time when new comprehensive legislation was already being planned. The story of implementing the Wootton Report istold in a little noticed passage in the Crossman diaries.(pp.836-7) After the legislation had been through the Home AffairsCommittee, there was an "absolutely outrageous pressleak." This presumably refers to a page one lead in theSunday Mirror on February 1st, 1970 : DRUG LAW SHOCK Jim Changes his Mind. Penalties for 'pot' smokers to be cut. Home Secretary James Callaghan has has had a dramatic change of mind on drugs. He has decided that people who smoke 'pot' should no longer be punished as severely as those using heroin. He has gone further by deciding that the penalties for possessing both hard and soft drugs should be cut. ... Mr. Callaghan only a year ago championed the cause of holding the line against drug permissiveness. ...Last year Mr. Callaghan denounced what he called "a notorious advertisement" in the Times - signed by many public figures including the Beatles - which urged that possessing cannabis should either be legalized, or at most punishable by a fine of not more than #25. Crossman's diary entry for Thursday February26th says that Callaghan had come back to the cabinet to say that"he now proposed not to have any reduction at all in anypenalties on cannabis." Crossman notes that this wasunusual. "One usually only brings things to Cabinet whenthere is disagreement at a Cabinet Committee." As thediscussion continued "it became absolutely clear that theissue was whether to kowtow to public opinion or not." TheCabinet divided. "Every member of the cabinet who had beento university voted one way and everyone else voted theother." Wilson voted with the antis. Having been outvoted bya clear majority, Callaghan published his Misuse of Drugs Bill onMarch 11th. The myth that Callaghan refused to implementthe proposals of the Wootton Report owes its survival to the factthat the labour government was defeated in the general electionof 1970. However, the legislation was bipartisan and it wasreintroduced by Reginald Maudling for the tories. It became lawas the Misuse of Drugs Act 1971. The maximum penalty forpossession of cannabis on summary conviction was reduced by halfto six months. When the Act received the Royal Assent in 1973 theLord Chancellor, Lord Hailsham (formerly Quintin Hogg), advisedthe conference of the Magistrates Association on sentencing.(Times, 12 October 1973) He reasserted the insistence of theAdvisory Council that minor offences did not merit imprisonment.Lord Hailsham told magistrates to treat cannabis users with"becoming moderation." He said: "Set aside yourprejudice, if you have one, and reserve the sentence ofimprisonment for suitably flagrant cases of large scaletrafficking." It must have been difficult for him to setaside his own prejudice long enough to say that, but hedid! Ten years after the Wootton report, Ronald Buttwrote in The Times, without intended irony, that we should begrateful to Callaghan who put his foot down and saved us from thepermissive society by rejecting the Wootton Report. (17 March1979) When he wrote this article Butt should have known that theCriminal Justice Act of 1977 had reduced the maximum sentence onsummary conviction for possession to three months, less than thefour months proposed in the Wootton Report. He should also havebeen aware of the 1978 Report on Sentencing of the AdvisoryCouncil, which proposed a further reduction in penalties, endingthe status of possession of cannabis as an "arrestableoffence" (i.e. one for which a warrant is not required tomake an arrest) and abolishing the residual powers of the courtsto deprive offenders of their liberty. However, the Report notedthat the Courts were already observing this condition inpractice; they no longer imposed prison sentences for simplepossession offences.* Margaret Thatcher was heavily indebted to thetobacco and alcohol lobbies. She sought to use the drugs issuefor political purposes. The wise counsel of civil servants andprofessional advisers was by-passed when a planeload of tame MPsdeparted for a Cooks Tour of American lowlife organized by theU.S. Drugs Enforcement Agency. Thatcher opened the doors to smugglers byreducing the number of customs staff and she spent severalmillion pounds of public money on advertisements for the use ofheroin and cocaine, against the advice of the Advisory Council.But the use of cannabis was so widespread that any attempt tofocus on its dangers would have derailed the entire campaign.Cannabis was not singled out for attention and soon references tocannabis became conspicuous by their absence. There was no way tostress the dangers of narcotics without pointing up the relativeharmlessness of cannabis. On this issue Thatcher was caught in atrap of her own making. Of course she refused to implement thefurther proposals for cannabis law reform made in the 1978 Reporton Sentencing and re-affirmed in the 1982 Report onCannabis." However, she did make a crucial concession,granting Chief Constables discretion to caution offenders ratherthan bring them to trial. This practise has grown and now themajority of offenders are cautioned and thus escapeconviction. * Report on A Review of the Classification ofControlled Drugs and of Penalties Under Schedules 2 and 4 of theMisuse of Drugs Act 1971 (15 December 1978) The Advisory Committee on Drug Dependence wasan ad hoc body. The Misuse of Drugs Act made it a statutory bodyakin to the Poisons Board. It was renamed the Advisory Council onthe Misuse of Drugs. ** Home Office Advisory Council on the Misuseof Drugs - Report of the Expert Group on the Effects of CannabisUse (1982). The Wootton Report was implemented twenty yearsago. Since that time we have had a "half-way house",and possession of cannabis has been virtually"decriminalized." One solicitor, Bernard Simons, whohas dealt with many drugs cases, described the present situationin The Independent on July 22nd: ... For me, twenty-five years ago, it was really important in my life - as a libertarian issue. Today the police rarely prosecute; they're told to administer cautions, and even bringing small amounts into the country doesn't lead to court. In my youth, in Notting Hill, people were stopped and searched all the time. and they had nothing on them. You used to have police raids on parties, where they'd find a bit of cannabis and arrest everyone in the room. Twelve people would appear in court charged with the same bit of cannabis. It doesn't happen any more, certainly not in London - though I can't speak for rural Wales. The police arrest users by accident. If theyare looking for a dealer or a thief and they find some 'dope',they make a charge. The few cases that show up in the statisticsas leading to imprisonment are artefacts; for example, a sentenceserved concurrently for possession of cannabis and another moreserious drug or non drug offence. In some other cases thequantities of cannabis seized are rather large. A decision to legalize cannabis in the contextof EC drug policy would be bolstered by the results of suchresearch as has been done in the past twenty years, mainly inAmerica. However, the decision is likely to depend on the sizeand growth of the market. The media have muddied the waters byexaggerating the extent of cannabis smoking in the 1960s. Aleader and several articles in The Independent have insisted thatcannabis use is currently greater than at any time since the1960s. In fact, official statistics imply a steady growth incannabis use over the past quarter century. The total of cannabisseized in 1967 was 295 kilos and 457 plants. Currently seizuresare running at about 1,000 kilos per week. In twenty-five yearsseizures have increased by two orders of magnitude. Cannabis is normally sold in the form ofhashish at a price of about #30 for a quarter of an ounce. Thatis a week's supply for a user who smokes all day every day. Iassume that a typical user smokes cannabis two or three times aweek and consumes about a sixteenth of an ounce per week. On thisbasis, the current level of seizures alone would be enough tosupport a user population of half a million. But the customs usea notional figure of five or ten per cent for the average levelof seizures.* It is therefore likely that there are severalmillion regular cannabis smokers in Britain, up to ten per centof the population. Probably the market has been saturated.Cannabis is not everyone's cup of tea, and many people do notenjoy its effects or are unable to experience any effect at allfrom taking it. The experience of decriminalization in Holland isthat further relaxation of control does not produce any long termincrease in use. * In the 'sixties the proportion of seizureswas probably lower than it is today, partially because thepenalties did not distinguish users from suppliers. The legalization of cannabis may now be on thecards, but how will it be done? "Legalization" is anextremely vague expression. My personal view has always been thatthe vendor should be the State; that any other solution wouldintroduce a vested interest in maximizing the use of cannabis,and, in one way or another, advertising it. In oral evidence tothe Wootton sub-committee on December 5th, 1967 I said that therecent legalization of gambling had been a disaster because thecrooks who controlled illegal gambling remained in control oflegalized gambling. Yet there is today, in 1993, a strong opinionin favour of legitimizing the existing trade in drugs, much ofwhich is in the hands of organized crime and terroristgroups. Mr. Lucas, a psychiatrist, asked me if Ithought the tobacco companies should sell cannabis to help themto phase out of the production of tobacco. I said that thetobacco companies should not be allowed to sell cannabis and thatI doubted they should even be permitted to sell tobacco. Originally, I hoped that cannabis could be madeavailable through liberal prescribing of standardizedpreparations. Since the 1970s I have supported those who favour arationing system loosely tied to the National Health System. Ithink that prospective users should be required to purchase acannabis licence, which could be obtained from a NHS surgery. Thelicence would allow them to purchase up to the equivalent of oneounce of cannabis per month from a chemists shop. This would makeit a slight nuisance to obtain cannabis. The doctor would not beasked to prescribe the drug, but would be entitled to know hispatient was a cannabis user. All profits from such a scheme couldgo to the NHS. It would be worth a few billions per annum. Inthis way the gangsters are cut out, a small overflow is provided,the forms of cannabis available are standardized and purified,and the profits go to a good cause. Moreover, such a scheme wouldbe reversible. A detailed consideration of alternative licensingsystems was provided in a book, Cannabis : Options for Change,published by the semi-official Institute for the Study of DrugDependence in 1979. Hopefully, the solution of nationalizingcannabis may be the only one which is compatible with the controlrequirements of the UN Single Convention on Narcotic Drugs, towhich Britain is a signatory. The Convention requires all statesto enact laws prohibiting the "possession" of cannabisand providing for deprivation of liberty in suitable cases. Thisconvention was brought in as a result of long pressure from theU. S. Treasury, which acts on behalf of the alcohol lobby inAmerica, and controlled or prohibited cannabis in America in thesame way that it prohibited "moonshine", as taxevasion. The Federal Bureau of Narcotics controlled by H. J.Anslinger, a former commissioner of prohibition and a relative ofHoover's, was part of the U.S. Treasury. It was succeeded by theDrugs Enforcement Authority, which is part of the Department ofJustice. The Wootton Report was followed by similarreports in other countries including the Le Dain Report in Canada and the Shafer Report in America.Following publication of the latter, by a PresidentialCommission, the government looked into the legal status ofcannabis under the Single Convention. Apparently, they obtainedan opinion based on the French text of the Convention that theoffence of possession" had the meaning of the offencedescribed in British law as "possession with intent tosell" as opposed to simple possession. The conclusion seemedto be that cannabis could be legalized, though only with thestate acting as the seller. It will, however, be difficult or impossible toresist a claim from the tobacco industry. For example, onetobacco company pays Lady Thatcher a fee in excess of #1,000,000p.a. to act as a "consultant." Such sums are paid outto protect the public image of an industry which may have killedoff a hundred million people worldwide in the course of thetwentieth century. To the tobacco industry the Single Conventionis a paper tiger. Supplement On the 8th of July 1968, the News of the Worlddevoted its entire pre-tabloid front page to an attack on me.There was a marvelous picture, borrowed from the Sunday Times andretouched, and an arrow pointing at my head. The headline said:This dangerous man MUST be stopped! The article had no content;it attacked my plans to manufacture small quantities of THC forresearch purposes but admitted that the Home Office was aware ofthe project and had no objection to it. Four days later, on the 12th of July, theOxford drugs squad searched the digs of a gentleman named StephenAbraham, who lived with his landlady, Miss Susan Ratcliffe, in ahouse at 88, Sunningwell Road. A roach, a spent cannabiscigarette, was found in the room he occupied with Miss Ratcliffe.The police also found an empty bottle of tincture of cannabis andsome tobacco with a green tinge. Stephen Abraham was an Americanand a member of Pembroke College. He had just taken first classhonours in maths. He smoked dope like a chimney and he too had aprescription (arranged by me) from Dr. Dunbar. I am sorry that Graham Greene (a signatory tothe Soma advertisement) is not alive to read this, to learn aboutthe "other Steve Abrams" I kept in Oxford to getarrested on my behalf.* Steve Abraham beat a strategic retreat toAmerica, but on August 1st, his girlfriend, Miss Ratcliffe, wascharged with the absolute offence of allowing him to smokecigarettes dipped in cannabis tincture in their room. The Courtand the police accepted that Abraham had a legalprescription. The case was heard at Oxford City MagistratesCourt on October 17th, 1968. The Bench of Magistrates, includedMrs. H. Y. Bullock, wife of Sir Alan Bullock, the Head of myCollege, then elevated to the rank of Vice Chancellor. She musthave been aware of the deliberate confusion of identities. Somapaid half the cost of the defence, who were represented by oursolicitor, Martin Polden. Expert evidence for the defence wasprovided by Dr. Ann Robinson, assistant to Professor FrancisCamps at London Hospital. (Dr. Robinson is now Professor ofFerensic Medicine at London Hospital Medical College.) I have no criminal record and have never beencharged with any drugs offence. I was an Advanced Student of St.Catherine's College from 1960 to 1967. I have never met MissRatcliffe and have never been to 88, Sunningwell Road, Oxford. In1968 I lived at 81, Holland Road, London W11 with Jane Firbank,to whom I was then married. The forensic scientist from Aldermaston whogave evidence for the police said that his tests did notdistinguish between cannabis resin and extract of cannabis. Hepromptly concluded that they were the same substance. He insistedthat the product of evaporating the alcohol in tincture ofcannabis (made by adding alcohol to extract of cannabis) was infact cannabis resin, whereas the extract was made by percolatingcannabis leaf (marijuana) in alcohol. It contained only thosecomponents of cannabis that dissolved in alcohol. It was argued in evidence that Abraham wasentitled to be in possession of a bottle of tincture of cannabisbut not to open it. If a fraction of the alcohol that the extractwas mixed with evaporated, that would be a step in the directionof "manufacturing cannabis resin." By the same token,opening a bottle of cough syrup might be construed as a step inthe direction of manufacturing morphine. By pouring the contentsof a bottle of tincture of cannabis, cost 30/onto a tin oftobacco, Abraham was supposed to have, transformed the house intoa "factory" for manufacturing Ireefers', according to areport in The Times. According to The Telegraph, Abrahammanufactured enough cannabis "to supply five hospitals forseven years." That is to say, he used up a bottle oftincture of cannabis, the same amount used by the five Oxfordhospitals over the past seven years. This case was upheld on appeal by BrianGibbens, the Recorder of Oxford on January 11th, 1969, four daysafter the Wootton Report was published. The decision wascriticised in legal and medical journals for making a nonsense ofthe law and it was ignored outside Oxford. However, theimpression was created that following a campaign in the New ofthe World, I had been convicted (in absentia) of"manufacturing" cannabis resin in Oxford. This may be a great joke, but it got on mycredit records here and in America, and it left the police withan open warrant in my name. I was picked up several times inLondon, the premises of Soma were raided, and I realized that itwas time to pack it in. Callaghan had just published his DrugsBill, so I could claim a victory. There is buried somewhere in the personalcolumns of The Times, probably in January or February 1969 asmall announcement advertising the fact that Steve Abrams is notSteve Abrams &c. On July 24th 1992, twenty-five years after thepublication of the Soma advertisement, a new full pagedadvertisement appeared in The Times, sponsored by the ReleaseLegal Emergency and Drugs Service Ltd., registered charity no.801118. Registered charities are not permitted tocampaign for law reform, but Release, in soliciting contributionsto defray the cost (#17,000) of the advertisement altered theirstationery to remove the designation of their charitable statusand allowed the press, e.g.? the Independent, to describe them asa "soft drugs campaigning group." Prospective contributors and signatories to theRelease advertisement were sent a poster reproduction of the Somaadvertisement, together with advice that affirmed or stronglyimplied that they had published the original as their callingcard, twenty-five years earlier. None of the signatories to theRelease advertisement got to see the embarrassing document towhich their names were appended. I told the organizers of the Releaseadvertisement that they were in breach of copyright incirculating posters of the Soma advertisement, and that they werealso guilty of the additional offence of "passing off."The Director of Release, Michael Goodman, a barrister, and one ofthe "founders" of the organization, Mr. Rufus Harris, alaw clerk, ignored my protestations and authorised the use of aphotograph of me, ostensibly smoking a joint, on the invitationto their 25th anniversary party. Release did come into existence in 1967, but ittook no significant part in the cannabis law reform movement ofthe late sixties. To begin with, Release was a 24 hour referralservice for a group of solicitors who specialised in defendingdrugs cases. Release would have cut itself off from reputablesources of funding had it campaigned for the legalization ofcannabis. The solicitors, who were onto a good thing, would havebeen compromised. The earliest reference to Release in The Timesis in October 1967 and all of the references are to fund raisingstunts arranged by Carolyn Coon or criticisms of the police. Moresurprisingly, perhaps, there is no reference to Release in the"pot people's newspaper" International Times in thesummer of 1967. A complete history of the early work of Releaseis given in The Release Report by Caroline Coon and Rufus Harris(Sphere Books, 1969). This book covers the wider interests of theauthors in the drugs problem but the text contains no referenceto the Wootton Report or to an advertisement in the Times. Theauthors seem to think it wrong to, as James Callaghan said,"look at one drug in isolation." They contentthemselves with a bland and ambiguous injunction, still in use,to "change the drug laws." If this seems tame, it is. Release has agovernment grant of #3,000 per week, covering sixty per cent ofits operating expenditure. In twenty-five years Release has notdone anything adventurous, nor has it published any worthwhileresearch. Now independent action is out of the question. Theorchestrated pre-publicity for the 1992 advertisement, with themedia acting in concert, regurgitating handouts from the HomeOffice Press office was an embarassing confirmation of the extentof news management in the one party state that is Britaintoday. I know that things are hard, and that anorganization like Release must be encouraged to establish itsstreet credibility and to raise money on its own by tapping avein of sympathy among a drug using population of severalmillions and preaching to the converted. I am not happy aboutRelease living on my good will, but I am amused that the HomeOffice now want to get in on the act, to claim that theythemselves inspired the 1967 advertisement. Contents | Feedback | Search DRCNet Library | Schaffer Library | Major Studies | WoottonReport WT01-B27-73IA030-000641-B019-159http://206.61.184.43:80/schaffer/LIBRARY/studies/wootton/strange.htm 206.61.184.43 19970122135003 text/html 28315HTTP/1.0 200 OKDate: Wednesday, 22-Jan-97 13:49:49 GMTServer: WebSitePro/1.1f (S/N wpo-0deb)Allow-ranges: bytesContent-type: text/htmlLast-modified: Saturday, 28-Dec-96 06:45:35 GMTContent-length: 28097 Wootton Report - Extract from 'The Strange Case of Pot' byMichael Schofield Contents | Feedback | Search DRCNet Library | Schaffer Library | Major Studies | WoottonReport The Wootton Report Extract from 'The Strange Case of Pot' by Michael Schofield(Penguin, 1971). Schofield was a social psychologist who sat on the WoottonCommittee and, dismayed by its reception, which led to theintroduction of the Misuse of Drugs Act, he subsequentlypublished this book. Introduction In the introduction, he writes: 'The original title of this book was to have been 'The Case For And Against Pot.' It was intended to present both sides of the controversy and weight the evidence before coming to a conclusion. But once the myths were cleared, it became obvious that the case for and against was not evenly balanced. By any ordinary standards of objectivity, it is clear that cannabis is not a very harmful drug. But the simple ranging of issues side by side is to superficial an approach for what is a very complex situation - really a social problem, much less a legal problem, and still less a medical problem.' 'The book is divided into three major parts. In the first five chapters I present the basic information about cannabis and compare it with the other illegal drugs. In the next six chapters I try to explain the public attitudes to cannabis and discuss the main controversies. In the last five chapters I attempt to describe the legal and sociological aspects, and end by suggesting a more sensible plan of action.' Chapter 7, The Wootton Report - In this chapter, Schofield discusses the background to theestablishment of the Wootton Committee and then goes on tooutline the committee's recommendations, elucidating each one. Other Reports At first Government committees were only concerned with theopiates, and in particular with heroin addiction. The two reportsof the Interdepartmental Committee under Lord Brain in 1961 and1965 hardly mentioned cannabis. In the first report the committeedecided that cannabis was not within their terms of reference andconcluded: 'In our view cannabis is not a drug of addiction; itis an intoxicant.' In the second report they noted briefly thatthere is 'a risk that young people may be persuaded to turn tocannabis' which was something of an understatement even in 1965. One important recommendation in the second Brain report was toset up a Standing Advisory Committee to keep under review thewhole problem of drug dependence. As this was not a static but achanging problem, it would be useful to bring together a group ofexperts with authority to advise to advise on the social as wellas the medical aspects. This committee was set up in early 1967under the Chairmanship of Sir Edward Wayne, MD, PhD, DSc, FRCP,FRCP(G). Twenty-two other members were appointed, nine of whomwere doctors. A small secretariat was formed to help thecommittee, but there was no money to pay for research and nospecial facilities. Some of the members were doctors treatingaddicts, but most of them had only a limited amount of knowledgeof drugs although all of them have learnt over the years. Without the facilities to initiate or carry out research, thiscommittee cannot be expected to provide new facts or makeimportant discoveries. All that the members can do is to discussthe matter between themselves and listen from time to time towitnesses called to give evidence because they are experts insome particular aspect of drug use. But nearly everyone who givesevidence to this committee does so as the representative of anorganisation which has a special interest in drugs. Conflictingviews will be heard from the representatives of otherorganisations. The function of the committee is essentiallyjudicial and its purpose is to reconcile the conflicting claimsof its witnesses. As there is a wide variety of opinionrepresented among the members, the suggested solutions to thevarious problems of drug dependence are obtained by compromisingbetween opposing views. The reports which are issued from time totime usually consist of an aggregation of existing opinions.including those of the chairman, the committee members, and thewitnesses. A research team of three or four people working fulltime is more likely to produce more penetrating and workablesolutions to the problems of drug use than a committee ofprominent citizens meeting three or four times a year to compileand select from conflicting expert opinions. None the less the committee has been able to give usefuladvice to the Home Office and Ministry of Social Security on thebest way to implement the earlier recommendations of the Braincommittee. Treatment centres for heroin addicts have been set upand special arrangements were introduced to control the outbreakof methedrine injections. Perhaps the most important work hasbeen done in the sub-committees which have met more regularlythan the main committee. There have been sub-committees onrehabilitation (published as a report by HMSO in 1969) and healtheducation (the results were circularised by the Department ofEducation), amphetamines, LSD, and the powers of search andarrest (these reports were published by HMSO in 1970). In April1967 a special sub-committee was appointed to review theavailable evidence on the pharmacological, clinical,pathological, social and legal aspects of cannabis. Afterseventeen meetings under the chairmanship of Baroness Wootton,the sub-committee's report was published in January 1969. The Recommendations (1) We recommend that in the interest of public health, itis necessary for the time being to maintain restrictions on theavailability of cannabis. - Although it is stated in the report that the consumption ofcannabis in moderate doses has no harmful effects, the committeefelt less sure about the mental effects. This recommendation,therefore, is intended to be a temporary measure and should bereviewed from time to time, when more is known about the effectsas a result of medical and social research. Meanwhile the courtsshould recognise that there is considerable variation in thepersonalities and motives of people who use cannabis. (2) Every encouragement, both academic and financial,should be given to suitable projects for enquiry into thecannabis problem. - It follows that if there is a lack of information on animportant and controversial problem, every effort should be madeto provide research facilities. Although three working partieshave been set up by the medical Research Council and an Institutefor the Study of Drug Dependence has been established, progressis very slow. It is inevitable that research into drug use willbe a lengthy business, but it is disquieting that even threeyears after the formation of the Government's Advisory Committee,very few large-scale research projects have even been started. In March 1970, the Home Office issued a list of research ondrug dependence. This list contained ten biochemical andpharmacological studies, mainly concerned with the developmentsof techniques for detecting cannabis in the body. there were nocannabis studies listed under the clinical and treatment section.Five studies were listed under the social and psychologicalsection; three of these (Chapple, 1966; Paton, 1968; Tylden,1968) who had written papers strongly opposed to the use ofcannabis even before starting the research; only one of the fivehas been undertaken by a sociologist. so far the Social ScienceResearch Council has not supported any researches on the use ofcannabis even though it is in the area of sociology that we mostneed information. The Wootton committee found that it was impossible to estimatethe number of people who used cannabis and the guesses seem torange between 30,000 and 300,000. It is clearly impossible tomake sense of statements about the social consequences ofwidespread use of cannabis until there are some reliableestimates of the prevalence of regular users. No detailedinformation is available about the extent of cannabis use byimmigrants. There is an immediate need for sociological andpsychological studies to define the different social groups andto describe the personalities of people who smoke cannabis.People do not hesitate to criticise the young for taking drugs,but in fact no one knows how many adolescents do take cannabis,how many use the drug only occasionally at parties and week-ends,and how many take it regularly. Only a well-planned researchwould show if there are differentiating characteristics betweenusers who take only cannabis and people who used to take cannabisbut have now given up all drug use. (3) The law should progressively be recast to giveParliament greater flexibility of control over individual drugs. - This was one of the few recommendations which the HomeSecretary found acceptable, although it seems likely that he doesnot interpret the 'greater flexibility of control' in the samesense as the Wootton Committee. Mr Callaghan, speaking during thedebate on the Wootton report, said that he would put before theHouse proposals which would give him more power to handle theproblem in a much more flexible manner. He then went on tocriticise the restrictions of the 1964 Drugs Act which in factdoes not apply to cannabis. He wanted the power to bring newsynthetic drugs under the Act as they were developed and becamepopular with users, and he also mentioned the need to havestronger legal control over manufacturers, doctors, chemists, andothers who distribute the drugs. he felt that there was 'a clearrisk that each new fashion of drug taking will find new gaps inthe defences, which will only be plugged too late' and thesolution would be 'to have a single comprehensive code whichwould rationalise and strengthen the Government's powers.'(Quoted from Hansard, 27 January, 1969, column 967). There ismuch substance in Mr Callaghan's remarks about changing fashionsin the drugs scene but this has nothing to do with the Woottonreport which is about cannabis, a drug that is alreadyfashionable and is hardly ever prescribed by medical men. It isdifficult to see what the Home Secretary's call for newlegislation has to do with cannabis unless he feels that one drugis much like another, an attitude of mind that Lady Wootton andher colleagues were most anxious to alter. The Wootton committee suggested changes in the law becausethere is now a better understanding of the reasons why people usedrugs. Criminological studies have cast doubts on theeffectiveness of deterrents and the general law on the treatmentof offenders has been changed considerable. The committee feltthat 'the penalties for cannabis offences have gone unreviewedfor too long'. Their idea of flexibility was that the law shouldbe adjusted according to the dangers of the drug and the way itis misused. (4) The association in legislation of cannabis and heroinand the other opiates is inappropriate and new legislation todeal specifically and separately with cannabis and its syntheticderivatives should be introduced as soon as possible. - There are two reasons for this. Many people agree that theconfusion between cannabis and heroin leads to misunderstandingsand, in some cases, to injustice. The committee also stated quiteclearly that the present penalties for possession of cannabiswere altogether too high. The Government accepted the thirdrecommendation for reasons other than those given by thecommittee, and after some hesitation, the fourth recommendationwas also incorporated into the new (Misuse of Drugs) Bill,although the penalties for possession of cannabis are stillsevere. (5) Unlawful possession of cannabis without knowledgeshould not be an offence. The practicability of distinguishingbetween possession intended for use and possession intended forsupply should be examined. - This brings to notice two of the several difficultiesencountered in a law which is about possession when what we arereally concerned about is the misuse of drugs. Although a recenttest case was taken as far as the House of Lords the resultingdecision was by no means clear because the issues in thatparticular case were complex. The law should make it quitecertain that a person cannot be incriminated, for example, bysomeone putting cannabis in his coat pocket without hisknowledge. The police maintain that is extremely difficult tocatch someone in the act of dealing in cannabis or any otherdrug. The unsatisfactory solution to this problem under the 1965Act was to retain high maximum penalties for the offence ofpossession so that the courts could sentence a man who had beenfound guilty of one offence (i.e. possession) as if he has beenfound guilty of another (i.e. supply). It is a form of justicethat is open to question, it is a bit like the bench saying to amotorist: 'You have been caught exceeding the speed limit and wehave been told that you had been drinking rather heavily;however, we can't prove that you were drunk, so we are going togive you a very heavy sentence for speeding.' The proposals forthe new legislation allow this practise to continue: although thenew offence of 'possession with intent to supply' is introduced,a maximum penalty of five years for the possession of cannabis isproposed. It is difficult to imagine a situation where the simplepossession of cannabis deserves such a severe sentence. The newBill distinguishes between possession and trafficking andincreases the penalty for selling cannabis to a maximum offourteen years. This reflects the public demand for heavypenalties for traffickers which is based on a misunderstanding ofthe role of the dealer. Nevertheless if a man is making money outof selling an illegal substance, it is reasonable to expect himto be dealt with more severely than someone who is merely usingthe drug. (6) Possession of a small amount of cannabis should notnormally be regarded as a serious crime to be punished byimprisonment. - This is a very radical recommendation and one which caused alarge amount of adverse comment in the press. But informedopinion is coming round to the idea that prison is not a sensibleway to treat people who wish to use cannabis. What even informedopinion found it difficult to take was the explicit statementthat possession in not a serious crime. But the committee wentstill further in paragraph 90 of the report, where they statethat prison is the wrong place even for those who supply on alimited scale. they do not attempt to define what they mean by alimited scale, but even a fairly strict definition would includeabout nine out of ten of the transactions between users andsellers because the amounts involved are so small. (7) The offence of unlawful possession, sale or supply ofcannabis should be punishable on summary conviction with a finenot exceeding 100, or imprisonment for a term not exceedingfour months, or both such fine and imprisonment. On conviction orindictment the penalty should be an unlimited fine, orimprisonment for a term not exceeding two years or both such fineand imprisonment. - Thus the committee recommended considerable reductions inthe penalties. The penalties for possession under the 1965 Act inforce when the committee reported, the penalties in the new Billand the penalties recommended in the Wootton report aresummarised as follows: Maximum         1965 Act                1970 Bill               Wootton penalties                                                               ReportSummary conviction:Fine                    250            400            100 Imprisonment    12 months               6 months                4 monthsIndictment:Fine                    1,000          unlimited               unlimited Imprisonment    10 years                5 years         2 years Some members of the committee argued strongly against any kindof prison sentence for simple possession, but in the end werepersuaded to agree to a maximum penalty of four monthsimprisonment because this sentence would allow the defendant theoption of going for trial by jury and also because a prisonsentence gives the judiciary the chance to deal with what thecommittee called 'difficult individual cases'. The committee wereaware that a substantial part of the smuggling of cannabis is insmall amounts (paragraph 37) and is not exploited to anysignificant extent by professional criminals (paragraph 38).Therefore they expected that most cases would be dealt withsummarily by imposing a small fine. the reaction to this showedthat it was a most unpopular recommendation. The home secretaryand the opposition spokesman on Home Affairs both said that thisrecommendation would make it appear that Parliament was condoningthe smoking of cannabis. ('If we were to adopt what is proposedor started to take a namby-pampy attitude about it, we shouldneed our heads examined. I range myself wholeheartedly behind theHome Secretary on this issue.' Quentin Hogg in Hansard, 27January 1969, column 957) (8) The existing law which inhibits research requiring thesmoking of cannabis (section 5, Dangerous Drugs Act, 1965) shouldbe amended to allow qualified workers to study its use both byobservation and by laboratory and social experiments. - There has been considerable uncertainty about the smoking ofcannabis for research purposes with the result that no seriousstudy has been made in this country on the effects of smoking onhumans, even in laboratory conditions. As the social factors areeven more important than the pharmacological problems, it isessential that researchers should be free to study thesephenomena by observations and experiments outside as well asinside the laboratory without the risk of prosecution. Althoughthe Home Secretary gave the lack of information as the reason forrejecting many of the recommendations in the Wootton Report, itwas notable that he never mentioned this in the House of Commons.In fact this was one of the earliest and most urgent of thesuggestions made by the full Standing Advisory committee, longbefore the Wootton report was published. Many members realisedthat their work was hindered by the shortage of information thatcould only be obtained by fairly elaborate and lengthy research.It was suggested that a short Bill should be put beforeParliament to make research on cannabis possible without the riskof prosecution. It was thought that such a bill would not arousemuch opposition, but the Home Office advisors to the committeefelt that this plan was not practical. They maintained that for ashort Bill on the subject of research into cannabis could not beconfined to this subject and far-reaching amendments would beadded during its passage through Parliament. so it was decided towait until the Government was ready to introduce comprehensivelegislation into which a special clause would be included toallow bona fide research workers to investigate the effects ofsmoking cannabis. But in fact three years have been lost betweenthe time when the law on cannabis research might have beenchanged and the introduction of this new legislation. It ispossible that much useful information could have been obtained inthat time, information which would have been invaluable duringthe preparation of the new Bill and the subsequent discussion ofvarious proposals. (9) Section 5 of the Dangerous Drugs Act, 1965 (permittingpremises to be used for smoking cannabis, etc.) should beredefined in scope so as to apply to premises open to the public,to exclude the reference to dealing in cannabis and cannabisresin, and to remove the absolute nature of the liability onmanagers. - This recommendation has been partly approved by the HomeSecretary in the proposals for new legislation so that occupiersand managers commit an offence if they knowingly permit a drug tobe used or sold in their premises. This will obviate theliability of the landlord of private premises who would have beenconvicted under the old law even if he was able to show that hedid not know that pot was being smoked in his house. But the HomeSecretary has rejected the suggestion that this should only be anoffence in public premises. (10) The Advisory Committee should undertake, as a matterof urgency, a review of police powers of arrest and search inrelation to drug offences generally, with a view to advising theSecretary of State on any changes that may be appropriate in thelaw, particularly as regards cannabis. - The Wootton committee seemed to think this task was too bigfor them because they felt that the question of police powerscould not be realistically considered in relation to cannabisalone. But there is no doubt that this is a most important issue.There is a growing public concern about the way the police areusing their powers of search and arrest and many youth workerssee this as one of the main causes of the substantialdeterioration in the relations between young people and thepolice. It may be said that this recommendation is a bit timid.In a large numbers of cases, the police search for drugs ingeneral, but this is not true of every case. There must beoccasions when the reasonable grounds for suspicion relate onlyto the use of cannabis; for example, it is the only drug that hasa pungent smell. the very extensive police powers of search andarrest, which may be necessary for the more harmful drugs, aredifficult to justify for cannabis, the possession of which,according to the report, is a relatively minor offence. Thisrecommendation was thought to be 'a matter of urgency' and a newsub-committee under the chairmanship of William Deedes was set upsoon after the Wootton report was published. In an early debateon drugs Mr Deedes said in the House of Commons: 'It makes nosense for the police to go round raiding and stripping youngpeople at parties to find drugs, some of which their elders treatas a staple diet. the posture against the young becomes morallyuntenable.' But his report turned out to be rather adisappointing document, with few positive recommendations. (11) The development of the manufacture of syntheticcannabinols should be kept under review and, if necessary,control should be imposed under powers provided by the Pharmacyand Poisons Act, 1933, and The Drugs (Prevention of Misuse) Act,1964. - Much progress is being made in the pharmacological study ofcannabis and the active ingredient has been synthesised. It ispossible that synthetic pot will be available in large quantitiesbefore long, and this substance is likely to be purer and safer,and perhaps more potent, than the product obtained from theplant. Such a substance would not be covered by the DangerousDrugs Act of 1965, but the proposed legislation would make itpossible to add new products of the pharmacological industry tothe schedule of restricted drugs simply by regulations placedbefore the two Houses of Parliament. (12) Preparations of cannabis and its derivatives shouldcontinue to be available on prescription for purposes of medicaltreatment and research. Provision should be made in legislationfor records to be maintained so that the position can be keptunder review. - The committee did not want to hinder the few doctors who areexperimenting with the use of cannabis in the treatment ofdisturbed adolescents, amphetamine dependence, alcoholism andother conditions which are difficult medical problems. Althoughthere have been few indications of success in this treatment, itis hoped that the new legislation will not interfere with theseexperiments. In summary, the Wootton report found that most ofthe fears about cannabis were groundless. Physically it is muchless dangerous than the other illegal drugs; most people can giveit up readily and without withdrawal symptoms. Most cannabisusers are industrious and law-abiding; there is no evidence thatin Britain it provokes the user to crime other than the crime ofpossessing it. nor is there any evidence to support the widelyheld belief that cannabis is a significant step in the escalationto heroin. It was agreed that cannabis is a potent drug, likealcohol, and that is was necessary to maintain restrictions onits availability for the time being; these restrictions wouldhave to be more severe than they are for alcohol until more wasknown about the long-term effects of the drug. Nevertheless itwas quite inappropriate to make cannabis subject to the samepenalties as heroin under the Dangerous Drugs Act and it waswrong to send people to prison for the possession of a smallamount. Research has been hampered and the law should be changedso as to encourage careful long-term investigations into theeffects of smoking cannabis. When these results are available,the interim recommendations should be reviewed. These mainconclusions were not so very different from the results found inearlier reports including the very thorough investigations madein India and the city of New York, and the more recent studiesmade in Canada and by the President's Commission in Washington.But the publication of the Wootton report was greeted with achorus of abuse from politicians, press and the public. Contents | Feedback | Search DRCNet Library | Schaffer Library | Major Studies | WoottonReport WT01-B27-74IA030-000641-B019-189http://206.61.184.43:80/schaffer/LIBRARY/studies/ledain/nonmed1a.htm 206.61.184.43 19970122135018 text/html 36024HTTP/1.0 200 OKDate: Wednesday, 22-Jan-97 13:50:02 GMTServer: WebSitePro/1.1f (S/N wpo-0deb)Allow-ranges: bytesContent-type: text/htmlLast-modified: Saturday, 28-Dec-96 07:01:08 GMTContent-length: 35806 Canadian Government Commission - The Commission'sInterpretation of Its Task Contents | Feedback | Search DRCNet Library | Schaffer Library | Major Studies Canadian Government Commission ofInquiry CHAPTER ONE THE COMMISSION'S INTERPRETATION OF ITS TASK The Background of the Commission's Appointment 1. The Commission of Inquiry into the Non-Medical Use of Drugswas appointed by the Government of Canada under Part I of theInquiries Act on May 29, 1969, on the recommendation of theHonourable John Munro, Minister of National Health and Welfare. The concern that gave rise to the appointment of theCommission is described in Order-in-Council P.C. 1969-1112, whichauthorized the appointment, in the following terms: The Committee of the Privy Council have had before them areport from the Minister of National Health and Welfare,representing: 'That there is growing concern in Canada about the non-medicaluse of certain drugs and substances, particularly, those havingsedative, stimulant, tranquillizing or hallucinogenic properties,and the effect of such use on the individual and the socialimplications thereof; That within recent years, there has developed also thepractice of inhaling the fumes of certain solvents having anhallucinogenic effect, and resulting in serious physical damageand a number of deaths, such solvents being found in certainhousehold substances. Despite warnings and considerablepublicity, this practice has developed among young people and canbe said to be related to the use of drugs for other than medicalpurposes; That certain of these drugs and substances including lysergicacid diethylamide, LSD, methamphetamines, commonly referred to as'Speed', and certain others, have been made the subject ofcontrolling or prohibiting legislation under the Food and DrugsAct, and cannabis, marijuana, has been a substance, thepossession of or trafficking in which has been prohibited underthe Narcotic Control Act; That notwithstanding these measures and the competentenforcement thereof by the R.C.M. Police and other enforcementbodies, the incidence of possession and use of these substancesfor non-medical purposes has increased and the need for aninvestigation as to the cause of such increasing use has becomeimperative. During the year or so preceding the appointment of theCommission, members of parliament had called for an inquiry intothe use of drugs. One member spoke of 'the galloping increase inthe use of marijuana and the increasing number of young peopletragically being paraded daily before the courts' and of 'theextreme urgency of dealing properly with these cases'. Inannouncing the Government's intention to appoint the Commission,the Minister of National Health and Welfare spoke of 'the graveconcern felt by the Government at the expanding proportions ofthe use of drugs and related substances for non-medicalpurposes'. The Commission's Terms of Reference 3. The Order-in-Council authorizing the appointment of theCommission sets out its terms of reference as follows; That inquiry be made into and concerning the factorsunderlying or relating to the non-medical use of the drugs andsubstances above described and that for this purpose a Commissionof Inquiry be established, constituted and with authority ashereinafter provided. (a) to marshal from available sources, both in Canada andabroad, data and information comprising the present fund ofknowledge concerning the non-medical use of sedative, stimulant,tranquillizing, hallucinogenic and other psychotropic drugs orsubstances; (b) to report on the current state of medical knowledgerespecting the effect of the drugs and substances referred to in(a); (c) to inquire into and report on the motivationunderlying the non-medical use referred to in (a); (d) to inquire into and report on the social,economic, educational and philosophical factors relating tothe use for non-medical purposes of the drugs and substancesreferred to in (a) and in particular, on the extent of thephenomenon, the social factors that had led to it, the age groupsinvolved, and problems of communication; and (e) to inquire into and recommend with respect tothe ways or means by which the Federal Government can act,alone or in its relations with Government at other levels, in thereduction of the dimensions of the problems involved in such use. The Implications of the Terms of Reference 4. While the Commission's terms of reference make specificmention of the sedative, stimulant, tranquillizing andhallucinogenic drugs, they also require inquiry concerning otherpsychotropic drugs and substances. The Commission understandsdrug to mean any substance that by its chemical nature altersstructure or function in the living organism. The psychotropicdrugs are those drugs which alter sensation, mood, consciousnessor other psychological or behavioural functions. Theseconcepts are further clarified in Chapter Two of thisreport. A number of classifications of psychotropic drugs havebeen brought to the Commission's attention. Chapter Two presentsthe classification that has been accepted by the Commission. Italso contains a detailed account of the psychotropic propertiesand medical and non-medical uses of certain of the drugs causingthe greatest public concern. It is clear to the Commission thatit would not be appropriate to confine its attention to theso-called 'soft drugs' such as marijuana, hashish and LSD. The'hard drugs' such as the opiate narcotics, of which heroin is anexample, have marked psychotropic effects. The amphetamines or'speed' drugs which are popularly considered as hard drugs appearto be increasing in their non-medical use. Moreover, both thestructure of present Canadian drug laws and the nature of thedrug controversy make it impossible to consider the 'soft drugs'without reference to the amphetamines and the opiates. Indeed,the opiate narcotics have been and are an important referencepoint in, establishing the public perspective for the non-medicaluse of many other drugs. The Commission believes that it hasproperly focused its primary attention in the initial phase ofits inquiry on the non-medical use of drugs such as cannabis, LSDand amphetamines by young people. However, we have had a growingconcern for the facts and implications of the use of drugs suchas alcohol and tobacco by people of all ages. These two drugs,both of which are psychotropic, remain the most popular drugs innon-medical use among both young people and adults. Adultsgenerally seem unwilling to accept the fact that alcohol andtobacco are drugs, and often find it difficult to view thenon-medical drug use of youth with reference to and in thecontext of the socially acceptable use of drugs by adults. 5. Two broad categories in which the use of psychotropic drugscan be classified are: (a) medical and non-medical use, and (b)legal and illegal use. While the distinction between legal andillegal use is simple and derives directly from the law, it isdifficult to find a satisfactory definition of medical andnon-medical drug use. Medical use of drugs is taken bythe Commission to be use which is indicated for generallyaccepted medical reasons, whether under medical supervision ornot; all drug use which is not indicated on generally acceptedmedical grounds is considered to be non-medical use. Thus,the occasional use of aspirin to control the pain of an ordinaryheadache is considered to be medical use, while the dependent useof large quantities of barbiturates obtained through one or moreprescriptions is not. Clearly, non-medical use is not to beequated with illegal use. The use of alcohol by adults isgenerally non-medical but it is legal, whereas the use ofmarijuana is both non-medical and illegal. 6. The commission is invited to marshal the present fund ofworld knowledge concerning the non-medical use of psychotropicdrugs and substances. Taken literally, this task is impossible,with the time and resources available to the Commission. Theworld literature on all the psychotropic drugs and substances isvery extensive. There are over 40,000 items on alcohol alone atRutgers University, a major centre of alcohol studies. There areestimated to be over 2,000 items on cannabis. Experts in thefield have testified to the extreme difficulty of keeping abreastof the literature, particularly because of its multi-disciplinarycharacter. There are only a few sources of comprehensiveinformation on this continent: the Addiction Research Foundationof Ontario is by far the best equipped in this country; theNational Institute of Mental Health in the United States providesa computerized data retrieval service. In Geneva, the WorldHealth Organization of the United Nations possesses extensivebibliographical resources. Collecting the available data and information is only onestage. It is also necessary to establish and apply criteria ofscientific validity to such data and information. In manyinstances, the Commission is obliged to rely heavily on the workof experts who have themselves sifted and critically evaluatedthe available literature. It must form its judgements on thebasis of the materials which they have identified as mostrelevant and reliable. The Commission cannot carry out acomprehensive bibliographical work for the whole range ofpsychotropic drugs and substances. It must try to seize upon theessentials in the present fund of knowledge as they bear upon theareas of concern and the issues in this inquiry. 7. The Commission is required to report on the current stateof medical knowledge concerning the effect of psychotropic drugsand substances. This it has attempted to do in an interimfashion, in Chapter Two, entitled 'The Drugs and Their Effects'.The effects contemplated by paragraph (b) in the terms ofreference are presumably the physiological and psychologicalones, including their behavioural manifestations. The term'medical' is rather too narrow as a reference to the expertisewhich is in the determination of drug effects since these are acomplex result of many factors, including the expectation of theuser and the social setting in which the drug is taken. In itsinterim brief to the Commission, the Canadian Medical Associationstressed the multi-disciplinary character of the study requiredfor a proper understanding of non-medical drug use. We have,therefore, interpreted the word 'medical' to refer broadly to allscientific knowledge concerning the effects of drug use. Thelanguage of paragraph (b) of the terms of reference suggests thatit was not intended that the Commission would itself undertakeoriginal research into the effects of non-medical drug use.Although we do not exclude the possibility of some clinical orexperimental work, particularly with respect to the effect ofcertain drugs on psychomotor functions, it is our opinion thatwith the time and resources at our disposal, and having regard tothe research currently being conducted by such organizations asthe Addiction Research Foundation and the National Institute ofMental Health, we should confine ourselves to carrying out acritical review of the existing knowledge and ongoing research,as well as attempting to identify research priorities and therole which the federal government can play in relation toresearch. 8. The remaining paragraphs in the terms of reference dealwith the extent and the causes of non-medical drug use. Theyreflect a broad concern to understand the reasons for theincrease in such use. They invite the Commission to attempt toplace this phenomenon in a proper social and philosophic context.We cannot help feeling that this is one of the most importantaspects of our task: one on which there is a compelling need foran understanding of current Canadian attitudes. This is impliedby the allusion in paragraph (d) of the terms of reference to'problems of communication'. To understand the factors underlyingnon-medical drug use and the problems for which government actionmay be indicated, it is necessary to consider not only theeffects, extent, and causes of such use, but the range of socialresponse and attitude which such use has elicited fromgovernment, other institutions and individuals. For non-medicaldrug use and the social response to it are interacting andmutually conditioning phenomena. Methods of Inquiry 9. The Commission has used a variety of methods of inquiry.Because of the profound social significance of the non-medicaldrug use phenomenon and of the importance of personal and publicattitudes to it, the Commission decided early to conduct publichearings in all of the provinces. It has attached particularimportant to these hearings. They have been used to foster thewidest possible public discussion. In order to encourage theparticipation of young people, it was decided to hold some of thepublic hearings in more informal settings than may have beencustomary for such commissions in the past. In addition to thepublic hearings, the Commissioners have collectively andindividually held numerous private hearings, have consulted withexperts in several fields related to non-medical drug use, andhave read extensively in the scientific and legal literature. TheCommission has also received many communications, written andoral, from Canadians in all walks of life. 10. At the beginning of September, 1969, the Commission wroteto over 750 individuals and organizations inviting them to submitbriefs or to make oral submissions. In particular, the Commissionsolicited briefs from: federal and provincial governmentdepartments; law enforcement authorities, educationalinstitutions and associations; members of university facultiesand departments; medical and pharmaceutical institutions andassociations, addiction research foundations; street clinics andother innovative services; correctional and welfareorganizations; bar associations; youth organizations; studentorganizations; and a wide variety of other organizations andindividuals having an evident concern or point of contact withthe phenomenon of non-medical drug use in Canada. The Commissionreceived a gratifying response to this invitation, and despitethe relatively short time available in some cases for thepreparation of briefs, individuals and organizations made a verycommendable effort to prepare submissions for the public hearingswhich began in the middle of October. 11. A list of the organizations and individuals who have beenidentified with submissions to the Commission in the initialphase of this inquiry is contained in Appendix A to this report,Fifty-five organizations have been represented at the publichearings at which they have submitted written briefs; twenty havebeen represented by oral submissions; forty-five have madewritten submissions to the Commission without appearing at apublic hearing. Thirty two individuals have submitted writtenbriefs and 45 others have made oral submissions at publichearings. In addition, there have been numerous oral submissionsand interventions by members of the public who have attended thehearings. The Commission has also received several hundredletters from individuals, and a selection of these letters orexcerpts from them is included in the Report as Appendix B. Weemphasize that this selection is not intended to convey theweight of opinion in this correspondence, but simply to reflectsomething of the range of response. 12. In the initial phase of this inquiry, the Commission hasheld public hearings in the following centres: Toronto - October16, 17 and 18; Vancouver - October 30 and 31; Victoria - November1; Montreal - November 6, 7 and 8; Winnipeg - November 13 and 14;Ottawa - December 12 and 13; Halifax - January 29 and 30; St.John's - January 31; Fredericton - February 19; Moncton -February 20; Sackville - February 20; and Charlottetown -February 21; Kingston - March 5. A special word may be appropriate concerning the nature of thepublic hearings. They have been conducted in a rather informalmanner. There has been a considerable degree of audienceparticipation. People have felt free to comment on formalsubmissions, and there has been a great deal of informal exchangeamong persons attending the hearings. On the whole, response tothis style of hearing has been favourable, although there hasbeen some criticism from one or two organizations who haveexpressed the opinion that we should not have permitted questionsand critical comments from members of the public. Because of thenature of the phenomenon which it is required to investigate, theCommission is convinced that it has been essential to attempt toestablish a true public forum for discussion of theissues. Most organizations have reacted favourably to this kindof inquiry. In addition to the more traditional settings ofhotels and public buildings, the Commission has held publichearings at universities and from time to time in coffee housesthat have become centres of the new youth culture. Informal hearings have been held in the followinguniversities: York University; the University of Toronto; theUniversity of British Columbia; the University of Montreal;McGill University; Sir George Williams University; the Universityof Manitoba; the University of Winnipeg; the University ofOttawa; Carleton University; Dalhousie University; MemorialUniversity; the University of New Brunswick; the University ofMoncton; Mount Allison University; the University of PrinceEdward Island; and in the following coffee houses: 'The PennyFarthing' in Yorkville, Toronto; 'The Bistro' in Vancouver, andthe 'Back Door' in Montreal. The hearings in these more informal settings have given theCommission direct and vivid contact with the opinions andattitudes of young people in Canada. All the Commission hearingshave been recorded on tape, and in addition there has been astenographic record. In many ways it is a matter of regret thatan audio-visual record could not have been made, but the natureof the subject matter is such that the Commission felt obliged toprotect individuals appearing before it from undue publicity. Themedia have cooperated with the Commission in respecting itsrequest that members of the public should not be photographedwhile making submissions. In many cases, the submissions havebeen of a highly personal nature, and the hearings would havebeen much inhibited if they had been photographed. At the sametime, the Commission has been intensely aware of the fact that itwas listening to an unusual social commentary. Opinions andfeelings have poured forth in the hearings with greatspontaneity, particularly in the more informal settings. TheCommission has been deeply impressed, and on several occasions,moved by the testimony which it has heard. It has been struck bythe depth of feeling which this phenomenon and the socialresponse to it have aroused. As a result of the initial phase ofits inquiry, the Commission is more than ever convinced that theproper response to the non-medical use of psychotropic drugs is aquestion which must be worked out by the people of Canada,examining it and talking it over together. It goes to the rootsof our society and touches the values underlying our wholeapproach to life. It is not a matter which can be confined to thediscrete consultation of experts, although experts obviously havetheir role, and a very important one, to play. 13. A word should be said about the protection of witnesses.The terms of reference of the Commission empower it to taketestimony in such manner as to safeguard the anonymity ofwitnesses. The Order-in-Council authorizing the appointment ofthe Commission provides: That the said Commissioners may, if they deem the sameexpedient, cause a record to be made of the evidence which shallbe given or produced before them, or any part of that evidence,as to the matters to be inquired into and reported upon and maydirect that the oral evidence of witnesses, before them, or anysuch witness, shall be taken in shorthand by a shorthand writer,approved and sworn by the said Commissioners or one of them, andmay direct that the oral evidence of any such witness may be sogiven and recorded, whether under oath or otherwise, without adisclosure of the identity of that witness, and that any evidenceso recorded shall be certified by the person or persons takingthe same in shorthand, as correct. The notices which the Commission has published of its hearingshave given prominence to this readiness to take evidence givenprivately and anonymously, and many witnesses have availedthemselves of this opportunity. The Commission has also receiveda number of anonymous submissions through the mail. At the sametime, concern has been expressed from time to time that thepublic hearings might be used for law enforcement purposes. As aresult of an understanding at the outset of this inquiry with theofficers of the R.C.M.P., the Commission has been able to assurethe public that its hearings would not be exploited for lawenforcement purposes. It has every reason to believe that thisunderstanding has been respected. Although there have beenrumours from time to time that law enforcement personnel havetaken advantage of the hearings for purposes of investigation, noevidence of this has been brought to the attention of theCommission, despite public statements by the Chairman that anysuch instances should be reported to him. The Commission has been very impressed by the candour withwhich people of all ages have come forward and spoken from adepth of conviction, and feeling about the phenomenon ofnon-medical drug usage and its relation to other aspects ofsocial and cultural change today. 14. Altogether, it is estimated that nearly 12,000 Canadianshave attended the hearings up to the end of February. TheCommissioners have travelled some 17,000 miles, and in the monthsahead they will continue to move back and forth across thecountry until every province and major city have been visited, aswell as many of the smaller communities. 15. The Commission has had the benefit of a wide range ofadvice from experts in the field of non-medical drug use. It isonly possible here to mention some of those who were particularlyhelpful. The Commission has had several sessions with officers of theR.C.M.P, and has received the fullest cooperation from the Forcein its attempt to understand the lessons of law enforcement inthis field. In addition to the public submission of the Force,each Division prepared a brief, and the Commission has had theadvantage of private hearings with officers from each Division.Moreover, research consultants of the Commission have beenpermitted to observe law enforcement by the Force at first hand.The Commission has also received a number of writtencommunications from the Force in addition to its formalsubmissions. We can not speak too highly of the cooperation thatwe have received from the R.C.M.P., who went to particulartrouble, on relatively short notice in the initial stages of theinquiry, to give the Commission the benefit of their experience.Whatever view one may take of law enforcement policy in thiscontroversial field, we feel obliged to record our respect forthe highly professional manner in which the R.C.M.P. have soughtto per-form their duty in relation to this inquiry. We lookforward to their continued cooperation as we deepen our study ofthe problems of law enforcement and the administration of justicein the field of non-medical drug use. The Commission has also received a great deal of valuableassistance from addiction foundations, notably the AddictionResearch Foundation of Ontario, the Narcotic Addiction Foundationof British Columbia, and OPTAT (Office de la Prevention et duTraitement de l'Alcoolisme et des Autres Toxicomanies). From theoutset of its inquiry the Commission has had the benefit offrequent consultation with members of the Ontario Foundation, andthe Commission's research staff have made extensive use of thebibliographical and documentary resources of the Foundation. The Commission has also consulted with many other experts, inCanada and the United States. It plans to consult with many more,including experts outside North America, in the ensuing year. Forthe present, it would like to make special mention of theassistance which it has received from Dr J. Robertson Unwin, DrLionel Solursh and Mr Wilfred Clement, whose intimate knowledgeof the Canadian drug scene from a scientific, yet deeply humanperspective, has made their observations and advice invaluable.The Commission should also record its indebtedness for advicereceived in the early stages of the inquiry from Dr Helen Nowlisof the University of Rochester, Samuel Pearlman of the CityUniversity of New York, Dr Daniel Glaser of the New York StateNarcotic Addiction Control Commission; members of the NationalInstitute of Mental Health, and Department of Justice in theUnited States. The Role of the Interim Report 16. We have had some difficulty in determining what should bethe role of our interim report. In particular, we have beensomewhat perplexed as to how far we are justified in coming toconclusions and making recommendations at this time. But we arerequired by our terms of reference to render an interim report,and we assume that something more is expected than a simplereport of progress. We believe that what is expected, at the veryleast, is a report, which conveys our initial understanding ofthe subject matter of the inquiry and makes such recommendationsas we feel are urgent and for which we believe we have asufficient basis at this time. We hope it will serve to put thephenomenon of non-medical drug use in some perspective, toidentify the issues, and to provide the basis for furtherconsideration and discussion by the people of Canada. Further, byidentifying certain attitudes, hypotheses, and tentativeopinions, the interim report will serve, we hope, as a soundingboard, eliciting further evidence and opinion, and indicating tous wherein our definition of the issues and our preliminaryopinions may require revision. 17. The function of the final report will be to complete thepicture begun by the interim report and to report upon the systemof social response which we recommend for the phenomenon ofnon-medical drug use. The inquiry between the interim report andthe final report will test the definitions of issues and thehypotheses reflected in the interim report, add necessaryinformation with respect to the effects, the extent, and thecauses of non-medical drug use, as well as the role played by thevarious aspects of social control and response, and lay thefoundation for specific recommendations concerning these variousaspects. The interim report is primarily concerned with astatement of the issues and applicable principles, and the finalreport is to be concerned with the detailed application of theseprinciples to the development of a satisfactory system of socialresponse. We recognize, however, that the urgency of some of theproblems involved in non-medical drug use and the time requiredto develop adequate resources to cope with them may indicate theappropriateness of certain recommendations at this time. This isparticularly true with respect to preparations and organizationfor which considerable lead time is required. In such cases itmay be sufficient to indicate the general direction which certainresponses should take, leaving it to further study andconsultation in the ensuing year to settle matters of detail. 18. Chapter Two on the effect of the drugs is offered at thistime for two reasons. First, we have been profoundly impressed byrepeated assertions of the need for more reliable information,and we hope that this chapter will serve a useful purpose asmaterial for drug education. Secondly, we feel that it is anindispensable basis for the development of public understandingof the issues. In effect, in Chapter Two we disclose our initialassumptions concerning the effects of the drugs. Our object is to identify the body of reliable and generally acceptedknowledge, and to determine where the important uncertainties andgaps exist. We certainly concur in the impression which othershave conveyed of a field of knowledge bedevilled by controversy,conflicting professional opinion, and uncertainty. Some observersquestion whether it is possible, in view of the intense feelingson this subject, ever to come to agreement on what should beaccepted as scientifically known. Erich Goode in his article,'Marijuana and the Politics of Reality', observes that 'themultitude of results from the many marijuana reports forms a seaof ambiguity into which nearly any message may be read'. He makesthe point that whether a particular drug effect is good or baddepends on one's subjective point of view - the implications ofthe effect in term's of one's own system of values. Goode sees nopossible reconciliation of these 'differential evaluationsof the same "objective" consequences', and heconcludes that 'the essential meaning of the marijuana issue isthe meaning which each individual brings to it'. The AddictionResearch Foundation of Ontario makes the same point in itspreliminary submission to the Commission. It puts the matter thisway: However, after all possible information has been acquired andverified scientifically, the final steps in the formulation oflegislation or governmental policy will be based upon valuejudgements. Even the classification of the effects of drug use as'beneficial' or 'adverse' is a process of evaluation with respectto subjective standards. The response to non-medical drug use is profoundly a matter ofattitudes. At the same time we must make every effort toascertain what should be accepted as scientific knowledge of the'objective' effects. It is intolerable that the process ofsubjective evaluation should take place in ignorance of theobjective facts. At the same, we would do well to heed Goode'scaution that there is an inevitable tendency to select andemphasize those views of 'objective' facts which support our ownsubjective evaluation. And as Goode points out, with specialreference to the La Guardia Report on marijuana, the variousfindings can be used to support conflicting points of view. Arewe to conclude that the task is hopeless? We think not. We cancertainly make progress by attempting to identify what should beaccepted scientifically concerning the 'objective' effects, bypointing out the important areas of scientific controversy or lackof scientific knowledge, and by making explicit the valuejudgements underlying the conflicting views as to how the effectsshould be subjectively characterized. We believe it is helpful toclarify the issues of the debate. Staff and Research 19. The members of the Commission and their staff are listedin Appendix C. The Commission is carrying out its task with asmall nucleus of full-time staff and with research consultants ona part-time basis for special aspects of its study. TheCommission's Research Associates, Dr Charles Farmilo and Dr RalphD. Miller, are concentrating on psychopharmacologicalresearch into the effects of the drugs. Dr Miller is the author,with the assistance of Dr Farmilo, of Chapter Two on 'The Drugsand Their Effects'. Research that has been commissioned so farincludes survey research to determine the extent and patterns ofnon-medical drug use in Canada, as well as Canadian perceptionsof and attitudes towards this phenomenon, and legal studies, bothdoctrinal and empirical, of the various problems involved in theregulation of non-medical drug use. The section of Chapter Fivedealing with the law is based in part on preliminary work byProfessor Paul Weiler and John Hogarth. Research is only part of the work that is involved in aninquiry of this kind. Special mention should be made of theadministrative staff who have had to work under particularpressure because of the requirement of an interim report,impinging concurrently with the organization and conduct of thepublic hearings. We would like to express our appreciation of thework of Mr James J. Moore, Executive-Secretary of the Commission,who has had the general direction of operations and who has alsoparticipated in the writing of the report; Mr Jack Macbeth, whohas been of great assistance in the organization of hearings andthe preparation of the report; Mrs Vivian Luscombe who hassupervised the secretarial staff of the Commission; Mr C. WilliamDoylend, the Ottawa Office Manager, and other members of theadministrative, secretarial and research staff. Contents | Feedback | Search DRCNet Library | Schaffer Library | Major Studies Canadian Government Commission ofInquiry WT01-B27-75IA030-000641-B019-221http://206.61.184.43:80/schaffer/LIBRARY/studies/ledain/nonmed2.htm 206.61.184.43 19970122135039 text/html 52266HTTP/1.0 200 OKDate: Wednesday, 22-Jan-97 13:50:25 GMTServer: WebSitePro/1.1f (S/N wpo-0deb)Allow-ranges: bytesContent-type: text/htmlLast-modified: Saturday, 28-Dec-96 07:00:58 GMTContent-length: 52048 Canadian Government Commission - Drugs and Their Effects Contents | Feedback | Search DRCNet Library | Schaffer Library | Major Studies Canadian Government Commission ofInquiry CHAPTER TWO : THE DRUGS AND THEIR EFFECTS INTRODUCTION 20. The primary purpose of this chapter is to review inpreliminary fashion the current scientific knowledge of certainpsychotropic drugs used non-medically in Canada. In addition,this section will introduce a few basic concepts which may behelpful to the understanding of some of the potentials andlimitations of the scientific method as applied to the study ofhuman behaviour and drugs.* Psychopharmacology, the branch ofscience specifically concerned with these issues, can be definedas the study of the interaction of drugs with ongoingpsychological and behavioural activity. A certain amount of the current controversy and lack ofcommunication regarding the 'drug problem' has been attributed tothe multitude of meanings that the term 'drug' has to differentpeople, and to the often arbitrary way in which our societydefines, and endeavours to solve, the problems arising from man'spersistent use of chemical substances to alter his existence. Tosome people the word 'drug' means a medicine used in theprevention, diagnosis, of treatment of an abnormal orpathological condition. In other situations, it is often used torefer only to illegal or socially disapproved substances. Someindividuals employ the word in a manner suggesting dependence oraddiction, regardless of whether it refers to some chemicalsubstance or to other preoccupations such as television, music,books, or sports and games. Some consider alcohol, tea and coffeeas drugs, while to others these are simply normal beverages notto be confused with the more foreign and unfamiliar substancesviewed as drugs. Furthermore, the terms 'drug' and 'narcotic' aregiven special meanings in legal areas. * A glossary of technical terms, as used in this report, ispresented at the end of this volume. Even scientists frequently disagree as to the precisedefinition of the term 'drug'. Modell164 has suggested a comprehensive pharmacologicaldefinition of drugs which the Commission has adopted. As noted inChapter One, a drug is considered to be any substancethat by its chemical nature alters structure or function in theliving organism. Modell observed that: Drug action is therefore a general biological phenomenon ...pharmacologic effects are exerted by foods, vitamins, hormones,microbial metabolites, plants, snake venoms, stings, products ofdecay, air pollutants, pesticides, minerals, synthetic chemicals,virtually all foreign materials (very few are completely inert)and many materials normally in the body. While this interpretation may be too broad for certainpractical purposes, it provides some perspective into theubiquitous nature of our internal and external chemicalenvironment, and the complexity of the question of human druguse. The Commission's primary concern is focused on the use andeffects of drugs taken for their psychotropic or psychoactive propertiesas defined by their capacity to alter sensation, mood,consciousness or other psychological or behavioural functions. 21. The use of psychoactive drugs seems to be an almostuniversal phenomenon and has apparently occurred throughoutrecorded history, in almost all societies. Some scholars havesuggested that this use of drugs may have been among the earliestbehavioural characteristics distinguishing man from the otheranimals. Blum, in the United States Task Force Report (1967),has stated:27 Mind-altering drug use is common to mankind. Such drugs havebeen employed for millennia in almost all cultures. In our workwe have been able to identify only a few societies in the worldtoday where no mind-altering drugs are used; these are small andisolated cultures. Our own society puts great stress onmind-altering drugs as desirable products which are used in manyacceptable ways (under medical supervision, as part of the familyhome remedies, in self-medication, in social use [alcohol, teaparties, coffee klatches, etc.] and in private use [cigarettes,etc.] ). In terms of drug use, 'the rarest or most abnormal formof behaviour is not to take any mind-altering drugs at all.... Ifone is to use the term 'drug user', it applies to nearly all ofus. TheRole of Science 22. It has been suggested that the potential role of sciencein the solution of the 'drug problem' is to provide informationto better enable individuals and society to make informed anddiscriminating decisions regarding the availability and use ofparticular drugs. Unfortunately, considerable disparity oftenexists between the need for such information and the capacity ofscience to acquire and communicate it. Helen Nowlis has noted: 172 There are many reasons why the 'facts' invoked innon-scientific discussions of drugs are often not facts at all.They may be second or third-hand quotations of statementsattributed to scientists. There is a readiness on the part ofmany to accept as 'scientific fact' any statement made by, orattributed to, someone labelled as scientist, whether it is astatement based on research, on uncontrolled observation, ormerely on personal opinion. While science may be able to serve as a useful guideline andsource of information, science itself is not a policy-makingprocess, but merely a practical system designed to explore andtest notions of a certain abstract nature. Even though the aim ofscience is to maximize objectivity, the interpretation andapplication of scientific data is usually a subjective ventureregardless of the controls maintained in the formal analyses. Thepractical use of such information in the social sphere oftenentails economic, legal, philosophical and moral issues which arenot amenable to scientific analysis as we know it today. Even though considerable progress has been made in advancingour knowledge of biology, science has provided only a minimalunderstanding of the essential nature of psychological andbehavioural functions and their relationship to underlyingphysiological processes. Consequently, psychopharmacology todaymust be content with exploring the interaction of chemicals(often with certain identified physical characteristics) with alargely unknown largely unknown human psychobiological system ofenormous complexity. TheClassification of Drugs 23. Drug classifications, based on a variety of differentconsiderations have been developed and there appears to be littlegeneral agreement as to the optimal scheme for ordering theuniverse of biologically active substances. For example, drugsmight be organized according to chemical structure,clinical-therapeutic use, potential health hazards, liability tonon-medical use, public availability and legality, effects onspecific neural or other physiological systems, or influence oncertain psychological and behavioural processes. Theclassification systems developed from these different approachesmay show considerable overlap, although there are often strikingincongruities. For example, some drugs which appear very similarin chemical structure may be quite different in pharmacologicalactivity and vice-versa. The most useful organization depends onthe intended use of the classifications. Since our major concern here is with the effects ofpsychologically active substances, our interim drugclassification system is based primarily on general psychologicaland pharmacological considerations. In Table I eight majorclasses are presented along with some examples of drugs from eachgroup. While the categories are not considered to be exhaustive,the general system is applicable to the majority of drugs usedfor their psychological effects. Since the effects of drugsdepend on a vast number of psychological and physiologicalcomponents, many of which seem unpredictable, these categoriesare to some extent based on a typical reaction by an averagesubject to a common dose. Large variations in any of variousfactors can greatly alter the effects and may reduce thereliability of the descriptions. CLASSIFICATION OF MAJOR PSYCHOACTIVE DRUGS I - Sedatives and Hypnotics (a) Barbiturates - e.g., Verpnal* (barbital) Seconal* (secobarbital) Nembutal* (pentobarbital) Minor tranquilizers - e.g., Librium* (chlordiazepoxide) Valium* (diazepam) Doriden* (glutethimide) Mittown* (meprobamate) Others - e.g., bromides, alcohol (ethanol), paraldehyde, chloral hydrate,antihistamines (e.g., Gravol*), anticholinergics (e.g., datura stramonium, atropine,scopolamine [Sominex* and Compoz*]) II - Stimulants (a) Amphetamines - e.g., Benzedrine* (amphetamine) Dexedrine* (dextroamphetamine) Methedrine* (methamphetamine) Others - e.g., Ritalin* (methylphenidate), Meratran* (pipradol), Preludin*(phenmetrazine), cocaine, ephedrine, caffeine (coffee, tea andcola drinks), nicotine (tobacco), khat III - Psychedelics and Hallucinogens (b) LSD (lysergic acid diethylamide-25, lysergide) Cannabis (marijuana, hashish) THC (tetrahydrocannabinol) Mescaline (peyote) Psilocybin DMT (dimethyltryptamine) DET (diethyltryptamine) DOM (STP, dimethoxymethamphetamine), MDA (methylenedioxyamphetamine ) MMDA (methoxymethylenedioxyamphetamine ) LBJ (methylipiperidylbenzilate) PCP (Sernyl*, phencyclidine) IV - Opiate Narcotics (a) Opium (e.g. Paregoric*, Pantopon*) Heroin (diacetylmorphine) Morphine Codeine (methoxymorphine) Synthetics -e.g., Deremol* (pethidine) Alvodine* (piminodine) Dolophine* (methadone) V - Volatile Solvents (b) Sources: Glue, gasoline, paint thinner, nail polish,nail polish remover, lighter and cleaning fluid, spray cans, etc. Active agents: Toluene, acetone, benzene, naphtha,trichloroethylene, ether, chloroform, amyl nitrate, nitrousoxide, freon, etc. VI - Non-Narcotic Analgesics (a) Aspirin* (acetylsacylic acid) Phenacetin* (acetophenetidin) VII - Clinical Anti-Depressants (c) Monoamine oxidase (MAO) inhibitors - e.g., Nardil* (Phenezine) Tricyclics - e.g., Trofanil* (Imipramine) VIII - Major Tranquillizers (c) Phenothiazines - e.g., Largactil * (chlopromazine) Rauwolfia alkaloids, (snake root) - e.g., Serpasil* (reserpine) Butyrophenones - e.g., Haldol* (haloperidol) Thioxanthenes - e.g., Taractan* (chlorprothixene) (a) Used medically and non-medically. (b) Little or no medical use. (c) Wide medical use, and little or no non-medical use * Registered Trade Name 24. The sedatives and hypnotics (e.g., alcohol,barbiturates, 'sleeping pills' and minor tranquillizers)generally decrease central nervous system (CNS) arousal (althoughsome psychological stimulation may result at low doses). Most ofthese drugs are used medically to reduce anxiety and tension, toproduce general sedation and, at higher doses, sleep. Theanticholinergic substances (e.g., belladonna alkaloids) are oftenused as sedatives at low doses although larger amounts mayproduce excitation and delirium. 25. The stimulants (e.g., amphetamines or 'speed','diet' and 'pep pills', caffeine, and cocaine) generally suppressappetite, increase activity, alertness, tension and general CNSarousal, and, at higher doses, block sleep. Tobacco (nicotine andcoal tars) is usually considered a physiological stimulantalthough a variety of other effects are not uncommon. 26. The third group includes drugs described as psychedelic(mind-manifesting), hallucinogenic (hallucination-producing),psychotomimetic (psychosis-imitating), illusinogenic (illusion-producing),and psychodysleptic (mind-disrupting). While these termsrefer to somewhat overlapping effects alleged to occur with thedrugs in this class, the various labels emphasize differentcharacteristics which are neither synonymous nor necessarilymutually exclusive. Probably none are entirely adequate asdescriptive terms. These drugs may produce profound alteration insensation, mood and consciousness at doses which result incomparatively light physiological activity . LSD and marijuanaare examples from this group. The medical value of these drugs isthe subject of considerable current controversy. 27. The drugs in the fourth category have, traditionally beenreferred to as narcotics or opiates, and are derivatives of, orpharmacologically related to, products of the opium plant. Thebest known examples are heroin, morphine and codeine. The word'narcotic' has been used inconsistently in scientific as well aslay language and has been the subject of considerabledisagreement in legal matters (for example, marijuana, cocaine,and other non-opiates are frequently controlled under lawsregulating narcotics, in spite of the fact that they arepharmacologically different from this group). The use of the term'opiates' is generally more specific, although its applicationhas not always been limited to these drugs. Consequently, thespecific term opiate narcotics is suggested to reduceambiguity. These drugs are used medically mainly for theirpain-relieving effects. 28. The fifth group is an aggregate of chemically diversesubstances perhaps best described on a physical basis as volatilesolvents. They are usually inhaled and include the vapour ofsuch common materials as glue, gasoline and lacquer thinner. Someof these drugs have been called deliriants althoughdelirium is only one of many potential effects and is clearly notrestricted to these substances. Many are quite similar in effectto the sedative group and might be considered in a sub-class ofthat category. Others may have slight psychedelic orhallucinogenic effects. Most of these substances have no knownmedical use although several have been employed as clinicalanaesthetics. 29. The non-narcotic analgesics (e.g., Aspirin* andPhenacetin*) are primarily used to reduce aching pain and tolower fever. In some instances they may also serve as mildsedatives. 30. The clinical anti-depressants (e.g., Tofranil* andNardil*) are used medically to improve mood in severely depressedpatients. These drugs are rarely used for non-medical purposessince they have little effect on normal mood states. 31. The final group, the major tranquillizers, areprimarily used to reduce the symptoms of severe psychosis (e.g.,schizophrenia). Largactil* and reserpine are examples. Whilethese have initiated a widespread revolution in chemo-therapy inpsychiatry, they are rarely involved in non-medical use. * Throughout this chapter an asterisk indicates a registereddrug trade name. PsychologicalConsiderations 32. The general effect of most drugs is greatly influenced bya variety of psychological and environmental factors. Uniquequalities of an individual's personality, his past history ofdrug experience, his attitudes towards the drug, his expectationsof its effects and his motivation for taking it are extremelyimportant and in some instances may completely obscure thetypical pharmacological response to a drug. These factors areoften referred to collectively as the person's mental 'set'. 'The'setting' or total environment in which the drug is taken mayalso be a factor of major significance. A few drinks of alcohol may produce drowsiness and fatigue insome situations, while the same individual under differentcircumstances may be psychologically stimulated and aroused bythe same dose. It appears that the set and setting may be ofgreater significance with the psychedelic-hallucinogenicsubstances than with the other drugs, and it has been suggestedthat psychological factors may often be the primary components indetermining the quality or character of the psychedelic drugexperience. The so-called placebo effect is a striking example ofthe importance of set and setting in determining the drugresponse. A placebo, in this context, refers to apharmacologically inactive substance which elicits a significantreaction, entirely because of what the individual expects ordesires to happen. In certain individuals in some settings aplacebo substance may have surprisingly powerful consequences.The placebo effect is specific to the individual and the setting,and not to any chemical properties of the substance involved.Therefore, in spite of an apparent 'drug effect', the placebo isnot considered a drug since it does not alter function 'by itschemical nature'. Placebos have been reported in therapeutic situations tosignificantly relieve such symptoms as headache and a variety ofother pains, hay fever, colds, seasickness, neuroses, and anumber of gastrointestinal complaints.97 Some scientists havesuggested that the bulk of medical history may actually have beena history of the placebo, since many 'effective cures' of thepast have been shown to be without relevant directpharmacological action, and are today of no value as therapeuticagents. To control for the influence of such psychological factors indrug research, testing is usually done under at least twoconditions: an assessment is made using the actual drug ofinterest, and a separate measurement is taken after a placebo isgiven under identical circumstances. By comparing these twoconditions some of the effects of set and setting can often becontrolled and the actual drug effect uncovered. PharmacologicalConsiderations 33. In studying how drugs affect the body, pharmacologistsgenerally divide the analysis into several processes: 1. Administration: how does the drug enter the body? 2. Absorption: how does the drug get from the site ofadministration into the physiological system of the body? 3. Distribution: how is the drug distributed to variousareas in the body? 4. Action: how and where does the drug produce whateffects? 5. Physiological Fate: how is the druginactivated, metabolized, and/or eliminated from the body? Different routes or modes of administration can haveconsiderable influence on the latency, duration, intensity andthe general nature of the drug effect. Many drugs are wellabsorbed from the stomach and intestines after ingestion whileothers are poorly taken up or may be destroyed by the gastricjuices. Certain drugs may be injected, with a hypodermic syringefor example, just under the skin (subcutaneous or S.C,), into themuscle (intramuscular or I.M.), or into a blood vein (intravenousor I.V.). The effects are generally most rapid and intense afterintravenous injection and, consequently, this mode ofadministration can be quite dangerous in inexperienced hands. Inaddition, certain volatile substances can be rapidly andefficiently absorbed from the lungs by inhalation. 34. The action of a drug is in many cases terminated bychemical changes which it undergoes in the body, Certain organs(often the liver) metabolize or 'break down' the originalsubstance into other chemicals which are usually (but not always)less active and more easily eliminated from the body. Some drugsmay be excreted unchanged in the urine, faeces, or breath. Actionis not always terminated by excretion, however, and the effectsof some drugs greatly outlast the actual presence of the chemicalin the body. Numerous physiological factors alter absorption,distribution, action and fate, and must therefore be taken intoconsideration in the study of drug effects. The details of cellular physiology are largely unknown andwith rare exceptions there is little information as to themechanism by which any particular drug changes the activity ofthe nervous system. At the simplest level, it appears that a drugalters the functioning of the living cell by entering into somesort of chemical combination with substances already present.Even if this molecular process were well understood, it would notprovide a straightforward basis for predicting the overalleffects of the drug on a group of interacting cells, or, athigher level, on the total nervous system (comprising billions ofcells) and associated psychological and behavioural processes. 35. The importance of dose. One of the basic principlesof pharmacology is that specific statements about drug effectscan not be made without consideration of the quantity or dose ofthe drug involved. With all drugs, the response differs both inthe intensity and the character of the reaction, according to theamount of the drug administered. The relation between the doseand the intensity of an effect is often referred to by scientistsas the dose-response or dose-effect relationship. Although the magnitude of the effects of some drugs mayincrease in a rather uniform (monotonic) fashion as dose isincreased, other drugs, particularly the sedatives, may show a bi-phasicresponse and actually produce behaviourally opposite effectsat some doses compared to others. Low doses of alcohol may, incertain instances, be somewhat stimulating, while higher dosesgenerally have a strong sedating effect. Scopolamine (abelladonna alkaloid) may produce sedation at low doses, andexcitation, delirium and hallucinations with larger quantities.Very toxic doses of this drug can again produce sedation, comaand even death. For every drug there is a dose low enough so as to produce nonoticeable reaction, and at the opposite extreme, some degree oftoxicity or poisoning can be produced by any substance if enoughis taken. The concept of a poison, in fact, really refers to thequantity of a drug which exceeds the body's capacity to cope withit without damage. No drug can be designated either safe,beneficial, or harmful without consideration of the dose likelyto be consumed. Chlorine, for example, which is present in mosturban drinking water in concentration so low as to have little orno pharmacological effect on humans, is intended to poisonharmful bacteria. The same substance, highly concentrated ingaseous form, was developed during World War I as an extremelypotent respiratory poison. Even the concept of a psychotropicdrug implies some notion of the range of doses likely to beconsumed, since almost any drug can, in high quantities, affectpsychological function. In many instances, however, considerablephysical toxicity or poisoning develops before significantpsychological effects occur. It is usually essential to study a drug's effect over a rangeof doses in order to obtain an adequate understanding of thenature of the response. It is also important to consider doseswhich have some relevance to existing or potential patterns ofuse if social implications are to be inferred from experimentalfindings. 36. The importance of time. Another importantpharmacological concept is the time-response relationship orthe relation between the time which has elapsed sinceadministration and the effect produced. Such a temporal analysismay be restricted to immediate or short-term (acute) effects of asingle dose, or on the other extreme, may involve the long-termeffects of persistently repeated (chronic) use of a drug. The intensity and often the character or quality of theoverall drug effect may change substantially within a shortperiod of time. For example, the main intoxicating effects of alarge dose of alcohol generally reach a peak in less than anhour, then gradually taper off. An initially stimulating effectmay later change to one of sedation. With some drugs, an initialstate of tension or anxiety may later turn into one of relaxationand sense of well-being, or vice-versa, as a function of time. It may also be important with some drugs to consider thelong-term consequences of chronic use. Usually such effects cannot be readily predicted from what is known of the immediateresponse. For instance, while there is little doubt that thesmoking of a few tobacco cigarettes has no lasting detrimentaleffect on lung or cardiac function, there is increasingscientific evidence that long-term heavy use of this substancehas serious consequences. As another example, the clinicalpicture of the chronic alcoholic involves psychological andphysiological disturbances which do not develop with moderatedrinking. In simple terms, it is essential to ask: 'How much?';'How often?'; and 'For how long?' (as well as 'By whom?') whendiscussing the long-term reaction to repeated drug use. 37. Main effects and side effects. It is highlyunlikely that any drug has only a single action on a particularbehavioural or physiological function. Most drugs can produce analmost unlimited number of effects on the body, each with asomewhat unique dose-response and time-response relationship. Therelative strength of the different responses to a drug generallyvaries with the amount taken, and a particular effect which isprominent at one dosage level may be quite secondary at another. In a therapeutic or clinical setting, one is usuallyinterested in a single or perhaps a small number of the manypossible effects. Those which are desired are generallyconsidered 'main effects' whilst the other unwanted butconcurrent drug responses are labelled 'side effects'. Thisdistinction between main and side effects is a relative one anddepends on the purpose or the anticipated use of the drug. Aresponse which is considered unnecessary or undesirable in oneapplication may, in fact, be the main or desired effect inanother. For example, in the clinical treatment of severe pain,the analgesic (pain-reducing) properties of morphine areconsidered the main effect, and the psychological euphoria andthe intestinal constipation also produced are undesirable sideeffects. To the 'street addict', however, the euphoric propertiesare the main effects, and the analgesic and constipating effectsmay be irrelevant or undesired. Certain opiate compounds such asparegoric are used in treatment of diarrhoea and, in thisinstance, the constipating effect of the drug is desired and theother responses are considered side effects. It is universal thatdrugs have undesirable and toxic side effects if the dose issufficiently increased. 38. Drug interaction. Even in cases where theindividual effects of different drugs are well known andreliable, if several substances are taken at the same time, tileinteraction may produce a response which is quite unpredictableon the basis of the knowledge of the individual drugs alone. Lesscommonly, a particular interaction effect may be anticipated. Ifthe drugs normally have similar properties, they may often havean additive effect if taken together, resulting in a generalincrease in responses similar to that produced by a larger singledose of either one. There are also instances in which one drugmay potentiate the action of another, and the two togetherproduce a greater effect than would be expected by merely addingthe individual reactions. Furthermore, some drugs haveantagonistic effects, and one may counteract or inhibit certainnormal responses to the other. Toleranceand Dependence 38a. Tolerance is said to develop when the response to thesame dose of a drug decreases with repeated use. With mosttolerance-producing drugs, effects of original intensity can beretained. to a certain extent, if the dose is increased. Theextent of tolerance, and the rate at which it is acquired, dependon the drug, the individual using it, and the magnitude andfrequency of administration. The body does not lose sensitivityto all aspects of the reaction to a particular drug with equalrapidity, or to the same degree. Some of the effects of a drugmay 'drop out' sooner than others with repeated use. Tolerance tothe effects which are reinforcing or rewarding drug use (i.e.,'main effects') is usually reflected by a tendency for users toincrease dose. Most aspects of tolerance dissipate withabstinence from the drug. A moderate degree of tolerance to most effects of alcohol andbarbiturates develops and a heavy drinker may be able to consumetwo to three times the alcohol tolerated by a novice. Littletolerance develops to the lethal toxicity of these drugs,however, and a heavy user of sedatives is just as susceptible todeath by overdose as is a non-tolerant individual. Opiatenarcotics, such as morphine, are capable of producing profoundtolerance, and heavy users have been known to take up to tentimes the amount which would normally produce death. By contrast,no noticeable tolerance develops to cocaine (a short-actingstimulant). The exact mechanisms by which the body adapts, or becomestolerant, to different drug effects are not completelyunderstood, although several processes have been suggested.Certain drugs (e.g., barbiturates) stimulate the body'sproduction of the metabolic enzymes which inactivate them. Inaddition, there is evidence that a considerable degree of centralnervous system (CNS) tolerance may develop to certain drugsindependent of changes in the rate of absorption, metabolism orexcretion. An individual tolerant to alcohol, for example, can berelatively unaffected by a large dose even though the resultinghigh level of alcohol in his blood may accurately reflect themagnitude of his intake. It is uncertain as to whether thisrepresents some general molecular adaptation to the drug at thelevel of the individual nerve cell, or perhaps a specificresponse by the central nervous system to counteract the sedatingeffects and maintain normal function. Learning factors oftenappear to play an important role in changing the individual'sresponse to a drug after experience with it. Effects whichinitially may be strange or frightening may later be acceptedwithout reaction or concern, or perhaps, even be desired. Thereis evidence that people may learn to control some drug effects,or otherwise come to function normally in the presence of certainresponses which might originally have been distracting, orotherwise disrupting of behaviour. A phenomenon often referred to as 'reverse tolerance' has beennoted with some drugs (notably the psychedelics) in which thedesired effects may be achieved with smaller doses afterexperience with the drug. Both learning and pharmacologicalmechanisms have been suggested to underly this process. In many instances, after an individual becomes tolerant to theeffects of one drug, he will also show tolerance to others withsimilar action. This is called cross-tolerance. Forexample, a heavy drinker will normally show a reduced response tobarbiturates, tranquillizers and anaesthetics, as well as toalcohol. 39. Physical dependence is a physiological state ofadaptation to a drug, normally following thedevelopment of tolerance, which results in a characteristic setof withdrawal symptoms (often called the 'abstinence syndrome'),when administration of the drug is stopped. These symptomsmay be of an intense nature after persistent heavy use, and withsome sedatives and opiate narcotics, may include tremors,vomiting, delirium, cramps and, in severe cases with some drugs,convulsions and death. There are generally no overt signs ofphysical dependence if the drug level is kept high enough toavoid the withdrawal syndrome. In a sense, the body comes todepend on the drug for 'normal' functioning after adapting to itspresence, and when the drug is absent, considerable disruption ofessential physiological processes occurs until readjustmentdevelops. The withdrawal syndrome may also he elicited withoutabstinence, by the administration of a substance whichspecifically antagonizes or blocks certain effects of theoriginal drug. Withdrawal symptoms can be prevented or promptly relieved bythe administration of a sufficient quantity of the original drugor one with similar pharmacological activity. The latter case, inwhich different drugs can be used interchangeably in preventingwithdrawal symptoms, is called cross-dependence. As anexample, barbiturates and tranquillizers can be used in treatingthe abstinence syndrome associated with chronic alcoholism. Often the recovery phase associated with different drugs ischaracterized by a rebound phenomenon dominated by activityopposite to that produced by the drug. For instance, withdrawalfrom the sedatives generally results in symptoms of acute andtoxic hyperactivation and physiological arousal, while thepattern following intense stimulant (e.g. 'speed') use usuallyinvolves sedation, depression and sleep. Although physical dependence can develop with such commondrugs as alcohol and barbiturates, it is not a factor in thedrug-taking behaviour of the vast majority of regular users. Inthe few individuals who become physically dependent on theseparticular drugs, serious social, personal and physiologicalconsequences of drug use usually precede the physical dependence.Therefore, although physical dependence is a serious medicalproblem in a minority of sedative users, the abstinence syndromeitself is not the cause of major public health problems. Thepotent opiate narcotics, by contrast, tend to produce verypronounced tolerance and physical dependence early in the historyof regular use. These features then soon become an integral partof the particular drug problem presented by the opiate narcotics.However, with these and other drugs, psychological factors in thedependence are often more significant in the long run. 40. Psychological dependence (also often calledbehavioural, psychic or emotional dependence, and habituation) isa much more elusive concept and is difficult to define in asatisfactory manner. A World Health Organization paper69 definespsychic dependence thus: 'In this situation there is a feeling ofsatisfaction and a psychic drive that require periodic orcontinuous administration of the drug to produce a desired effector to avoid discomfort.' A major problem with this definition isthe difficulty in operationally defining and objectivelyidentifying the characteristics of the dependence in a practicalsituation. By contrast, some scientists224 have identified behaviouraldependence as repeated self-administration of a drug. Thisapproach seems far too broad for most purposes since it onlyindicates that the drug is in some way reinforcing or rewardingto the user, and merely restates the observation that he takesthe drug. Extreme instances of psychological dependence are easier toidentify and may be characterized by an intense craving for, orcompulsion to continue the use of, a drug with obviousbehavioural manifestations. In many instances, psychologicalaspects may be considerably more important than physicaldependence in maintaining chronic drug use. The major problemwith opiate dependence is not the physical aspects, sincewithdrawal can be successfully achieved in a few weeks, but thegreat likelihood that the individual will later return to chronicuse due to psychological dependence. In most instances of even regular non-medical use of drugs,such intense psychological dependence probably does not occur.However, more subtle psychological and social factors usuallyhave persisting effects in maintaining the behaviour of drugconsumption. In talking about dependency in any context, whether dealingwith drugs or not, it would seem useful to specify what it isthat is being depended upon and for what reasons, and to identifythe consequences of its presence or its absence. The significanceof dependency changes considerably if the entity is relied upon,for example, for the maintenance of life (e.g., insulin for thediabetic) or for the escape from an unpleasant or intolerablesituation (e.g., privacy), or perhaps for a feeling of well-beingor satisfaction with life. In one sense psychological dependencemay be said to exist with respect to anything which is part ofone's preferred way of life. In our society, this kind ofdependency occurs regularly with respect to such things astelevision, music, books, religion, sex, money, favourite foods,certain drugs, hobbies, sports or games and, often, otherpersons. Some degree of psychological dependence is, in thissense, a general and normal psychological condition. A statement in the preliminary brief of the Addiction ResearchFoundation of Ontario reflects the complexity of interpreting thequestion of dependency:4 It should be recognized, however, that dependence is notnecessarily bad in itself, either for the individual or forsociety. The question to he evaluated, therefore, is not whetherdependence can occur, but whether dependence in a given caseresults in physical, psychological or social harm. 41. The concept of addiction. The term 'addiction' hashad a variety of meanings, and a consensus as to the properdefinition seems unlikely, even in scientific circles. Often ithas been used interchangeably with dependence (psychologicaland/or physiological), while at other times it appears to besynonymous with the term 'drug abuse'. The classical model of theaddiction- producing drug was based on the opiate narcotics, andhas traditionally required the presence of tolerance, andphysical and psychological dependence. However, this approach hasnot been generally satisfactory since only a few commonly useddrugs (e.g., alcohol and other sedatives), in addition to theopiates, seem to fit the model at all. It is clearlyinappropriate for many other drugs which can cause seriousdependency problems. For example, amphetamines can produceconsiderable tolerance and strong psychological dependence withlittle or no physical dependence, and cocaine can producepsychological dependence without tolerance or physicaldependence. Furthermore, in certain medical applications,morphine has been reported to produce tolerance and physicaldependence without a significant psychological component. Recognizing the problems with the concept of addiction, theWorld Health Organization (WHO) proposed the following:69 It has become impossible in practice, and is scientificallyunsound, to maintain a single definition for all forms of drugaddiction and/or habituation. A feature common to theseconditions as well as to drug abuse in general is dependence,psychic or physical or both, of the individual on a chemicalagent. Therefore, better understanding should be attained bysubstitution of the term drug dependence of this or that type,according to the agent or class of agents involved.... It must beemphasized that drug dependence is a general term that has beenselected for its applicability to all types of drug abuse andthus carries no connotation of the degree of risk to publichealth or need for any or a particular type of drug control. The WHO committee presented short descriptions of variousdifferent types of drug dependence which may occur in someindividuals and situations. The list identifies drug dependenceof the morphine type, the barbiturate - alcohol type, the cocainetype, the cannabis (marijuana) type, the amphetamine type, thekhat type, and the hallucinogen (LSD) type. Details of thesevarious kinds of drug dependence are discussed separately laterin this chapter. For reasons analogous to those presented above, it is furthersuggested here that the term dependent rather than the ambiguousdescription 'addict' be used to refer to aft individual who hasdeveloped drug dependence of either the physical or psychologicalforms. ScientificMethods 42. The role of statistics. Statistics can be helpfulin collecting and handling numerical or quantified information,interpreting data, and making inferences or generalizations fromit. The simplest use of statistics is to describe or summarizecertain abstract characteristics of a group or sample. Forexample, the average height of players on a basketball teamprovides a shorthand description of the group. The numerical meanis a common index of the average. Considerably more informationcould be communicated if some idea of the variability of heightswithin the team were known. The range of measures, for example,is a crude index of the variance of 'spread' in the distributionwithin a group. A second function of statistics is to provide a system forinference about some population on the basis of a smaller groupor sample selected from that population. For example, the meanI.Q. of a group of 50 students randomly selected from a schoolwith 500 individuals might provide a reasonable estimate of theaverage intelligence of the entire student population of thatschool. The success of such generalization or extrapolationdepends on the relative size of the sample and the accuracy orfidelity with which the group studied represents the overallpopulation of interest. Any bias in sampling which reduces thesimilarity between the selected group and the population to whichthe results are to be generalized reduces the validity of suchextrapolation. Statistics may also assist in distinguishing between thedifferences in measurements resulting from random variation andthe variance due to the factor which is being studied. Byobtaining an estimate of the natural variability in a population,it may be possible to distinguish, with some confidence, betweena 'real effect' associated with a particular condition ortreatment, and the difference which might be expected by chancealone. The phrase 'statistically significant' is used to indicatean effect considered significantly greater than that likely dueto chance. However, statistical techniques alone can only indicate anassociation between different variables and can not actuallyidentify cause and effect. Such causal inferences must be basedon an overall consideration of the research design. In manylaboratory experiments, the stimulus and its response may bereadily identified, but in less tightly controlled social studies(e.g., surveys) and clinical observations, it is often verydifficult or impossible to positively identify the causalvariable in a complex pattern of associations among differentcharacteristics of the sample. For example, the demonstrationthat persons who are heavy users of tranquillizers also tend tobe regular alcohol drinkers does not necessarily indicate thatone causes the other. It may well be that a third factor (e.g.,the desire to avoid or escape anxiety and tension) may beresponsible for both behaviours. Interpretation of the datagenerally requires considerations beyond that involved in thestatistical analysis. 43. Experimental methods. Details of research designwould not be appropriate here, although some simple notions as toelementary requirements for adequate experimental techniques inpsychopharmacology may be worthwhile. A major goal of scientificresearch is to eliminate or control all factors, other than thoseto be studied, which can influence or bias measurement. As discussed above, the subjects of the study must besufficiently similar to the general population of ultimateinterest to allow generalization from the data. Extrapolationfrom one animal species to another, from one human society toanother, or from one social group to another is oftenquite tenuous and must be viewed with extreme caution. Variablessuch as age, sex, and social class often exert considerableinfluence on psychological measures, and must be taken intocareful consideration. Unless there is some reason why a particular dose level is of singularsignificance, more than one dose should be studied. If thepurpose of the experiment is to allow inferences of a generalsocial nature, then the dose, mode of administration and thegeneral circumstances of the study must be relevant to thepattern of use in the general population. In order to determine the effect of a particular treatment, itis necessary to have a reference or control condition forcomparison, which has been treated identically to theexperimental condition except for the factor under analysis.These data may be obtained from a separate group of controlsubjects, which is sufficiently similar to the experimentalgroup, or from the same subjects studied at a different time. Dueto the great variation between individuals in response to drugs,the latter approach is often most efficient, although it issometimes inappropriate or impractical. Using subjects as theirown controls requires special statistical techniques for handlingthe data, since repeated experience in the situation will affectthe subject's subsequent performance through such mechanisms asgeneral adaptation, practice and other learning variables, andoften fatigue. Care must be taken to control or eliminate the possibleeffects of the subject's and researcher's expectations andbiases. Since set and setting play an important role indetermining drug effects, an inactive placebo substance should betested in a control situation under conditions which areidentical to those present when the drug is studied. Sometimes,however, if the subject has had previous experience with theexperimental drug, he may soon realize whether he was given theactive drug or an inactive substance despite his initial lack ofinformation, and consequently the placebo control may not becomplete. An experimental design in which the subject is notinformed as to which treatment is being investigated is called a single-blindstudy. Since the scientist's bias and expectations can also influencethe subject's performance and the interpretation of his behaviour(as well as the later data analysis), the validity of themeasurements can often be further increased it the researcher isalso unaware of which treatment condition is in effect at thetime of the experiment. A study in which neither the subject northe researcher knows which of the experimental treatmentvariables are operating is called a double-blind design.There are certain circumstances where a double-blind isinappropriate or impossible, although it is often the mostefficient way to acquire specific information about drug effectsin an experimental situation. AReview of Selected Drugs 44. The remainder of this chapter is devoted to a shortcritical review of the scientific literature pertaining to theeffects of certain psychoactive drugs. Barbiturates, alcohol,minor tranquillizers, amphetamines, LSD, cannabis, opiatenarcotics, and volatile solvents are discussed. In these interimreviews an attempt has been made to concentrate on humanpsychopharmacological studies rather than on animal experimentsor general social reports. Although original scientific sourceswere sought and used as often as possible, it wasfrequently necessary at this interim stage to rely on reviewsprepared by others. There has been no attempt to be exhaustive in the referencespresented in the text. These citations often indicate a typicalexample chosen from among numerous sources which would have beenappropriate. The bibliography at the end of this chapter containsa broader representation of some of the materials used inpreparing the summaries. Contents | Feedback | Search DRCNet Library | Schaffer Library | Major Studies Canadian Government Commission ofInquiry