WT01-B29-1IA030-000641-B023-68http://206.61.184.43:80/schaffer/LIBRARY/studies/aus/can_ch4.htm 206.61.184.43 19970122140007 text/html 43724HTTP/1.0 200 OKDate: Wednesday, 22-Jan-97 13:59:56 GMTServer: WebSitePro/1.1f (S/N wpo-0deb)Allow-ranges: bytesContent-type: text/htmlLast-modified: Saturday, 28-Dec-96 07:15:15 GMTContent-length: 43506 FIVE LEGISLATIVE OPTIONS for cannabis / marijuana Chapter 4. FIVE LEGISLATIVE OPTIONS Introduction Many legislative options are available for cannabis and, asindicated in [1]Chapter 2, much confusion exists in theterminology used to describe them. In this chapter, we outlinethe five broad options available to Australian decision-makers,namely: total prohibition; prohibition with civil penalties for minor offences; partial prohibition; regulation; and free availability. Some readers will be aware that this is the classificationused by the South Australian Royal Commission into theNon-Medical Use of Drugs (the Sackville Commission) whichreported in 1978. We have adopted their approach as it is, in ourview, both precise and comprehensive. It avoids the semanticproblems that often cause much confusion in debates about drugpolicies. In particular, it avoids the terms 'decriminalisation'and 'legalisation', terms which have different meanings fordifferent authorities. The five options listed capture all the approaches whichpeople have in mind when they refer to 'decriminalisation' and'legalisation', as well as other options which these two wordsmay or may not encompass. The five legislative options arediscussed in turn. We follow a consistent format to facilitatecomparisons between them. First we describe the option; anexample of it in operation follows (or, if there is no suchexample, we describe what it would look like if the option wereimplemented); we then outline the rationales which are given orare imputable (both philosophical and pragmatic rationales arecovered); discuss the outcomes and impacts (observed or likely)flowing from its implementation; and in conclusion we evaluatethe appropriateness of the option. Option 1: Total prohibition Under the system of total prohibition the use, possession,cultivation, importation, sale and distribution of any amount ofcannabis are treated as criminal offences. People importing ordealing in cannabis may be liable to severe sanctions, and thoseusing or found in possession of the drug are subject to arrestand prosecution. If convicted, they acquire a criminal record andmay be subject to a variety of sanctions including imprisonment. 'Total prohibition' can take a number of forms. For example,although both The Netherlands and the United States havelegislation that can be described as total prohibition, thedifferences in the strategies used to enforce, or not enforce,the legislation mean that the drug policies in these two nationsare dramatically different. This section will outline thebackground and rationale of American and Dutch drug policies, andwill evaluate them in light of the goals outlined in [2]Chapter2. PART A: THE UNITED STATES: Total legislative and administrative prohibition: Drug lawand policy in the United States This examination of drug policy will focus on the US FederalGovernment's strategy of total prohibition.5 The Federal Controlled Substances Act (CSA) groups drugs intofive categories. These categories are said to be based on thedrugs' perceived potential for abuse, accepted medical use andpropensity to create physiological and psychological dependency,for users (Inciardi 1990). The US Drug Enforcement Agency (DEA)is responsible for classifying drugs and for periodicallyupdating classifications. Cannabis is listed in Schedule 1 of theclassification scheme. Schedule 1 drugs are seen to have a highpotential for abuse, no currently accepted medical use in theUnited States and no acceptable safe level of use under medicalsupervision. Violations of the CSA are separated into two offencecategories: first, the possession of controlled substances; and,secondly, the manufacture, delivery or sale of controlledsubstances. All first possession offences carry a penalty of upto one year's incarceration and a fine of $1,000 to $5,000.Second offences are punishable by more severe sanctions. Thebasic penalty for the manufacture, delivery or sale of less than50kg of marijuana, 100 or more marijuana plants, less than 10kgof cannabis resin (hashish) or less than one kilogram of cannabisoil is punishment by up to five years incarceration and/or a$250,000 fine. Second or subsequent offences are punishable by upto 10 years incarceration and/or a $500,000 fine. The penalty forthe manufacture, sale or delivery of between 50kg and 100kg ofmarijuana is a sentence of up to 20 years imprisonment and/or afine of up to $1 million. Second or subsequent violations ofmanufacture/delivery/sale provisions are punishable by up to 30years imprisonment and/or up to $2 million in fines forindividuals and $30 million for others. The CSA also provides for other sanctions against people whoprofit from drug dealing. An offender can be required to forfeitto the state all controlled substances, raw materials orequipment used to manufacture, import or export controlledsubstances, all conveyances used to transport controlledsubstances, all money and property gained through contraveningthe CSA, and all property used to facilitate violations of theCSA. The proceeds of forfeiture are used to fund drug lawenforcement. Drug policy in the US has, in part, been conceptualised inthe economic terms of supply and demand. Primarily the focus hasbeen on reducing the supply of illegal drugs, including cannabis,through such measures as destroying crops at the source orinterdicting supplies as they enter the US. Cannabis crops, forexample, may be spotted from the air by helicopter, sprayed withherbicide or eradicated by ground teams. Destroying cannabiscrops in other countries, particularly South American, andencouraging other governments to participate in law enforcementefforts, have formed an important part of the American drugstrategy of reducing the supply of drugs. Central to the US Government's policy on reducing demand isthe idea of creating a climate of intolerance towards all druguse through concepts such as 'user accountability' and 'zerotolerance'. 'User accountability' is the idea that individualusers should be made to recognise that their drug use, no matterhow minor it may appear to be, is part of a drug problem thateventually results in the death of some users ([3]Wardlaw 1992).The notion of 'zero tolerance' holds that no drug offence shouldbe allowed any degree of tolerance and makes little distinctionin terms of culpability between the different scales of drugoffences ([4]US Bureau of Justice Statistics 1992). Rationales Pragmatic rationales The eradication of all illicit drug use is the central aim ofUS drug policy and it is thought that prohibition is the mosteffective means of reaching this goal. Cannabis use is seen as apart of a larger drug problem. Prohibition is thought to decreasecannabis usage in the following ways: prohibition discourages people from experimenting with drugs and deters people convicted of drug offences from re-offending; and prohibition causes the price of illicit drugs to increase, making them more difficult to obtain. Philosophical rationales Drug policy in the US is based on a deeply held belief thatall illicit drug use is extremely harmful, both in terms of thedangers that it poses to users and in terms of the dangers thatit poses to the social fabric of American society. There is verylittle distinction made between cannabis and other drugs. In1971, President Richard Nixon declared that drug abuse was'public enemy number one' ([5]Wijingaart 1991, p95) and, morerecently, one commentator has claimed that: Drug use in Americatoday is a major threat to our health, productivity, and qualityof life (Du Pont 1984: xvi, [6]cited in Wijingaart 1991, p101). Section 801 of the Federal Controlled Substances Act statesthat: The illegal importation, manufacture, distribution, andpossession and improper use of controlled substances have asubstantial and detrimental effect on the health and generalwelfare of the American people. In the US, official analysis of the social problemsassociated with drug use has been narrow, and American policymakers have tended to see drugs themselves as the central sourceof all the ills associated with drug use in that country.Analyses of the social context of drug taking or of therelationship between drug taking and poverty have apparently hadlittle impact on the development of drug policy. Central to the official American idea of 'harm' caused bydrugs is that all drugs are 'addictive', and that anyexperimentation with drugs will inevitably result in dependency.Associated with the fear of dependence is the fear, in many casesunrealistic, of the effect that drug use has on individuals.Although not accepting this characterisation, James Inciardi hasdescribed the stereotype of the American drug user in thefollowing terms: 'Dope fiends', as they were called, weresex-crazed maniacs, degenerate criminals, and members of the'living dead'. 'Narcotics', including marijuana and cocaine ...destroyed morality, addicts were sexually violent and criminallyaggressive, they were weak and ineffective members of society;addiction was contagious since users had a mania for perpetuatingthe social anathema of drug taking; and finally, once addicted,the user entered into a lifetime of slavery to drugs ([7]Inciardi1986, p100). It has been claimed that those debating drugs policy in theUS have blurred the distinction between the effects of drug useand the effects of the prohibition of drug use ([8]Wardlaw 1992).Drug use is therefore thought to be inextricably linked toviolent crime, users are conceptualised as criminals, and policytowards any level of drug use is punitive and coercive. Thisphilosophy of drug use is evident in the rhetorical language ofUS policy makers who talk about 'zero tolerance' and who havecalled their drug strategy a 'war on drugs'. Outcomes Although the price of cannabis has increased with thepolicies of prohibition, the increase has not had the intendedeffect of significantly reducing cannabis consumption. Despitehalf a century of total prohibition, cannabis is still the mostwidely used of illicit drugs in the US. Household surveys of druguse conducted by the National Institute on Drug Abuse have foundthat almost 68 million people in the US reported that they hadused cannabis, including 9.7 million who reported that they hadused it in the past month. In other words, some 33 per cent ofthe household population aged 12 years or older reported they hadused marijuana in their lifetimes and 5 per cent reported havingused the drug in the past month. (NIDA, National Household Surveyon Drug Abuse: Population estimates 1991; cited in [9]US Bureauof Justice Statistics 1992, p26). It could be concluded that the prohibition of cannabis hasnot been successful in eradicating or even significantlydecreasing cannabis use in the United States. On the other hand,it could be argued that the policy has prevented an even higherlevel of use occurring. From 1981 to 1987, 5.3 million kilogramsof marijuana were seized, however Customs, Coast Guard and theDEA believe that they seized only 10 per cent of the marijuanaentering the country ([10]Inciardi & McBride 1990, p284).Despite the fluctuations in price that law enforcement effortsmay cause to cannabis markets from time to time, demand forcannabis has, it is claimed, remained relatively unchanged.Nadelmann has argued that 'the greatest beneficiaries of the druglaws are organised and unorganised drug traffickers. Thecriminalisation of the drug market effectively imposes a 'valueadded tax' ([11]Nadelmann 1991). The law enforcement program associated with prohibition hasalso been costly, both in financial and social terms. In 1986 theFederal expenditure on cannabis enforcement was estimated to bearound $800 million, and it is thought to have significantlyincreased since then (Kleiman 1986). This figure does not includestate and local expenditures on law enforcement and criminaljustice. Every year there are 350,000 arrests for cannabispossession alone, making this the third most common cause ofarrest in the US ([12]Kleiman 1992, pp267-8). The social costs of the law enforcement program are alsohigh. [13]Kleiman (1992) claims that the majority of people whoare arrested for buying and using cannabis rarely do anythingelse that might bring them to the attention of the criminaljustice system and that, for many users, being subject to arrestand criminal justice processing is the most substantial risk ofusing cannabis. The consequence of this is that large numbers ofpeople acquire criminal records and are stigmatised for what manywould see as relatively minor offences. Kleiman also argues that the prohibition of cannabisundermines the symbolic value of the criminal law. Since arrestis the most immediate and frequent part of the punishment processfor all crimes, it is important that arrest should retain itssocial meaning both as involving some substantial risk of furtherpunishment (to maintain its deterrent value) and as resultingfrom the doing of some substantial harm (to maintain its moralforce). The fact that simple possession of marijuana is the thirdmost common cause of arrest puts strain on both of these symboliclinks. This contribution to the devaluation of arrest as asanction ought to be counted as a sizeable cost of currentmarijuana laws ([14]Kleiman 1992, p268). It has also been claimed by some opponents of the 'war ondrugs' that one by product of prohibition is the abuse of civilliberties (e.g. [15]Boaz 1990). In the United States, propertycan be seized if a police officer alleges that a small amount ofa controlled substance, including cannabis, is found in theproperty. Forfeiture can occur without indictment or convictionof the owner of the property, a practice that Boaz claims is aviolation of civil rights. The prohibition of cannabis has also had a number ofunintended consequences. It is argued that the patterns ofcannabis use have become more dangerous and the amount ofviolence associated with the cannabis market has increased.First, it is argued that the successful interdiction of cannabisentering the US from overseas has resulted in increasedcultivation and production of cannabis within the country.Nadelmann has claimed that the US has emerged as one of theworld's leading producers of cannabis ([16]Nadelmann 1991, p787).He also argues that international drug traffickers haveredirected their attention from cannabis to cocaine, resulting ina 'glut of increasingly potent cocaine being available and ashortage of comparatively benign marijuana' ([17]Nadelmann 1991,p787). It is also argued that prohibition has caused an increase inthe crime and violence associated with cannabis markets and anincrease in the content of THC (the major psychoactiveingredient) of cannabis. When the majority of cannabis used wasimported from other countries, the distribution system forcannabis was much smaller. The production of cannabis within theUS, it is argued, leads to more small and medium producers with awider, more competitive and possibly more violent distributionsystem (Kleiman 1986; [18]Wardlaw 1992). Domestic enforcementhas, it is argued, resulted in more technology-intensive methodsof cultivation and an increase in the potency of cannabis([19]Reuter 1987). The fact that the sale of water pipes forsmoking cannabis is illegal means that users more often consumecannabis in cigarette papers, which is the form of consumptionmost damaging to their lungs (Reuter 1987). Given the costs of this form of prohibition, and its relativelack of success, it is perhaps surprising that the US drugstrategy enjoys widespread support from the American people. InGallup surveys conducted from 1969 to 1985, people were asked:'do you think the use of marijuana should be made legal or not?'.In 1985, 23 per cent of respondents were in favour, 73 per centopposed and 4 per cent expressed no opinion ([20]Inciardi &McBride 1990, p295). In October 1989 a Time/CNN poll found that79 per cent of the population would be willing to pay highertaxes if the money were used for fighting the 'war on drugs'(Inciardi & McBride 1990, p295). The 'war on drugs' issupported by liberal and conservative politicians alike, publicdebate on drug strategy is rare, and discussion of theappropriateness of drug strategy has been described as 'a parloursport for intellectuals' rather than a subject of general publicconcern. As noted above, during the 1970s a number of US statesremoved the penal penalties for possession of small amounts ofcannabis for personal use (a process referred to in the USA as'decriminalisation'), but this move towards a more liberalapproach was subsequently abandoned. Little information isavailable on the basis of the policy reversal, referred to as'recriminalisation'. Apparently the decisions were made not onthe basis of factual research into the impact ofdecriminalisation, but rather on ideological grounds.Opportunities were available for research comparing theexperiences of the various states, but apparently such researchwas not undertaken, leaving policy to be made without a firminformation base.6 CONCLUSION - THE USA APPROACH The US drug policy does not seem to have met many of thepolicy goals identified in the early part of this report. First, cannabis policy has not been separated from that ofother drugs. Policy makers see only the larger 'drug problem' andhave not recognised the need to have different policies fordifferent drugs. Secondly, in the USA the arguments for the total prohibitionof all drugs are highly emotive; arguments about the consequencesof drug use have not been separated from arguments about morals.Consequently, this has led to the idea that is implicit in muchUS drug policy, that all illicit drugs and consequently all drugusers are inherently criminal and even evil. Theconceptualisation of the drug problem in such uncompromising,black and white terms means that there is little room to makeexceptions for arguably 'soft' drugs such as cannabis. Thirdly, the goals of the 'war on drugs' are not realistic.Kleiman has argued that US drug policy amounts to a 'holy war'against drugs, and as such it is not surprising that the policygoals are far from realistic ([21]Kleiman 1992). Those creatingand implementing the US drug strategy do not talk of 'minimisingthe harm' arising from drug use (as in Australia's National DrugStrategy); rather they aim to completely eliminate drug use, agoal that many would consider to be unreachable. Finally, in [22]Chapter Two of this report, we have suggestedthat the harms caused by the drug control regimes themselvesshould not outweigh the harms prevented by them. With respect tocannabis use it has been argued that the harm caused by controlregimes clearly outweighs the harm caused by the drug([23]Kleiman 1992). It has also been argued that those developingpolicy in the US have failed to make the distinction between theproblems created by drugs and the problems created by prohibition(e.g. [24]Wardlaw 1992). The USA has a number of severe socialproblems associated with drug use, including forcing users intothe criminal milieu, demeaning the criminal law in the eyes ofusers, increasing the number of people with criminal records,increasing the level of imprisonment, and increasing the level oftransmission of the AIDS virus. These problems, and therelatively limited achievements in reducing drug use anddrug-related problems, have prompted ever increasing efforts inthe 'war against drugs'. It is likely, however, that many of thesocial problems are created not by the drugs themselves but bythe strategy of total prohibition. Part B: The Netherlands: LEGISLATIVE PROHIBITION WITH AN ADMINISTRATIVE EXPEDIENCYPRINCIPLE Background Between the mid-1960s and the mid-1970s in The Netherlands,the use of illegal drugs grew from 'almost non-existent toconstitute a serious health and public order problem in urbanareas' ([25]van Vliet 1990). Although the use of cannabis in TheNetherlands came to public attention in the late 1950s, debate ondrug policy only began in earnest when heroin use and theproblems associated with it became increasingly visible between1972 and 1975. Amendments to the Opium Act were introduced in 1976 and canbe seen as heralding a new era in drug policy. Until this timedrug policy in The Netherlands was much like that of othercountries ([26]Wijingaart 1990, p668, cited in [27]Wardlaw 1992,p16). Drug law and policy in The Netherlands The Opium Act of1976 makes a clear distinction between 'drugs presentingunacceptable risks' (heroin, cocaine, LSD, amphetamines) and'cannabis products'. The changes introduced in this legislationincreased penalties for dealing in 'drugs presenting unacceptablerisks' and decreased the penalties for possession and dealing incannabis products. The purpose of the legislation was to separate drug marketsand user groups in an effort to prevent cannabis users frominvolvement in the 'hard' drug scene. Although the legislationfalls clearly within a total prohibition framework, as Dutchcommentators have pointed out 'law in practice is more relevantthan law in books' ([28]Leuw 1991). A clause in The NetherlandsCode of Criminal Procedure, known as the 'expediency principle',states that the prosecution office may decide whether or not toenforce certain laws, to prosecute or to initiate criminalinvestigation on the basis of whether or not such action would be'in the public interest'. Using this clause, the Minister ofJustice issued guidelines in 1976 for the enforcement of druglaws and the investigation and prosecution of breaches of druglaws. Essentially it is these guidelines rather than legislationthat determines drug policy in The Netherlands. [29]Marshall etal. (1990) have noted that the priorities in the guidelinescorrespond to the distinctions made between 'hard' and 'soft'drugs in the Opium Act. High priority is given to detecting theimportation and exportation of drugs that are seen to representan 'unacceptable risk'. Investigation and prosecution of 'soft' drug violations, withthe exception of the import and export of large amounts of suchdrugs, are assigned a low priority (Marshall et al. 1990).According to the guidelines, dealing, possessing or producingsmall amounts (30g or less) of marijuana, do not require policeinvestigation, arrest or prosecution. A low priority is alsogiven to the investigation and prosecution of retail dealing incannabis, and police are only required to confront dealers whenthey advertise publicly or conduct their business in aprovocative manner. As long as there is no sale to minors, noadvertising, no sale of 'hard' drugs, and if the dealing takesplace without causing a public nuisance, then (generallyspeaking) there will be no police intervention. Where there arebreaches of the type outlined above, administrative measures,such as the withdrawal of permits to serve drinks and food, areimposed. If the parties involved persist in contravening theguidelines, they are issued with a warning. Confiscation of thedrugs may be another consequence of continuing breaches of theguidelines. [30]Marshall et al. (1990) report that only veryrarely is imprisonment the consequence of such violations. Theextent to which the guidelines, or the Opium Act, are followeddepends on local circumstances. Sanctions imposed may varybetween different districts of The Netherlands. Rationales Pragmatic rationales The goals or rationales for Dutch drug policy include thefollowing: to promote safer methods of consumption of cannabis; to limit sales of cannabis to specialist sellers; to limit progression from cannabis use to other drugs; to limit the amount of violence in the cannabis distribution system; and to limit the substitution of other (more damaging) drugs for cannabis. Philosophical rationales The 'drug problem' in The Netherlands has always beenrecognised as a complex social problem and as such, lawenforcement and penal sanctions alone have never been seen torepresent a complete solution . During the parliamentary debateon the revised Opium Act of 1976 Irene Vorrink, the Minister ofPublic Health, identified the following aims that form the basisof drug policy in The Netherlands: the central aim is the prevention and amelioration of social and individual risks caused by the use of drugs; a rational relation between those risks and policy measures; a differentiation of policy measures which will also take into account the risks of legal recreational and medical drugs; a priority of repressive measures against the trafficking of drugs other than cannabis; and the inadequacy of the criminal law with regard to any other aspect of the drug problem ([31] Handelingen 1976, cited in Leuw 1991, p10). The aims outlined above illustrate that The Netherlands drugpolicy is characterised by a number of factors. First, thecriminal law was never thought to be a solution to the drugproblem. Government policy with respect to 'hard' drugs isbroadly based and focuses on treatment and assistance for theuser and punishment for the commercial dealer ([32]Marshall etal. 1990). Secondly, it is recognised that the basis of drugpolicy should be to minimise harm rather than eradicate drug use,and thirdly, it is argued that drug policy should not be the samefor all illicit drugs. Cannabis is seen in a different light fromother drugs. Clearly there are pragmatic reasons for thisseparation, as the user markets for different drugs are dividedand users of cannabis are, it is argued, less likely to progressto the use of 'harder' drugs. However there is also evidence that suggests that the use ofcannabis was never perceived by Dutch society to be aparticularly compelling social problem. Leuw claims that: Inaccordance with the legal differentiation between cannabisproducts and hard drugs, drug policy encompassing prevention andassistance developed primarily in reaction to the emerging heroinproblem. The cannabis problem - if there ever had been one seemedto have disappeared from the face of the earth even before theamended Opium Act became effective ([33]Leuw 1991, p725). The separation of cannabis from other drug problems also hashad the effect of making the drug problem more manageable.[34]Van Vliet (1988) is critical of the US style of drug policythat makes no moral or legal distinction between different typesof drug offences or different types of drugs and claims that 'bylumping all these different phenomena together, societies andgovernments help to create a problem which is unsolvable' (vanVliet 1988). Conversely, The Netherlands breaks down the'inextricable' problem into 'manageable bits'. In the mid-1980s, a Government-sponsored research project ledto the development of the concept of 'normalisation' or 'culturalintegration' which added to the sophistication of Dutch drugpolicy ([35]van Vliet 1990;[36] Leuw 1991). 'Normalisation'recognises that some type of drug use is natural to all humansocieties and argues that the eradication of all drug use is anunrealistic policy goal. The reduction of drug use and the socialand individual problems associated with it are felt to be farmore reasonable policy goals. Central to the concept of'normalisation' is the idea that drug users should not bemarginalised from the rest of society. In a speech to the DutchParliament, the State Secretary of Health stated, in 1985, that:Normalisation ... includes the cultural integration of drug usersin society ... This does not mean the elimination of the drugphenomenon as a social reality: it means a change of contextwhich clears the way for a different approach ... drug addictsshould be treated neither as criminals nor as dependent patientsbut as 'normal' people to whom we can make 'normal' demands andwho should be offered 'normal' opportunities ([37]van Vliet 1990,p727). The implications for cannabis policy of 'normalisation' areclear. According to the Dutch, the eradication of cannabis use isan unrealistic policy goal and the creation of a 'deviant status'for drug users means that users are more likely to 'drop out' ofmain stream society and perhaps start using more dangerous drugs.The use of the criminal law to deal with cannabis use wouldmarginalise cannabis users and this would be seen asunnecessarily destructive in terms of its social costs. Outcomes Today it is possible to openly buy and use cannabis in anumber of coffee shops in Amsterdam and other regional centres.Most of these coffee shops do not sell any other drugs and manydo not even sell alcohol. However, the public consumption ofcannabis has been subject to criticism from other countries, whoseem to equate public consumption with increased use. Downes(1988) has claimed that the image of The Netherlands portrayed inthe international media is one of 'a blinkered liberalismbelatedly struggling to cope with the results of its ownpermissiveness' and cites an example of a British journalist whowrote in the Sunday Times that 'Amsterdam has a long history offree-thinking and tolerating most things except law and order ...But the city's tolerance has been worn thin by crime, drug abuseand militant squatters' ([38]Downes 1988, p123). Unsurprisingly, Dutch commentators do not subscribe to theview that their society is on the brink of collapse. They arguethat the 'hash cafes' have been integrated as normal urbanfacilities and do not pose a threat to public order ([39]Leuw1991). The point has also been made that visible drug use onlysignals failure if maintaining an image of a drug-free society isan aim of drug policy (Leuw 1991). In contrast, the Dutch, whoaim to prevent drug users from being marginalised, may seevisible drug use as a sign of success. Despite the impression presented in the international media,most studies suggest that the policies implemented in TheNetherlands have not resulted in any significant increase in druguse or changes in patterns of use ([40]Engelsmann 1989;Wijingaart 1988a cited in [41]Wardlaw 1992, p23). A recent studycombined the results of over 20 Dutch studies that examined thepercentage of the population who had 'ever used' cannabis andcompared them with data from Norway, Sweden and the USA. Theperiod from 1970 to 1988 was examined and the authors concludedthat: The results of the time analysis show that the prevalence ofcannabis use since 1970 decreased, whereas the policy became moretolerant. Since 1979 a slight increase in the use of cannabis canbe observed. A comparison with data from other countries with amore restrictive policy reveals that the use of cannabis in TheNetherlands is on the same level as in Sweden and Norway (around10-15 per cent), but far lower than that in the US (exceeding 50per cent). However the downward trend in these three countriessince 1984 did not occur in The Netherlands ([42]Driesen, van Dam& Olsen 1989, p11 cited in Leuw 1991). The savings made to law enforcement and criminal justicebudgets of not processing large numbers of cannabis offenders aresubstantial and should be seen as one of the primary benefits ofthe Dutch approach to drug policy. In addition, the cannabismarket and distribution system is free from violence ([43]vanVliet 1990). It has also been argued that the Dutch approach has led tosafer patterns of cannabis use. First, the fact that users ofcannabis do not seem to turn to other more dangerous drugs isused as evidence that the policy of the separation of drugmarkets is working ([44]van Vliet 1990). [45]Cohen (1988) arguesthat Dutch cannabis users, unlike their counterparts in the USA,are not likely to ingest the herbicide paraquat in the cannabisthat they consume, and are also more likely to consume the drugin a safer way because the sale of drug paraphernalia such aswater pipes is legal in The Netherlands (Cohen 1988). Cohen hasalso argued that 'the knowledge of how to regulate cannabis usehas become an inconspicuous part of local Dutch youth culturebecause the development of drug use rules was not pushed out ofthe mainstream and into deviant sub cultures' (Cohen 1988, p24). In terms of the goals that Dutch policy makers identified,drug policy in The Netherlands has been moderately successful.However, the Dutch approach to drug policy has not been popularinternationally: Germany and the USA in particular have beenvocal in their opposition. In recent times this has led to theintroduction of tougher drug policies with respect to 'harddrugs' ([46]Marshall et al. 1990), however these pressures havenot yet had any impact on cannabis policy. Indeed, it has beenspeculated that Dutch cannabis policy is unlikely to change as aresult of international pressure ([47]Wardlaw 1992). CONCLUSION - THE DUTCH APPROACH In a variety of ways The Netherlands drug policy meets manyof the criteria outlined in [48]Chapter 2. First, Dutch policy makers have recognised the need to havedifferent policies for different drugs. The idea of separating'drugs of unacceptable risk' and cannabis is based on the ideathat the control regime that appears to be appropriate for oneillicit drug need not apply to others. Secondly, policy makers have managed to separate argumentsabout the consequences of drug use from arguments about morals.In fact, Dutch policy was intended to be 'non-moralistic'([49]Leuw 1991). It has been claimed that, in The Netherlands,drug use has never been seen as a 'moral' issue and it is arguedthat: Political speeches elaborating on the abhorrence of illegaldrugs have seldom been staged. They would appear as quitemisplaced in Dutch political culture. Consequently there are novotes to be won or positions to be conquered by rallying ananti-drug theme ([50]Leuw 1991). Thirdly, this non-moralistic approach to drug policy has ledto the development of realistic policy goals with respect tocannabis use. [51]Leuw (1991) notes that in The Netherlands therehas been no pledge of 'solving the problem' of drug use. Insteadof attempting to eradicate drug use Dutch authorities haveadopted the more pragmatic goal of minimising the risks anddamaging effects of drug use. Of concern to some observers,however, is the Dutch approach of formalising inconsistencybetween the provisions of legislation and its implementation. Anargument can be advanced that this conveys confusing messages tothe community. It is preferable, some would argue, forlegislation and policy on implementation to be aligned so thatboth permit (or proscribe) the use of cannabis in certaincircumstances. Having legislation creating an offence of cannabisuse, along with policy declaring that it is inexpedient toprosecute such offences, seems to be acceptable in the Dutchcontext, although it would possibly be unacceptable in othercultures. We return to this apparent difficulty in the concludingchapter of this report. Conclusion - the total prohibition options The Netherlands has been successful in terms of the goalsidentified by Dutch policy makers. Their policy has not resultedin the increased use of cannabis; indeed levels of cannabis useare markedly lower than those seen in the United States orAustralia. There is little violence associated with the cannabisdistribution system, cannabis users do not seem to progress tousing more serious drugs and the drug is consumed in a mannerwhereby the risks of harm are minimised. Dutch policy is also relatively successful in terms of manyof the policy goals that we discussed above. The separation ofcannabis from other drugs ensures that The Netherlands has a moremanageable drug policy. The goals of policy are realistic andpolicy makers have not confused moral arguments with argumentsabout the consequences of drug use. In contrast, the US drug strategy with respect to cannabisdoes not seem to be particularly successful. Despite considerableeconomic and social costs, cannabis use is far from beingeradicated in the USA. Cannabis users may be consuming the drugin a particularly dangerous manner, the illicit drugsdistribution system (of which cannabis is a part) is associatedwith violence, and law enforcement, criminal justice processingand the imprisonment of cannabis-related offenders costs Americantax payers millions of dollars every year. The USA has not emerged favourably in relation to the goalsidentified in the first part of this report. Apparently Americanpolicy makers have not recognised the need to consider differentpolicy strategies for different drugs, leaving cannabis part ofthe larger, seemingly unsolvable 'drug problem'. Moral argumentshave been confused with arguments about the consequences of druguse, and this has led to the development of unrealistic policygoals and a failure to recognise that the control regime imposedto deal with the problem of cannabis use may be causing more harmthan the cannabis use itself. Examples from the USA and TheNetherlands demonstrate that the legislative option of totalprohibition can be implemented in very different ways. The twocountries have very different philosophical and pragmaticrationales for their policies and, unsurprisingly, the outcomesof the policies have varied considerably. In developing policy, international examples are of benefitto Australian policy makers. It should be remembered, however,that the relative success or failure of drug policies depend asmuch on cultural factors, existing patterns of drug use, andpublic views of drug use, as they do on the soundness of thepolicy. References Boaz, D. 1990, 'The consequences of prohibition', in TheCrisis in Drug Prohibition, ed. D. Boaz, Cato Institute,Washington DC. Cohen, P. 1988, 'Building upon the successes ofDutch drug policy', The International Journal on Drug Policy,vol. 2, no. 2, pp22-24. Downes, D. 1988, Contrasts in Tolerance:Post-war Penal Policy in The Netherlands and England and Wales,Clarendon Press, Oxford. Driessen, van Dam & Olsen 1989, 'Deontwikkeling van het cannabisgebruik in Nederland, enkeleEuropese landen en de VS sinds 1969', Tijidschrift voor alcohol,drugs en andere psychotrope stoffen, vol. 15, pp2-15, cited inLeuw, E. 1991, 'Drugs and drug policy in The Netherlands,' inCrime and Justice: A Review Of Research, vol 14., ed. M. Tonry,University of Chicago Press, Chicago. Engelsman, E. L. 1989,'Dutch policy on the management of drug-related problems',British Journal of Addiction, vol. 84, pp211-218. Inciardi, J.(ed.) 1990, Handbook of Drug Control in the United States,Greenwood Press, New York. Kleiman, Mark A.R. 1989, Marijuana:Costs of Abuse, Costs of Control, Greenwood Press, United States.Kleiman, Mark A.R. 1992, Against Excess: Drug Policy for Results:Alcohol, Cocaine, Heroin, Marijuana, Tobacco, Basic Books, NewYork. Kleiman, Mark A.R & Saiger, A.J. 1990, 'Druglegalisation: The importance of asking the right question', TheHofstra Law Review, vol. 18, 1989-90, pp527-565. Leuw, E 1991,'Drugs and drug policy in The Netherlands,' in Crime and Justice:A Review Of Research, vol. 14, ed. M. Tonry, University ofChicago Press, Chicago. Marshall, I E., Anjewerierden, O. &Atteveld, H.A. 1990, 'Toward an Americanisation of Dutch drugpolicy', Justice Quarterly, vol. 7, no. 2, pp391-420. Nadelmann,E.A. 1991, 'Drug prohibition in the United States: Costs,consequences and alternatives', Notre Dame Journal of Law, Ethicsand Public Policy, vol. 5, no. 37, pp783-808. National Instituteon Drug Abuse 1991, Household Surveys as cited in US Bureau ofJustice Statistics 1992, Drugs Crime and the Justice System, USGovernment Printing Office, Washington. Reuter, P. 1987, 'Whatimpasse? A skeptical view', Nova Law Review, vol. 11, no. 3,pp1025-1040. Single, E. 1989, 'The impact of marijuanadecriminalisation: An update', Journal of Public Health Policy,vol. 10, no. 4, pp456-466. US Bureau of Justice Statistics 1992,A National Report. Drugs, Crime and the Justice System, USGovernment Printing Office, Washington. van Vliet, H. 1988, 'Drugpolicy as a management strategy', The International Journal onDrug Policy, vol. 1, no 1, pp27-19. van Vliet, H. 1990, 'Theuneasy decriminalisation: A perspective on Dutch drug policy',Hofstra Law Review, vol. 18, 1989-90, pp717-750. Wardlaw, G.1992, 'Overview of national drug control strategies' inComparative Analysis of Illicit Drug Strategy, Monograph Seriesno. 18, National Campaign Against Drug Abuse, eds M. Bull, D.McDowell, J. Norberry, H. Strang, & G. Wardlaw, AGPS,Canberra. Wijingaart, Govert Frank van de 1991, CompetingPerspectives on Drug Use: The Dutch Experience, Swets andZeitlinger, Amsterdam. CliffSchaffer's Home Page WT01-B29-2IA030-000641-B023-93http://206.61.184.43:80/schaffer/LIBRARY/studies/aus/can_ch5.htm 206.61.184.43 19970122140027 text/html 83826HTTP/1.0 200 OKDate: Wednesday, 22-Jan-97 14:00:16 GMTServer: WebSitePro/1.1f (S/N wpo-0deb)Allow-ranges: bytesContent-type: text/htmlLast-modified: Saturday, 28-Dec-96 07:15:04 GMTContent-length: 83608 Australian Cannabis (Marijuana) Report - Chapter 5 CHAPTER 5: DIVERSION AND COMPULSORY TREATMENT Introduction This chapter covers the two related fields of diversion andtreatment - including compulsory treatment - for drug offenders,particularly where cannabis is involved. Such diversion maysimply involve diversion from the criminal justice system forindividuals involved in minor cannabis offences; it may alsoinvolve diversion to treatment for those who either want, or arejudged by others, to need treatment for drug use sufficientlyserious to bring them into contact with the criminal justicesystem. Diversion is a form of intervention in the lives of offendersprimarily based on humanitarian grounds (i.e. to keep them out ofprison), but also, more pragmatically, to relieve the burden onthe courts and the prisons imposed by the very large numbers ofpeople charged with very minor offences. While diversion from acourt appearance is a mild form of intervention receiving broadcommunity support, diversion to treatment, particularly whenmandated by the court, raises philosophical issues relating tothe degree of intervention the state should be empowered toexercise over people's lives. Compulsory treatment when it takesthe form of civil commitment is the most extreme form ofintervention, and, where ordered for drug offenders, is morallydistasteful to many and the subject of much controversy.Nevertheless, there are legislative provisions for civilcommitment of drug offenders in many countries, includingAustralia. We begin the chapter with a discussion of the concept ofdiversion, then review existing diversion programs in Australiaand overseas, with particular reference to programs involvingtreatment. The subject of compulsory treatment, including civilcommitment for drug offenders, is dealt with next, with anoverview of international legislation and treatment programs,along with such evaluations as exist. The implications of thisfor offenders whose primary drug is cannabis are discussed andsome conclusions are drawn regarding treatment for repeatoffenders. Finally, we present a summary of the major findings forcannabis users resulting from our review of the key Australianand international literature dealing with diversion and treatmentfor drug offenders. The concept of diversion In the US, accordingto Tomasic ([1]1977, cited in Dept of Attorney-General 1982, p6),official use of the term 'diversion' occurred for the first timein the US President's Commission on Law Enforcement andAdministration of Justice. The following are two definitions ofdiversion from the US literature: ... the disposition of acriminal complaint without conviction, the non-criminaldisposition being conditioned on either the performance ofspecified obligations by the defendant, or his participation incounselling or treatment, ([2]Nimmer 1974, cited in Dept ofAttorney-General 1982, p6). ... those formally acknowledged andorganised efforts to utilize alternatives to the initial orcontinued criminal justice processing of alleged offenders, whichare undertaken prior to adjudication but after a prosecutableaction has occurred, ([3]Rovner-Pieczenik, cited in Dept ofAttorney-General 1982, p6). Due to fears, in the case ofnon-trial disposition, of unfairness, lack of proceduralprotection and lack of follow-up treatment to prevent recurrenceof the offence, the Commission recommended formalising theprocedure and adding extra-legal services such as treatment andpreventative education as an integral part of the non-trialdisposition. The total package came to be known as 'diversion'([4]Dept of Attorney-General 1982, p8). The early justifications for diversion included: relief of overburdened courts; avoiding the further criminalisation of first offenders; avoiding the disadvantaging of first offenders on re-entry to society by their being labelled as criminals; providing a preferable way of dealing with certain offenders such as juveniles or drug users, who could be better dealt with in the community than in prisons; and providing cost-benefits to the community and a more humane way of dealing with certain categories of offenders ([5]Dept of Attorney-General 1982, p9). The term 'diversion' when used in relation to the Australiancriminal justice system may incorporate a 'range of related butrelatively exclusive procedures some of which are seen aspotential alternatives to "due process" others asadditions to it' ([6]Williams 1981, p3). Those falling into the'alternatives' classification include: pre-arrest diversion: this amounts to discretionary measures taken by police at the point of apprehension of an offender; and pre-trial diversion (or 'pre-court', in Australia): in this case certain conditions have to be satisfied by the offender, following which the alleged offences are struck off the record. Those falling into the 'additions' classification include: +pre-sentence diversion: this is essentially remand for assessmentand/or treatment; and + post-conviction diversion: in this caseoffenders are directed to some form of treatment-relatedsupervision as a part of their sentence (presumably in lieu ofimprisonment). Prisoners may also be diverted from jail totreatment as a condition of their parole. These additions to dueprocess, therefore, function as increased sentencing options([7]Williams 1981, p3). The subject of diversion has been a neglected area inAustralia, although there have been 'official' diversionaryprograms operating at least since 1977 (in NSW). The termdiversion is applied to a wide variety of programs, and inAustralia can occur pre-court or pre- or post-sentence. Pre-courtdiversion can vary from a police warning or an expiation noticefor a minor drug offence, to referral for drug-treatment as analternative to a punitive sentence. Unlike some countries, in Australia cannabis use andpossession offences are not regarded as very serious incomparison with offences involving 'harder' drugs, and thesubject of treatment for cannabis use has similarly not beenconsidered much of an issue. In fact the legislation in someStates does not cover diversion for treatment on the grounds ofcannabis use alone. If cannabis users are diverted for treatmentit is usually because they are polydrug users, as many of themore serious users are. The main diversion programs operating in Australia will bebriefly described, and an overview presented of diversion in theUS and other countries, with reference to their relevance forcannabis users. Key features of treatment programs for drug usersare discussed, along with the issue of compulsory treatment and,what is known in the United States as, civil commitment. Diversion programs in Australia (10) AUSTRALIAN CAPITAL TERRITORY The ACT Drugs of Dependence Act 1989 (as amended in 1992 and1993) allows as a sentencing option anyone found guilty of acrime to be sent for assessment as to whether they aredrug-dependent and therefore suitable to be referred fortreatment. Those brought to court usually appear on a combinationof charges of different degrees of seriousness. Often a communityservice order may be the sentence or a conviction onrecognisance, which can include a good behaviour bond or apartially or fully suspended sentence. Assessment or treatmentorders are rare and are typically given for such offences asunlawful possession, stolen property offences, burglary and motorvehicle theft (where drug dependence is believed to havecontributed to the criminal behaviour).11 The DODA (Drugs of Dependence) Referral Program works in thefollowing way: anyone committing an offence requiring a courtappearance who seems to defence counsel to have a drug problem(or who claims to have a drug problem) is entitled to have thisfact raised before sentencing. If the court issues an assessmentorder, the client then has to contact the DODA Referral Programwhere a counsellor takes a case history to be sent to theTreatment Assessment Panel. The panel consists of a legal person(usually a solicitor) and two others with extensive knowledge ofdrug and alcohol treatment in the ACT, who are appointed for ayear. The client is assessed and options for treatment putforward. The client then goes to the chosen treatment centrewhich reports back to the panel as to whether the client issuitable or not suitable for treatment. The client then goes backto the panel for a second time at which time the panel looks atthe information from the treatment centre and listens to what theclient has to say, since the client has high input andresponsibility throughout the process. If the client fails tocome back (or fails to attend at any stage) an arrest warrant maybe issued, or the panel may suggest a Breach of Assessment Order.This information goes to the court, where a warrant for arrestmay be issued, or the failure to attend may be brought up whenthe client next comes before the court and the client may losethe right to the alternative to sentencing. This does not happenvery often, as the court usually chooses the treatment order whenthey have the option. The court specifies the length of time atthe treatment centre and periodic reviews by the panel, which canbe every three months. The program tries to be lenient if theclient misses one or two reviews, as the objective is harmminimisation rather than abstinence (unless the client has optedfor abstinence). If the client consistently fails to appear forreview or is not doing well (this is not the usual outcome) it ispossible to breach them. The breach is issued in court but DODAprovides the report on behalf of the panel. Then a summons can beissued and the usual court process (arrest warrant issued) isfollowed. The magistrate primarily concerned with diversion made thefollowing observations: Most drug-related offences are caused by alcohol, often used in conjunction with cannabis, which is particularly dangerous if the offender is driving. The DODA Program does not cover alcohol. There is concern about the danger posed by offenders combining alcohol and cannabis prior to driving (many alcohol-dependent people coming before the DODA treatment panel are also cannabis-dependent). Clients should not be referred for treatment in the case of cannabis use unless assessed as 'seriously dependent on cannabis', in order to screen out those seeking simply to avoid conviction. A distinct preference was expressed for post-court diversion, as opposed to pre-court diversion, so that the court has the opportunity to assess offenders. Offenders may be diverted more than once. The goal is 'harm reduction', and total rehabilitation is not expected after the first treatment. It was confirmed by the magistrate and treatment personnelthat there have been clients coming to the program who complainof cannabis dependence. Personnel at the DODA Referral Programreport that there is very little treatment for cannabis users. Itis usually outpatient treatment and 'is not 100 per centsuccessful'. The treatment they use is adapted from the treatmentfor tobacco, i.e. a process of slow cessation, while keeping adiary of the situations and times of use, with counselling once aweek. Ideally the treatment should be tailored to theindividual's needs. Very few cannabis users would be referred toa residential facility such as Karralika, and if so, it would beon the grounds of polydrug use. The DODA program is the only one of its sort in Australia,and mainly deals with fairly longstanding opiate users withlengthy records. There is a juvenile panel, but this has not beenused much. If magistrates send more juveniles in future, theprogram would be especially relevant for alcohol use. A formalevaluation has not yet been done, but program staff claim thefollowing desirable results: a reduction in criminal activity onthe part of its clients; monitoring their progress rather thanseeing them go to jail; and reducing their drug use. Very fewbecome drug-free, but there is significant harm reduction fromthe social, personal and economic viewpoint. SOUTH AUSTRALIA The drug diversion scheme operating in South Australia wasestablished when the Controlled Substances Act 1984 provided forthe South Australian Drug Assessment and Aid Panel (the panel) asan alternative to the criminal law for illicit drug users.12 Thepanel is only one of 13 penalty outcomes for drug offenders inSouth Australia, ranging from a $50 expiation fee for possessionof small amounts of cannabis and cannabis resin to $1 million andlife imprisonment for the most serious trafficking offence. Theunderlying philosophy is to make a clear distinction between thedrug dealer and the drug user (Gray, Reynolds & Rumbold1992). The new Act came about primarily as a result of therecommendation of the Sackville Commission that drug assessmentand aid panels should be established to which all persons chargedwith simple possession offences involving drugs must be referredbefore a prosecution may proceed. Juvenile Aid Panels were alsoestablished - as an alternative to the juvenile court system -which continue to operate and to provide for the diversion ofsome, but not all, young offenders out of the criminal justicesystem ([8]Gray, Reynolds & Rumbold 1992). The panel provides for absolute diversion in so far as thepanel and its clients, not the courts and prosecutors, determinethe outcome of proceedings. All persons charged with a 'simplepossession' offence (i.e. involving personal use of illicit drugsother than cannabis and cannabis resin and including use orpossession of implements for the use of an illicit drug) must bereferred to the panel, thus precluding any issue of discretion onthe part of courts or prosecutors, and removing the offender fromthe court system ([9]Gray, Reynolds & Rumbold 1992, p129). The panel, however, considers only a limited number ofoffences, and although an amendment to the Act permitted courtsto refer matters to the panel for the preparation of pre-sentencereports, this power has rarely been exercised ([10]Gray, Reynolds& Rumbold 1992, p130). The panel consists of a lawyer and twopeople with extensive knowledge of the problems and/or treatmentof illicit drug use. Hearings are private and proceedingsconfidential in order to create an atmosphere of trust. Clientsare referred from either the police or the courts, more often theformer. Before being dealt with by the panel, the client musthave admitted to the offence and be willing to undertake theassessment and any treatment or counselling which may berequired. The client may choose the option of being dealt with bythe courts. Those who do not appear willing to change their livesand those who do not respond to the initial letter from the panelor attend their appointment are referred back to court. Those dealt with by the panel must undertake to comply withthe directions of the panel and attend panel sessions asrequested over a six-month period.13 At the end of this periodthe panel instructs the court and the police to withdraw thematter, and no record of any drug offence may be usedsubsequently against the client ([11]Gray, Reynolds & Rumbold1992, p129). The major findings of an evaluation of the panel were that: Out of the 1,400 clients seen between May 1985 and September 1991, most were male and in their 20s, directed to the panel for illegal possession of, mostly, amphetamines followed by heroin. The panel did not provide the early intervention hoped for. Although most clients were being offered the opportunity for assessment for treatment for the first time, many already had criminal histories. Intervention at an earlier stage is desirable for a more successful outcome. The amount of polydrug use 'should be seen as a matter of significance and concern. This includes the dangerous - though legal - drugs, alcohol and tobacco, which will often prove more of a problem and potentially more destructive to clients than the illicit drug problem that brought them to the attention of the panel in the first place' ([12]Gray, Reynolds & Rumbold 1992, p133). While cannabis and cannabis resin offences were excluded from the panel's jurisdiction, 'there were indications of extensive and potentially harmful levels of cannabis use among many clients' ([13]Gray, Reynolds & Rumbold 1992, p132). The characteristics of most of the clients were such that the treatment required was based on coping and lifestyle skills 'rather than strategies influenced by models of physiological addiction' ([14]Gray, Reynolds & Rumbold 1992, p132). The panel is only as effective as the treatment and other social supports which are available. The statutory barrier allowing only people over 18 to be seen by the panel means that many have had drug habits for years. Although structured to deal with these cases, the Childrens Aid Panel is not sufficiently a specialist drug assessment and aid body, nor are drugs its primary concern. Overall 'the justification for the panel as a means ofdiverting offenders from the criminal justice system andproviding intervention opportunities is overwhelming' ([15]Gray,Reynolds & Rumbold 1992, p134). Interviews with criminaljustice personnel indicated that the panel is satisfactory fromthe point of view of cutting down on court congestion and fromthe point of view that it is treatment-focused rather thanpunitive. There is also no stigma of a conviction being recorded.However, it seems that within the confines of the Act, the policehave the discretion as to what charge to lay, e.g. if theoffender is known by the police and has an amount of the drugwhich could be trafficked, he may instead be charged withtrafficking. NEW SOUTH WALES Offences relating to alcohol or drug use in New South Walesare covered by the Drug Misuse and Trafficking Act 1985 (NSW).This Act distinguishes between cannabis and other drugs only inthe case of commercial trafficking. Possession and administrationof cannabis are prosecuted summarily and offenders are liable toa penalty of $2,000 and/or two years' imprisonment. Cultivation,manufacture and production, and supply are prosecuted onindictment, an offender being liable to a fine of $2,000 and/ortwo years imprisonment if there are less than five plants or lessthan a quantity of 25g. New South Wales was the first State inAustralia to introduce a drug diversion program. Its current program, the Drug and Alcohol Court AssessmentProgramme (DACAP) is a post-conviction, pre-sentence programwhere offenders on drug-related charges (such as possession of anillicit substance) or drug-involved crime (such as property crimeto finance drug use) are bailed/remanded to attend a treatmentagency and undergo a comprehensive assessment which forms thebasis of a pre-sentence report for the magistrate, containingrecommendations for sentencing, including treatment options([16]Desland & Batey 1990, p796). Successful completion of the treatment program, the length ofwhich is determined by a health worker, finalises the matter([17]Walters & Coventry 1993). A further objective is to'provide drug offenders with a comprehensive assessment that mayencourage them to consider improving their health and socialfunctioning' ([18]Schlosser 1984, pxi). DACAP further attempts through these assessments to match theindividual's drug-related problems to the most appropriate rangeof therapeutic interventions within a legal/health framework(Schlosser 1984).'... the diversion from the Criminal JusticeSystem to the health care system provides to the offender in manycases, the initial insight and confrontation that criminalactivities are directly related to their health. Often thisinsight initiates motivation to address the problems of substanceabuse' ([19]MSJ Keys Young, 1992, p92). DACAP statistics between 1990 and 1992 indicate that, whileheroin was the main drug of concern (after alcohol) in about onecase in five, both in 1990-91 and 1991-92, cannabis was the nextranking drug ([20]MSJ Keys Young, 1992, p96).14 An interview withone of DACAP's clients who had been arrested for possession andsupply of a large amount of cannabis revealed that, although heknew that he had 'a big marijuana problem', he had never beenprepared to do anything about it and that DACAP provided theopportunity and a reason to 'address the issue'. The magistrateplaced this client under supervision, fined him, imposed asentence of periodic detention, with 20 hours at an AttendanceCentre and the requirement to undertake a series of courses onissues such as personal development, money management, drug andalcohol information and education. The client fulfilled theserequirements ([21]MSJ Keys Young, 1992, p118). MSJ Keys Young's recent evaluation of DACAP included theobservations that: Magistrates generally agreed that a DACAP report might be considered appropriate in cases involving a relatively serious and/or repeated offence, where a custodial sentence was a realistic possibility (some used it even where a custodial sentence was unlikely), and where it appeared that drug/alcohol dependency might be a significant factor (1992, p113). It was very desirable to use the pre-sentence 'crisis' period to get the dependency problem acknowledged and, if possible, to start treatment, as if left until after sentence, the chances of success were much less (1992, p105); sometimes it takes a long time for a drug user to recognise dependency (e.g. in the case of cannabis) and an intervention such as that of DACAP can be very beneficial in confronting this. Some magistrates observed that they did not see many people who had been through the DACAP process coming before the court for repeat offences. Important issues were availability of places in treatment and skilled counsellors with broad views of dependency. Regarding the issue of coercion, several evaluations of DACAP have 'tentatively concluded' that the legal coercion into treatment as evidenced in the DACAP program was effective in acting as an early intervention into drug use, generating a younger client less involved with drugs, who is more amenable to an abstinent outcome (Desland & Batey 1988; [22]Schlosser 1984; [23]Bush & Scagliotti 1983; [24]Williams 1981; all cited in Desland & Batey 1988, p51). This is consistent with other studies of court-ordered assessment/treatment for substance use ([25]Salmon & Salmon 1983, cited in Desland & Batey 1987, p51). VICTORIA Victoria appears not to have any government-implementedpre-court drug diversion programs ([26]Walters & Coventry1993). The Alcoholics and Drug Dependent Person's Act 1968 (Vic),s13 provides for bonds under which offenders may be ordered toattend treatment as an alternative to a custodial sentence (Skene1986, cited in [27]Walters 1993, p11). Programs are available foroffenders who are detected to be intoxicated at the time of theoffence and considered by the court to be 'habitually usingintoxicating liquor or drugs of addiction'. The Court Advice and Assessment Programme precipitates acourt report which makes recommendations on the suitability of acommunity-based order, and provides a management plan based onthe offender's level of substance use. Referral to the program isat the discretion of the court, and applies only at themagistrate's jurisdiction, but is not limited to particularoffences ([28]Gray, Reynolds & Rumbold 1992, p130). Inaddition, s67 of the Act allows for a good behaviour bond forfirst offenders so that the number of drug users ending up incourt is not large. A current study being carried out in Victoria by the NationalCentre for Socio-Legal Studies ([29]Walters & Coventry 1993)for the Victoria Police, is considering a pilot pre-court drugdiversion program for 'all first-time drug offenders apprehendedfor use and possession offences regardless of the illicitsubstance'. At the time of detection and arrest these offenderswould be considered 'recreational users', and one option forprocessing such offenders would be a diversion panel. In thiscase it would be up to the panel to assess the nature and extentof drug use and recommend a course of action ([30]Walters &Coventry 1993, p7). WESTERN AUSTRALIA In Western Australia, the Bail Act 1982 provides fortreatment as a condition of bail in the case of a defendant whois suffering from alcohol or drug dependence. Their pre-courtdiversion system, the Court Diversion Service (CDS) has beenoperating since 1988 as a cooperative venture between the WestAustralian Alcohol and Drug Authority (WAADA), the Department ofCorrective Services and non-government drug treatment agencies,coordinated by the WAADA. Any person with a drug dependencyproblem who is charged with a criminal offence is entitled toapply to the court for inclusion in the CDS program. However, itis important to note that persons are disqualified whose primarydrug problem is alcohol or cannabis unless there is evidence ofother current substance use that is a contributing factor.Informal referral and preassessment does occur and clients mayvoluntarily engage with a treatment agency prior to a formalreferral by the court (CDS 1993). CDS policy requires only that aperson admit to substance use, not to an alleged offence, thusthe person can be formally engaged in treatment for an admitteddrug problem and maintain a not guilty plea throughout the legalproceedings. If formal referral does not occur, the CDS is not empoweredto oversee the defendant's drug treatment and no CDS reports canbe provided to the courts on the defendants progress (CDS 1993). When formal referral to the CDS does occur, defendants areinformed of the relevant drug treatment agencies and theirphilosophies, and must choose. They are then required to remainwith that agency unless otherwise instructed by the CDS officer.Court appearances after formal referral are accompanied byinterim reports regarding progress, and at the point of plea orof a finding of guilt the defendant is generally remanded for afull pre-sentence report. The coercive nature of the CDS inengaging drug dependent persons in treatment programs duringtimes of legal crisis is acknowledged, and it is emphasised topotential clients that progress in treatment is only one aspecttaken into consideration by the sentencing judge or magistrate(CDS 1993). CDS personnel expressed the view that, whereas in the earlydays of the program there were mostly self-referrals, now mostare court-generated. People have always had the option oftreatment but clearly the catalyst is often a legal charge. Themore familiar the courts become with the process the more it isused, and it is regarded as being generally well accepted. Pre-court or pre-sentence diversion? As long as personalcannabis use/possession/cultivation remains illegal, thefundamental problem exists of the involvement of policediscretion and variation in enforcement policies from one officerto another and from one jurisdiction to another. Any contactbetween the cannabis user and the police (at street level) orbetween the user and the court has the potential for theindividual to have continuing involvement with the criminaljustice system. Police discretion at street level at the point ofarrest (or non-arrest) is inevitable. Police officers have thediscretion regarding whether or not to issue an expiation notice(in jurisdictions such as South Australia) or (in jurisdictionssuch as Victoria) to choose which (if any) of a number ofpossible charges they will lay, which can vary from possession totrafficking. While this could work in the interests of the offender, itmay also act in a discriminatory fashion, which is why many wouldmake the argument in favour of diversion systems which bring alloffenders before the court, thus guaranteeing them due process.Many lawyers tend to support leaving the conventional criminalprocessing intact 'to ensure that the diversion program does notresult in more coercive treatment of offenders through thenon-judicial exercise of discretion' (Dept of Attorney General1982, p78). In the case of expiation fines, it appears that manyfines are not being expiated.15 Therefore the objective ofrelieving the burden on the courts, while achieved to asubstantial degree, has not yet been 100 per cent successful, andthere is room for improvement in terms of reducing the number ofnon-expiators and consequently removing more offenders from thecriminal justice system. Diversion programs in other countries UNITED STATES The most prominent drug diversion programs in the US are theTreatment Alternatives to Street Crime (TASC) programs,established primarily to try to reduce the crime associated withdrug use (mainly heroin). This national pre-trial diversionprogram was expanded to include all drug users (except thosedependent on alcohol), including juveniles, recruited at allpoints of entry to the criminal justice system (e.g. throughpre-sentence referral, conditional probation, police diversionand conditional parole). The program varies with the differentlegal systems and drug problems existing from State to State. Forinstance, marijuana users and juveniles were excluded inColorado, whereas in Michigan marijuana users were preferred.Overall, however, most programs concentrated on heroin users([31]Dept of Attorney-General 1982, pp10-11). Such programs were not particularly amenable to satisfactoryevaluation and usually were restricted to an examination of howwell program objectives had been met. The results indicated: Dissatisfaction among law enforcement officials because of reduced opportunities for information from defendants regarding drug supplies (an example of the clash of philosophies between health authorities and law enforcement, which can be a factor contributing to failure in many diversion programs; this also indicates the emphasis on the supply reduction approach in the US, which is greater than that in Australia). Most of those diverted did not totally abstain from marijuana use although they reported reduced use (again this was not acceptable from the US total prohibition point of view, but a reduction in use can be seen as a successful program outcome in many treatment programs in Australia). There were fewer arrests and convictions (though marginally) among those diverted. There was some reduction in workload in the case of the prosecutor and the court but greatly increased workloads for the probation service. Purely from the treatment outcome point of view for the individual, the results were encouraging (though lack of adequate data precluded assessment of recidivism over the long term). Individuals' characteristics prior to program entry are an important determinant to successful program outcome (Rovner-Pieczenik cited in [32]Dept of Attorney-General 1982, p14). Criticisms of the program also include: The argument that the workloads of courts and prisons are not really reduced because people are being brought into the criminal justice process who would not have been processed at all, since they would have been handled in the community. Diversion programs are sometimes utilised by prosecutors and courts when less official procedures might accomplish the same objective with less intervention and use of court time. The court is saved time only if the accused would have gone to trial and then to jail. However diversion appears to be more an 'alternative todismissal of charges or probation than to incarceration'(Gorelick 1975 cited in [33]Dept of Attorney General 1982, p16).This view was also shared by the Canadian Law Reform Commission(Dept of Attorney-General 1982). Further criticisms were: That diversion might also come to carry with it a social stigma if it is an 'institutionalised element of the criminal justice system'. Unsuccessful participants may be disadvantaged when returned to the court system. Legal analysts are concerned about the exercise of judicial discretion by non-judicial bodies. Diversion could be seen as an expansion of social control, and the concept of 'need for treatment' has no inherent limitation ([34]Dept of Attorney-General 1982, pp16-17). All of the points made above are also valid for Australiandiversion schemes. A very recent form of pre-court intervention(for the purpose of treatment) operating in the US is the WeekendIntervention Program (WIP) which is reported to be 'highlyeffective in identifying and intervening with persons chargedwith alcohol- and other drug-related driving offences' (Siegal& Cole 1993). The underlying philosophy of the program is that the crisisnature of an encounter with the criminal justice system, ifsuccessfully managed, provides a valuable opportunity tointervene in an individual's life by identifying the clinicalneeds of substance users who are not yet receiving treatment, andin a non-punitive way 'gently' confronting participants with theconsequences of their own drug and alcohol use. The individual isprovided with a diagnostic assessment and treatment programrecommendation 'with a specificity unavailable throughtraditional settings' ([35]Siegal & Cole 1993, p133). Theprogram consists of a three-day residential program to whichpersons involved in a drug or alcohol offence may be remanded bya court or other supervising agency. It consists of 'Marathonsubstance abuse counselling sessions using acognitive-behavioural-oriented approach combined withpresentations structured around a modified health belief model'.This participation in the assessment and referral process itselfis regarded as being able to help prepare the substance user forany treatment to be received ([36]Siegal & Cole 1993,pp133-4). NEW ZEALAND New Zealand has an adult pre-trial diversion scheme whichcommenced operation in 1988. It was developed and is managed bythe New Zealand Police as part of a wider program which entailsan increasing emphasis on the use of discretion by police intheir handling of minor offenders. The scheme is not, at present,statutorily based although the Government is considering thisoption. The scheme is widely accepted by police officers, members ofthe judiciary and practising lawyers, as well as the offenderswho are offered pre-trial diversion. The New Zealand Police havedescribed the scheme in the following terms: The key steps in thescheme are that the offender must be a first offender (there arelimited exceptions in special cases), there is sufficientevidence to charge the offender, and information is then laid andat that stage the offender is considered for diversion. If theoffender meets the criteria [see below] and admits the offence tothe diversion coordinator (a police prosecutor) the court isasked to adjourn the case until the offender has completed therequirements of the diversion scheme. Those requirements mayconsist of paying money to a charity, doing community work,and/or attending specialist counselling depending on what problemthey may have, e.g. drugs, alcohol, anger management, etc. Oncethe requirements have been completed the police ask the court towithdraw the information (personal communication, New ZealandPolice, 17 December 1993). If the court agrees to withdraw theinformation, the offender is not convicted and the police destroythe offender's records, including fingerprints. The criteria for diversion are not rigid; they include thefollowing: The offender should be a first offender. There should be special circumstances which make the offender suitable for diversion. The offence must be non-serious. The offender must admit guilt, show remorse, and be prepared to pay full reparation to the victim. The victim must agree to diversion. The officer in charge of the case [generally the arresting officer] must agree to diversion. The offender must agree to diversion ([37]Young & Cameron 1991, pp9-10). The use of cannabis and the possession of small quantitiesfor personal use are considered to be minor offences, making anoffender eligible for consideration for diversion. (Clearly thecriterion relating to the consent of the victim is not relevantin such cases.) Consultants reviewed the scheme for the NewZealand Police in 1991. They reported that approximately 12 percent of the people dealt with through the diversionary processhad been charged with cannabis possession ([38]Young &Cameron 1991, pp41-6). The review indicated that the scheme wasgenerally very well received by all the parties involved and alsopointed to existing and potential difficulties and to ways inwhich it could be strengthened. The police and the Government arecurrently reviewing the scheme, considering the option of givingit a legislative base and ensuring that it operates in a similarmanner throughout the country. This diversionary scheme, combinedwith an actively implemented policy of cautioning minor offenderswhenever possible (rather than charging them), comprises anenlightened approach to the handling of minor offenders such ascannabis users. OTHER COUNTRIES An overview of international legislation relating todiversion, in countries covered by the World Health Organization([39]Porter, Arif & Curran 1986), indicates that manycountries provide for diversion to drug- and alcohol-dependencetreatment programs both separately and in combination, thecovering legislation falling into a variety of categories (e.g.mental health, public health, criminal or specialised treatmentlaws).16 The legal disposition of drug- or alcohol-dependent personsis frequently covered by the criminal law (e.g. under specifiedstatutory offence) or mental health legislation. In Victoria, forexample, treatment programs for drug and alcohol dependenceinclude provision for both voluntary and involuntary admission,while other provisions governing treatment may be found in roadtraffic laws and the mental health legislation (Porter, Arif& Curran 1986, pp36-37). Porter et al. emphasise theimportance of treatment as a service to the public and theindividual concerned, which should be available at every stage ofthe criminal justice system. Initial contact between the offender and the police can bevery important, as it may create the kind of crisis thatmotivates a person to undergo effective treatment, and the policeshould be 'both legally entitled and encouraged to refer theperson directly to a treatment program, in lieu of arrest, for ashort time until the emergency passes'. They claim that there aredefinite advantages in including treatment provisions in drugcontrol legislation because of the flexibility it gives to thecourts in imposing alternatives to penal sanctions ([40]Porter,Arif & Curran 1986, p116). To summarise some relevant points raised by Porter et al'soverview of international diversion legislation: 1. Cannabis is rarely named specifically in legislation relating to diversion for drug users who commit offences. Usually the legislation refers to 'narcotics', 'opiates', 'alcohol' or 'other drugs'. Although cannabis is usually not specifically singled out (as distinct from alcohol, for example, which is mostly treated in a special class of its own with specialised treatment), it falls within the general class of substances for which many countries legislate compulsory reporting and/or registration followed by referral into a treatment program. 2. There are many precedents among overseas countries for diversion and voluntary or non-voluntary commitment to treatment. There are also examples of such diversion occurring at every stage of the criminal justice process. 3. There is a clear lack of evaluation of programs, which means results cannot be quantified, but the general impression is one of diversion to treatment being more acceptable all round than imprisonment without rehabilitation, which would otherwise be the situation in countries with a total prohibition policy. 4. Civil commitment appears to be common internationally, but in Australia legislative provisions for civil commitment exist only in certain States, e.g. NSW and Victoria. (This is discussed further under the heading Compulsory Treatment for Drug Offenders: Criminal Justice System-Initiated Treatment and Civil Commitment.) 5. There are a wide variety of legislative approaches to treatment and many different routes. Among the problems raised are: 1. The different objectives (sometimes conflicting) of health professionals and legal practitioners, when diversion for treatment is involved. 2. The clear need for evaluation programs and for planning for these when the program is established. The importance is stressed of evaluating treatment programs in terms of the objectives stated in the legislation. It is important to establish realistic and concrete objectives for treatment in addition to the overriding goal of reducing morbidity and mortality. 3. With regard to compulsory treatment, it is acknowledged that it is in conflict with individual liberty and freedom of decision, and it is emphasised that the legislation should lay down the conditions governing participation in voluntary treatment programs, e.g. should the 'voluntary' status be ended if the client is not cooperating? 4. On occasions there may be legislation that is not used or does not work because of lack of suitable treatment facilities and resources. Drug diversion schemes of various types operate in overseascountries. In France, for example, an offender who complies witha court-determined treatment order is not liable to prosecution;in Germany, a period of treatment can be credited against acustodial sentence; in Massachusetts, a court-appointed diversionscheme operates to stay court proceedings ([41]Porter 1986,p171). In some countries, e.g. France and Italy, a personvoluntarily undergoing treatment, on completion is issued with acertificate as evidence to protect against subsequent prosecutionfor offences committed prior to treatment ([42]Leroy 1991). Ofthe 51 jurisdictions surveyed by the WHO, 22 diverted persons fortreatment at one or more of these stages in the criminal justiceprocess: (a) instead of arrest; (b) after arrest, pending trial;(c) after trial in lieu of imprisonment (e.g. suspendedsentence); and (d) correction with imprisonment (e.g. duringconfinement or as a condition of parole) (Porter, Arif &Curran 1986, p57). A major issue for legislators is whether such diversionshould be mandatory. If diversion is mandatory prior to orinstead of trial, this amounts to decriminalisation of theoffending behaviour.17 In Sweden, which allows for compulsorycommitment, there is now legislation in place criminalising druguse and widening the powers of the authorities to take adultalcohol and drug-dependent people into care. Sweden is a countrywith a strong temperance tradition which has led to 'an obsessionwith substance misuse generally'. Faced with the problem of AIDSand with economic difficulties, a 'new moralism' has developed inthis country leading to these harsher drug measures (Gould 1989,p731). Another approach to the handling of cannabis offenders isthat taken in the United Kingdom, where more than half of thepolice constabulary areas have allowed police officers to takenote of drug users found in possession of quantities of drugsconsistent with personal use. Police then have the option not toproceed with a legal charge unless the individual has beencautioned on more than two occasions previously ([43]Wodak 1993). A recent example of a pre-court initiative involving anattempt to bring drug users into contact with treatment is the'Southwark Arrest Referral Pilot Program', funded by the BritishHome Office Local Drug Prevention Team. This three-year pilotprogram, commenced in March 1991, is being carried out toestablish the effectiveness of arrest as an intervention for drugusers wanting help. Police provide arrestees with information onlocal drug referral agencies and cards are sent to all chargedoffenders. Also, drug workers are on call to visit the relevantpolice stations. Though referrals were not numerous, most ofthose participating in referral programs reported reduced druguse in the following 12-month period. The flaw in the program to date is the lack of effort andencouragement on the part of the police. However, it reflects anattempt to bring into a closer working relationship police andlocal welfare agencies in a harm reduction effort rather thansimply to exercise law enforcement against drug users([44]Walters & Coventry 1993, p12). Although the BritishCriminal Justice Act was proclaimed in 1991 with specificsections relating to the treatment of drug and alcohol dependentoffenders (Criminal Justice Act 1991, s69, schedule 1, cited inWalters and Coventry 1993, p11) and allowing for referral andassessment procedures as components of non-custodial orders, itdoes not establish diversionary programs for drug offenders. Compulsory treatment for drug users CRIMINAL JUSTICE SYSTEM-INITIATED DRUG TREATMENT AND CIVILCOMMITMENT A number of literature reviews have concluded that treatmentcan effectively reduce drug use as well as the criminal activitywhich often accompanies it ([45]Anglin & Hser 1990; Gerstein1990; Office of Technology Assessment 1990 in Anglin & Hser1991, p244). There is also increasing evidence that those coercedinto treatment by way of the criminal justice system achieve thesame success as those entering voluntarily (Anglin & Hser1991, p244). The issue for makers of social policy is how to increase thenumber entering treatment, since 'the nature of drug use,especially at abusive and addictive levels, often inhibits orprecludes self-motivation in the user toward voluntarily seekingtreatment' (Anglin & Hser 1991, p247). Many would say that 'when offenders, such as arrestees,probationers, inmates or parolees, are identified as substanceabusers by the criminal justice system, remanding to treatment isa necessary and logical action ... One of the most successful ofcoercive efforts has been civil commitment' (Anglin & Hser1991, p247; see also discussion below of countries which employcivil commitment). Carney, in his Drug Users and the Law inAustralia (1987), points out that, in Australia, civil commitmentpolicies for drug-dependent people date back to the 19th century,and were based on the early view of drug use as a 'disease' forwhich in-patient therapy should be compulsory (1987, p1). As early as 1867, Victoria copied Scotland's move to amendits lunacy laws to allow inebriates to be admitted to 'lunaticasylums', and in 1872 passed the Victorian Inebriates Act, whichwas the first comprehensive Inebriates Act to be enacted outsideAmerica. The other Australian States followed, with legislationin Tasmania in 1873, in South Australia in 1874, in Queensland in1898, in New South Wales in 1900 and in Western Australia in 1903(1987, p3). Much of the Australian State legislation has survivedto the present time. When Queensland was debating its legislationin 1896, the subject of drugs other than alcohol, i.e. 'opium,chloral and other drugs', came up for the first time (1987, p13).Legislation providing for voluntary or compulsory civil admissionto treatment facilities of alcohol or drug-dependent people is inforce in most of the major Australian jurisdictions - but is notmuch utilised. Carney (1987, pp52-53) outlines four approaches tothe regulation of entry to civil treatment schemes for dependentdrug users - the fourth 'applies the classic justifications forthe enactment of criminal law, namely that the actions of theprospective patient constitutes an intolerable degree of harm toother members of the community. Judicial commitment of offenders,and some third party proceedings initiated by police officers,fit this model' (1987, p53). Moving to the United States, the origins of 'civilcommitment' for opiate-dependent (and also alcohol-dependent)people date back to the second half of the 19th century when someof the laws enacted to provide for the civil commitment of thementally ill also permitted civil commitment of people dependenton narcotics ([46]Rosenthal 1988). In the United States civilcommitment generally takes the form, described by [47]Brown(1988, p664), of the direct remanding of the individual to thehealth care system in which civil procedures alone are broughtinto play ... This administrative/judicial action need notinvolve provision of legal counsel, the potential for judgment byone's peers, access to witnesses for one's defense, etc. With some exceptions (see Newman 1986, cited in [48]Brown1988), diversion from the criminal justice system for drugtreatment seems to be acceptable to both health and criminaljustice authorities. However, in democratic countries, civilcommitment of the drug user conflicts with many people's viewsregarding civil rights, the proper relationship of the individualto the State and the use of the health care system for socialcontrol. Regardless, legislation in a number of countriesprovides for such civil commitment for drug use. [49]Porter etal. (1986) point out that in 27 (comprising 32 separatejurisdictions) of the countries they surveyed, there wasprovision for civil commitment under certain conditions, as thereare in 35 American States. It has been argued (Bejerot 1983 & Webster 1986, cited inBrown 1988) that such extreme measures to deal with drug use musthave wide public support. Generally the rationale for such actionis that drug use is a threat to the country's stability (as inSingapore in the case of heroin dependence among young males) ora threat to the country achieving its economic goals, e.g.Malaysia, where the Government decided that the drug problem wasa threat to national security as the country was 'losing itsmanpower to drugs' ([50]Rysavy 1990).18 In 1983, due to an increasing heroin problem in Malaysia, thepowers of police and drug rehabilitation officers were extended,allowing them to arrest and detain persons suspected of usingillegal substances. A positive urine sample resulted in mandatorydrug treatment. Ten per cent of those in treatment in 1989 wereundertaking rehabilitation for cannabis use only. All programswere the same, lasting a maximum of two years with two years'compulsory aftercare, an important part of which was theassignment of a drug-free 'guardian' to act as a role model andto provide positive support. Any infringement of rules duringtreatment resulted in severe punishment, and any drug use afterrelease from treatment resulted in incarceration (Rysavy 1990).Needless to say the program has a high success rate, but isunlikely to fit other countries with cultures differing from thatof Malaysia. Brown summarises the conditions that 'on the basis of othersocieties' actions, have been described as necessary to theimplementation of civil commitment procedures: there needs to be the appearance of risk to the larger society through the subgroup's (i.e. drug users') inappropriate behaviours; there needs to be the capacity to marshal public support for such action; there must be a capacity to identify and isolate the subgroup demonstrating the offending behaviour; the subgroup must be without sufficient political support to withstand the competing political pressure; there must be the machinery to process, detain and confine those whose behaviour is inappropriate or threatening; and there should be a belief in the ability of the community to put in place initiatives that will humanely change individuals' behaviour for their own and for the larger society's well-being ([51]Brown 1988, p676). Brown goes on to say that it is likely that jurisdictionswill retain the option to call upon civil commitment in the eventof a situation arising which has the capacity to 'disrupt thenormal course of society and for which criminal prosecution maybe seen as either inappropriate, unwarranted or infeasible'. Atthe same time, only with the greatest conservatism will civilcommitment be likely to be employed, due to a general distastefor such emergency measures ([52]Brown 1988). The contribution tothe spread of AIDS of intravenous drug use, and its repercussionsfor individual drug users and the wider society, is potentiallyone such situation. Throughout the wide variety of countries providing for civilcommitment for drug use, there have been few studies of theefficacy of such treatment ([53]Brown 1988). However, somestudies have been produced by the US and these are discussedbelow. Generally, in the majority of countries, grounds forcommitment are provided either in mental health legislation orspecific drug legislation. Countries using mental healthlegislation usually include provision for commitment for threatsboth to others and to self. Germany, Japan and Somalia, forexample, provide for civil commitment if the drug-relateddisorder 'constitutes an imminent threat to public safety, orwhen individuals pose a danger to their own life and health'([54]Brown 1988, p666). Bangladesh, on the other hand, specifiesonly the existence of psychiatric disturbance without elaborationof threat, and Trinidad and Tobago emphasise the individual'sinability to provide for himself (Brown 1988). Fifteen out of 43countries surveyed by [55]Porter et al (1986) provide for civilcommitment under legislation specific to drug use, where thecriteria may be limited to evidence of dependence (as in Mexico,Columbia, Peru, Thailand and Malaysia). Some (i.e. Argentina,Italy, Australia and Sweden) also include reference to the threatposed to others and/or to the need for treatment. In Victoria(Australia) under the Alcoholics and Drug Dependent Persons Actof 18 December 1968, an alcohol- or drug-dependent person'suitable for treatment' (i.e. 'who habitually uses drugs ofaddiction to such an extent that he has lost the power ofself-control with respect to the use of drugs of addiction'(Porter et al 1986, p126), may be committed for seven days and,at the discretion of the medical officer in charge of theassessment centre (the decision-making authority), for anotherseven days. A consensus statement issued by the participants at a meetingin the US to examine research findings relating to civilcommitment and mandatory treatment, particularly in relation tohindering the spread of AIDS, found that 'treatment is effectivein reducing intravenous drug abuse and that the length of time intreatment is positively related to treatment success, thecriminal justice system is important for identification andretention of drug abusers in treatment' ([56]Leukefeld & Tims1988). It was further recommended at this meeting that 'the term"compulsory treatment" be used rather than "civilcommitment" to capture a wider range of possibleinterventions, since civil commitment is only one type ofcompulsory treatment. Further, it is essential that candidatesfor compulsory treatment receive appropriate legal protections.'In the US, despite interest in the early 1970s due to 'high ratesof recidivism and criminal justice system over-crowding and theshift away from a rehabilitative philosophy in corrections,programs for drug-abusing offenders have languished in the 1980suntil fairly recently' ([57]Anglin and Hser 1990, p424). However, the 1960s saw the beginning of civil commitment fordrug-abusing offenders in some States of the US. These were basedon the therapeutic community philosophy. There are fewevaluations of treatment for offenders except for these civilcommitment programs, and such programs as have been developed areso recent that they have not been evaluated. CIVIL COMMITMENT IN THE US Compulsory treatment of drug users has been a controversialissue worldwide for decades. In response to two forces, one aimedat more effective treatment of problem drug users and the otherat social control of the problem user, civil commitmentlegislation was enacted in the US in the 1960s and 1970s([58]Rosenthal 1988). Following this, three major treatment programs wereestablished: the California Civil Addict Program, the New YorkCivil Commitment Program and programs under the federal NarcoticAddict Rehabilitation Act (NARA) ([59]Anglin & Hser 1990,p425), enabling large-scale commitment of drug-dependent people.However, relatively few persons were committed under theMassachusetts law, one of the earliest in the country, anddespite civil commitment laws in many other jurisdictions theyremained only statutes on the books (Rosenthal 1988). Since involuntary civil commitment involves a substantialdeprivation of liberty, various aspects of the California and NewYork programs were challenged quite early - the federal programfor involuntary civil commitment of drug users not charged with acrime was not challenged in this way, presumably because thefederal program permitted only relatives to initiate commitment,and few relatives did. Despite challenges to theconstitutionality of involuntary treatment, the Californian andNew York courts held in its favour. They were, however,influenced by the Supreme Court case of Robinson v. Californiawhich did not really involve the constitutionality of involuntarycommitment at all but rather the question of whether it wasconstitutional for a State to make 'addiction' a crime:'Nevertheless, the Supreme Court declared (in a dictum) that aState might establish a program of compulsory treatment foropiate addicts either to discourage violation of its criminallaws against narcotic trafficking or to safeguard the generalhealth or welfare of its inhabitants' ([60]Rosenthal 1988, p641). It has been suggested that because this case did not involvethe constitutionality of involuntary treatment of opiate users,the Supreme Court did not go into that question as deeply as itmight have and, in turn, the California and New York courtsrelied too much on the Supreme Court dictum without delvingdeeply enough into the question. The Supreme Court decisiontherefore meant almost inevitably that in future cases thesubstantive validity of involuntary civil commitment would beupheld (Rosenthal 1988, p643). Under the legislation discussed here anyone found in amedical examination to be dependent on drugs (usually heroin)could be committed. Mostly those committed had been arrested forproperty crimes or drug trafficking and were diverted from theusual criminal processing. Usually there were two phases oftreatment, initially one of imprisonment, plus a period of paroleor monitored community release. During both phases the goal wasreduced drug use and criminal behaviour; vocational training wassometimes added. The California Civil Addict Program was more successful thanthe New York State program, primarily due to better management.The main results of evaluations were that program participantsreduced 'narcotic use and associated property crime' to one-thirdcompared with those not in the program ([61]Lindblad 1988).Overall, studies of the California CAP concluded that civilcommitment and other drug treatment programs, particularlymethadone maintenance, were effective in reducing narcoticsdependence and minimising the associated adverse social effects,the important issue being that the dependence should be broughtinto an environment where intervention can occur over time. In this respect, civil commitment and other legally coercivemeasures were found to be useful where the dependent person wouldnot enter treatment voluntarily ([62]Anglin 1988a). A vital issueis the implementation strategy employed, which can 'ensure orsabotage success' (Anglin 1988a, p539). Although NARA was acomparatively short-lived program superseded by otherlegislation, it provided a national network of treatmentproviders and was regarded as an effective way of bringingnarcotic dependent people into treatment. NARA allowed treatmentfor offenders as a pre-trial civil commitment, rather thanprosecution for drug-dependent people convicted of a specificcrime and for voluntary applicants. Those admitted to the programdid as well or better than those in other programs (Lindblad1988). TASC PROGRAMS IN THE US More recently in the US, coordinated programs have beendeveloped in a number of States to refer 'drug-abusing offendersto community-based treatment in lieu of prosecution or probationrevocation', e.g. the Treatment Alternatives to Street Crime(TASC) program ([63]Anglin & Hser 1990, p428), begun in 1972and by 1988 operating in 18 States (Cook et al. 1988 in Anglin& Hser 1990, p428). This provides community-based treatmentfor drug-dependent offenders who 'otherwise might becomeprogressively more involved with the criminal justice system'(p428). Diversionary dispositions such as deferred prosecution,creative community sentencing, and pretrial intervention are usedto motivate offenders to enter and remain in treatment.Evaluation Such limited evaluation as has taken place (throughthe Treatment Outcomes Prospective Study) indicates that criminaljustice referred clients, because they were monitored, tended tostay in treatment longer than voluntary clients, which is usuallyassociated with more successful treatment outcomes ([64]Anglin& Hser 1990, p429). Although evaluations of treatment are positive, it remains aquestion as to whether improvements would have occurred over timeanyway due to maturation or other outside influences. In terms ofclient characteristics and treatment effectiveness, it was foundthat 'addicts who have a more stable family background, an intactmarriage, a job, a history of minimal criminality, less evidenceof alcohol or polydrug abuse, and less severe psychiatricdisorders are more likely to achieve a better outcome in mostprograms' (Anglin & Hser 1990, p429). Many studies have shown that, while older clients, mostlyopiate users, tend to stay in treatment longer and thereforebenefit most (possibly due to the 'maturing out' effect noted byWinick (1962 in Anglin & Hser 1990, p435), those under 25tend to leave treatment prematurely, thus limiting theirprospects for effective results. In terms of program factorswhich appeared to be most beneficial, the significant ones were:psychotherapy, urine testing, and legal coercion. 'Clientsreferred from the criminal justice system have been shown to stayin treatment longer than other clients' (Collins et al., cited in[65]Leukefeld & Timms 1988, p57) and longer retentionsuggests better treatment outcomes than with other clients (butsee above). Some argue that treatment cannot be effective if the clientis coerced, and the findings are not consistent on this issue.However, the best-designed studies 'generally support theproposition that a collaborative relationship between thecriminal justice system and community-treatment delivery systemsproduces, at an aggregate level, enhanced treatment outcomes'([66]Anglin & Hser 1990, p439). While length of retention intreatment is an important predictor of success it appears that'for many drug abusers, repeated exposure to treatment is moreeffective than one episode' (McLellan & Druley 1977 in Anglin& Hser 1990, p441). Total time in treatment may be more important, when accruedacross treatment episodes, than retention in a single program(p441). In a number of other countries, any illegal drug useincluding that of cannabis is sufficient grounds for recommendingor ordering treatment, implying that some other countries regardcannabis use more seriously than Australia does, and deserving oftreatment. The mode of treatment depends on the profile of theindividual user and on such factors as are mentioned elsewhere inthis report, e.g. whether the person is a polydrug user, lengthof time of use, degree of psychopathology and so forth.Outpatient non-methadone programs which involve clients with alltypes of drug use who tend not to have serious criminalhistories, are the most obvious option for treatment of cannabisdependence. Therapeutic communities are not necessarily specificto any class of drug and could also therefore potentially be ofbenefit to certain cannabis-dependent persons. Since the numbers of cannabis users who have problems isstill small and very few are likely to be seriously enoughdependent to be referred by the court, it is unlikely thattreatment facilities could not incorporate them. Summary of findings A summary of findings from Australian and internationalliterature concerned with diversion and treatment for drugoffenders suggests the following conclusions with relation tocannabis users: While the vast majority of cannabis users do not report any problems, there are increasing reports of individuals both in Australia and in other countries (e.g. the United States and New Zealand) who are seeking treatment for cannabis dependence. It is generally accepted that a prison sentence is unsatisfactory for offenders with drug problems, and diversion with the purpose of treatment is a widely used alternative, welcomed by judges and magistrates. Usually the illegal drug involved is heroin but occasionally cannabis is the offender's primary drug. Criminal justice involvement is seen as providing an opportunity to intervene in drug users' lives in order to confront the users with their drug problems and to bring them into contact with treatment agencies, often for the first time. The earlier the intervention in the users' lives the better, and the longer (or more frequent) the periods of treatment, the more successful the treatment outcome. In some cases merely attending for assessment is sufficient to bring about a change in attitude since the users are often confronted with their drug problem for the first time. While some dispute the value of coercion in getting drug users into treatment, it is often the only way, and there is more evidence to indicate successful treatment results for involuntary than for voluntary clients. This is primarily due to the length of time spent in treatment. Frequently the attitude of an unwilling client will change quite quickly once treatment has begun. The success of diversion to treatment programs depends on the skill and experience of the drug counsellor, the availability of sufficient places in suitable treatment facilities, and close cooperation between health and criminal justice agencies. It would be more cost effective to provide additional funds for the training of counsellors and the provision of suitable facilities than to continue to send repeat drug offenders to prison. Conclusions regarding treatment for cannabis offenders, particularly repeat offenders, are as follows: There are reports from most diversion programs/treatment agencies of individuals being referred for other drug use who also have serious problems in reducing or ceasing their cannabis use. Some of these may also be alcohol-dependent. There appears then to be some demand for cannabis treatment in this country. Interpreting treatment in its broadest and most ideal sense (i.e. as a program personally selected by the client in consultation with a counsellor, tailored to the needs and characteristics of the particular individual), for a repeat offender facing a prison sentence, treatment is a preferable alternative. Treatment appears to have the potential to help offenders restructure their lives in such a way as to avoid breaches of the law which bring them continually into contact with the criminal justice system. In the sense that treatment may be 'compulsory' (i.e. court mandated), while the client must be assessed as suitable for treatment (genuinely motivated to participate, although there may be some initial resistance), the advantage of the compulsory nature of the treatment is that it provides the 'crisis' generally acknowledged as necessary to get most drug users into treatment and to keep them there long enough for a successful outcome. In the case of cannabis use, the earlier the intervention the better, since there is likely to be less criminal involvement and therefore more likelihood of a successful outcome for the client. Young users, particularly juveniles, should receive more attention than they appear to be getting at present in Australia from, for instance, juvenile 'panels' (such as those in South Australia) for whom this is not a major focus. A final consideration regarding the treatment option for cannabis users is the availability of treatment programs and facilities and counsellors of sufficient quality and in sufficient numbers to accommodate those referred from the court system, since this is vital for successful treatment outcomes. Conclusion In this chapter we have discussed the two related fields ofdiversion and treatment for drug offenders. We believe that fewpeople would disagree with the wisdom of diversion from thecriminal justice system for minor cannabis offenders. Further,though some would object that treatment of drug offenders is aform of social control and that the concept of the 'need fortreatment' has no inherent limitation, the evidence suggeststhat, although methodological problems exist in the evaluation oftreatment programs, most of the programs outlined here haveachieved a certain level of success in terms of meeting theirobjectives - which generally means, in the Australian context,reducing the drug use, and associated involvement with thecriminal justice system, of the individual undergoing treatment. Disagreement arises regarding the degree of interventionwhich should be exercised by the criminal justice system, as anagent of the State, in coercing drug offenders into treatment -in its most extreme form, through civil commitment. While theUnited States, for example, indicates considerable support forcivil commitment, in Australia, although commitment exists as alegislative option, there has been reluctance to use it. Thisdecision with respect to the balance between protecting societyand infringing the rights of individuals is a matter for theparticular society involved and the prevailing mores at the time. References Anglin, M.D. 1988, 'A social policy analysis of compulsorytreatment for opiate dependence: Introduction', Journal of DrugIssues, vol. 18, no. 4, pp503-504. Anglin, M.D. 1988a, 'The efficacy of civil commitment intreating narcotics addiction', Journal of Drug Issues, vol. 18,no. 4, pp527-545. Anglin, M.D. & Hser, Y. 1990, 'Treatment of drug abuse',in Drugs and Crime, ed. Tonry & J.Q. Wilson, University of Chicago Press, Chicago, pp393-460, Crime and Justice: A Review of Research, vol. 13. Brown, B.S. 1988, 'Civil commitment-An internationalperspective', Journal of Drug Issues, vol. 18, no. 4, pp663-678. Bush, R. & Scagliotti, L. 1983, 'Programmes for opiateusers at the criminal justice and health care interface, asystems analysis of the New South Wales experience', paperpresented at the Stipendiary Magistrates Conference in New SouthWales, May, pp95-120. C ourt Diversion Service (Western Australia), 1993, Briefsummary of the Court Diversion Service, provided by the WesternAustralia Alcohol and Drug Authority, Central Drug Unit, EastPerth. Department of the Attorney-General & of Justice. NSW Bureau of Crime Statistics & Research. 1982, TheSydney Drug Diversion Programme, The First Two Years. Desland, M. & Batey, R. 1990, 'Criminality of heroinusers presenting to an Australian hospital-based drug and alcoholunit', British Journal of Addiction, vol. 85, pp795-801. Desland, M.L. & Batey, R.G. 1992, 'A 12-month prospectivecomparison of court-diverted with self-referred heroin users',Drug and Alcohol Review, vol. 11, pp121-129. Desland, M. & Batey, R. 1991, 'Legal Coercion andTreatment, Screening for Drug Abuse - A Community Challenge',proceedings of a Conjoint Conference organised by the AustralianAssociation of Clinical Biochemists and the Australian Medicaland Professional Society on Alcohol and Drugs, ANU, Canberra1988, Monograph/The Clinical Biochemist; 5th Maylands, W.A. Australian Association of Clinical Biochemists. Gray, Y.,Reynolds, C. & Rumbold, M. 1992, 'The South Australian DrugAssessment and Aid Panels: An alternative to the criminal law forillicit drug users', in Drug Problems in Society: Dimensions andPerspectives, ed. J. White, pp127-134. Jones, R.T., Benowitz, N. & Bachman, J. 1976, 'Clinicalstudies of cannabis tolerance and dependence', Annals of the NewYork Academy of Sciences, vol. 282, pp221-239. Kleiman, M.A.R. 1992, Against Excess. Drug Policy forResults, Basic Books, New York. Leroy, B, 1991, The Community of Twelve and the Drug Demand.Comparative Study of Legislations and Judicial Practice,Commission of the European Community, Luxembourg. Leukefeld, C.G. & Tims, F.L. (eds) 1988, CompulsoryTreatment of Drug Abuse: Research and Clinical Practice.Rockville, MD, National Institute on Drug Abuse, NIDA ResearchMonograph 86. Lindblad, R. 1988. 'Civil commitment under the FederalNarcotic Addict Rehabilitation Act', Journal of Drug Issues, vol.18, no. 4, pp595-624. McBride, D.C. & Inciardi, J.A. 1993, 'The focusedoffender disposition program: Philosophy, procedures, andpreliminary findings', Journal of Drug Issues, vol 23, no.1pp143-160. Ministry of Welfare, Health and Cultural Affairs/Ministry ofJustice (Netherlands), 1992. The Drug Policy in the Netherlands,Government report, December 1992 version, Rijswijk's/Gravenhage. MSJ Keys Young 1992, Evaluation of NCADA-Funded Drug andAlcohol Services in the Department of Corrective Services and theCommunity Corrections Service, MSJ Keys Young, Surry Hills. New South Wales Bureau of Crime Statistics and Research.1992, New South Wales Recorded Crime Statistics 1991, Sydney. Nowlan, R. & Cohen, S. 1977, 'Tolerance to marijuana:Heart rate and subjective "high"', ClinicalPharmacology and Therapeutics, vol. 22, no. 5, pp550-556. Porter, L., Arif, A.E. & Curran, W.J. 1986, The Law andthe Treatment of Drug- and Alcohol-dependent Persons: AComparative Study of Existing Legislation, WHO, Geneva. Roffman, R.A., Stephens, R.S., Simpson, E.E. & Whitaker,D.L. 1988, 'Treatment of Marijuana Dependence: PreliminaryResults', Journal of Psychoactive Drugs, vol. 20, no. 1,pp129-137. Rosenthal, M.P1988, 'The constitutionality of involuntarycivil commitment of opiate addicts', Journal of Drug Issues, vol.18, no. 4, pp641-661. Rysavy, P. 1990, 'Drug rehabilitation in Malaysia',Australian Therapeutic Communities Association Magazine, October,pp 36-37. Salmon, R. & Salmon, K. 1983, 'The role of coercion inthe rehabilitation of drug abusers', International Journal of theAddictions, vol. 8, pp9-21. Sarre, R., Sutton, A. & Pulsford, T. 1989, Cannabis. TheExpiation Notice Approval, Office of Crime Statistics, SouthAustralian Attorney-General's Department, Adelaide. Schlosser, D. 1984, An Investigation of Court Referrals andVoluntary Referrals at Bourke Street Drug Advisory Service(Sydney, NSW): Main Report, Sydney, NSW Drug and AlcoholAuthority Publication. Siegal, H.A. & Cole, P.A. 1993, 'Enhancing criminaljustice based treatment through the application of theintervention approach', Journal of Drug Issues, vol. 23, no. 1,pp131-142. South Australia Police Department, 1992, Crime Statistics andAnalysis, Supplement to the 1991-92 Annual Report, Adelaide. South Australia. Royal Commission into the Non-Medical Use ofDrugs 1979, Final Report, South Austrlian Government, Adelaide. Tennant, F.S. 1986a, 'The clinical syndrome of marijuanadependence', Psychiatric Annals, vol. 16, no. 4, pp225-42. Tennant, F.S. 1986b, 'Neurophysiology of marijuanadependence', paper presented at Marijuana Dependence: A NationalConference, San Francisco, October. Victoria Police. 1992, Statistical Review 1991/92, Melbourne. Walters, R. & Coventry, G. 1993, A Proposal forEstablishing a Pre-Court Drug Diversion Program in Victoria.Draft Discussion Paper-For Information Only, May, National Centrefor Socio-Legal Studies, Melbourne. Williams, R.J. 1981, The Drug and Alcohol Court AssessmentProgramme (DACAP). Pilot Project: (December, 1979 to December,1980), Final Report to the N.S.W. Drug and Alcohol Authority,Diversion 3/81. Wodak, A. 1993, 'Prohibition has Failed. What Next?', paperdelivered at the Australian Institute of Criminology's Law,Medicine and Criminal Justice Conference, Surfer's Paradise, 6-8July. Young, W. & Cameron, N. 1991, Adult Pre-trial Diversionin New Zealand, Young & Cameron Policy & ResearchConsultants, Wellington. CliffSchaffer's Home Page WT01-B29-3IA030-000641-B023-114http://206.61.184.43:80/schaffer/LIBRARY/studies/aus/can_ch6.htm 206.61.184.43 19970122140051 text/html 13419HTTP/1.0 200 OKDate: Wednesday, 22-Jan-97 14:00:27 GMTServer: WebSitePro/1.1f (S/N wpo-0deb)Allow-ranges: bytesContent-type: text/htmlLast-modified: Saturday, 28-Dec-96 07:14:46 GMTContent-length: 13201 Australian Cannabis (Marijuana) Study - Chapter 6 Chapter 6: EVALUATING NEW LEGISLATIVE APPROACHES TO CANNABIS The principle of evaluating new policy and legislation iswidely accepted, but is less frequently observed in practice. InAustralia and most Western nations, little has been done,especially by government agencies, to monitor and evaluate, in asystematic manner, their national drug policies. This is the casein instances where legislation has developed incrementally (as inmost of Australia's States and Territories) and where newapproaches have been implemented following detailed policyreviews (e.g. the Australian Capital Territory's cannabisexpiation notice initiative). Too often evaluation is consideredrelevant only after a policy has been in place for some time andchanges are being considered. To be of most value, new initiatives should be designed andimplemented with an explicit and adequately resourced monitoringand evaluation component built into the initiative from theoutset. In the context of evaluating new legislative approachesto cannabis, we suggest that policy evaluation and programevaluation be considered separately. The bulk of this paper hasaddressed the evaluation of policies, as reflected throughlegislative options. The details of evaluating the implementationof policies, focusing on the programs themselves, are matterswhich need to be addressed after the broad policy issues aresettled and particular new approaches are agreed upon. We provide below an overview of the steps involved in bothevaluative tasks. The National Drug Strategic Plan 1993-97(Ministerial Council on Drug Strategy 1993) provides theframework within which we base our recommendations relating tomonitoring and evaluation. The Plan is explicitly goal-attainmentfocused, the approach that we argued for in [1]Chapter 2, where we highlighted theimportance of clarity in the specification of the goals of drugpolicy, legislation and program implementation. The Plan providesan overarching goal (or 'mission') for Australian drug policy:'The overall mission of the National Drug Strategy is to minimisethe harmful effects of drugs and drug use in Australian society'(MCDS 1993, p6). Policies and programs in specific areas, including cannabis,should be evaluated in a manner consistent with this nationalgoal. Applying goal attainment models of evaluation is a morecomplex task than it sometimes seems to be initially. Substantialtechnical difficulties exist in both designing and conductingevaluation research; part of this is the often complex task ofidentifying policy and program goals. Our discussion in [2]Chapter 2referred to the fact that, in practice, a particular cannabispolicy can relate to goals which are inconsistent: the attainmentof one may militate against the attainment of another. Needschange over time; often policy and legislation are far behind.For a given policy, it is likely that a hierarchy of goals willexist: the mission statement of the National Drug Strategic Planis an overarching goal, one which must be articulated in termswhich encompass other goals such as those concerned specificallywith cannabis. Policy evaluation and decision-making In [3]Chapter 4 we outlined fivebroad policy and legislative options for cannabis in Australia.The approach taken there is a contribution to policy evaluationin this area, and, by extension, a contribution todecision-making. But how are decisions about drug policy to bemade? One approach is the making of ad hoc decisions. This must berejected in favour of more systematic policy choice models. Theliterature differentiates two groups of decision-making modelsfor use by governments: 'rational' and 'incremental' approaches(see, e.g. Corbett 1992, pp59-76; Davis et al.1993, pp157-81).The rational approach, illustrated below, is something of anideal. It is not always easy to implement in practice, but thealternative (making decisions incrementally without everreconsidering the overall needs and patterns of policy responses)is much less attractive. Applying a rational approach todecision-making in evaluating new legislative approaches tocannabis use (as different from evaluating the actualimplementation of new legislation and resulting programs), wesuggest that the following issues be taken into account: The need to examine the sources of the proposal and the context within which it has been presented. The need to clarify just why that approach (rather than a different one) is proposed. The need to identify the goals which the new approach, if implemented, would attain. The philosophical and pragmatic goals should both be specified. Multiple goals may be identified and inconsistencies between them made explicit. The need to assess the likely impacts on key stakeholders, if the approach were to be implemented. For each key stakeholder, assess the likely costs and benefits, both intended and unintended. The need to review the depth, breadth, relevance and quality of the data currently available to assist the evaluation of the proposed approach. Determine whether or not it is, in fact, feasible to reach a conclusion on the value of the proposed policy, given the availability of data to answer questions about the proposal's likely outcomes and impacts. The need to make judgments regarding: (a) the value of the goal or goals; (b) how achievable the goals are; and (c) if the goals are judged to be achievable, how effective, efficient and appropriate are the implementation programs. This systematic approach to policy evaluation is not oftenseen in the development of drugs policy. Nevertheless, in thearea of legislative options for cannabis in Australia, policymakers have the capacity to apply such a process. This should beundertaken as part of the National Drug Strategic Plan's projectto develop a national statement on cannabis, one which includes acontemporary perspective on the most appropriate legislativeoption or options for cannabis. Program evaluation It is beyondthe scope of this report to present details on the techniques ofprogram evaluation. These are to be found in standard textbooks(Brinkerhoff et al. 1983; Hawe et al. 1991; Guba & Lincoln1989; Morris 1987; Patton 1990; Rossi & Freeman 1989). One point to be made, however, is that the evaluationresearch model and techniques employed should be selected on thebasis of answering a precisely defined evaluation question. Ifthe evaluation question is, for example, 'What has been theimpact on policing of a new legislative approach to cannabis',quite different evaluation techniques will be used from asituation where the evaluation question is 'How cost-effectivehas the new approach been', or 'How relevant is currentlegislation to contemporary needs?'. No single approach coversall circumstances. Again, the National Drug Strategic Plan emphasises theimportance of monitoring and evaluation. Under the heading'Policy Approach', it states: The National Drug Strategic Planexplicitly identifies policy objectives and indicators to enablethe effectiveness of the program to be evaluated. The NationalDrug Strategic Plan is committed to the application ofneeds-based planning and evaluation activities to ensure theeffectiveness and efficiency of strategies employed to minimisedrug-related harm (MCDS 1993, p5). We commend those responsiblefor this emphasis, but note that this policy cannot beimplemented without the allocation of a significant level ofresources. The oft-stated policy that evaluation should be anintegral part of all drug-related programs can only be realisedif program budgets include sufficient funds to cover the designand conduct of monitoring and evaluation, and if reporting timeframes are appropriate to the evaluation model being employed.Indicators A related strength of the National Drug Strategic Planwhich is highly relevant to the present review is its focus onindicators of program implementation, short-term outcomes andlonger-term and broader impacts. The indicators selected for thispurpose will depend on the particular initiative being evaluated;accordingly, they cannot be comprehensively described here.Within Australia, the work of Sarre, Sutton and Pulsford (1989)and of Christie (1991) in evaluating the South Australiancannabis expiation notice scheme, and of the Queensland CriminalJustice Commission's Advisory Committee on Illicit Drugs (1993)are examples of the effective use of indicators in the monitoringand evaluation of cannabis legislation. Single's (1989) review ofthe USA experience of marijuana 'decriminalisation' demonstratesthe dearth of information available in that country to evaluatethe legislative changes initiated over the last 20 years.Elsewhere in this paper we have referred to such evaluation dataas are available relating to other nations. Without seeking to beexhaustive, we list here some examples of indicators which aresignificant inputs to policy and program evaluation relating tonew legislative initiatives concerned with cannabis: The impact on social justice in Australian society of the implementation of cannabis legislation. Costs of cannabis controls, including the transfer of resources. The effectiveness and efficiency of the implementation of policies and legislation. Public opinion concerning cannabis. Cannabis consumption patterns and levels. Numbers and characteristics of the people presenting to treatment agencies with cannabis-related health and social problems. Cannabis-related offences. Cannabis-related driving and motor vehicle crashes. THC levels of the cannabis available to consumers. Cannabis-related workplace accidents. Conclusion In this section we have discussed the evaluation of newlegislative approaches to cannabis use in Australia. We havedifferentiated between policy evaluation and program evaluation,and have pointed to the need to develop indicators, tied tospecific initiatives, of activities, outcomes and impacts.Undertaking high quality, systematic policy evaluation concerningcannabis is essential and this paper contributes to that process.Research aimed at developing evaluation techniques and programindicators will be needed as part of the development andimplementation of new legislative approaches in this area. References Brinkerhoff, R. et al. 1983, Program Evaluation, Kluwer-Nijhoff, Boston. Corbett, D. 1992, Australian Public Sector Management, Allen & Unwin, St Leonards. Davis, G., Wanna, J., Warhurst, J. & Weller, P. 1993, Public Policy in Australia, 2nd ed., Allen & Unwin, St Leonards. Guba, E. & Lincoln, Y. 1989, Fourth Generation Evaluation, Sage, Beverly Hills. Hawe, D., Degeling, P. & Hall, J. 1990, Evaluating Health Promotion: A Health Worker's Guide, MacLennan & Petty, Sydney. McDermott, F., Pyett, P. & Hamilton, M. 1991, Evaluate Yourself: A Handbook for Alcohol and Other Drug Treatment Agencies, [National Campaign Against Drug Abuse, Canberra]. Ministerial Council on Drug Strategy (MCDS) 1993, National Drug Strategic Plan 1993-97, AGPS, Canberra. Morris, L. (ed.) 1987, Program Evaluation Kit, 2nd ed. 1987, Program Evaluation Kit, 2nd ed., nine volumes, Sage, Beverly Hills. Patton, M. 1990, Qualitative Evaluation and Research Methods, Sage, Beverly Hills. Rossi, P. & Freeman, H. 1985, Evaluation: A Systematic Approach, Sage, Beverly Hills. Rotem, A. 1985, 'Evaluating programs on drug and alcohol related problems', Australian Alcohol and Drug Review, vol. 4, pp181-186. CliffSchaffer's Home Page WT01-B29-4IA030-000641-B023-134http://206.61.184.43:80/schaffer/LIBRARY/studies/aus/can_ch7.htm 206.61.184.43 19970122140101 text/html 9907HTTP/1.0 200 OKDate: Wednesday, 22-Jan-97 14:00:53 GMTServer: WebSitePro/1.1f (S/N wpo-0deb)Allow-ranges: bytesContent-type: text/htmlLast-modified: Saturday, 28-Dec-96 07:14:40 GMTContent-length: 9690 Legislative options for cannabis use in australia:Conclusion Chapter 7. Conclusion This paper has addressed the legislative options availablefor cannabis in Australia, and has argued that choosing fromamong these options requires a process of policy evaluation.Accordingly, the paper first considered the policy frameworkswithin which decision-making occurs, emphasising the necessityfor clarity in the goals that society seeks to attain throughlegislating in this area. The paper places contemporary Australian cannabis legislationwithin its broader context: historical and international. Despitethe work of numerous Royal Commissions and other officialinquiries, much of Australia's legislation concerning cannabisreflects the dynamics of earlier times, when Australia tended tomimic other nations' policies without taking sufficient accountof local circumstances. Our framework of legislative prohibitionwas put in place at a time when there was virtually no cannabisuse in Australia. In the 1990s, when over four millionAustralians report having used the drug and nearly half of themreport having done so during the last year, most jurisdictionsmaintain total prohibition as their legislative stance, eventhough only a tiny proportion of the offenders against theirlegislation will ever be prosecuted. We have reviewed the range of legislative options available,classifying them as: total prohibition; prohibition combined witha civil penalty for personal use, etc; partial prohibitionwhereby personal use, etc., is not an offence, but traffickingand large-scale growing of cannabis remains prohibited; the legalavailability of cannabis under various forms of regulation; and,finally, the option of unregulated, free availability. Each ofthese options is reviewed in terms of its rationale, experienceswith it to date and its impacts. The related topics of the diversion from the criminal justicesystem of people who come to the attention of the police forcannabis offences, and the compulsory treatment of cannabisusers, have also been discussed. Experience to date suggests thatwell-resourced and managed diversionary programs can beeffective, and desirable, alternatives to imprisonment for someoffenders. Very few cannabis users will need treatment, asconceived of through a medical model, simply because of theircannabis use. Many users can benefit, however, from a helpingintervention, the success of which may be potentiated by thecrisis of a 'bust' for cannabis use or related offences. Cannabis is used mainly as a recreational drug and thispattern of use has been the focus of this paper. Forcompleteness, we have included in the appendixes information onthe medical and industrial/agricultural uses of the cannabisplant and its by-products. In doing so, we remind readers that,in drug policies, we are not faced with 'all-or-nothing' choices.Within the range of available policy options lies the possibilityof prohibiting the recreational use of cannabis while permittingits use for other purposes. (This occurs, of course, withopiates: the opium poppy is grown in Tasmania to provide rawmaterial for the manufacture of pharmaceutical products.) Australia's National Drug Strategy provides a policyframework within which new legislative approaches may bedeveloped. Both existing and new approaches have the possibilityof both enhancing and detracting from the achievement of themission of the National Drug Strategy, that of minimising theharmful effects of drugs and drug use in Australian society. Ourreview of the policy options, set out in Chapter4, demonstrates this. No single 'best option' for cannabis legislation exists. Whatis most appropriate will depend upon what goals both policymakers and the community are seeking to achieve. It is not therole of researchers to dictate policy goals; rather we have drawnattention to their importance, outlined an approach to evaluatingthem and described the likely outcomes, in terms of policy goals,of the five broad categories of legislative options which areavailable now. Our review suggests that two of the five legislative optionsdiscussed in Chapter 4 areinappropriate in contemporary Australian circumstances. They arethe options which we have characterised as 'total prohibition'and 'free availability'. The arguments for rejecting theseoptions will not be repeated here as they are detailed in Chapter 4. We point out, however, that the cultivation, possession andsupply of cannabis remain an offence in all Australian States andTerritories (and using it is an offence in most), even thoughcannabis use is commonplace and little evidence exists thatcannabis itself causes significant harm when used in smallquantities. Australian society experiences more harm, weconclude, from maintaining the prohibition policy than itexperiences from the use of the drug. Widespread interest exists in the Dutch approach to drugpolicies. We have categorised them, in this paper, under theheading of total prohibition, as that is the Dutch legislativeposition. However, as detailed above, the application of theprinciple that it is, in their terms, 'inexpedient' to prosecutepeople for minor drug offences (including selling cannabis incertain coffee shops) means that Dutch policy and practice (ascontrasted to legislation) is closer to the regulatory optionthan the total prohibition option. The regulatory option is oneof the approaches which we suggest is more appropriate toAustralian circumstances than is total prohibition. It could be argued that the Dutch approach is a product of adifferent culture and system of administration of criminaljustice. If the Australian States and Territories resolve not toarrest and proceed against people using, possessing or supplyingcannabis, by far the best approach is for this policy to beimplemented through legislation, rather than through anadministrative decision not to prosecute cannabis offenders. Thisis because the Australian system of legal justice is based uponthe principle of legal clarity and consistency in theimplementation of the law. Nevertheless, the reality is that, for a variety of reasons,Australian governments may well prefer to implement the Dutchapproach. A number of precedents exist whereby, especially inareas of moral contention, certain illegal activities, as amatter of policy, are excluded from the purview of the criminaljustice authorities. In the Australian Capital Territory, forexample, we understand that the Director of Public Prosecutionspublicly announced that he would not conduct any prosecutions inthe area of prostitution. Abortion and certain types of gambling(e.g. playing two-up on ANZAC Day) are or were similarly dealtwith. Police general orders frequently remind officers of thedesirability of exercising their discretion not to arrest orsummons a person found committing only a minor offence. Warnings,formal cautions and referral to other agencies are encourageddespite the existence of legislation prohibiting the behaviourinvolved. We suggest, then, that if governments agree that totalprohibition is not the most desirable approach, but are unwillingor unable to legislate to enable a more preferable option to beimplemented, then the Dutch approach is a desirable alternative.It would entail the government, the State/Territory Director ofPublic Prosecutions, or another appropriate authority declaringthat, as from a certain date, no person would be prosecutedbefore the courts for specified (minor) cannabis offences. Wesuggest that this is a legitimate, but not optimal, pragmaticoption currently available to Australian governments. We also reject the legislative option found at the oppositeend of the continuum from total prohibition, the totallyunregulated, free availability of cannabis. Our society is onewhich accepts that governments and others have both the right andthe responsibility to intervene in diverse ways to protect peoplefrom harm and to advance the common good. It would beunreasonable, we suggest, to argue that cannabis should beavailable in an uncontrolled manner: issues of quality control,protection of the young, road safety, etc., demand at least somedegree of control over the drug's availability. We conclude, then, that cannabis law reform is required inthis country. Numerous options for policy, legislation andimplementation processes exist within the broad categories ofprohibition with civil penalties, partial prohibition andrelatively free but regulated availability. We believe, on thebasis of the available evidence, that widely acceptable socialgoals, well attuned to the needs of contemporary Australiansociety, will be attained through the adoption and implementationof policies which lie within these options. CliffSchaffer's Home Page WT01-B29-5IA030-000641-B023-156http://206.61.184.43:80/schaffer/LIBRARY/studies/aus/can_app1.htm 206.61.184.43 19970122140114 text/html 9945HTTP/1.0 200 OKDate: Wednesday, 22-Jan-97 14:01:05 GMTServer: WebSitePro/1.1f (S/N wpo-0deb)Allow-ranges: bytesContent-type: text/htmlLast-modified: Saturday, 28-Dec-96 07:16:16 GMTContent-length: 9728 Appendix 1. The Medicinal Uses of Cannabis Contents | Feedback | Search DRCNet Library | Schaffer Library | Major Studies | LegislativeOptions for Cannabis APPENDIX 1. THE MEDICINAL USE OF CANNABIS (19) The medicinal use of cannabis in the ancient world has beenwell documented (Abel 1980). In the United States, cannabis wasfirst mentioned as a medicinal drug in 1843 and by 1852 it wasincluded in the US dispensatory list of medicines. It was thoughtto be beneficial in the treatment of 'neuralgia, gout, tetanus,hydrophobia, cholera, convulsions, chorea, hysteria, depressionand insanity' (Wood & Bache 1854, cited in [1]Abel 1980,p182). In Australia, tincture of cannabis was used in medicineuntil the 1960s, when it was declared a prohibited drug([2]Cartwright 1983). Since the introduction of legislation prohibiting therecreational use of cannabis, its use for medicinal purposes has,in most Western countries, not been popular. However, recentlythe therapeutic benefits of cannabis have received closeattention in the United States. In 1991, Doblin and Kleimanconducted an anonymous survey of the members of the AmericanSociety of Clinical Oncology measuring the attitudes andexperiences of American oncologists concerning the use ofcannabis to treat nausea in cancer chemotherapy patients. Theyfound that, of those oncologists who replied to the survey (43per cent), more than 44 per cent of them reported recommendingthe illegal use of cannabis for the control of nausea to at leastone cancer patient. Some 48 per cent said that they wouldprescribe cannabis to some of their patients if it were legal([3]Doblin & Kleiman 1991). Cannabis has been used as an anti-emetic in the treatment ofAIDS patients and as a painkiller for those suffering fromchronic pain ([4]Grinspoon 1991). It has also been regarded bysome medical practitioners as being effective in reducingintra-ocular pressure in glaucoma patients ([5]Caswell 1992) andin treating epilepsy ([6]Cartwright 1983), Huntington's chorea([7]Moss et al. 1989) and Parkinsonian tremor ([8]Frankel et al.1990). Despite the attention that the medical use of cannabis hasreceived in recent times, legislation in the United States doesnot permit the medical use of marijuana. In the FederalControlled Substances Act, cannabis is categorised as a Schedule1 drug, and as such is described as having a high potential forabuse, no currently accepted medical use and no acceptable safelevel of use under medical supervision. In 1989, organisations such as the (US) National Organizationfor Reform of Marijuana Laws (NORML), the Alliance for CannabisTherapeutics (ACT) as well as various individuals,20 applied tohave cannabis rescheduled so that it could be used for medicalpurposes. The Administrator of the Drug EnforcementAdministration rejected these claims and stated that: It is clear that cannabis cannot meet the criteria ... forsafety under medical supervision. The chemistry of cannabis isnot known and reproducible. The record supports a finding thatmarijuana plant material is variable from plant to plant. Thequantities of the active constituents, the cannabinoids, varyconsiderably. In addition, the actions and potential risks ofseveral of the cannabinoids have not been studied ... (USGovernment, Federal Register, vol. 54, no. 249, 29 December 1989,p53,734). This position has recently been restated by Robert C. Bonner,a later Administrator of the US Drug Enforcement Agency, when heresponded to a subsequent petition lodged by NORML (USGovernment, Federal Register, vol. 57, no. 59, 26 March 1992,pp10,499-10,508). Those in favour of rescheduling the drug argue that, for some,the denial of cannabis as a medicine is particularly cruel.Grinspoon argues that 'sick people are forced to suffer anxietyabout prosecution in addition to their anxiety about the illness... Doctors are afraid to recommend what they know to be the besttreatment because they might lose their reputation or even theirlicence' ([9]Grinspoon 1991). The Australian medical community has not been as enthusiasticabout the therapeutic benefits of cannabis although many arguethat where the drug has been demonstrated to be effective its useshould be permitted. A study done at the Royal Children'sHospital in Melbourne found that THC (the psychoactive ingredientin cannabis) was an effective anti-emetic for some childrenundergoing chemotherapy ([10]Cartwright 1983). Dr LornaCartwright, a lecturer in Pharmacology at Sydney Universitystated: I think there are probably better drugs for medical uses. Thepoint is, though, I think it should be allowed to be used forconditions in which it has been shown to have effect, such as forglaucoma, for children having chemotherapy and for epilepsy. Ialways feel that if something is good even for a small percentageof patients, it should be allowed to be used (cited in[11]Caswell 1992, p498). Another pharmacologist, Dr Greg Chesher, argues that cannabisclearly has therapeutic benefits but that research into thepossible uses of the drug is being hampered by the fact thatcannabis is a prohibited drug (cited in [12]Caswell 1992). Theposition in Australia is different from that in the USA in thatin this country there is no legislation or binding administrativeruling specifically stating that no medical use exists forcannabis.21 Neither does the United Nations Single Convention onNarcotic Drugs, to which Australia is a party, specificallyforbid the medical use of cannabis. In fact the Conventionrecognises that some otherwise illicit drugs may have medicalpurposes and states that cannabis use should be 'subject to theprovisions of this Convention, to limit exclusively to medicaland scientific purposes the...use and possession of drugs'(Article 4(1) (c)). Given that the United Nations Conventions donot specifically proscribe the medical uses of cannabis,introducing legislation that allowed the use of the drug formedical purposes in Australia would be relatively simple. Clausesauthorising the therapeutic use of the drug could simply beinserted into relevant drug legislation and therapeutic productsscheduling. Politically, however, such a change in policy couldbe difficult. As an illicit drug, cannabis has a negative image and is seenas an being an inherently dependence producing, damaging drugthat has no possible benefits. Recognition of the medicalbenefits of the drug may challenge this dominant view ofcannabis. References Abel, E. 1980, Marihuana: The First Twelve Thousand Years,Plenum Press, New York. Cartwright, L. 1983, 'Marihuana', Current Affairs Bulletin,vol. 59, no. 10, pp19-31. Caswell, A. 1992, 'Marijuana as medicine', The Medical Journalof Australia, vol. 156, pp497-498. Doblin, R. E. & Kleiman, M. 1991, 'Marijuana asanti-emetic dedicine: A survey of oncologists experiences andattitudes, Journal of Clinical Oncology, vol. 9, pp1314-1319. Frankel, J.P., Hughes, A., Lees, A.J. & Stern, G.M. 1990,'Marijuana for Parkinsonian Tremor', Journal of NeurologicalNeurosurgical Psychiatry, vol. 53, pp436-442. Grinspoon, L. 1991, 'Marijuana in a time ofpsychopharmalogical McCarthyism' in Searching for Alternatives:Drug Control Policy in The United States, eds M.B. Krauss & E.PLazear, pp379-389, Hoover InstitutionPress, Stanford, California. Moss, D.E., Manderscheid, P.Z. & Montgomery, S.P. 1992,'Nicotine and cannabinoids as adjuncts to neuroleptics in thetreatment of Tourettes Syndrome and other motor disorders', LifeScience, 1989, vol. 44, pp1521-1525. Contents | Feedback | Search DRCNet Library | Schaffer Library | Major Studies | LegislativeOptions for Cannabis WT01-B29-6IA030-000641-B023-171http://206.61.184.43:80/schaffer/LIBRARY/studies/aus/can_app2.htm 206.61.184.43 19970122140125 text/html 4076HTTP/1.0 200 OKDate: Wednesday, 22-Jan-97 14:01:15 GMTServer: WebSitePro/1.1f (S/N wpo-0deb)Allow-ranges: bytesContent-type: text/htmlLast-modified: Saturday, 28-Dec-96 07:15:56 GMTContent-length: 3859 APPENDIX 2. INDUSTRIAL AND HORTICULTURAL USES OF CANNABIS APPENDIX 2. INDUSTRIAL AND HORTICULTURAL USES OF CANNABIS Since ancient times the fibres from the cannabis or hempplant have been used to make fabric, rope and paper ([1]Abel1980). In World War II, the USA grew 50,000 acres of hemp, aspart of their war effort ([2]see United States Government 1944,Hemp for Victory), and hemp fibres were used to make rope forships and the canvas used in parachutes. More recently, experimental crops of a low THC-contentspecies of cannabis have been grown in The Netherlands, Italy,Spain, France and Tasmania. Its fibres have been used in theproduction of paper and fabric. Australian groups such as theBusiness Alliance for Commercial Hemp argue that Australia shouldallow the cultivation of hemp for industrial purposes. Theposition is that, if a State or Territory Government authorisesthe growing of cannabis, the Commonwealth will issue a permit forthe importation of seeds, provided that the applicant for theimport permit meets the criteria set out in the Act, such asbeing 'a fit and proper person'. The trade magazine for the US paper industry recently arguedthat hemp has a number of advantages over timber in the area ofpaper production, and there are a number of strong environmentalarguments for the commercial cultivation of hemp. Every fourmonths, each acre of hemp grown will produce 10 tons of fibre. Itcan produce four times the amount of paper per acre than20-year-old trees can, it requires less bleaching than pulp fromtimber and, because it is a very densely growing crop, weeds arechoked and there is less need for pesticides and herbicides([3]Young 1991). In addition, hemp requires less watering andpesticides than cotton and produces a fibre that is argued to bemore durable than cotton fabrics ([4]Cowperthwaite 1993). The United Nations Single Convention on Narcotic Drugs allowsthe cultivation of cannabis for industrial and horticulturalpurposes. Article 28(2) states that 'this Convention should notapply to the cultivation of the cannabis plant exclusively forindustrial purposes (fibre and seed) or horticultural purposes'.Australian drug legislation permits the cultivation of cannabisfor scientific purposes and some limited experimentation hasalready taken place in Australia. However, groups such as the Business Alliance for CommericalHemp argue that the full benefits of hemp production can only beobtained if hemp is grown on a wider scale, and that cannabiswith a very low THC content can be grown for industrial purposes.Legislation permitting the cultivation of cannabis for industrialpurposes could be included in existing drug legislation, however,as with the medicinal use of cannabis, introducing legislationthat recognises the industrial uses of a substance that isthought of simply as a dangerous illicit drug may pose politicaldifficulties for those advocating legislative change. References Abel, E. 1980, Marihuana: The First Twelve Thousand Years,Plenum Press, New York. Cowperthwaite, V. 1993, 'Moral Fibre', Growing Today, June,pp23-27 United States Government 1944, Hemp for Victory, EducationalFilm. Young, J. 1991, 'It's time to reconsider hemp', Pulp andPaper, June. CliffSchaffer's Home Page WT01-B29-7IA030-000641-B023-185http://206.61.184.43:80/schaffer/LIBRARY/studies/aus/can_app3.htm 206.61.184.43 19970122140134 text/html 3525HTTP/1.0 200 OKDate: Wednesday, 22-Jan-97 14:01:24 GMTServer: WebSitePro/1.1f (S/N wpo-0deb)Allow-ranges: bytesContent-type: text/htmlLast-modified: Saturday, 28-Dec-96 07:15:51 GMTContent-length: 3308 APPENDIX 3. THE AUTHORS APPENDIX 3. THE AUTHORS David McDonald David McDonald is a Senior Criminologist at the AustralianInstitute of Criminology. He holds the degrees of BA, DipSocWk(Syd), MA (Alta), and GradDipPoplnHlth (ANU). Mr McDonald'sresearch interests lie in the areas of custodial health, policingand drug and alcohol policy. Prior to joining the Institute in1992, Mr McDonald held a research appointment in primary healthcare at the ANU's National Centre for Epidemiology and PopulationHealth. He has wide experience in research, program developmentand evaluation in the drug and alcohol field, having establishedthe Northern Territory's drug and alcohol services and served,for two years, as Director of the NCADA's National Drug AbuseInformation Centre. His publications are mainly in the fields ofalcohol and other drugs, correctional health, primary health careand Aboriginal health. Rhonda Moore Rhonda Moore is a Researcher in the Politics Department atthe University College (UNSW), Canberra. She holds a BA fromSydney University and a Postgraduate Diploma of Librarianshipfrom UNSW. She has worked as a contract researcher in the UK,Canada and Australia, primarily in the fields of criminology andpolitical sociology, and since 1987 has done research on drug usein Australia. Jennifer Norberry Jennifer Norberry BA(Hons), LLB(Hons), Dip Lib is a lawyeremployed at the Australian Institute of Criminology. Her researchinterests include illicit drugs policy, HIV/AIDS and prisons andenvironmental crime. Grant Wardlaw Grant Wardlaw BA, MA(Hons), PhD (Auckland), BA(Soc Sci)(Deakin), Grad Dip Intl Law (ANU). Dr Wardlaw is Director ofWardlaw Consulting Pty Ltd and currently acts as a consultant tothe Commonwealth Attorney-General's Department and a number ofother government agencies. Prior to this, he held senior researchpositions in the Australian Institute of Criminology (1976-1991)and worked as a clinical psychologist with the New ZealandDepartment of Justice (1974-76). Dr Wardlaw has published widelyin the areas of drug policy, drug law enforcement, andepidemiology of drug use. He is a member of the Commonwealth'sDrug Abuse Research and Education Advisory Committee, and anumber of other advisory boards. Dr Wardlaw has led a number ofmajor drug research projects funded by the Australasian PoliceCommissioner's Conference, the National Campaign Against DrugAbuse, and the US Department of Defence. Nicola Ballenden Nicola Ballenden BA(Hons) was employed as a research officeron the project. She is currently completing her Masters at theUniversity of Melbourne. Her research interests include mentalhealth law, drugs and medico-legal issues. CliffSchaffer's Home Page WT01-B29-8IA030-000641-B023-213http://206.61.184.43:80/schaffer/LIBRARY/studies/ota/ch1.htm 206.61.184.43 19970122140145 text/html 54706HTTP/1.0 200 OKDate: Wednesday, 22-Jan-97 14:01:33 GMTServer: WebSitePro/1.1f (S/N wpo-0deb)Allow-ranges: bytesContent-type: text/htmlLast-modified: Saturday, 28-Dec-96 06:51:21 GMTContent-length: 54488 CHAPTER 1 EXECUTIVE SUMMARY TECHNOLOGIES FOR UNDERSTANDING AND PREVENTING SUBSTANCEABUSE AND ADDICTION US Government Office of Technology Assessment October 18, 1994 CHAPTER 1 EXECUTIVE SUMMARY The abuse of licit and illicit drugs represents a majorpublic health problem in the United States. The costs to societyof such abuse include thousands of premature deaths annually dueto drug-related illnesses, accidents, and homicides; economiccosts related to health care, criminal justice, and lostproductivity; and the mental and physical pain suffered bymillions of Americans. Many ills plaguing the nationtoday--including the AIDS epidemic, increased crime and violence,and homelessness--in some cases, may be linked to individuals'physical dependence on a variety of abusable substances. Theconsequences of substance abuse and addiction have been felt bypeople within every economic, social, racial, religious, andpolitical boundary. What are the root causes of substance abuse and addiction?Why and how does addiction occur? Who are the substance abusers?What factors lead to addiction? What are the implications forprevention and treatment? ROOT CAUSES The Office of Technology Assessment (OTA) was asked toidentify the root causes of substance abuse and addiction. Theterm root causes has been used in political discussions anddebate. To some, root causes of substance abuse and addiction areframed in a moral context, in which decisions related to use,abuse, and addiction are the responsibility primarily ofindividuals. To others, root causes include a multitude of socialand economic problems, such as homelessness, poverty, and racism.Many people have strongly held opinions as to what constitutesthe general root causes of substance abuse and addiction inpopulations, but no consensus exists about the specific rootcauses of substance abuse and addiction for particularindividuals. The OTA report has four parts: necessary preconditions,individual factors, community contexts, and policy options. Thefirst part, Necessary Preconditions, focuses on several factorsthat are necessary for substance abuse and addiction to occur.The second part, Individual Factors, focuses on risk andprotective factors in individuals that are thought to influencesubstance use, abuse, and addiction. The third part, CommunityContexts, looks at how risk and protective factors play out insubcultures and in major activity settings (home, school,workplace, and recreation). The fourth part, Policy Optionsaddresses a range of legislative issues and options for Congress. NECESSARY PRECONDITIONS No single or general set of variables explains the misuse ofalcohol and other drugs for every individual; in other wordsthere are no "root causes" for substance abuse thatuniversally apply to everyone. Nevertheless, OTA has identifiedthree major sets of necessary preconditions that must be presentin order for substance abuse and addiction to occur: biology and pharmacology, availability, and use and transitions to abuse and dependency. Biology and Pharmacology The first major set of preconditions includes biological andpharmacological factors, without which drug abuse and dependencywould be impossible. Underlying all alcohol and drug problems arethe actions and effects that drugs of abuse exert on the brain.It is important to understand how drugs work in the brain, whycertain drugs have the potential for being abused, and what, ifany, biological differences exist among individuals in theirsusceptibility to abuse drugs. A wide range of psychoactive substances have the potentialfor abuse (see box 1-1). The possession and use of severalsubstances (e.g., marijuana, heroin, cocaine) are illegal in all50 states. Other addictive substances (e.g., tobacco and alcohol)may be legally purchased, possessed, and consumed by manyAmericans. Some abusable substances (e.g., a wide range ofprescription drugs) are available on a restricted basis, usuallyby a physician's order, while others (e.g., inhalants) may belegally purchased, possessed, and consumed by anybody. Biological factors that contribute to substance abuse andaddiction fall into two groups: the effects drugs of abuse exerton the individual in general, and the biological status ofspecific individuals taking drugs. The effects the drugs exertcan be either acute or chronic and will vary depending on thedrug and its route of administration. Most drugs of abuseinfluence the brain's reward system. The pleasurable sensationsthat drug use can produce reinforce drug-seeking and drug-takingbehaviors. These actions differ with different drugs; thus, somesubstances have greater potential for abuse and addiction thanothers. While growing evidence suggests that the brain rewardsystem plays a role in the reinforcing properties of most drugsof abuse, the precise mechanisms involved are complex and haveyet to be completely described (see figures 1-1 and 1-2). Prolonged or chronic use of a substance or substances canproduce both biological and behavioral changes (some long-lasting). Biological changes can include sensitization and/ortolerance to a substance and, if use is discontinued, withdrawal(see box 1-2). Behavioral changes also occur with continued druguse. An individual's drug-craving, drug- seeking, and drug-takingbehaviors are reinforced through neuroadaptive changes in thebrain's reward system. Environmental cues also play a large role in drug-seeking anddrug-taking behavior. On encountering certain environmentalstimuli (i.e., specific locations, smells, tastes), drug-cravingand drug withdrawal symptoms have been reported by former drugusers who have been drug-free for months and even years. Through family, twin, and adoption studies, most researchersagree that genetic factors play some part in the acquisition ofalcohol problems and, although less clear, other drug problems.However, no conclusive evidence has been found to explainprecisely what is inherited or the overall importance of thisinherited material. It has been hypothesized that numerous genes(as opposed to one) interact in complex ways, and expression ofthose genes are affected by a myriad of environmental factors.Thus, the presence or absence of a genetic factor neither ensuresnor protects against drug addiction. Availability The second set of preconditions for drug abuse and dependencyincludes availability. A person cannot become a drug abuserunless a drug is physically available. In addition, however,availability is affected by social norms (e.g., factors withinthe community conducive to drug use, including level of parentalor guardian supervision, lack of consequences for alcohol anddrug offenses, lack of alternative activities, and portrayals ofalcohol and other drug use by friends and the media as aglamorous and healthy activity), prices (economic availability),and personal values (subjective availability) (see table 1-1). The primary focus of U.S. antidrug policy has been to attackthe physical availability of illicit drugs through lawenforcement efforts aimed at disrupting the production,transport, and sale of drugs. While this focus has increaseddrug-related arrests--nearly half of newly sentenced federalinmates in 1991 were imprisoned on drug charges--illicit drugsare still widely available. Marketing techniques for both licit and illicit drugs canalter social, economic, and subjective availability. Keycomponents of marketing include the promotion and advertising ofparticular product lines to appeal to particular subpopulationsof the consuming public, development of a product line that canbe targeted to subpopulations within the larger community ofconsumers, pricing strategies to attract new buyers, andidentification of retail outlets for sales. Federal law regulates the merchandising of licit yet abusablesubstances such as tobacco, alcohol, and prescription drugs byplacing a variety of restrictions on how such products may bemarketed. Despite current restrictions, debate continues as towhether and how a variety of legal drugs should be marketed. Use and Transitions to Abuse and Dependency The third set of preconditions for drug abuse and addictionis drug use, including the progression to heavier and moreharmful use. A person cannot become drug-dependent without firstusing a drug and then progressing to more harmful levels of use.Researchers have focused on stages in the progression of drug usein several ways. They have studied stages in the initiation ofthe use of different drugs, finding a sequence that moves fromthe use of cigarettes and wine or beer, to the use of marijuana,then hard liquor, and finally other illicit drugs. Because mostindividuals who use drugs do not go on to abuse drugs, andbecause the use of drugs at one level does not guarantee the useof drugs at a higher level, these stages are descriptive but notpredictive. Initiation is the first step in the progression to moreserious levels of drug use. Because drug use often begins duringadolescence, most drug use research has focused on drug useinitiation among adolescents. However, many individuals whoinitiate drug use do not progress to harmful drug use. Also, thefactors associated with such progression may often differ fromthe factors associated with initiation. Thus, the focus on theinitiation of drug use during adolescence is not sufficient foran understanding of the progression from use to abuse anddependency. In addition to initiation, research has focused on otheridentifiable stages in the full cycle of drug use and abuse,including continuation of drug use, maintenance and progressionof drug use within a class of drugs, progression in drug useacross drug classes, and regression, cessation, and relapsecycles. Research has also been done on the co- occurrence andpossible sequences in drug abuse and other problem behaviors,with some studies finding that problem behaviors often precedethe onset of drug abuse. INDIVIDUAL FACTORS Much of the research on substance abuse and addiction hasfocused on identifying individual risk factors for alcohol andother drug use, specifically among adolescents and young adults(see table 1-2). Risk factors have been identified as thosecognitive, psychological, attitudinal, social, pharmacological,physiological, and developmental characteristics that fosterinitiation of drug and alcohol use and/or abuse by an individual.Protective factors are those characteristics that reduce the riskof substance use and abuse and promote positive development, suchas appropriate role models, involvement in positive peer groups,and a positive self-image and outlook for the future. Because no individual risk or protective factor can becategorized as a root cause of substance abuse and addiction, afull analysis of each individual factor is beyond the scope ofthis report. However, an overview of selected factors highlightsassociations often present in substance abuse and addiction. Demographic Age The preponderance of substance abuse research points to thefact that children who use alcohol and other drugs before the ageof 15 have a greater likelihood of becoming problem alcohol andother drug users, versus those youth who begin use at a laterage. While most substance use and abuse occur during theadolescent and young-adult years, older persons are not immune tothe addictive powers of these substances. For example, amongwomen, alcohol problems tend to appear on average several yearslater than they do among men (although this trend may bereversing). For black males, problem drinking patterns typicallyoccur after age 30, versus ages 18 to 25 for white males. Although substance abuse problems are not exclusive toadolescence, most prevention programs currently target youth. Theimportance of these types of programs is obvious--to prevent ordecrease the use of alcohol, tobacco, cigarettes, and other drugsby youth. Yet, adults can also be exposed to stressful lifesituations, such as unemployment, divorce, or death of a spouseor child, which could contribute to substance abuse problems. Theadult population presents unique and often overlooked challengesfor the planning and implementation of substance abuse preventionprograms. Gender Historically, the vast majority of biological and behavioralstudies were conducted on male participants; women substanceabusers were not commonly included in research studies. Adistorted picture emerged, in which women were assumed to misusethe same substances, and for the same reasons, as men. Within thepast 10 to 20 years, however, some researchers have focused onthe causes and consequences of substance abuse problems amongwomen, and are beginning to report differences based on gender.Basic gaps in knowledge remain, however, regarding substance useand abuse among women. Until these gaps are addressed, theinaccurate and misleading practice of transferring data garneredfrom studies on men to women is likely to continue. Race and Ethnicity Historically, racial and ethnic minorities have been linkedwith, and often blamed for, many of the substance abuse problemswithin the United States (see box 1-3). Certainly, many urbanareas have high concentrations of minorities, and within many ofthese areas the prevalence of substance abuse may be high. Oftenoverlooked, however, is the prevalence of substance abuseproblems in suburban and rural areas throughout the UnitedStates. In the minds of many, the link between minoritypopulations and rampant substance abuse is inaccurate andderogatory. Adolescent research has documented substantial racial andethnic differences in substance use among high school seniors. Onaverage, licit and illicit substance use is highest among NativeAmerican Indian youth, somewhat lower among white and Hispanicyouth, substantially lower among black youth, and lowest amongAsian youth. However, such findings do not include populationsmost likely to be excluded from self-reporting studies (e.g.,high school dropouts). Until recently, much of the analysis of substance use and/orabuse data has concentrated on the relationship between the useof a substance and one or two variables such as race andethnicity and/or educational level. Often a positive associationwas found between minority populations and the use or abuse ofcertain substances. While statistically correct, these analysescan be simplistic and misleading. Clearly many risk andprotective factors interact to produce substance use and abuse.If the majority of these variables are excluded from theanalysis, a skewed picture may arise as to the importance ofcertain variables as risk factors for substance use and abuse.Additionally, to simplify the data collection, racial and ethniccategories are often broad. The most popular groupings are black,white non- Hispanic, Hispanic, and other. While each of thesecategories contains many distinct cultures, gross generalizationsare commonly made. Race and ethnicity have not been shown to be eitherbiological or genetic risk factors for substance use or abuse. Todate, the preponderance of investigative studies has focused onracial and ethnic differences in response specifically toalcohol. Few studies have been completed on differences in racialand ethnic biological responses to other licit or illicit drugs. Economic Are poor individuals at greater risk of developing problemsrelated to substance abuse? While a relatively straight forwardquestion, its resolution is hampered by the fact that poverty isdifficult to define and drawing conclusions concerning anindividual's potential for future substance abuse based on one ortwo variables such as family income or educational level isoverly simplistic and deceptive. In recent years, attention has been paid to the plight of theurban poor, many of whom are minorities. These inner- citycommunities are often riddled with high rates of crime, violence,unemployment, and inadequate social and medical services. Forindividuals living in these localities, the consequences of theseproblems are serious and far reaching. To assess poverty and its relationship to substance abuseproblems, some researchers have used the federal guidelines forpoverty, while others employ measures of socioeconomic status(SES) such as educational level and household income. To date,the largest and most comprehensive analysis of SES variables andsubstance use has been accomplished by the National Institute onDrug Abuse (NIDA). While the analysis revealed associationsbetween certain characteristics and patterns of substance use, itdid not reveal causality. From this analysis, a straightforward"yes or no" response to the initial question linkingpoverty to increased individual risk for substance use or abuseis clearly impossible. The NIDA analysis demonstrated that thetype and quantity of an individual's substance use is correlatedwith a variety of both individual as well as geographiccharacteristics. Furthermore, while the NIDA study was thelargest and most comprehensive to date, some segments of thepopulation (e.g., homeless, dropouts, institutionalized), many ofwhom were possible alcohol and drug abusers, were excluded fromthe survey. Psychosocial and Behavioral Many of the identified risk and protective factors relate topsychological, social, and behavioral characteristics. Conditionssuch as aggressiveness, delinquency, and mental disorders areoften linked with substance abuse and addiction. Experiences suchas physical and sexual abuse have also been identified aspotential risk factors. While relatively little research has beenaccomplished on protective factors, several elements identifiedwithin the resiliency literature, as well as religiosity andspirituality, have been associated with decreased substance use. However, the presence or absence of specific risk factorsneither predicates nor guarantees protection from substanceabuse. In addition, consensus is lacking within the substanceabuse field as to the importance, interaction, or order of thefactors. COMMUNITY CONTEXTS A growing body of research is focusing on factors andinterventions relevant to the onset and prevention of substanceuse, abuse, and dependency in the four principal communityactivity settings--homes and families, schools and peers,workplaces, and recreational settings. In framing prevention programs with divergent populations,researchers are attempting to better understand qualitative aswell as quantitative research methods, and the variety ofsettings in which substance abuse and addiction can take placeand can be combated (see box 1-4). Despite the promise of community-based research, severalproblems exist. First, much of the research does not addresssubstance abuse and addiction per se, but rather risk andprotective factors that can lead to a number of outcomes,including substance abuse and addiction. Second, research studiesvary widely in methodology, making it difficult to drawscientifically valid conclusions. Third, rigorous evaluation ofmany prevention research programs is missing, leaving theeffectiveness of such programs open to debate. Homes and Families Although American society expects families in their homes totake the lead in dealing with substance abuse and other problembehaviors, families in this country generally receive onlylimited support in protecting themselves against substance abuse.This situation may result in part from the belief that mostnuclear families can raise their children largely independentlyand therefore do not need outside support, and in part from thebelief that teens and young adults are more influenced by theirpeers. The first belief, however, is not supported bylong-standing practices in most societies, where extendedfamilies and life-long neighbors have traditionally helped raisechildren (although in the United States many parents do not haveaccess to these additional child-rearing resources because ofurbanization, high technology, and family mobility). And thesecond belief is being questioned by growing evidence thatcertain parenting practices and family intervention programs cansignificantly reduce the risk of substance abuse amongadolescents and young adults. A growing body of research has identified risk and protectivefactors that may be particularly relevant in home and familysituations (see table 1-3). Programs that enhance protectivefactors include those providing parent education, prenatal andinfant care, preschool, and social support activities that helpstrengthen involved and responsive parenting. Programs that seekto decrease the presence of risk factors include those designedto reduce drug trafficking (e.g., community policing, cleansweeps of housing projects), physical and sexual abuse, theimpact of negative life events (e.g., mental health counseling),and parental neglect. Substance abuse treatment programs thatinclude an addict's family members also address risk factors. Schools and Peers Schools have been the target for prevention programs tocurtail drug use at school sites (e.g., Drug Free School Zones)as well as curriculum-based programs that target drug use in thecommunity as a whole. Because school-age youth are especiallylikely to initiate the use of alcohol and other drugs, much ofthe research has focused on use, rather than on abuse anddependency. Such research is nevertheless relevant to anunderstanding of abuse and dependency, since use is aprecondition and contributor to abuse and dependency and becauseeven experimental use can be harmful. OTA conducted the most extensive compilation and examinationof survey research on school-aged substance use to date-- 9,930statistical analyses from 242 separate studies. The studiesreported statistical relationships between substance use and itspostulated causes. Statistical findings from the study reportswere sorted into 11 major categories and 50 subcategories (seetable 1-4), and then analyzed to identify strong, moderate, andweak statistical relationships, as well as those that had beeninsufficiently studied. The four variables that dominated ascorrelates of and possible contributors to substance abuse are:1) prior and concurrent use of substances, 2) substance use bypeers and friends, 3) perceived peer attitudes about substanceuse, and 4) offers to use substances. The prominence of prior andconcurrent use is consistent with the reinforcing nature ofsubstance use itself. The prominence of the other three variablesemphasizes the importance of the social environment incontributing to and reinforcing substance use among school- ageyouth. Schools primarily seek to prevent substance use and abusethrough curriculum-based drug prevention programs. Such programshave dominated the field, largely because they are relativelysimple to understand, implement, and replicate, and becausemethods to evaluate them have become standardized.Curriculum-based prevention programs have been hampered, however,by a lack of good evaluation data needed to prove theireffectiveness. Workplaces The prevalence of drug abuse among the employed remainsinadequately documented, based on a small number of studies.Substance abuse contributes to workplace problems, such asaccidents, injuries, absenteeism, turnover, lost productivity,compensation claims, and insurance costs. Substance abuse inworkplaces can be affected by nonworkplace factors and workplacefactors. The primary interventions are employee assistanceprograms that help employees with personal problems by providingservices directly (through the work organization) or indirectly(through a provider in the community); health promotion programsthat typically seek to prevent illness and promote wellnessthrough behavior change; and alterations to workplaceenvironments that seek to reduce stress and strengthen supportfor workers. Recreational Settings Recreational activities and settings may also contribute tothe prevention of substance use and abuse or, by their absence,increase the risk. Examples of recreational activities andsettings include Boys and Girls Clubs, Boy and Girl Scouts,organized sports, and local park and recreation departmentprograms. Research on the impact of organized youth activities onsubstance use and abuse is limited, and only a few studies haveaddressed the issue directly. However, existing researchindicates that involvement in youth programs and activities isassociated with fewer at-risk behaviors, including substance useamong youth. The youth development field, including the resourcesof park and recreation departments, provides opportunities forbroad-based prevention interventions. Involvement in activities does not by itself protect againstsubstance abuse. Some activities, such as those that areunstructured and unsupervised, may even increase the risks ofsubstance use and abuse through association with a wider range ofpeers, some of whom are using substances. In addition, activitiesperceived as boring may not protect against substance use andabuse. More research is needed to clarify the aspects ofrecreational and other leisure activities that may protectagainst substance use and abuse. Research might focus on whetheractivities that are supervised, structured, drug-free,empowering, skills- building, self-esteem-promoting, active,shared, and nonboring (or some combination of those) areassociated with lower levels of substance use and abuse. POLICY OPTIONS Issues related to substance abuse and addiction have longoccupied the attention of the American public (see table 1- 5).Congress has authorized a multitude of federal programs aimed atreducing or preventing the supply and demand of illicit drugs andregulating the availability of illicit substances, and hasappropriated billions of dollars each year to federal agencies,provided oversight of federal programs, and passed broad-basedlegislation to coordinate programs as part of the war on drugs.In addressing what some policymakers term as the root causes ofsubstance abuse and addiction, the list of relevant statutesexpands significantly, as many domestic and social programs caninfluence the risk and protective factors that can lead anindividual into or away from substance abuse and addiction. A total of 12 executive branch departments, four independentagencies, one multiagency program (Weed and Seed), one WhiteHouse office (the Office of National Drug Control Policy--ONDCP), and the Judiciary, all receive federal funding as part ofnational drug control strategy. These efforts includeinterdiction, treatment, and prevention programs. The federal substance abuse control policy has as its primaryfocus the eradication of the supply of drugs. Congress currentlyappropriates more than $12 billion annually on antidrug efforts,with approximately two-thirds of this amount supporting druginterdiction and law enforcement activities, and the remaindersupporting demand- side activities, such as drug treatment,research, and prevention programs. Drug demand reduction efforts focus on providing treatmentfor abusers and addicts, prevention programs for variouspopulations, and biomedical and behavioral research on the causesof substance use, abuse, and addiction. Of these, the federalgovernment spends the most on treatment, followed by preventionand causality research. Drug treatment and prevention programsare funded at both the federal and state levels, while causationresearch is funded primarily by the federal government. A recentGeneral Accounting Office (GAO) study revealed that for studyingthe causes of drug abuse, funding has remained comparativelytiny. In 1990, for example, such research was funded at a levelof $6 million, about one-tenth of one percent of the nation'sdrug control budget for that year. OTA, in conjunction with GAO, surveyed federal agenciesidentified as having substance abuse prevention efforts. OTAfinds that substance abuse prevention efforts are scattered overa number of federal agencies, and that federal prevention effortsare dictated by statutory mandates, rather than directed atidentifying causes of substance abuse and addiction per se. TheWhite House ONDCP, charged with coordinating federal antidrugefforts, lacks the statutory mandate to forcibly integrate oralter the multitude of programs that make up the federalgovernment's war on drugs. Congress faces several fundamental difficulties in addressingthe causes of substance abuse and addiction: o No scientific consensus exists as to what is the driving cause of substance abuse and addiction. A range of risk and protective factors have been associated with drug use, abuse, and addiction. o Federal antidrug efforts, though coordinated by ONDCP, are spread among many federal agencies, whose authorization and appropriations fall under the jurisdiction of numerous congressional committees and subcommittees. ONDCP efforts in drug demand reduction efforts alone involved federal agencies across at least 11 Cabinet-level departments. This makes coordinated legislative action difficult to achieve. o The federal budget deficit is an obstacle to the creation of new domestic programs or the enhancement of existing programs that target known risk and protective factors in individuals and communities. The framework and literature reviews presented in this report make clear that substance abuse and addiction can arise and be influenced by multiple factors in individuals, groups, and communities. Thus, effective intervention requires prevention practitioners to select from a variety of options, so they can target the specific factors that are especially important for the particular populations and communities they are addressing. This does not mean that everything must be done at once nor that everything be known in advance of taking action. To the contrary, policymakers and practitioners can take small steps at a time, and then, as resources and new knowledge permit, take additional steps that address a fuller range of factors and contexts in greater depth. o Current drug prevention programs lack scientifically accepted standards for determining their success or failure. Whatever methods are developed, tested, and incorporated into prevention programs, a critical component of success is careful, rigorous evaluation. Answering "what works?" is essential in making advances in preventing substance abuse. In choosing which policy issues to address, OTA focused onthose areas directly addressed in this study. OTA identified aseries of policy issues in four broad categories: federal focusand prevention program structure, research needs, communityactivity settings, and availability (see table 1- 6). A number ofpolicy questions and options for congressional action emerge fromthese four categories (see table 1-7). A full discussion of thepolicy issues and options for congressional action can be foundin chapter 9 of the full report. Given the broad nature offederal antidrug efforts, many important issues relating tofederal antidrug efforts remain beyond the scope of this report.Such topics include drug treatment, interdiction and enforcement,and drug legalization. BOX 1-1: Overview of Alcohol and Some Other PsychoactiveSubstances Class of psychoactive substance(a) Description(b) ALCOHOL (ethyl alcohol) Alcohol, one of the most widely used of all drugs, is acentral nervous system depressant with effects similar to thoseof sedative-hypnotic compounds (see below). At low doses, alcoholmay be associated with behavioral excitation thought to be due tothe depression of inhibitory neurons in the brain. Alcoholdiffers from sedative-hypnotic compounds in that it is usedprimarily for recreation or social rather than medical purposes. Examples 1. Beer. 2. Wine. 3. "Hard" liquor (e.g., whiskey,gin). Class of psychoactive substance(a) Description(b) SEDATIVES, HYPNOTICS, OR ANXIOLYTICS Sedative-hypnotics are drugs of diverse chemical structurethat exert a nonselective general depressant on the centralnervous system. In addition, they reduce metabolism in a varietyof tissues in the body, depressing any system that uses energy.Depending on the dose, any sedative hypnotic compound may beclassified as a sedative (an agent that allays excitement), atranquilizer (an antianxiety agent), a hypnotic (a sleep-inducingagent), or an anesthetic (an agent that eliminates pain).Sedative-hypnotics are used medically as sedatives, anxiolytics(antianxiety agents), hypnotics, antiepileptics, musclerelaxants, and general anesthetics. Examples 1. Barbiturates ("downers" or "barbs"):pentobarbital sodium[NembutalR], secobarbital sodium [SeconalR],amobarbital [AmytalR]--taken orally. 2. Nonbarbiturate hypnotics: methaqualone [QuaaludesR]--taken orally. 3. Tranquilizers: diazepam [ValiumR], chlordiazepoxidehydrochloride [LibriumR]--taken orally. Class of psychoactive substance(a) Description(b) CANNABIS (THC) THC (tetrahydrocannabinol) the active agent in marijuana,alters perceptions, concentration, emotions, and behavior, thoughthe mechanisms of action are not entirely clear. Researchers havefound, however, that THC changes the way in which sensoryinformation is processed by the brain. It can be used medicallyto relieve nausea and side effects of chemotherapy in cancerpatients; it is very rarely used to treat glaucoma. Examples 1. Marijuana ("pot" or "grass")-- smokedor eaten. 2. Hashish ("hash")--smoked or eaten. 3.Hashish oil ("hash oil")--smoked (mixed with tobacco.4. Tetrahydrocannabinol (THC)-- taken orally in capsules. Class of psychoactive substance(a) Description(b) NICOTINE Nicotine, obtained naturally from tobacco, is a centralnervous system stimulant.(c) It exerts its action secondary tostimulation of certain cholinergic (excitatory) synapses bothwithin the brain and in the peripheral nervous system. Examples 1. Cigarettes. 2. Smokeless tobacco (e.g., snuff or chewingtobacco). Class of psychoactive substance(a) Description(b) COCAINE Cocaine, obtained naturally from coca leaves, is a potentcentral nervous system stimulant.(c) It stimulates thesympathetic nervous system, which regulates the activity ofcardiac muscle, smooth muscle, and glands. It also producesbronchodilation in the lungs. It is used medically as a topicalanesthetic for surgical procedures. Examples 1. Cocaine hydrochloride powder ("coke" or"street cocaine")--usually snorted or injectedintravenously.(d) 2. Cocaine alkaloid ("freebase" or"crack")--smoked.(e) Class of psychoactive substance(a) Description(b) AMPHETAMINES AND RELATED STIMULANTS(f) 1. Amphetamines Amphetamines are a group of three closely related compounds,all of which are potent central nervous system and behavioralstimulants.(c) Some amphetamines are used medically to treatattention deficit disorder or minimal brain dysfunction inchildren, narcolepsy (recurrent, uncontrollable, brief episodesof sleep), or (rarely) depression. Examples 1. Amphetamine ("speed" or "uppers"(BenzedrineR]--taken orally, injected, or snorted.(g) 2. Methamphetamine ("speed" or "crystalmeth" or "ice") [MethadrineR]--taken orally,injected, or snorted.(g),(h) 3. Dextroamphetamine [DexedrineR]--taken orally, or injected. Class of psychoactive substance(a) Description(b) 2. Nonamphetamine stimulants Like amphetamines, nonamphetamine stimulates are centralnervous and behavioral stimulants. Some non-amphetaminestimulants (e.g., PreludinR) are used for weight control, andsome (e.g., RitalinR and CylertR) are used medically to treathyperactivity, minimal brain dysfunction, narcolepsy, or (rarely)depression. Examples 1. Pheumetrazine hydrochloride [PreludinR]--taken orally orinjected.(d) 2. Methylphenidate hydrochloride injected.(d) 3. Pemoline [CylertR]--taken orally. [RitalinR]--takenorally, or injected.(d) Class of psychoactive substance(a) Description(b) HALLUCINOGENS Hallucinogens, or psychedelics, are a heterogeneous group ofcompounds that affect a person's perceptions, sensations,thinking, self-awareness, and emotions.(i) Examples 1. LSD (lysergic acid diethylamide) or"acid"--taken orally or put in the eyes. 2. Mescaline (3,4,5-trimethylox- phenylethyl amide) or"mesc" and peyote--disks chewed, swallowed, or smoked;tablets taken orally. 3. Psilocybin ("magic mushrooms")--chewed andswallowed. 4. MDMA (methylene dioxymethamphetamine)--takenorally. Class of psychoactive substance(a) Description(b) INHALANTS Inhalants are chemicals that produce psychoactive vapors.Although different in makeup, nearly all of the abused inhalantsproduce effects similar to those of anesthetics, which act toslow down the body's functions or produce feelings of dizziness.At low doses, users may feel slightly stimulated. Amyl nitrite isused for heart patients because it dilates the blood vessels andincreases blood supply to the heart. There are no medicalindications for most of the inhalants. Examples 1. Solvents (model airplane glue, nail polish remover,lighter and cleaning fluids, and gasoline)--vapors inhaled. 2. Aerosols (e.g., paints, hairsprays)--vapors inhaled. 3. Some anesthetics (e.g.,nitrous oxide)--vapors inhaled. 4. Amyl nitrite ("snappers" or "poppers")and butyl nitrite ("rush")--vapors inhaled. Class of psychoactive substance(a) Description(b) OPIATES (NARCOTICS) AND RELATED ANALGESICS Opiates are natural or synthetic drugs that, like morphine, asubstance derived from the opium poppy, have analgesic(pain-relieving) properties. Heroin is not approved for medicaluses in the United States. The major medical use of other opiatesis for the relief of pain (i.e., as analgesics); some narcoticsare used to relieve coughing (i.e., as antitussives) or to treatdiarrhea. Methadone is used in the treatment of narcoticabstinence syndromes and as an analgesic in terminal illness. Examples 1. Heroin ("smack" or "horse")--injected, smoked, or inhaled.(d) 2. Codeine (codeine sulfate)--taken orally or injected.(d) 3.Morphine (morphine hydrochloride)--injected, smoked, or inhaled. 4. Synthetic opiates (e.g., methadone [DolophineR]);hydromorphone hydrochloride [DilaudidR], meperidine hydrochloride[DemerolR], oxycodone and asprin [PercodanR]-- taken orally orinjected. Class of psychoactive substance(a) Description(b) PCP (PHENCYCLIDINE) AND SIMILARLY ACTINGSYMPHATHOMIMETICS Phencycyclidine, commonly referred to as PCP, alters thefunctions of the neocortex and has been called a dissociativeanesthetic. It was developed in the 1950s as an anesthetic butwas subsequently taken off the market in 1967 when it wasdiscovered that the drug caused hallucinations in some people.(j)PCP is now used legally only in veterinary medicine as animmobilizing agent. Examples PCP ("angel dust" or "lovely")--takenorally, or smoked (sprayed on joints or cigarettes).(d) (a) According to Julien, one could conceivably classifypsychoactive drugs by at least three methods: 1) mechanism ofaction, 2) chemical structure, and 3) behavioral effects.Probably the most useful approach would be to classify them bymechanism of action, but knowledge of the brain's physiology istoo limited for this approach to be comprehensive. A limitationof the second approach is that many drugs of apparently similarstructure exert quite different effects, and many drugs ofdissimilar structure exert quite similar effects. Theclassification in this table largely reflects the behavioraleffects approach. The classification used here is based on thecategories in the American Psychiatric Association's Diagnosticand Statistical Manual of Mental Disorders, 3rd ed., revised.According to the American Psychiatric Association, all of theclasses of psychoactive substances listed in this box exceptnicotine are associated with both abuse and dependence. Nicotineis associated with dependence but not abuse. (b) The potential physiological, psychological, andbehavioral effects of using the psychoactive substance shown arediscussed in the sources listed below. The consequences depend inpart on the specific drug used, the dosage level and mode ofadministration. (c) Central nervous system stimulants are drugs that canelevate mood, increase alertness, reduce fatigue, provide a senseof increased energy, decrease appetite, and improve taskperformance. They can also produce anxiety, insomnia, andirritability. The drugs differ widely in their molecularstructures and mechanisms of action. (d) According to the American Psychiatric Association, theroute of administration of a psychoactive substance is animportant variable in determining whether use will lead todependence or abuse. In general, routes of administration thatproduce more efficient absorption of the substance in the bloodstream (e.g., intravenous injection) tend to increase thelikelihood of an escalating pattern of substance uses that leadsto dependence. Routes that quickly deliver psychoactivesubstances to the brain (e.g., smoking or intravenous injection)are associated with higher levels of consumption and with anincreased likelihood of toxic effects. Use of contaminatedneedles for intravenous administration of amphetamines, cocaine,and opiates can cause hepatitis, HIV infection, and otherillnesses. (e) Freebase cocaine is a form of cocaine made by converting"street cocaine" (cocaine hydrochloride) to a purifiedbase that is smoked. The effect of smoking freebase is similar tothat of intravenous injection but smoking provides a shorter moreintense high than sniffing or ingestion because of the rapidabsorption of the drug through the lungs. "Crackcocaine" is the street name given to freebase cocaine thathas been processed from cocaine hydrochloride to a chemical baseby cooking it with baking soda and water. The term crack refersto the cracking sound that is heard when the mixture is smoked(heated), presumably due to the sodium bicarbonate. (f) Describing a drug as a stimulant does not adequatelydescribe its properties. Drug use surveys typically meanamphetamines when they use the word stimulants. Some surveysregard as stimulants both prescription (amphetamines) andnonprescription substances (e.g., caffeine-based compounds usedin No-Doz, diet pills, and "fake pep pills"). Cocaineand nicotine (described above) are also central nervous systemsimulants. (g) According to the National Institute on Drug Abuse,designer drugs are structural analogs of substances scheduledunder the Controlled Substances Act that are prepared byunderground chemists to mimic the psychoactive effects ofcontrolled substances or produce other psychoactive effects.Because such analogs are not identical to their parent compound,their manufacture and distribution does not violate the law. Asof June 1986, there were synthetic analogs of PCP, fentanyl andmeperidine, and amphetamine and methamphetamine. (h) In the past, abuse of methamphetamine had been in theform of tablets or intravenous injection. More recently,"ice" (one of the common street names ford-methamphetamine hydrochloride) has gained popularity in a formsuitable for smoking. (i) Most of the agents in this class of drugs can inducehallucinations if the dose is high enough. But the termhallucinogen does not adequately describe the range ofpharmacological actions of the diverse group of substancesusually included in the class. The term psychedelic was proposedby Osmond in 1957 to imply that these agents all have the abilityto alter the sensory perception and thus may be considered"mind expanding." The effects of hallucinogens areunpredictable and depend on the amount taken, the user'spersonality, mood and expectations, and the surroundings in whichthe drug is used. (j) PCP is considered a hallucinogen in some surveys of druguse. SOURCES: Office of Technology Assessment, 1991, based on thefollowing sources: American Psychiatric Association, Diagnosticand Statistical Manual of Mental Disorders, 3rd ed. revised(Washington, DC: 1987); R.M. Julien, A Primer of Drug Action, 5thed. (New York, NY: W.H. Freeman and Co., 1988); J.F. Kauffman, H.Shaffer, and M. Burglass, "The Biological Basics: Drugs andTheir Effects," Alcoholism and Substance Abuse: ClinicalInterventions (New York, NY: 1985); U.S. Department of Health andHuman Services, Public Health Service, Alcohol, Drug Abuse, andMental Health Administration, National Institute on Drug Abuse,"Hallucinogens and PCP, Inhalants, Marijuana, Opiates,Sedative-Hypnotics, Stimulants, and Cocaine," Rockville, MD,1983; U.S. Department of Health and Human Services, Public HealthService, Alcohol, Drug Abuse, and Mental Health Administration,National Institute on Drug Abuse, "Designer Drugs,"NIDA Capsules, Rockville, MD, June 1986; U.S. Department ofHealth and Human Services, Public Health Service, Alcohol, DrugAbuse, and Mental Health Administration, National Institute onDrug Abuse, "Marijuana Update," NIDA Capsules,Rockville, MD, May 1989; U.S. Department of Health and HumanServices, Public Health Service, Alcohol, Drug Abuse, and MentalHealth Administration, National Institute on Drug Abuse,"Methamphetamine Abuse," NIDA Capsules, Rockville, MD,January 1989; and U.S. Department of Education, Growing Up DrugFree: A Parent's Guide to Prevention (Washington, DC: 1989). BOX 1-2: Tolerance, Sensitization, Dependence, and Withdrawal Tolerance to a drug develops when, following a prolongedperiod of use, more of the drug is required to produce a giveneffect. Sensitization, the opposite of tolerance, occurs when theeffects of a given dose of a drug increase after repeatedadministration. Dependence is a type of neuroadaptation to drugexposure. With prolonged use of a drug, cells in the brain adaptto its presence such that the drug is required to maintain normalcell function. On abrupt withdrawal of the drug, the cell behavesabnormally and a withdrawal syndrome ensues. Generally, thewithdrawal syndrome is characterized by a series of signs andsymptoms that are opposite to those of the drug's acute effects.For example, withdrawal of sedative drugs produce excitation andirritability. Conversely, withdrawal of stimulants producesprofound depression. SOURCE: Office of Technology Assessment, 1994. BOX 1-3: Drugs and Discrimination In America, tensions between the majority and variousminorities often hinge on concerns raised by drug use. The groupschange over time and place, but the dividing issues remainremarkably similar. Those in power decide which drugs are legaland how rules should be enforced. Minorities charge that unfairpolicies result from prejudice, ignorance, and hypocrisy. When? 1850 Where? Boston Who? Irish Immigrants Impoverished Irish immigrants brought the tradition ofdrinking whiskey with them. In American cities, people oftenblamed whiskey for neighborhood quarrels. In the mid-19thcentury, clashes with Irish immigrants occurred so often thatpolice vans came to be known by the term "paddywagons." When? 1880s Where? San Francisco Who? Chinese Immigrants Fear of immigrant Chinese often focused on their recreationaluse of opium. In 1875, San Francisco outlawed opium smoking,which most residents associated exclusively with the Chinese.This citywide ban became nationwide in 1909. When? 1882 Where? Ohio Who? German Immigrants Beer drinking often brought Germans into conflict withtemperance advocates. Cincinnati's lively German communitygathered at beer gardens on Sundays to sing, dance, drink, andargue politics. In 1882, Ohio's governor denounced Germans as"sabbath breakers, criminals, and free thinkers." When? 1930s Where? Colorado, New Mexico Who? Mexican MigrantWorkers The Southwest welcomed Mexican migrants during laborshortages. But during the Depression, anxiety over competitionfor jobs shifted to wildly exaggerated fears of the effects ofmarijuana use customary among Mexicans. To placate fears,Congress passed the Marijuana Tax Act of 1937, which prohibitedrecreational use of the drug. When? 1991 Who? African Americans Police forces are largelywhite and inner-city residents are mostly black. Between 1980 and1990, the drug-arrest rate in the city of Rochester, New York,was about five times that for suburban Monroe County. SOURCE: "Altered States: Alcohol and Other Drugs inAmerica," Strong Museum, Rochester, NY, 1993. BOX 1-4: Ethnography Ethnographic techniques allow researchers to study howenvironmental and cultural factors affect values, attitudes, andbehaviors of individuals and groups. For three decades,researchers have documented societal and cultural influences onthe patterns of substance use, abuse, and addiction; using arange of methodologies and working in diverse contexts,ethnographers have contributed to the understanding of substanceabuse. Interacting with drug users under a wider set ofcircumstances than do strict quantitative researchers,ethnographers have expanded the framework of substance abuseresearch hypotheses. They have also assisted in the evaluationand interpretation of clinical and survey data to differentsubcultures and populations. Ethnographies also provide information on constantlychangingsubstance use patterns. By collecting data from substance usersin their natural environments, ethnographers have been able todocument who uses drugs and how drugs are used. This type ofmethodology is essential to the historical understanding ofsubstance use and abuse. Lastly, ethnographers have documented different styles ofsubstance use within American society as well as abroad.Differences are cited in experience and use patterns based onsocial class, cultural background, gender, and geographiclocation. SOURCE: Office of Technology Assessment, 1994. _ CliffSchaffer's Home Page WT01-B29-9IA030-000641-B023-235http://206.61.184.43:80/schaffer/LIBRARY/studies/ota/ch2.htm 206.61.184.43 19970122140157 text/html 46692HTTP/1.0 200 OKDate: Wednesday, 22-Jan-97 14:01:46 GMTServer: WebSitePro/1.1f (S/N wpo-0deb)Allow-ranges: bytesContent-type: text/htmlLast-modified: Saturday, 28-Dec-96 06:51:09 GMTContent-length: 46474 CHAPTER 2 INTRODUCTION TECHNOLOGIES FOR UNDERSTANDING AND PREVENTING SUBSTANCEABUSE AND ADDICTION US Government Office of Technology Assessment October 18, 1994 CHAPTER 2 INTRODUCTION Substance abuse and addiction are pervasive in our society,with their consequences felt by people in every economic, social,racial, and political boundary. The United States has grappled with problems associated withsubstance abuse and addiction for over a century (see appendix Aand table 2-1). In 1986, then-President Ronald Reagan launchedwhat has become known as the war on drugs. Federal spending tocombat drugs increased from $1.5 billion in 1981 to more than $12billion in 1994, with spending in 1995 projected to pass the $13billion mark (see table 2-2). Nearly two-thirds of the federalantidrug budget goes toward efforts to curb the supply of drugs(e.g., border interdiction, law enforcement), with the remainderbeing spent on drug treatment and prevention programs. While theuse of illegal drugs has declined in the United States in recentyears, a vigorous debate continues as to whether the nation isindeed winning the war on drugs, and what the balance of federaleffort should be in formulating programs to decrease the supplyof drugs, treat drug abusers and addicts, and educate Americansabout problems associated with drug abuse and addiction. Congress has enacted a number of laws in an attempt to createa national policy to fight the scourge of drug abuse andaddiction. As part of oversight responsibility for national drugpolicy, several committees of Congress have requested the Officeof Technology Assessment (OTA) to undertake a study addressingthe socioeconomic, psychological, physiological, and geneticunderpinnings of substance abuse and addiction (see table 2-3). OTA has been asked to address a number of questions: o What are the root causes of substance abuse and addiction? o Why and how does addiction occur? o Who are the substance abusers? o What factors, scientific and social, lead to addiction? o What are the implications for prevention? ROOT CAUSES At the outset, OTA was asked to address the root causes ofsubstance abuse and addiction. The term root causes has been usedin political discussions and debate (see box 2-1), and althoughmany people have strongly held opinions as to what constitutesthe root causes of drug abuse, no consensus exists as to what, ifanything, is inherent in every case of substance abuse andaddiction. OTA conducted a search of various bibliographicdatabases, which revealed only limited discussion about rootcauses of drug abuse (2). Research into drug abuse looks not at root causes per se, butrather at risk and protective factors that increase or decreasethe possibility that substance abuse and addiction will occur(see table 2-4), and how these risk and protective factors affectvarious subpopulations in different settings. WHAT ARE SUBSTANCE ABUSE AND ADDICTION? Drug consumption is divided into three levels or stagescommonly distinguished by clinicians and researchers: use, abuse,and dependence (see figure 2-1). Each of these stages is, onaverage, more hazardous, more obtrusive, and more likely toprovoke or induce social interventions (e.g., punitive sanctions,attention by prevention programs, admission to treatment) thanthe one before (4). A substance is abusable if it has thecapacity to induce dependence in those who use it. Dependence, aterm that is often used interchangeably with the term addiction,can include psychological dependence (a form of obsessivebehavior whose objective is the attainment of pleasure or theavoidance of unpleasantness) and physical dependence (developmentof tolerance, causing the user to need increasing amounts of thedrug for it to have its desired effect, and withdrawal symptomsif drug use is stopped) (5). Nevertheless, there is considerable controversy about whatconstitutes substance abuse and addiction. A number of issuescome into play, such as: o What substance is being used? A wide range of psychoactivesubstances has the potential for abuse (see box 2-2). Thepossession and use of several substances--such as marijuana,heroin, cocaine--are illegal in all 50 states. Other addictivesubstances--such as tobacco and alcohol--may be legallypurchased, possessed, and consumed by a majority of Americans.Other abusable substances--such as inhalants-- may be legallypurchased, possessed, and consumed by anybody. o Does experimental use constitute abuse? Some maintain thatany use of an abusable or addictive substance constitutes abuse.Others suggest that experimentation-- particularly with suchpsychoactive substances as alcohol or tobacco that are availablefor purchase by adults of legal age--is part of normaldevelopment and does not necessarily have harmful consequences. o In what context are substance abuse and addiction beingaddressed? Four broad arenas that encounter substance abuserelated issues include: mass communications, criminal justice,medicine, and public health. These entities often operateindependently of one another, and use substantially differentterms when describing the use of illicit substances or theillegal use of licit substances (see appendix C). Public Health Model The traditional public health model incorporates the host-agent-environment relationship. Each of these factors has anindividual, as well as an interrelated role in the potential useand/or harmful use of a substance. Host factors may includepossible genetic, psychological, and biological susceptibility.Agent factors incorporate the substance's abuse liabilitycapacity, as well as how the substance is marketed. Lastly,environmental factors encompass not only the availability of thesubstance, but the social, cultural, political, and economicclimate as well. The focus of the public health perspective is tounderstand the importance social norms, environment, andavailability play in the shaping of alcohol- and drug-relatedproblems both on an individual and societal level. The public health approach toward substance abuse has severaldefining characteristics: o The substance abuse problem is primarily one of health, andrisks for ill-health. In every recreational, mood- altering druguser, use increases the risk of contracting one or more diseasesor conditions damaging to one's health. Drug use always createsthe potential, from great to small, for developing one or moredrug-related health problems. o The legality or illegality of a drug is an artificialbarrier that is not as relevant as the health-relatedconsiderations stemming from all types of drug use. Rather thanusing legal/illegal, the public health approach categorizes drugsby such characteristics as addictive potential and long-termhealth risks. o The drug abuse problem and the drug-related crime problemare not one and the same. As two distinct, interrelated problems,they have different, interrelated solutions. o Dealing with the drug problem primarily as a moral problemis considered inappropriate and counterproductive. Medical Model Within the fields of medicine, the two most frequently citedtexts for the definitions of substance abuse and dependence arethe Diagnostic and Statistical Manual of Mental Disorders (DSM)issued by the American Psychiatric Association and used widely inAmerican medical practice, and the International Classificationof Diseases (ICD) published by the World Health Organization(WHO). The current ICD and DSM definitions of substance dependenceare nearly identical. However, the two manuals differ sharply onthe concepts of abuse, which DSM classifies as a maladaptivepattern of substance use leading to impairment or distress, asmanifested by one or more of several events occurring over thesame 12-month period (e.g., failure to fulfill major roleobligations at work, school, or home; recurrent substance-relatedlegal problems, such as arrests for substance-related disorderlyconduct. The current ICD-10 category of harmful use, whileapplicable cross-culturally, is limited to a pattern ofpsychoactive substance use that is causing damage to health. Thedamage may be physical, as in cases of hepatitis from theself-administration of injected drugs, or mental, such asepisodes of depressive disorder secondary to heavy consumption ofalcohol (see appendix C for a full discussion of DSM and ICDdefinitions). Criminal Justice Model While it is well-known that many crimes are committed bypersons with substance use disorders and that these disorders canbe major contributors to their crimes, the criminal justicesystem has no systematic policy for the evaluation of thesedisorders. In many jurisdictions, whether federal, state, orlocal, the prevailing sentiment is that any use of an illicitsubstance and/or use of a licit substance in an illegal manner isconsidered criminal abuse. A limited set of quantitative analysesincluding blood, urine, and breath tests can be performed todetect illegal levels of alcohol and/or the presence of illicitsubstances. Besides the limited amount of testing and evaluation,psychological screening examinations or structured interviews areused infrequently to determine the level and severity of use,abuse, or dependence. For purposes of this report, OTA does not adopt any singledefinition for the terms substance abuse or substanceaddiction/dependence. The focus of this report, the underlyingcauses of substance abuse and addiction, relates to each of thedefinitions discussed above. MAGNITUDE OF THE PROBLEM The abuse of licit and illicit drugs represents a majorpublic health problem in the United States. Abuse of alcohol andother drugs has been associated with many problems (see figure2-2) costing Americans an estimated $144.1 billion annually. Federal survey data estimate that 11.4 million Americans aged12 and older used illegal drugs in 1992, continuing a steadydecline from a peak of 24 million in 1979. Findings from the 1992National Household Survey found the following about specificdrugs: o Illegal drugs. Since 1979, overall rates of current use(defined as use within the last 30 days) have dropped in all agegroups, except those aged 35 and older, whose use of drugs hasremained level. This has resulted in a general shift in the agedistribution of illegal drug users. In 1992, 23 percent ofillegal drug users were aged 35 and older, compared with only 10percent in 1979. o Cocaine. The number of cocaine users decreased 31 percentfrom 1.9 million users in 1991 to 1.3 million in 1992. This isdown from a peak of 5.8 million in 1985. The number of occasionalusers (defined as those who used the drug in 1992 but less oftenthan monthly) also continued a sharp decline from 4.3 million in1991 to 3.4 million in 1992. This is down from a peak of 8.6million in 1985. Frequent use of cocaine (defined as use on aweekly basis) remained unchanged between 1991 and 1992. In fact,no significant change has occurred in this number since it wasfirst estimated in 1985. o Marijuana. This is the most common illegal drug--used by 78percent of all illegal drug users in 1992. o Other illegal drugs. No major changes in the prevalence ofthe use of hallucinogens, such as lysergic acid diethylamide(LSD) and phencyclidine (PCP), between 1991 and 1992. The surveyestimates that approximately 1.8 million Americans have usedheroin at least once. However, the data on these categories aresomewhat unreliable, as these users are less likely to becontacted and reported in a household survey. o Alcohol. In 1992, approximately 98 million persons over theage of 12 had used alcohol in the last month, which isapproximately 48 percent of the population aged 12 and older.This number is down from an estimated high of 106 milliondrinkers in 1988. The number of heavy drinkers (defined as havingfive or more drinks per occasion on five or more days in the pastmonth) has remained steady at an estimated 9 million people. o Tobacco. An estimated 54 million Americans were smokers in1992, a rate of 26 percent of the population aged 12 and older.Cigarette smoking has declined since 1988, when an estimated 57million Americans smoked cigarettes. o Smokeless tobacco. An estimated 7.5 million Americans usedsmokeless tobacco in 1992, the vast majority of whom (7.1million) were males. o Inhalants. The use of inhalants (e.g., gasoline, glue, andnitrites) dropped slightly in 1992 as compared to 1991. o Prescription drugs. The estimated current nonmedical use ofpsychotherapeutics (sedatives, tranquilizers, stimulants, oranalgesics) dropped from 1991 to 1992. The survey also provides demographic variables useful tounderstanding substance use and abuse in the United States (seebox 2-3). However, these figures, as all data on drug use, aresuspect. Most surveys have strengths and weaknesses, which haveled stakeholders and policymakers to make widely divergentconclusions based on the same sets of data. MEASURING SUBSTANCE USE AND ABUSE Like the old fable about blind men describing an elephant,individual drug statistics usually tell us only part of the story(13). Each survey provides useful information, but at the sametime, each survey is flawed. Currently, no single measurement canby itself describe drug use and abuse in all its complexity.Nonetheless, several useful indicators do provide information topolicymakers. Three major national drug monitoring systems are the primarydata source for this review: The National Household Survey onDrug Abuse (the Household Survey), the National Survey of HighSchool Seniors (the Seniors Survey), and the Drug Abuse WarningNetwork (DAWN). These continuing data series have been sponsoredby the National Institute on Drug Abuse (NIDA) since the 1970s.Supplementary data sources include the few small area studiesthat compare drug use by poverty or income status and the DrugUse Forecasting System (DUF), sponsored by the National Instituteof Justice, which provides quarterly estimates of drug use amongthe criminal population in selected cities. National Household Survey on Drug Abuse Since 1974, NIDA has commissioned the Household Survey everyone to three years. The survey is based on a multistage randomsample of the household population in the 48 contiguous UnitedStates. The sample excludes persons living in group quarters,including institutions, prisons, military quarters, and collegedormitories, and those with no permanent address, including thehomeless. Since 1985, a number of enhancements have been made to theHousehold Survey. In 1985, blacks and Hispanics were oversampledto provide additional cases for subgroup analyses, and newmeasures of drug use frequency were introduced to identifypersons who used drugs monthly and weekly during the previousyear. In 1991, special supplementary samples were added for sixmetropolitan areas with highly publicized drug problems.Similarly, reports published since the early 1980s providegreater detail on the demographic characteristics of users byfrequency of use. National Survey of High School Seniors Every year since 1975 researchers at the University ofMichigan have surveyed a nationally representative sample ofapproximately 16,000 high school seniors. Beginning in 1976, afollowup survey of members from each graduating class, includingan over-sampling of drug users, has been conducted by mail. In1990, the followup sample included young adults aged 19 to 32. Drug Abuse Warning Network DAWN, established in 1972, is the federal government's majordata system for tracking patterns and trends in the serioushealth consequences of drug use. DAWN reports include statisticson the total number of hospital emergency room visits (episodes),separate counts of the number of drugs mentioned per episode(drug mentions), and drug-related deaths. Throughout the 1970s and 1980s, the DAWN program focusedprimarily on data from emergency rooms and medical examiners in27 metropolitan areas. The selection of reporting facilities,over 700 emergency rooms and 87 medical examiners by 1989, wasnot random, however, and the number of facilities reportingvaried from year to year, with facilities in metropolitan areasbeing overrepresented. Beginning in 1990, DAWN implemented anational probability sample for the collection of drug-relatedemergency room visit data to allow reporting of national as wellas metropolitan area information. Drug Use Forecasting System DUF, initiated in 1988 by the Department of Justice, providesestimates of drug use among booked arrestees in selected citiesbased on urinalysis tests. The tests, administered shortly afterarrest, measure very recent drug use among lawbreakers. Fourtimes a year, samples of about 250 male adult arrestees inparticipating cities are tested; some areas also test femalearrestees and juveniles. The proportion of persons arrestedexplicitly on drug charges is limited to 25 percent of the totalsample. Limitations of the Data The national drug monitoring surveys have several limitationsfor studying drug use, abuse, and addiction: o Most surveys rely on self-reporting. The results of suchsurveys rely on the veracity of the person responding to thesurvey. A major, and widely recognized, limitation in thenational surveys is that respondents may be unwilling or unableto report their drug use accurately. Comparisons of self-reportand urinalysis results based on DUF data indicate that, amongarrestees, the tendency to underreport drug use is substantial(12). As one Member of Congress noted, "how in the hell canyou expect people who live in households to share with anybody,let alone the government, how often they use drugs?" (3). o Surveys miss populations at risk for drug abuse.TheHousehold Survey, by definition, excludes certain groups whodo not reside in households, such as the homeless and persons injail or prison. Although the excluded groups represent only 2percent of the total population, drug use may be higher, ordifferent, among excluded groups such as the homeless and jail orprison inmates. The Household Survey may also fail to capturedrug users within the target population. Although overall surveyresponse rates are high (82 percent in 1990), drugs users mayhave been more difficult to locate and interview because theirlifestyles may involve irregular hours, avoiding authority, andother behaviors that reduce the likelihood of survey response. Inaddition, response rates tend to be generally lower among youngadults and residents of metropolitan and low-income areas, andthose not interviewed may be more likely to use drugs than thosewho respond to the survey. o Poverty indicators per se are not available. The nationaldrug monitoring systems contain very limited data on poverty, andnone that meet the official poverty definition (in 1991, thepoverty thresholds varied from $6,932 for a person living aloneto $27,942 for a family of nine or more members (6). The proxyvariables relating to employment, education, place of residence,and race and ethnicity unsuccessfully separate the effects ofincome from the effects of other correlated factors. Informationon drug use by income status is available only in the most recentHousehold Surveys, and then only by family income without regardto household size. More information is provided by the HouseholdSurvey on other variables related to poverty, includingemployment status, race and ethnicity, and neighborhoodcharacteristics. The Seniors Survey provides no income data. Forhigh school seniors, the only regularly reported indicators ofsocioeconomic status are college plans and parental education. Nosocioeconomic indicators are available for the followup sample ofyoung adults except current enrollment in college. Race andethnic status are not regularly reported for either sample, butfor high school seniors racial and ethnic patterns of drug useare analyzed and published separately. DAWN has severelimitations for an analysis of poverty and drug use. The onlyindicators in DAWN related to poverty are race and ethnicity. Nodata are available on income status of patients or the economicstatus of areas served by the facility. o Surveys may over- and underrepresent findings regardingpopulations at risk for drug abuse. Populations at risk for bothpoverty and drug abuse, for example, are excluded orunderrepresented in the major surveys and overrepresented inreports from hospital emergency rooms. These problems mean thatthe findings from these surveys are suggestive rather thandefinitive (see box 2-4). o Drug measures focus on use, rather than abuse or addiction.The common measures of drug use employed by the Household andSeniors Surveys--lifetime, past year, and past month use--areinsufficiently refined to distinguish between casual anddependent drug use. Definitions of alcohol, drug abuse, anddependency --such as those set forth in DSM (1)-- link thequantity and frequency of use to indications of persistent,uncontrolled consumption, impaired social and psychologicalfunctioning as a result of use, and physical problems includingwithdrawal symptoms. No published estimates of the number of drugusers meeting medical criteria for abuse or dependence by povertyindicators are available, with the single exception of the DAWNestimates of emergency room contacts for dependency, which arereported by race and ethnicity. o The surveys include few multivariate analyses. Since thesurveys do not examine variables while controlling for factorsrelated to drug use, an accurate link of drug use with the roleof income, race, education, and place of residence is impossible.The dearth of such analyses results in part from sample sizelimitations and in part from the fact that secondary analyses ofthe national survey data have not been encouraged. ORGANIZATION AND SCOPE OF THE REPORT This report has four parts: necessary preconditions,individual factors, community contexts, and policy options. The first part, Necessary Preconditions (chs. 3-5), focuseson several factors necessary for substance abuse to occur. Thesecond part, Individual Factors (ch. 6), explores researchconducted on risk and protective factors thought to be indicatorsin assessing an individual's substance use, abuse, and addiction.The third part, Activity Settings (chs. 7 and 8), looks at howrisk and protective factors play out in various populationsubgroups and in various community settings (home, school,workplace, recreation, and neighborhood). The fourth section,Policy Options (ch. 9), addresses the range of legislative issuesand options for Congress arising from chapters 3 through 8. This report focuses on factors that contribute to or protectagainst substance abuse and addiction, and the implications forprevention. It does not address in any depth drug treatment orlaw enforcement issues and interventions. Based on theliteratures reviewed by OTA about causes and prevention, however,it is clear that comprehensive prevention strategies willgenerally need drug treatment and law enforcement components, ifthey are to be effective. While drawing on data from federalantidrug prevention programs, the effectiveness of suchapproaches needs to be studied in greater depth than was possiblein this report. This report is the second and final publication of thisassessment. The first publication, a background report onBiological Components of Substance Abuse and Addiction, describedgenetic, pharmacological, and abuse liability research issues(9). Readers are also referred to earlier OTA reports thataddress issues related to drug interdiction efforts (10);alcohol, tobacco, and drug abuse prevention and services issuesin adolescent health (7); the effectiveness of drug abusetreatment in controlling AIDS/HIV infection (11); and alternativecoca reduction strategies (8). BOX 2-1: Root Causes: Two Views From the Political Arena "Many states and cities are on shoe-string budgets andmust provide services and alternatives to substance abuse inlocal communities. The failure to address the fundamental causesof substance abuse and to provide immediate interventionstrategies will impact city residents most... The committeerecommends that the National Drug Control Strategy be framed bybroader social and economic problems which require dramaticreforms in order to attack the root causes of substance abuse. Weneed to begin to build the infrastructure necessary to improvethe quality of treatment services by requiring medical schools toprovide comprehensive training to identify and treat substanceabusers; provide adequate treatment services at the communitylevel, including after care, vocational, educational, andpsychiatric assessments; and develop alternative leisureactivities for youth and adults to replace `street life' andassist individuals to escape the drug culture." House Committee on Government Operations committee report "One of [the Democrats'] tactics was to talk about theroot causes of drug use, the `deeper and more profound problems,'as they put it, of homelessness, poverty, helplessness, and thelike. The elites liked this shift in emphasis, too. It took thediscussion away from moral considerations to the (for them) morecomfortable ground of social theory. They wanted to talk about`hopelessness' as a condition caused by lack of governmentinvolvement. We talked about hopelessness, too, but talked aboutit as a condition caused by social decomposition and thebreakdown of the family and a lack of law and order in thesecommunities . . . I found it shocking and disappointing that whenwe argued for more police, jails, courts, and prisons because ofthe exploding crime epidemic in some of America's inner cities,some people responded by saying, `But what are the root causes ofthis? `That's an interesting debate which should go on at anelite university. But if there are drug dealers going aroundshooting people in the affluent suburbs, the citizenry will notcall for a seminar on root causes. They will raise hell anddemand that the dealers be arrested. And they are right to doso." William Bennett Former director, U.S. Office of National DrugControl Policy SOURCES: U.S. House of Representatives, Committee onGovernment Operations, H.Rept. 101-992, "The Role of DemandReduction in the National Drug Control Strategy"; Bennett,W., The De-Valuing of America: The Fight for Our Culture and OurChildren (New York, NY: Summitt Books, 1992).F:\USERS\LL\SUBSTAN\BOX2-2.TXT October 7, 1994 BOX 2-2: Overview of Alcohol and Some Other PsychoactiveSubstances Class of psychoactive substance(a) Description(b) ALCOHOL (ethyl alcohol) Alcohol, one of the most widely used of all drugs, is acentral nervous system depressant with effects similar to thoseof sedative-hypnotic compounds (see below). At low doses, alcoholmay be associated with behavioral excitation thought to be due tothe depression of inhibitory neurons in the brain. Alcoholdiffers from sedative-hypnotic compounds in that it is usedprimarily for recreation or social rather than medical purposes. Examples 1. Beer. 2. Wine. 3. "Hard" liquor (e.g., whiskey,gin). SEDATIVES, HYPNOTICS, OR ANXIOLYTICS Sedative-hypnotics aredrugs of diverse chemical structure that exert a nonselectivegeneral depressant on the central nervous system. In addition,they reduce metabolism in a variety of tissues in the body,depressing any system that uses energy. Depending on the dose,any sedative hypnotic compound may be classified as a sedative(an agent that allays excitement), a tranquilizer (an antianxietyagent), a hypnotic (a sleep-inducing agent), or an anesthetic (anagent that eliminates pain). Sedative-hypnotics are usedmedically as sedatives, anxiolytics (antianxiety agents),hypnotics, antiepileptics, muscle relaxants, and generalanesthetics. Examples 1. Barbiturates ("downers" or "barbs"):pentobarbital sodium[NembutalR], secobarbital sodium [SeconalR],amobarbital [AmytalR]--taken orally. 2. Nonbarbiturate hypnotics: methaqualone [QuaaludesR]--taken orally. 3. Tranquilizers: diazepam [ValiumR], chlordiazepoxidehydrochloride [LibriumR]--taken orally. CANNABIS (THC) THC (tetrahydrocannabinol) the active agent inmarijuana, alters perceptions, concentration, emotions, andbehavior, though the mechanisms of action are not entirely clear.Researchers have found, however, that THC changes the way inwhich sensory information is processed by the brain. It can beused medically to relieve nausea and side effects of chemotherapyin cancer patients; it is very rarely used to treat glaucoma. Examples 1. Marijuana ("pot" or "grass")--smokedor eaten. 2. Hashish ("hash")--smoked or eaten. 3.Hashish oil ("hash oil")--smoked (mixed with tobacco.4. Tetrahydrocannabinol (THC)-- taken orally in capsules. NICOTINE Nicotine, obtained naturally from tobacco, is acentral nervous system stimulant.(c) It exerts its actionsecondary to stimulation of certain cholinergic (excitatory)synapses both within the brain and in the peripheral nervoussystem. Examples 1. Cigarettes. 2. Smokeless tobacco (e.g., snuff or chewingtobacco). COCAINE Cocaine, obtained naturally from coca leaves, is apotent central nervous system stimulant.(c) It stimulates thesympathetic nervous system, which regulates the activity ofcardiac muscle, smooth muscle, and glands. It also producesbronchodilation in the lungs. It is used medically as a topicalanesthetic for surgical procedures. Examples 1. Cocaine hydrochloride powder ("coke" or"street cocaine")--usually snorted or injectedintravenously.d 2. Cocaine alkaloid ("freebase" or"crack")--smoked.e AMPHETAMINES AND RELATED STIMULANTSf 1. AmphetaminesAmphetamines are a group of three closely related compounds, allof which are potent central nervous system and behavioralstimulants.(c) Some amphetamines are used medically to treatattention deficit disorder or minimal brain dysfunction inchildren, narcolepsy (recurrent, uncontrollable, brief episodesof sleep), or (rarely) depression. Examples 1. Amphetamine ("speed" or "uppers"(BenzedrineR]--taken orally, injected, or snorted.(g) 2. Methamphetamine ("speed" or "crystalmeth" or "ice") [MethadrineR]--taken orally,injected, or snorted.(g,h) 3. Dextroamphetamine [DexedrineR]--taken orally, or injected. 2. Nonamphetamine stimulants Like amphetamines,nonamphetamine stimulates are central nervous and behavioralstimulants. Some non-amphetamine stimulants (e.g., PreludinR) areused for weight control, and some (e.g., RitalinR and CylertR)are used medically to treat hyperactivity, minimal braindysfunction, narcolepsy, or (rarely) depression. Examples 1. Pheumetrazine hydrochloride [PreludinR]--taken orally orinjected.d 2. Methylphenidate hydrochloride injected.d 3. Pemoline [CylertR]--taken orally. [RitalinR]--takenorally, or injected.(d) HALLUCINOGENS Hallucinogens, or psychedelics, are aheterogeneous group of compounds that affect a person'sperceptions, sensations, thinking, self-awareness, andemotions.(i) Examples 1. LSD (lysergic acid diethylamide) or"acid"--taken orally or put in the eyes. 2. Mescaline (3,4,5-trimethylox- phenylethyl amide) or"mesc" and peyote--disks chewed, swallowed, or smoked;tablets taken orally. 3. Psilocybin ("magic mushrooms")--chewed andswallowed. 4. MDMA (methylene dioxymethamphetamine)--takenorally. INHALANTS Inhalants are chemicals that produce psychoactivevapors. Although different in makeup, nearly all of the abusedinhalants produce effects similar to those of anesthetics, whichact to slow down the body's functions or produce feelings ofdizziness. At low doses, users may feel slightly stimulated. Amylnitrite is used for heart patients because it dilates the bloodvessels and increases blood supply to the heart. There are nomedical indications for most of the inhalants. Examples 1. Solvents (model airplane glue, nail polish remover,lighter and cleaning fluids, and gasoline)--vapors inhaled. 2. Aerosols (e.g., paints, hairsprays)--vapors inhaled. 3. Some anesthetics (e.g.,nitrous oxide)--vapors inhaled. 4. Amyl nitrite ("snappers" or "poppers")and butyl nitrite ("rush")--vapors inhaled. OPIATES (NARCOTICS) AND RELATED ANALGESICS Opiates arenatural or synthetic drugs that, like morphine, a substancederived from the opium poppy, have analgesic (pain-relieving)properties. Heroin is not approved for medical uses in the UnitedStates. The major medical use of other opiates is for the reliefof pain (i.e., as analgesics); some narcotics are used to relievecoughing (i.e., as antitussives) or to treat diarrhea. Methadoneis used in the treatment of narcotic abstinence syndromes and asan analgesic in terminal illness. 1. Heroin ("smack" or "horse")--injected, smoked, or inhaledd. 2. Codeine (codeine sulfate)--taken orally or injected.d 3. Morphine (morphine hydrochloride)--injected, smoked, orinhaled. 4. Synthetic opiates (e.g., methadone [DolophineR]);hydromorphone hydrochloride [DilaudidR], meperidine hydrochloride[DemerolR], oxycodone and asprin [PercodanR]-- taken orally orinjected. PCP (PHENCYCLIDINE) AND SIMILARLY ACTING SYMPHATHOMIMETICS Phencycyclidine, commonly referred to as PCP, alters thefunctions of the neocortex and has been called a dissociativeanesthetic. It was developed in the 1950s as an anesthetic butwas subsequently taken off the market in 1967 when it wasdiscovered that the drug caused hallucinations in some people.(j)PCP is now used legally only in veterinary medicine as animmobilizing agent. PCP ("angel dust" or "lovely")--takenorally, or smoked (sprayed on joints or cigarettes).(d) ______________ (a) According to Julien, one could conceivablyclassify psychoactive drugs by at least three methods: 1)mechanism of action, 2) chemical structure, and 3) behavioraleffects. Probably the most useful approach would be to classifythem by mechanism of action, but knowledge of the brain'sphysiology is too limited for this approach to be comprehensive.A limitation of the second approach is that many drugs ofapparently similar structure exert quite different effects, andmany drugs of dissimilar structure exert quite similar effects.The classification in this table largely reflects the behavioraleffects approach. The classification used here is based on thecategories in the American Psychiatric Association's Diagnosticand Statistical Manual of Mental Disorders, 3rd ed., revised.According to the American Psychiatric Association, all of theclasses of psychoactive substances listed in this box exceptnicotine are associated with both abuse and dependence. Nicotineis associated with dependence but not abuse. (b) The potential physiological, psychological, andbehavioral effects of using the psychoactive substance shown arediscussed in the sources listed below. The consequences depend inpart on the specific drug used, the dosage level and mode ofadministration. (c) Central nervous system stimulants are drugs that canelevate mood, increase alertness, reduce fatigue, provide a senseof increased energy, decrease appetite, and improve taskperformance. They can also produce anxiety, insomnia, andirritability. The drugs differ widely in their molecularstructures and mechanisms of action. (d) According to the American Psychiatric Association, theroute of administration of a psychoactive substance is animportant variable in determining whether use will lead todependence or abuse. In general, routes of administration thatproduce more efficient absorption of the substance in the bloodstream (e.g., intravenous injection) tend to increase thelikelihood of an escalating pattern of substance uses that leadsto dependence. Routes that quickly deliver psychoactivesubstances to the brain (e.g., smoking or intravenous injection)are associated with higher levels of consumption and with anincreased likelihood of toxic effects. Use of contaminatedneedles for intravenous administration of amphetamines, cocaine,and opiates can cause hepatitis, HIV infection, and otherillnesses. (e) Freebase cocaine is a form of cocaine made by converting"street cocaine" (cocaine hydrochloride) to a purifiedbase that is smoked. The effect of smoking freebase is similar tothat of intravenous injection but smoking provides a shorter moreintense high than sniffing or ingestion because of the rapidabsorption of the drug through the lungs. "Crackcocaine" is the street name given to freebase cocaine thathas been processed from cocaine hydrochloride to a chemical baseby cooking it with baking soda and water. The term crack refersto the cracking sound that is heard when the mixture is smoked(heated), presumably due to the sodium bicarbonate. (f) Describing a drug as a stimulant does not adequatelydescribe its properties. Drug use surveys typically meanamphetamines when they use the word stimulants. Some surveysregard as stimulants both prescription (amphetamines) andnonprescription substances (e.g., caffeine-based compounds usedin No-Doz, diet pills, and "fake pep pills"). Cocaineand nicotine (described above) are also central nervous systemsimulants. (g) According to the National Institute on Drug Abuse,designer drugs are structural analogs of substances scheduledunder the Controlled Substances Act that are prepared byunderground chemists to mimic the psychoactive effects ofcontrolled substances or produce other psychoactive effects.Because such analogs are not identical to their parent compound,their manufacture and distribution does not violate the law. Asof June 1986, there were synthetic analogs of PCP, fentanyl andmeperidine, and amphetamine and methamphetamine. (h) In the past, abuse of methamphetamine had been in theform of tablets or intravenous injection. More recently,"ice" (one of the common street names ford-methamphetamine hydrochloride) has gained popularity in a formsuitable for smoking. (i) Most of the agents in this class of drugs can inducehallucinations if the dose is high enough. But the termhallucinogen does not adequately describe the range ofpharmacological actions of the diverse group of substancesusually included in the class. The term psychedelic was proposedby Osmond in 1957 to imply that these agents all have the abilityto alter the sensory perception and thus may be considered"mind expanding." The effects of hallucinogens areunpredictable and depend on the amount taken, the user'spersonality, mood and expectations, and the surroundings in whichthe drug is used. (j) PCP is considered a hallucinogen in some surveys of druguse. SOURCES: Office of Technology Assessment, 1991, based on thefollowing sources: American Psychiatric Association, Diagnosticand Statistical Manual of Mental Disorders, 3rd ed. revised(Washington, DC: 1987); R.M. Julien, A Primer of Drug Action, 5thed. (New York, NY: W.H. Freeman and Co., 1988); J.F. Kauffman, H.Shaffer, and M. Burglass, "The Biological Basics: Drugs andTheir Effects," Alcoholism and Substance Abuse: ClinicalInterventions (New York, NY: 1985); U.S. Department of Health andHuman Services, Public Health Service, Alcohol, Drug Abuse, andMental Health Administration, National Institute on Drug Abuse,"Hallucinogens and PCP, Inhalants, Marijuana, Opiates,Sedative-Hypnotics, Stimulants, and Cocaine," Rockville, MD,1983; U.S. Department of Health and Human Services, Public HealthService, Alcohol, Drug Abuse, and Mental Health Administration,National Institute on Drug Abuse, "Designer Drugs,"NIDA Capsules, Rockville, MD, June 1986; U.S. Department ofHealth and Human Services, Public Health Service, Alcohol, DrugAbuse, and Mental Health Administration, National Institute onDrug Abuse, "Marijuana Update," NIDA Capsules,Rockville, MD, May 1989; U.S. Department of Health and HumanServices, Public Health Service, Alcohol, Drug Abuse, and MentalHealth Administration, National Institute on Drug Abuse,"Methamphetamine Abuse," NIDA Capsules, Rockville, MD,January 1989; and U.S. Department of Education, Growing Up DrugFree: A Parent's Guide to Prevention (Washington, DC: 1989). BOX 2-3: Household Survey Demographic Portrait According tothe 1992 National Household Survey on DrugAbuse:o Illegal druguse is most prevalent in the 18- to 25-yearage group.o Mostillegal drug users are in the white population (76percent of allcurrent users or 8.7 million people).o Men have a higher rate ofcurrent illegal drug use thanwomen.o Illegal drug use is highlycorrelated with educationalstatus. Those who had not completedhigh school had thehighest rate of use.o Unemployed people aretwice as likely as employed peopleto be using illegal drugs.o Theprevalence of illegal drug use in large metropolitancities isslightly higher than in nonmetropolitan areas.SOURCE: Office ofTechnology Assessment, 1994, based on U.S.Department of Healthand Human Services data. BOX 2-4: Two Contrasting Surveys Measuring Cocaine Use Because of populations not represented in the HouseholdSurveys (including homeless, run-away children, andinstitutionalized populations such as the incarcerated), thesurveys may greatly underestimate the involvement of the poor indrug use. Two years ago, for example, Abt Associates conducted astudy to determine the number of heavy cocaine users in theUnited States. Two measures of heavy cocaine use were employed,both of which measured use of cocaine in the very recent past.Estimates of the number of regular weekly cocaine users from the1990 Household Survey were compared to estimates of the number ofrecent cocaine users based on urinalysis tests of arrestees fromthe Drug Use Forecasting (DUF) program. DUF urinalysis tests wereconducted at the time of booking, and the results measuredcocaine use during the day or two before arrest. DUF estimatestherefore measured the prevalence of very recent drug use amongthose involved with the criminal justice system in selected majorcities. The two data systems generated significantly differentestimates. From the Household Survey, Abt estimated that therewere about 662,000 heavy cocaine users in this country in 1990.This is substantially lower than the Abt estimate of 1.709million heavy cocaine users derived from DUF data. Reasons forthe differences include both possible underreporting on theHousehold Survey and the fact that many heavy cocaine users maybe excluded from the household population or may be exceedinglydifficult to locate and interview. Overall, the study indicatedthat approximately two-thirds of the heavy cocaine users in thiscountry are not counted by the Household Survey and thatapproximately 87 percent of all heavy cocaine users are involvedwith the criminal justice system. SOURCE: Office of Technology Assessment, 1994; based on AbtAssociates, Heavy Cocaine Use in the United States: The Number ofUsers (Washington, DC: Abt Associates, 1991). _ CliffSchaffer's Home Page WT01-B29-10IA030-000641-B023-255http://206.61.184.43:80/schaffer/LIBRARY/studies/ota/ch3.htm 206.61.184.43 19970122140211 text/html 54349HTTP/1.0 200 OKDate: Wednesday, 22-Jan-97 14:01:59 GMTServer: WebSitePro/1.1f (S/N wpo-0deb)Allow-ranges: bytesContent-type: text/htmlLast-modified: Saturday, 28-Dec-96 06:50:57 GMTContent-length: 54131 CHAPTER 3 BIOLOGY AND PHARMACOLOGY TECHNOLOGIES FOR UNDERSTANDING AND PREVENTING SUBSTANCEABUSE AND ADDICTION US Government Office of Technology Assessment October 18, 1994 CHAPTER 3 BIOLOGY AND PHARMACOLOGY Substance abuse and addiction are complex phenomena that defysimple explanation or description. A tangled interaction offactors contribute to an individual's seeking out, use, andperhaps subsequent abuse of drugs. Since more individualsexperiment with drugs than eventually develop substance abuseproblems, great interest persists in understanding whatdifferentiates these groups. Factors that can play a role in drugabuse susceptibility include a person's psychological makeup(e.g., self-esteem, propensity to take risks, impulsivity,depression), biological response to drugs, environmentalsituation (e.g., peer groups, family organization, socioeconomicstatus), and the availability of drugs. The exact combination ofelements that lead to substance abuse varies among individuals. Underlying all substance use, abuse and addiction are theactions and effects that drugs of abuse exert. For a completeunderstanding of drug abuse and addiction one must address howdrugs affect the brain, why certain drugs have the potential forbeing abused, and what, if any, biological differences existamong individuals in their susceptibility to abuse drugs. Whilemany other factors ultimately contribute to an individual'sdrug-taking behavior, understanding the biological components iscrucial in understanding substance abuse, addiction, anddependency. Two biological factors contribute to substance use, abuse,and addiction: the effects drugs of abuse exert on a person; andthe biological status of the individual taking drugs. The formerrelates to the acute mechanisms of action of drugs in the brainand the long-term effects that occur after chronic exposure. Thelatter pertains to an individual's biological constitution, mostimportantly the presence of inherited characteristics that affectthat person's response to a drug. The biological mechanisms of substance abuse are complex andinteractive. A previously published background paper by theOffice of Technology Assessment (OTA) entitled BiologicalComponents of Substance Abuse and Addiction thoroughly discussesthe basic concepts, neuropharmacology, and genetics of drugabuse. This chapter is a synopsis of the background paper. DRUG ACTION Acute Actions Drugs of abuse alter the brain's normal balance and level ofbiochemical activity (see box 3-1). In order to have theseaffects, a drug must first reach the brain. This is accomplishedby the drug diffusing from the circulatory system into the brain.The routes of administration, methods by which a drug enters thebloodstream, affect how quickly a drug penetrates the brain. Thechemical structure of a drug plays an important role in theability of a drug to cross from the circulatory system into thebrain. The four main routes of administration for drugs of abuseare oral, nasal, intravenous, and inhalation. With oralingestion, the drug must be absorbed by the stomach or gut whichresults in a delay before effects become apparent. When the nasalroute of administration is used, effects are usually felt within3 minutes, as the capillary rich mucous membranes of the noserapidly absorb substances into the bloodstream. Intravenousadministration usually produces effects in 1/2 to 2 minutes andis slowed only by the detour back through the lungs that venousblood must take to reach the brain. Lastly, the inhalation methodbypasses the venous system completely because the drug isabsorbed into the pulmonary circulation which goes directly fromthe lungs to the heart and then to the brain. As a result,effects are felt within 5 to 10 seconds, making inhalation thefastest route of administration. The route of administration candetermine the drug's potency and the efficacy the drug will haveon affecting brain activity, thereby contributing to the abusepotential of the drug. Distinct from other psychoactive agents, drugs of abuse, inpart, affect those areas of the brain that mediate feelings ofpleasure and reward (see box 3-2). Evidence is accumulating thatpositive sensations experienced during these activities aremediated by the brain reward system. Studies have shown thatdirect stimulation of the areas of the brain involved in thereward system, in the absence of any goal-seeking behavior,produces extreme pleasure that has strong reinforcing propertiesin its own right (48,60). Animals with electrodes implanted inthese areas in such a way that electrical impulses produce apleasurable sensation will repeatedly press a bar, or do anyother required task, to receive electrical stimulation. The factthat animals will forego food and drink or will willinglyexperience a painful stimulus to receive stimulation of thereward system attests to the powerful reinforcing characteristicsof the reward system. Most drugs of abuse, either directly orindirectly, are presumed to affect the brain reward system. Inducing activity in the brain reward system gives drugs ofabuse positive reinforcing actions that support their continueduse and abuse. Drug reinforcement is defined as increasing thebehavior that led to the taking of the drug. Put more simply,individuals who use drugs experience some effect, such aspleasure, detachment, or relief from distress which initiallyestablishes and then maintains drug self-administration. Theconsequence of taking the drug enhances the probability that itwill continue to be used for some real or perceived effect and,hence, tends to lead to continued compulsive self-administration.In fact, the ability of a drug to support self-administration inexperimental animals is a measure of the drug's strength as areinforcer. While growing evidence suggests that the brain reward systemplays a role in the reinforcing properties of most drugs ofabuse, the precise mechanisms involved are complex, vary amongsubstances, and have yet to be completely described (41,42,43).For example, while some drugs of abuse directly affect thechemical release of dopamine (see box 3-3), the interactions ofother neurotransmitters such as gamma amino butyric acid (GABA),opioid peptides, and serotonin may also be important. Chronic Actions Chronic, long-term exposure to drugs of abuse can causechanges in the brain that may take weeks, months, and possiblyyears, to reverse once drug use has stopped. Most drugs of abuse have complex actions in the brain andother parts of the body resulting in a variety of behavioraleffects. In general, tolerance develops to many of the effects ofdrugs of abuse and a withdrawal syndrome occurs on cessationafter prolonged use. However, the details of these phenomena varyfrom drug to drug, and the specific details of the biologicalmechanisms that underlie these phenomena are not completelyunderstood. Recent advances in neuroscience research have begunto unravel how neuroadaptive responses manifest themselves forvarious drugs of abuse. Tolerance to a drug develops when, following a prolongedperiod of use, more of the drug is required to produce a giveneffect (33,38). This response occurs with many types of drugs. Itis a common, but unnecessary, characteristic of drug abuse (seebox 3-4). For example, while tolerance develops to some of theeffects of cocaine and amphetamines, sensitization can also occurto some of their other effects. Also, while it is unclear fromavailable data whether tolerance develops to cocaine'sreinforcing effects, the notion is supported by some experimentalevidence and anecdotal reports from cocaine users that the drug'seuphoric action diminishes with repeated use. In a recent study,it has been shown that acute tolerance to dopamine response isinduced by binge patterns of cocaine administration in male rats(51). Tolerance develops to most of the effects, including thereinforcing properties, of opiates, barbiturates, and alcohol. Sensitization, the opposite of tolerance, occurs when theeffects of a given dose of a drug increase after repeated, butintermittent, administration. Sensitization to a drug's effectscan play a significant role in supporting drug- taking behavior. Dependence is a type of neuroadaptation to drug exposure.With prolonged use of a drug, cells in the brain adapt to itspresence such that the drug is required to maintain normal cellfunction. On abrupt withdrawal of the drug, the cell behavesabnormally and a withdrawal syndrome ensues. Generally, thewithdrawal syndrome is characterized by a series of signs andsymptoms that are opposite to those of the drug's acute effects.For example, withdrawal of sedative drugs produce excitation andirritability. Conversely, withdrawal of stimulants producesprofound depression. The magnitude of the withdrawal syndrome varies from drug todrug. Although the severity varies, withdrawal is associated withthe cessation of use of most drugs of abuse. Opiates, cocaine,amphetamines, barbiturates, alcohol, and benzodiazepines producepronounced and sometimes severe withdrawal symptoms(20,24,56,68,74) while those for nicotine and caffeine are lessintense (1,31). A mild withdrawal episode is associated withdiscontinued cannabis use, while none is associated with lysergicacid diethylamide (LSD) use (12,63). No matter the severity ofthe physical withdrawal syndrome, its existence can create acraving or desire for the drug and dependence can play a verystrong role in recurrent patterns of relapse and maintainingdrug-seeking behavior to forestall withdrawal. At one time, withdrawal was believed to peak within severalhours after drug-taking was discontinued and then dissipate;similarly, common knowledge held that tolerance to most drugs wasthought to dissipate gradually with time, as the brain readaptedto the drug's disappearance. Substantial evidence now indicatesthat persistent, residual neuroadaptations are present, which canlast for months or possibly years, and may or may not beassociated with the pathways that mediate physical dependence(33,44,45,77). An important component of this phenomena may bethe learning which takes place during drug-taking behavior.Moreover, with repeated cycles of abstinence and reinitiation ofdrug use, the time required to elicit drug dependence growsshorter and shorter. Evidence also indicates that theadministration of naloxone, a drug that blocks the actions ofopiates, may elicit a withdrawal syndrome in individuals who haveabstained from use for extended periods of time. These dataindicate the existence of long-lasting, drug- inducedneuroadaptive changes that persist for as yet undefined periodsof time. Although information explaining this effect is lacking,these changes may help account for the relapses that sometimesoccur in long-term abstinent, drug-dependent individuals. Abuse Liability The Comprehensive Drug Abuse Prevention and Control Act(Public Law 91-513) and the Psychotropic Substances Act of 1978(Public Law 95-633) gives exclusive authority to the Secretary ofthe Department of Health and Human Services to determine theabuse liability of substances and to make recommendationsconcerning substance regulation and other drug policy decisions.Although the Secretary receives advice from the Drug EnforcementAdministration (DEA), the Food and Drug Administration (FDA), andvarious other regulatory agencies, these laws explicitly statethat the National Institute on Drug Abuse (NIDA) must provide tothe Secretary information relevant to the abuse potential ofsuspected drugs of abuse and all facts key to an assessment oftheir abuse potential. On the basis of this information fromNIDA, and input from FDA and DEA, the Secretary makes a judgmentas to the dependence potential of new drugs. NIDA supports avariety of activities in commercial and private laboratoriesaround the country to provide this information. A drug's abuse liability is measured by the likelihood thatits use will result in drug addiction. Many factors ultimatelyplay a role in an individual's drug-taking behavior;nevertheless, the abuse potential of a drug is related to itsintrinsic rewarding properties and/or the presumed neuroadaptivemotivational effects that result from its prolonged use. Drugscan be tested and screened for their abuse liability in animals.Four criteria can be evaluated to classify a drug as havingsignificant abuse potential: o pharmacological equivalence to known drugs of abuse, o demonstration of reinforcing effects, o tolerance, and o physical dependence. The capacity to produce reinforcing effects is essential toany drug with significant abuse potential, whereas tolerance andphysical dependence often occur but are not absolutely requiredto make such a determination. Testing new pharmaceuticals for their abuse potential is animportant step in new drug development. Many major pharmaceuticalfirms today emphasize the development of new and safer drugs forpain reduction and in the development of psychoactive compoundsfor treatment of brain disorders. In particular, scientificstrides in understanding the brain, neurological disease,psychiatric disturbances, and aging are fueling research intotreatment of brain disorders. As psychoactive compounds becomeavailable, they must be screened for abuse potential. The abuseliability assessment of new products is not simply at thediscretions of the manufacturer. Various federal regulatory lawsmandate such testing and federal regulatory agencies are chargedwith seeing that testing is carried out. The College on Problemsof Drug Dependence (CPDD), and, specifically, its Drug EvaluationCommittee (DEC), provides the majority of abuse liability testinginformation to NIDA. Animal models are generally used to screen for the abusepotential of new drugs in earlier stages of drug development orto evaluate abuse potential in drugs that cannot be readilystudied in humans (2). Laboratory methods for abuse potentialevaluation in humans are also well developed and is an area ofactive research (21). However, factors such as the heterogeneityof drug-using populations, the use of multiple drugs, and theother biological, social, and environmental factors involved inhuman drug use make human studies complex. In terms of the validity of animal models as a means ofstudying human drug addiction, an excellent correlation existsbetween predicting the abuse liability of specific classes ofdrugs in animals and humans (34). However, it is recognized thatanimal models are imperfect and, in fact, there are examples ofdrugs that proved to have significant abuse potential in humans,whereas the preclinical testing in animals revealed relativelyminimal abuse potential (9,33,38). The ultimate answer to theissue of whether a drug has significant abuse potential islong-term experience with the drug once it has become available,either legally or illegally. Nevertheless, animal models serve asthe only practical means of initially screening drugs for abuseliability and have proven to be the most effective means ofdetecting whether there is likely to be a problem in humans. Self-Administration The predominant feature of all drugs with significantaddiction-producing properties is that they are self-administered. In fact, self-administration of a drug to the pointwhen the behavior becomes detrimental to the individual is theprimary criterion for classifying a drug as having significantabuse potential for addiction. In addition toself-administration, another contributing factor to abuseliability is the notion of craving (9,33,38). Although craving isa difficult term to quantify, once a drug is voluntarily orinvoluntarily withdrawn, the increased desire to take the drugcan play a role in the relapse to substance abuse. As previouslymentioned, the reinforcing properties of the drug may shift thepattern of administration established during the initial, earlyphase of drug?addiction. Specifically, the drug may haveinitially been self-administered for its pleasurable effects butmay eventually be self-administered to relieve the discomfortassociated with withdrawal. Animals can be readily trained to self-administer drugs in avariety of settings (9). Animal models of self- administrationprovide a powerful tool that can give a good indication of theabuse liability of new or unknown drugs. These models also permitexamination of the behavioral, physiological, and biologicalfactors leading to sustained self-administration. Drug Discrimination Another tool in the assessment of abuse liability of drugs isdrug discrimination, which refers to the perception of theeffects of drugs (3,9). Specifically, animals or humans trainedto discriminate a drug from a placebo show a remarkable abilityto discriminate it from other drugs with different properties.These procedures also permit a determination of whether thesubject considers the drug to be the pharmacological equivalentof another drug. Pharmacological equivalence refers to the factthat drugs of particular classes, such as opiates, stimulants,and depressants cause a series of affects on the brain and otherorgans which collectively constitute their pharmacologicalprofile. Drug discrimination provides a useful measure in animalsto assess the subjective effects of drugs in humans. Dependence and Tolerance Physical dependence and tolerance to drugs of abuse canreadily be induced in animals by chronic administration of thesedrugs (37,38). Following abrupt cessation of these drugs, awithdrawal syndrome will often develop and, if given theopportunity, self-administration rates will be increased.Furthermore, since the understanding of the biological changeswhich take place during the development of physical dependenceand tolerance are poorly understood in humans, with the possibleexception of opiate dependency (45), animal models offer a uniqueopportunity to carry out experiments designed to address theseissues. GENETIC FACTORS Why does one person abuse or become dependent on drugs whileanother, exposed to a similar environment and experiences, doesnot? To date, the majority of biomedical research has focused onthe role, if any, that genetics plays in individualsusceptibility to substance abuse and dependence. There isgrowing interest, however, in researching other factors thateffect a person's biological status. For example, nutrition,biological development, in utero experiences, early exposure toenvironmental lead, head injuries, and other environmentalcomponents, can modify individual neurophysiology. Thus, whilethis section features genetics, there are many other factors thatcan influence individual biological susceptibility to the effectsof a drug. Progress in understanding the genetics of various conditionsand diseases has brought with it a realization that substanceabuse and addiction probably involve a genetic component. Thatis, hereditary biological differences among individuals may makesome more or less susceptible to drug dependency than others.However, a genetic component alone is undoubtedly insufficient toprecipitate substance abuse and addiction. Unlike disorders suchas Huntington's disease and cystic fibrosis that result from thepresence of alterations in a single gene, any genetic componentof substance abuse is likely to involve multiple genes thatcontrol various aspects of the biological response to drugs,individual temperament, and the propensity to engage inrisk-taking behaviors, or physiological predisposition to becomean abuser. In addition, the involvement of many behavioral andenvironmental factors indicates that any genetic component actsin consort with other nongenetic risk factors to contribute tothe development of substance abuse and addiction. Thus, thepresence or absence of a genetic factor neither ensures drugaddiction nor precludes it. Two questions arise when consideringa genetic component to substance abuse and addiction. Doinherited factors exist? If so, what are they? To date, most ofthe work done in this field is related to alcoholism; much lessis known about the genetics of other drugs of abuse. Do Inherited Factors Exist? Results from family, twin, and adoption studies as well asextensive research on animal models indicate that there areheritable influences on patterns of alcohol use. Animal studiesusing selective breeding techniques have established that alcoholpreference, the reinforcing actions of alcohol, alcoholtolerance, and alcohol physical dependence can be affected bygenetic factors. Although fewer studies have examined the geneticcomponent of vulnerability to the addictive properties of otherdrugs of abuse, evidence from animal studies confirms the role ofa genetic influence on the use and abuse of drugs other thanalcohol. To study nonalcoholic drug abuse in humans has beendifficult because of substantially lower population prevalenceand marked changes in availability and, hence, exposure to thesesubstances. Investigation in this area is further hampered by thecomplexity of subjects' drug use--most drug abusers have used(and had problems from using) multiple substances. This has ledresearchers either to concentrate on one class of drug or totreat all illicit drug use as equivalent. The tendency to lumpall illicit drugs into one category makes results difficult tointerpret or compare. Family Studies: Alcoholism References to a familial tendency or hereditary"taint" of alcoholism date back to classical times(23). Family studies have repeatedly confirmed that the risk ofalcoholism is higher among first-degree relatives (i.e., parents,siblings, children) of alcoholics as compared with the generalpopulation (54). Moreover, while family studies can establishthat a disorder (or liability to a disorder) is transmitted, ingeneral they fail to distinguish between biological andenvironmental transmission. This issue, however, can be evaluatedin large family studies by analyzing multiple classes ofrelatives with differing degrees of genetic relatedness. Results of numerous family studies indicate that alcoholismsegregates within families, with male first-degree relatives ofalcoholics having a higher incidence (ranging from 27 to 54percent) than female first-degree relatives (6 to 17 percent) ascompared to first-degree relatives of nonalcoholics (20 percentof males, 4 percent of females) (26,66,76). In fitting models ofinheritance to family data, researchers concluded that observedpatterns of inheritance were consistent with the hypothesis thatfamilial factors predisposing to alcoholism were the same in menand women, but that nonfamilial environmental factors exertedmore influence in the development of alcoholism in women (14).However, a review of drug abuse research on women presentedseveral comparative studies of men and women showing thatalcoholism among some women appeared more highly correlated witha family history of alcohol problems. Compared to alcoholic menin various studies, alcoholic women had a greater likelihood ofhaving an alcoholic father and/or parents, as well as alcoholicsiblings (47). Additionally, while perhaps not geneticallyinfluenced, familial alcoholics (those with at least one relativewith alcoholism) appear to have earlier onset, more antisocialsymptoms, more social complications of alcohol use, and worsetreatment outcome than nonfamilial alcoholics (22,62,70). Familial is not identical to genetic, and in the case ofalcoholism, the familial patterns of inheritance are notconsistent with those of a purely genetic condition (36,79). Inaddition, researchers suggest that the transmissibility ofalcoholism has increased over time (65). Thus, any geneticfactors promoting the development of alcoholism are significantlymoderated by nongenetic influences. Family Studies: Other Drugs Although fewer family studies have been conducted on thegenetic transmission of liability to other drugs of abuse,researchers suggest that, as in the case of alcohol, addiction toother psychoactive substances appears to run in families. One study found evidence of drug use running in families,based on family history obtained from individuals admitted forsubstance abuse treatment (53). However, this study combined useof all illicit drugs into one category and relied on self-reportsby the subject on his or her drug use as well as that of familymembers. A large family interview of opiate addicts found thatthe relatives of opiate users had elevated rates of drugaddiction as compared with the controls (67). In addition, anassociation was found between opiate use and the presence ofantisocial personality disorder (ASPD). Further analysis of thesedata revealed that the incidence of both drug abuse and ASPD washigher among the siblings of the opiate subjects than among theirparents (49,50). A familial association between opiate addiction andalcoholism has been noted in some studies (46). However, anotherfamily history study found that while both opiate addiction andalcoholism clustered within families, co- occurrence of thedisorders within families occurred only as frequently as expectedby chance, thus supporting the hypothesis of independenttransmission (29). Little has been done to test hypotheses regarding familialtransmission of liability to addiction to specific substancesother than opiates or alcohol. One study examining treated drugabusers and their relatives found that alcoholism was equallycommon among relatives of individuals who preferentially abusedopiates, cocaine, or sedative-hypnotics (27 percent, 31 percent,and 24 percent of male relatives, respectively), whereasrelatives of sedative-hypnotic users were subject to diagnoses ofother substance abuses (2 percent of male relatives, versus 11percent of male relatives of opiate abusers and 16 percent ofmale relatives of cocaine abusers) (55). Twin and Adoption Studies Twin and adoption studies provide information to distinguishbetween biological and cultural transmission. Twin studiesobserve siblings raised in the same environment, but compare howoften identical twins, who are genetically identical, andfraternal twins, who have the genetic similarity of nontwinsiblings are concordant for a trait. A high concordance rate fora trait among identical twins versus fraternal twins usuallyindicates a genetic component for the trait. Adoption studies, bycontrast, compare the presence of a trait among biological versusadoptive family members or other control groups. In this wayindividuals sharing the same environment but having differentgenetic heritages, or vice versa, can be compared. Evidence from twin studies suggests genetic influences ondrinking patterns as well as alcohol-related problems. Resultsfrom twin studies demonstrate genetic influences on measures ofalcohol consumption such as abstention, average alcohol intake,and heavy alcohol use (28,39,61). Twin studies also indicate aninherited risk for smoking (16). When evaluating the development of alcoholism, twin studieshave generally supported the existence of genetic influences overthe disorder's development. One early study found a higherconcordance rate for alcohol abuse between identical twins (54percent) than in fraternal twins (28 percent) (35), while twoother studies did not find such a relationship (25,61). A 1991study examined male and female identical twin pairs, and male andfemale fraternal twin pairs, with one member of the pair meetingthe criteria for alcohol abuse or dependence (64). Researchersfound that identical male twins differed from fraternal maletwins in the frequencies of both alcohol abuse and dependence aswell as other substance abuse and/or dependence. On the otherhand, female identical and fraternal twins were equally likely toabuse alcohol and/or become dependent on other substances, butidentical female twins were more likely to become alcoholdependent. Another study of 356 twin pairs also found higheridentical than fraternal rates of concordance for problemsrelated to alcohol and drug use as well as conduct disorder (52).The same study also noted that among men, heritability played agreater role in the early rather than late onset of alcoholproblems, whereas no such effect was seen among women. However, astudy of 1,030 female twin pairs found evidence for substantialheritability of liability to alcoholism, ranging from 50 to 60percent (40). Thus, twin studies provide general agreement that geneticfactors influence certain aspects of drinking. Most twin studiesalso show genetic influence over pathological drinking, includingthe diagnosis of alcoholism, which appears (like many otherpsychiatric disorders) to be moderately heritable. Whethergenetic factors operate comparably in men and women, and whetherseverity of alcoholism influences twin concordance is less clear.How psychiatric comorbidity may affect heritability of alcoholismalso remains to be clarified. Adoption studies have supported the role of heritable factorsin risk for alcoholism (6,11,71). The results from a series ofstudies conducted in Denmark during the 1970s are typical.Researchers studied male adoptees, later comparing them withnonadopted brothers; female adoptees, later comparing them withnonadopted daughters of alcoholics, comparisons were also madewith matched control adoptees. Sons of alcoholic and nonalcoholicparents who were put up for adoption were compared for thedevelopment of alcoholism. Sons of alcoholic parents were foundto be four times as likely as sons of nonalcoholic parents tohave developed alcoholism; evidence also suggested that thealcoholism in these cases was more severe. The groups differedlittle on other variables, including prevalence of otherpsychiatric illness or "heavy drinking." Being raisedby an alcoholic biological parent did not further increase thelikelihood of developing alcoholism; that is, rates of alcoholismdid not differ between the adopted-away children and theirnonadopted brothers. In contrast, a study of daughters ofalcoholics revealed no elevated risk of alcoholism (23). Another analysis examined factors promoting drug abuse aswell as alcoholism (10). In this study, all classes of illicitdrug use were categorized into a single category of drug abuse.Most of the 40 adopted drug abusers examined had coexisting ASPDand alcoholism; the presence of ASPD correlated highly with drugabuse. Among those without ASPD, a biological background ofalcoholism (i.e., alcoholism in a biological parent) wasassociated with drug abuse. Also, turmoil in the adoptive family(divorce or psychiatric disturbance) was associated withincreased odds for drug abuse in the adoptee. Finally, results from other adoption studies suggest twoforms of alcohol abuse (7,13). The two forms were originallyclassified by C.R. Cloninger as "milieu-limited" ortype 1 alcohol abuse and "male-limited" or type 2alcohol abuse (15). Type 1 alcohol abuse is characterized bymoderate alcohol problems and minimal criminal behavior in theparents, and is generally mild, but occasionally severe,depending on presence of a provocative environment. Type 2 isassociated with severe alcohol abuse and criminality in thebiological fathers. In the adoptees, it is associated withrecurrent problems and appears to be unaffected by postnatalenvironment. While the appropriateness of the biological and environmentalparameters used in the Cloninger study have been challenged, thediscriminating characteristics used to classify individuals astype 1 or 2 alcohol abusers have not been--until recently. A newstudy of familial and nonfamilial male alcoholics hasinvestigated the type 1 and 2 classifications by analyzing theimportance of age differences and cohort distributions (19). Theresearchers showed that among the male alcoholics, there was nota clear distinction between familial and nonfamilial basedalcohol abuse problems and type 1 or 2 characteristics, asreported in previous studies. Additionally, another recentpublication discusses the absence of paternal sociopathy in theetiology of severe alcoholism, and the possibility of a type 3alcoholism (30). This type of research raises obvious questionsas to the validity of the discriminating characteristicsoriginally outlined by Cloninger and currently used in theclassification of individual alcohol abusers. In summary, adoption studies of alcoholism clearly indicatethe role of biological, presumably genetic, factors in thegenesis of alcoholism. They do not exclude, however, a possiblerole for nongenetic, environmental factors as well. Moreover,researchers have suggested more than one kind of biologicalbackground may be conducive to alcoholism. In particular, onepattern of inheritance suggests a relationship between parentalantisocial behavior and alcoholism in the next generation. Thus,adoption studies, like other designs, suggest that even at thegenetic level, alcoholism is not a homogeneous construct. What Is Inherited? While study results indicate a probable genetic component toalcoholism and probably other drug abuse, they lack informationabout what exactly is inherited. For example, do individuals witha family history of drug abuse have an increased susceptibilityor sensitivity to the effects of drugs with reinforcingproperties? If a susceptibility exists, what are its underlyingbiological mechanisms? To understand what might be inherited,both individuals who have a substance abuse problem and animalsmodels of substance abuse are studied. Various types ofinformation can be derived from these studies. As with family,twin, and adoption studies, much more information is availableabout alcoholism as compared with other drugs of abuse. First, it may be possible to identify specific inherited riskmarkers for alcoholism and other substance abuse. A risk markeris a biological trait or characteristic associated with a givencondition. Thus, if an individual is found to have an identifiedmarker for substance abuse, he or she is at risk for developing adrug dependency. To date, no biological characteristic has beenclearly identified as being a risk marker for either alcoholismor substance abuse, although evidence suggests some possiblecandidates. The identification of a valid and reliable riskmarker could provide important information about the fundamentalmechanisms underlying substance abuse and addiction and would bean invaluable aid in diagnosis and treatment. Second, inherited differences in biochemical, physiological,and anatomical processes related to differences in drug responsesmight be identified and studied. Animal models of substance abuseallow thorough biological assays to be carried out. Animalgenetic models of substance abuse consist of strains of animals(usually rodents) that have been selectively bred to eitherexhibit a preference for taking or refusing a drug, or to differin some way in their behavioral or physiological response to adrug. In the case of alcohol, studies suggest that low doses ofalcohol are more stimulating and produce a stronger positivereward in rats bred to have a high preference for alcohol ascompared with normal rats. Experimental data indicate that thismay be due to inherited differences in the dopamine, GABA, andserotonin systems (27,32, 57,73). These differences representinherited traits related to drug taking behavior, and theseanimals can be examined to determine what biological mechanismsare involved in the expression of these traits. Third, the genetic technique of linkage analysis can narrowthe area on a chromosome where a gene may be located. It can leadto the identification of the gene itself which in turn canimprove the understanding of the molecular events that underliethe expression of the gene. There have been few genetic linkagestudies related to substance abuse since few specific biologicaltraits associated with drug dependency have been identified. Somestudies in humans have been carried out related to alcoholism butthe findings of these studies are contradictory and inconclusive. Several studies have reported an association betweenalcoholism and a gene that regulates the number of a type ofdopamine receptor in the brain; other studies have found no suchlink (4,5,8,18,58). The reason for this discrepancy is unclear.One study revealed a relationship between the presence of thegene not only in alcoholics, but in other disorders such asautism, attention deficit hyperactivity disorder, and Tourette'ssyndrome (17). Thus, the presence of this particular gene, whilenot uniquely specific for alcoholism, may cause an alteration inthe brain's dopamine system that somehow exacerbates orcontributes to alcohol abuse. Few studies have examined possible inherited biologicalmechanisms associated with the abuse of other drugs. For example,strains of rats and mice that differ in their sensitivity to thereinforcing effects of cocaine and in their cocaine-seekingbehavior have been observed to also have differences in theactual number of dopamine-containing neurons and receptors incertain brain areas. Also, a comparison of one strain of rat thatself-administers drugs of abuse at higher rates than anotherstrain, found that the higher self-administering strain exhibiteddifferences in the intracellular mechanisms that control activityin some of the neurons in the brain reward system (see box 3-2)as compared with the low self-administering strain. Additionalstudies exploring the role of genes in drug response are neededto more fully understand the full range of biological factorsassociated with drug abuse. The recent development of new andmore sensitive techniques to analyze brain activity and processeswill facilitate these studies. ROLE OF LEARNING The learning that occurs during drug-taking activities is animportant force in the continued use and craving of drugs(59,72). Drugs of abuse often produce feelings of intensepleasure in the user. In addition, such drugs produce changes innumerous organ systems (e.g., cardiovascular, digestive,endocrine). Both the behavioral and physiological effects of adrug occur in the context of the individual's drug-seeking anddrug-using environment. As a result, environmental cues arepresent before and during an individual's drug use that areconsistently associated with a drug's behavioral andphysiological effects. With repetition the cues becomeconditioned stimuli, that on presentation, even in the absence ofthe drug, evoke automatic changes in organ systems and sensationsthat the individual reports as drug craving. This is analogous toPavlov's classical conditioning experiments in which dogssalivated at the cue of a bell following repeated pairing of foodpresentation with a ringing bell. Evidence for this effect isseen in numerous studies showing that animals seek out placesassociated with reinforcing drugs and that the physiologicaleffects of drugs can be classically conditioned in both animalsand humans (72). Conditioning also occurs in relation to the withdrawaleffects of drugs (75). It was observed that opiate addicts whowere drug free for months and thus should not have had any signsof opiate withdrawal, developed withdrawal symptoms (e.g.,yawning, sniffling, tearing of the eyes) when talking about drugsin group therapy sessions. This phenomenon, termed conditionedwithdrawal, results from environmental stimuli acquiring theability, through classical conditioning, to elicit signs andsymptoms of pharmacological withdrawal. Conditioned withdrawalcan also play a role in relapse to drug use in abstinentindividuals. The emergence of withdrawal symptoms as a result ofexposure to conditioned cues can motivate an individual to seekout and use drugs. These associations are difficult to reverse. In theory,repeated presentation of the environmental cues, without the drugshould extinguish the conditioned association. Animal studiesindicate that stopping the conditioned response is difficult toachieve and does not erase the original learning. These types ofstudies examining drug conditioning have found that variousaspects of extinguished responses can either be reinstated with asingle pairing of the drug and environmental cue, can bereinstated with a single dose of drug in the absence of theenvironmental cue, or canspontaneously recover (72). Thus, exposure to environmental cues associated with drug usein the past can act as a stimulus for voluntary drug- seekingbehavior. If the individual succeeds in finding and taking thedrug, the chain of behaviors is further reinforced by thedrug-induced, rewarding feelings and the effects of the drug onother organ systems (59). The effects of the environmentalstimuli can be similar to the priming effects of a dose of thedrug. The complexity of human responses to drugs of abuse, coupledwith the number of drugs that are abused, complicatesunderstanding of the role of biology in drug use and abuse.Nevertheless, scientists know the site of action of many drugs inthe brain, and sophisticated new devices are expected to improvethat understanding. A genetic component to drug use and abuse islikely, but it has not been fully characterized. SUMMARY Underlying all alcohol and drug problems are the actions andeffects that drugs of abuse exert. It is important to understandhow drugs work in the brain, why certain drugs have the potentialfor being abused, and what, if any, biological differences existamong individuals in their susceptibility to abuse drugs. Two biological factors contribute to substance abuse andaddiction: the effects drugs of abuse exert on the individual,and the biological status of the individual taking drugs. Theeffects the drugs exert can be either acute or chronic and willvary depending on the drug and its route of administration. Mostdrugs of abuse influence the brain's reward system. Thepleasurable sensations that drug use can produce reinforcedrug-seeking and -taking behaviors. These actions differ withdifferent drugs: and, thus, some substances have greaterpotential for abuse and addiction than others. Prolonged or chronic use of a substance or substances canproduce both biological and behavioral changes (some long-lasting). Biological changes can include sensitization and/ortolerance and, if use is discontinued, withdrawal. The behavioralchanges from continued drug use are directly related to thesebiological changes. An individual's drug- craving, -seeking, and-taking behaviors are amplified through the neuroadaptive changesin the brain reward system that occur with chronicadministration. Environmental cues also play a large role in drug-seeking and-taking behavior. On encountering certain environmental stimuli(i.e., specific locations, smells, tastes), drug- craving anddrug withdrawal symptoms have been reported by former drug userswho have been drug-free for months, even years. Through family, twin, and adoption studies, most researchersagree that genetic factors play some part in the heritability ofalcohol problems and, although less clear, other drug problems.No conclusive evidence has been found to explain precisely whatis inherited or the overall importance of this inheritedmaterial. It has been hypothesized that there are probablynumerous genes (as opposed to one) that interact in complex ways,and whose expressions are affected by a myriad of environmentalfactors. Thus, the presence or absence of a genetic factorneither ensures nor protects against drug dependency. BOX 3-1: Neuropharmacology Neurons are the cells that process information in the brain.Neurotransmitters are chemicals released by neurons tocommunicate with other neurons. When a neuron is activated itreleases a neurotransmitter into the gap between two neurons (seefigure 3-1). The molecules of the neurotransmitter move acrossthe gap and attach to proteins, called receptors, in the outerwall of an adjacent cell. Once the receptor is activated, theneurotransmitter is removed from the gap, either by reabsorptioninto the neuron that released it or by being broken downchemically. For each neurotransmitter in the brain, there are specificreceptors to which it can attach. Receptors and receptor subtypescan activate a variety of membrane and cellular mechanisms. Inthis way, one chemical can have diverse effects in differentareas of the brain. Many chemicals have been identified asneurotransmitters. Some particularly relevant to the reportedpleasurable sensations associated with drug abuse includedopamine, norepinephrine, serotonin, opioids and otherneuropeptides, gamma amino butyric acid (GABA), and glutamate. A neuron can have thousands of receptors for many differentneurotransmitters. Some neurotransmitters activate neurons(excitatory neurotransmitters), while others decrease neuronactivity (inhibitory neurotransmitters). Some receptors arebiochemically coupled: the activation of one modulates thefunction of the other, either increasing or decreasing itsactivity. A neuron can also have receptors for the chemical itreleases. In this way, neurons can regulate their release of aparticular neurotransmitter. Thus, these so-called autoreceptorsact as a feedback mechanism. The activity of a neuron will bedetermined by the cumulative activity of all its variousreceptors. Drugs that work in the brain, including drugs of abuse, alternormal neuropharmacological activity through a variety ofdifferent mechanisms. They can affect the production, release, orreuptake of a chemical, they can mimic or block the action of achemical at a receptor, or they can interfere with or enhance theactivity of a membrane or cellular mechanism associated with areceptor. Prolonged drug use has the potential to alter each ofthese processes. SOURCE: Office of Technology Assessment, 1994. BOX 3-2: The Brain Reward System Eating, drinking, sexual, and maternal behaviors areactivities essential for the survival of the individual and thespecies. Natural selection, in order to ensure that thesebehaviors occur, has imbued them with powerful rewardingproperties. The brain reward system evolved to process thesenatural reinforcers. The reward system is made up of various brain structures. Akey part of this system for drug reward appears to be themesocorticolimbic pathway (MCLP). The MCLP is composed of theaxons of neuronal cell bodies in the middle part of the brain(i.e., ventral tegmental area) projecting to areas in the frontpart of the brain (i.e., the nucleus accumbens, a nucleus in thelimbic system, a network of brain structures associated withcontrol of emotion, perception, motivation, gratification, andmemory; medial prefrontal cortex, part of the front of the braininvolved with higher ordered thinking) (see figure 3-2). Ventraltegmental neurons release the neurotransmitter dopamine toregulate the activity of the cells in the nucleus accumbens andthe medial prefrontal cortex. Other parts of the reward systeminclude the nucleus accumbens and its connections with otherlimbic structures, and other regions in the front part of thebrain (i.e., substantia innominata-ventral palladium). Thenucleus accumbens also sends signals back to the ventraltegmental area. Finally, other neuronal pathways containingdifferent neurotransmitters regulate the activity of themesocorticolimbic dopamine system and may also be involved inmediating the rewarding properties of drugs of abuse. SOURCE: Koob, G.F., "Drugs of Abuse: Anatomy,Pharmacology, and Function of Reward Pathways," Trends inPharmacological Sciences 13:177-184, 1992; Koob, G.F.,"Neural Mechanisms of Drug Reinforcement," P.W. Kalivasand H.H. Samson (eds.), The Neurobiology of Drug and AlcoholAddiction, Annals of the American Academy of Sciences654:171-191, 1992. BOX 3-3: How Drugs of Abuse Affect the Chemical Release ofDopamine The rewarding properties of stimulant drugs such as cocaineand amphetamines are due directly to the effects of the chemicaldopamine. Opiates, on the other hand, indirectly stimulatedopamine by activating other chemical pathways, which in turnincrease dopamine activity. Similarly, alcohol, barbiturates, andbenzodiazepines likely have an indirect action which increasesdopamine activity. All of these drugs have reinforcingproperties. Phencyclidine (PCP) is also a strong reinforcer butits relationship, if any, to activity in the dopamine pathway hasyet to be established. Other drugs are either weak reinforcers orhave not been shown to support self-administration in animalexperiments. Nicotine stimulates dopamine neurons; however, itseffect is modest when compared with cocaine or amphetamine.Likewise, caffeine is a weak reinforcer, but the precisemechanisms of its reinforcement are unclear. Finally, cannabisand lysergic acid diethylamide (LSD) also produce positiveeffects that clearly support their use. SOURCE: Office of Technology Assessment, 1994. BOX 3-4: The Two Types of Tolerance The two types of tolerance are: dispositional(pharmacokinetic) and pharmacodynamic. Dispositional tolerancedevelops when the amount of drug reaching active sites in thebrain is reduced in some way. Generally, this arises from anincreased breakdown of the drug or a change in its distributionin the rest of the body. Thus, more drug must be taken to achievethe same blood levels or concentrations at the active sites inthe brain. Pharmacodynamic tolerance represents a reduced response ofthe brain to the same level of drug. It develops during thecontinued and sustained presence of the drug. It may be that themechanism of adaptation may differ from drug to drug and dependon the original mechanism of action of a given drug. The neteffect is that more drug is required to overcome this newneuronal adaptation to produce an equivalent pharmacologiceffect. Although dispositional tolerance represents a component oftolerance to some drugs (e.g., alcohol, barbiturates), in mostcases much or all of the tolerance which develops to drugs withsignificant abuse potential can be attributed to pharmacodynamictolerance. Tolerance can contribute to drug- taking behavior byrequiring that an individual take larger and larger doses of adrug to achieve a desired effect. SOURCES: Jaffe, J.H., "Drug Addiction and DrugAbuse," The Pharmacological Basis of Therapeutics, A.G.Gilman, T.W. Rall, A.S. Nies, and P. Taylor (eds.), (New York:Pergammon Press, 1990). Kalant, H., "The Nature ofAddiction: An Analysis of the Problem," Molecular andCellular Aspects of the Drug Addictions, A. Goldstein, (ed).,(New York, NY: Springer Verlag, 1989). _ CliffSchaffer's Home Page WT01-B29-11IA030-000641-B024-24http://206.61.184.43:80/schaffer/LIBRARY/studies/ota/ch4.htm 206.61.184.43 19970122140220 text/html 43656HTTP/1.0 200 OKDate: Wednesday, 22-Jan-97 14:02:11 GMTServer: WebSitePro/1.1f (S/N wpo-0deb)Allow-ranges: bytesContent-type: text/htmlLast-modified: Saturday, 28-Dec-96 06:50:45 GMTContent-length: 43438 CHAPTER 4 - AVAILABILITY TECHNOLOGIES FORUNDERSTANDING AND PREVENTING SUBSTANCE ABUSE AND ADDICTION USGovernment Office of Technology Assessment October 18, 1994 CHAPTER 4 - AVAILABILITY Availability is a precondition for drug abuse and dependency.A person cannot become a drug abuser unless a drug is availableto be used. Drug availability is often thought of as mere physicalpresence of an abusable substance. In addition, however,availability is affected by social norms (social availability),prices (economic availability), and personal values (subjectiveavailability) (see table 4-1). Marketing techniques for bothlicit and illicit drugs can alter social, economic, andsubjective availability, and thus are addressed in this chapter(see box 4-1). A substantial body of literature addressing the relationshipbetween drug availability and drug demand does exist. However,most of this information addresses tobacco and alcohol, ratherthan illicit drugs. In addition to conducting a literature search(primarily of mass media), the Office of Technology Assessment(OTA) contracted with the National Center for Juvenile Justice(NCJJ) to conduct a survey of juvenile probation officers on theperceived availability of drugs and to conduct a workshop onavailability issues (see appendix F for a list of participants). AVAILABILITY Availability is a concept usually reserved for the supply-side of the substance abuse policy equation (i.e., making drugsavailable to supply an already existing demand). However, theproximity of drugs and drug dealers to potential users, and theease with which these substances can be purchased or otherwiseobtained can affect demand, use, and abuse. This is especiallytrue when one considers aggressive marketing efforts bysuppliers, who seek to create or expand the demand for drugs byconvincing potential consumers of the benefits, acceptability,and availability of these substances. While availability is aconcept that applies to the whole range of drugs, most of what weknow about its role in drug use and abuse comes from research inthe arena of alcohol and tobacco abuse (1,9,10,14) (see box 4-2and figure 4-1). Research has shown that when alcohol is more available, theprevalence of drinking, the amount of alcohol consumed, and theheavy use of alcohol all increase (5). Alternatively, theliterature also suggests that physical conditions that restrictalcohol availability reduce rates of alcohol consumption (1). Areview of alcohol-related literature reveals that availabilitycan be conceptualized in four different, yet related categories. Physical Availability Physical availability refers to a basic element--theproximity and accessibility of an abusable substance. Simplelogic dictates that if a substance is absent, it cannot be used.Government interdiction and law enforcement policies target thephysical availability of illicit drugs. Other policies, such aslimitations on the point-of-sale, hours, or age of purchasers,target the physical availability of other abusable drugs, such astobacco and alcohol products. Responses to the OTA survey of juvenile probationadministrators indicated that respondents perceived two ways inwhich physical availability is increased: through contaminationby outsiders (e.g., youth gangs, tourists, foreigners) bringingdrugs into the community, and through proximity to a source ofdrugs or alcohol. Gangs and organized drug trafficking were mentioned often byrespondents as reasons for increases in the availability ofdrugs. Respondents from all over the country, representing bothrural and urban areas, registered concerns about gangs and theirrole in marketing and trafficking drugs. A respondent fromCanton, Mississippi, for example, attributed the increase in drugavailability simply to "gang leaders from California."A respondent from Waterbury, Connecticut, was more explicit aboutthe age and ethnicity of the gang influences, attributing theobserved increase in drugs to the "emergence of gangactivity for the 12-to-15-year-old age group, particularly in theHispanic and black ethnic groupings." A respondent fromPaducah, Kentucky, said that the "increase in drugs has beenfrom gangs entering the community from Memphis, Tennessee,Arkansas, and Chicago, Illinois." The respondent fromDavenport, Iowa, attributed the increase to attempts by"Chicago gang members to establish crack markets in QuadCities--lots of arrests of Chicago residents includingjuveniles." Even cities with an established history of youthgangs identified gangs as being responsible for increases indrugs. For example, a respondent from Philadelphia, Pennsylvania,attributed the observed increase to the fact that "gangparticipation has become increasingly sophisticated." However, gangs were not the only phenomena associated withincreasing the physical availability of drugs and alcohol. Manyrespondents were concerned with the potential for contaminationdue to proximity to areas thought to be established drug marketsor through proximity to the means for widespread drugdistribution (e.g., major highways and roads, prisons). Physical availability is necessary but not solely responsiblefor drug use. For example, drugs often are physically availablebut are not always used. Also, seeking to prevent or reduce druguse solely by eliminating or reducing physical availability maybe doomed to failure, since it has proven to be very difficult tokeep drugs out of communities. So although the concept ofphysical availability is important, it is limited, both as acause and a cure to drug use and abuse. Economic Availability Economic availability may be increased when a person hasaccess to surplus income or the costs of drugs are low, illegaldrug sales are a key component of the local economy, or the priceper unit of a drug or drugs in general is reduced. In describingthe difference between "private" and"flagrant" drug markets, one article specified some ofthe dimensions of the changing economics of addiction: If cigarettes were sold only by the carton and whiskey onlyby the case, the effect would be to decrease the totalconsumption of tobacco and whiskey. Presumably, few people wouldstart smoking cigarettes if the first experimental purchase werea $20 carton rather than a $1 pack. Similarly, fewer poor peoplewould drink if they were required to buy whiskey by the case. Asimilar effect would, in all likelihood, hold true if open airand flagrant drug markets were eliminated (3). In addition to overall conditions, economic availability ofall substances can be affected by the pricing of products. Forlicit products such as alcohol and tobacco, economic availabilityis also affected by taxes levied by federal, state, and localauthorities. In 1989, federal excise taxes on tobacco, alcoholicbeverages, and motor fuels raised $24.4 billion in revenue--about 2.5 percent of total federal revenues (11). Excisetaxes--taxes on specific products--while representing a smallpart of total taxes, are an important consideration in theeconomic availability of licit substances. Excise taxes are seen by many as having three impacts: o to raise revenue for government programs; o to make certain harmful substances less affordable and,hence, less used and abused; and o to cover societal costs that accrue from the use of varioussubstances (e.g., environmental costs from the use of gasoline,health costs resulting from smoking and drinking). Whether taxation of alcoholic beverages and tobacco productsis an appropriate means of reducing societal costs caused bytheir use is a continuing public debate. Some argue that thepublic health costs and other external costs are so significantas to justify substantial excise taxes. Others counter that suchtaxes are regressive--impacting the poor more than the rich--andreduce the satisfaction experienced by millions of sensibledrinkers without necessarily reducing the harm caused byexcessive drinkers (8). Social Availability Social availability refers to those factors within thecommunity conducive to drug use. One study explored alternativeexplanations for reported declines in cocaine use among highschool seniors, using questionnaire data from annual nationwidesurveys conducted from 1976 to 1988 (2). Results of this analysisindicated that although lifestyle factors showed strong linkswith the use of marijuana and cocaine, these factors had notdeveloped trends in ways that could account for declines in theuse of either drug. Reported physical availability of either drughad not been reduced. Instead, increases in perceived risks anddisapproval appear to have contributed substantially to therecent declines in the use of marijuana and cocaine. The studyconcluded that it was important to lower demand by reducingsocial availability, as opposed to trying to reduce supply byreducing physical availability. Increasingly, grass roots community action groups are workingto diminish both the subjective and social domains ofavailability. These efforts usually entail developing andpresenting public awareness and fact-based education to consumersand potential consumers, decreasing community tolerance for druguse while increasing collective pride in the community, anddeveloping or otherwise demonstrating alternatives to substanceuse and abuse. Subjective Availability Subjective availability encompasses individual differences inhow people perceive their access to substances. For example, anindividual may choose to use one type of abusable substance, butnot another. Or, an individual may choose to use a drug (e.g.,cocaine), but only in certain forms (i.e., a person may choose tosnort a line of cocaine but refuse to smoke or inject it). Theperson who refuses to use illicit drugs has interjected his orher personal values in a way to make illicit drugs unavailable,even if they are physically and economically available. One reviewer identified four components of subjectiveavailability as it relates to alcohol: 1) willingness to go outof one's way to purchase alcohol, 2) perceived convenience ofbuying alcohol, 3) discomfort about buying alcohol, and4)?importance of the price of alcohol. Subjective and socialavailability were demonstrated to have direct influences onalcohol consumption, and subjective and social aspects ofavailability can mediate and outweigh the influence of physicalavailability (1). Subjective availability is likely to increase when anindividual holds attitudes or values favorable toward use; livesin a community that condones, or even celebrates, drug use; andhas ready access to drugs that are highly valued, particularly ifthose agents are addictive. ARE DRUGS READILY AVAILABLE? A number of surveys exists for measuring drug use (seechapter 2). In addressing the question of whether drugs arereadily available, several measures exist (e.g., marketingfigures related to alcohol and tobacco sales, tallies of illegaldrugs seized by law enforcement authorities). In addition toquantitative measures of drug use, many people perceive variousdrugs to be widely available. In an attempt to measure theseanecdotal perceptions, OTA surveyed juvenile probationadministrators randomly selected from a database maintained byNCJJ. The purpose of the survey was to identify communities thathave experienced a sudden, observable change in the abuse ofdrugs or alcohol in the past 12 months and to collect preliminarydata about the events and circumstances leading to the change inabuse. Such anecdotal evidence could be gathered from a number ofgroups; OTA chose to survey juvenile justice officials because oftheir involvement in drug issues and the availability of anationwide database of such officials who could be accessed. Responses were received from 246 juvenile justiceadministrators across 38 States. The data provide a glimpse atsome of the drug and alcohol availability issues being addressedby juvenile courts and probation departments across the UnitedStates. Seven findings resulted from the survey: o Most respondents consider substance abuse to be a seriousproblem in their communities. Using a scale of 1 (not serious) to10 (very serious), the respondents, on average, rated the problemof substance abuse among juveniles in their communities at 7.4.In addition, 85.8 percent of the respondents rated substanceabuse seriousness at six or above. o Almost half of the respondents indicated a dramaticincrease in availability of drugs and/or alcohol in theircommunities. A total of 46.7 percent of the survey respondentsreported a dramatic increase in the availability of drugs and/oralcohol in their communities. Some 50.8 percent of therespondents indicated "no dramatic changes" inperceived availability of drugs and/or alcohol. Only 2.4 percentindicated a dramatic decrease in availability. o Factors affecting physical availability (i.e., sales and/ordistribution of drugs) were selected most often and were ratedhighest in terms of increasing availability of drugs. Given anopportunity to select and rate commonly cited reasons forincreased availability of drugs and alcohol, the respondentsselected items that were strongly associated with the sales anddistribution of drugs and alcohol (see table 4-2). o Crack cocaine and cocaine were much more likely than otherdrugs to show dramatic increases in availability. Respondentswere given an opportunity to report whether they had noticed achange (ranging from a dramatic decrease to a dramatic increase)in the availability of a range of drugs, including alcohol. Crack(24.5 percent) and cocaine (17.8 percent) had the highestpercentage of respondents indicating a "dramaticincrease" in availability. The next closest were inhalantsat 14.6 percent (see table 4-3). o Economic conditions and the perceived lack of realopportunities for many youths were frequently cited as factorscontributing to the increased availability of drugs in manycommunities (see box 4-3). o Survey respondents listed several factors contributing to asense of social availability, including lack of parental/guardiansupervision, consequences for alcohol and drug offenses,alternative activities, as well as portrayals of alcohol and druguse by the mass media as a glamorous and healthy activity (seebox 4-4). o Substance abuse prevention and early intervention effortswere rated highest as important community responses to increasesin the availability of drugs and alcohol. Over 80 percent ofrespondents agreed that an increase in prevention andintervention efforts was an important response to an increase inthe availability of drugs. Trailing behind prevention and earlyintervention were increased law enforcement (68.4 percent),increased treatment (68.2 percent), and stiffer judicialpenalties (68.0 percent). Respondents were also asked to rate therelative effectiveness of the listed responses to availability ona scale of 1 (not effective) to 10 (very effective). Preventionand early intervention (6.4 percent) was rated the highest interms of perceived effectiveness, but not much higher than lawenforcement (6.2 percent), increased treatment (6.0 percent), andstiffer judicial penalties (6.2 percent) (see table 4-4). MARKETING Standard marketing strategies used to increase consumption oflegal goods are used in equally effective ways to increaseconsumption of illicit drugs. Marketing refers to efforts byindividuals interested in the sale or trade of a product tomaintain or increase sales by maintaining market shares andopening new markets. Marketing includes efforts to increase theperceived availability of a product or products by enhancing thesense of both subjective and social availability in prospectiveconsumers. To the extent that those efforts are successful, thenpurveyors of consumer products will attempt to make the supplymatch the demand (physical availability) at a cost that maximizesboth sales to consumers (economic availability) and profits tothe sellers. Illegal Drugs Illegal drugs are marketed aggressively in the United States.Some of the strategies for marketing illicit drugs are verysimilar to those strategies for marketing licit products.Sometimes the distinction between licit and illicit products isdifficult to determine. Take, for example, the case of so-calledhead shops. Drug paraphernalia are items sold specifically topromote the preparation, manufacture, or marketing of drugs. Headshops may sell a wide variety of products that are oftenassociated with specific drugs, for example: o Stash cases, rolling machines, pipes, bongs (marijuana). o Bottles, concert kits, brass straws, spoons (cocaine). o Glass pipes, vials, stems, screens, shaker bottles (crackcocaine). o Testing kits, scales, adulterants (heroin). o Canisters, balloons, tanks (inhalants). Head shops represent the most shrewd form of pro-drugmarketing by targeting mostly young customers and providing thetechnology and products required to increase the ability of usersto procure, prepare, hide, and ingest drugs. Despite Federallegislation prohibiting the sale of drug paraphernalia (18 USCAp4), heads shops continue to flourish. These shops can avoid theintention of the law because the definition of what constitutesdrug paraphernalia is ambiguous and open to interpretation. Headshop owners will simply emphasize the legitimate use of theirproducts. For example, they may sell a scale designed to weighdrugs as a product to weigh food for dieting purposes.Specifically, head shops contribute to the drug abuse problem by: o sending a double message--if drugs are so bad, why is drugparaphernalia sold openly? o operating, in some cases, in the guise of candy stores,exposing children to drug paraphernalia and stimulating curiosityabout drugs; o serving to facilitate the use, marketing, and sale ofdrugs; o selling items designed as conversation pieces which serveto glamorize drug use; and o becoming hubs for drug abusers, indirectly serving toincrease crime in the neighborhoods in which they operate. Another example of a marketing strategy used for licitsubstances and now being adapted for illicit substances is totalmarketing, which consists of four basic strategies-- promotion,product, price, and place--to maximize theexposure of a productin a positive light to the most likely consumer groups (4). A key component of total marketing is promotion, oradvertising particular product lines to appeal to particularsubpopulations of the consuming public. Promotion is a standardpractice in the marketing of legitimate products-- it is also avery powerful force for manipulating consumer habits. Promotion includes activities like advertising andsponsorship of sporting and entertainment events (7). For illicitdrugs, promotional activities may include sponsoring a party inwhich the illegal drug is dispensed free or at a dramaticdiscount along with other attractions (e.g., sex, drugparaphernalia) (15). Total marketing also entails the development of a productline that can be targeted to subpopulations within the largerconsumer community. For example, alcohol and tobaccomanufacturers will produce an array of products targeted atseveral consumer groups--premium beers for one group, winecoolers for another, rugged masculine cigarettes for one group,thin feminine cigarettes for another. Similarly, purveyors ofillegal drugs have begun to develop product lines--powderedcocaine for one group, crack cocaine for another. The use ofbrand names is one technique used by marketers to establish aniche in the larger market, which is one reason people becomeunwilling participants in the marketing wars between Coke andPepsi or Visa and American Express or even Bud and Bud Light. A great deal of uniformity exists in the price, quantity, andquality of drugs sold in the same city, especially in the sameneighborhood or street market. As a result, a dealer willoccasionally try to capture a larger share of the market byincreasing the weight or strength of the product and applying abrand name for recognition (3). In Washington, DC, for example, brand name heroin is soldunder the name of "Smurf," "Mr. T,""Brown Wrapper," and "Black Poison."Phencyclidine (PCP) is occasionally sold under the brand name"Hinkley" (after John Hinkley, the man who shot RonaldReagan), "Gofer" (a reference to a television characteron the "Love Boat," which is a popular street name forPCP), and "Keys to St. E's" (a reference to a localmental institution). Crack cocaine is sometimes hawked under thebrand names of "Conan," "007," and"Baseball." Pricing is the process of assigning a retail cost to eachitem in a given product-line that matches the ability of thetargeted subgroup to pay. By producing a line of products at awide range of prices, the purveyor of the goods can maximize theconsumer population. For example, whether a consumer of tobaccoproducts is smoking low-priced generic cigarettes from thesupermarket or high-priced cigarettes from the tobacconist, thatindividual is included in the range of consumers. Illegal drugsellers also price their particular products to move. Forexample, while powdered cocaine may be too expensive for someeconomically disadvantaged consumers to purchase regularly,almost everyone can afford a $5 vial of crack cocaine. Drugdealers also manipulate the cost for their goods to attractcustomers. Once a product has been developed, promoted, and priced tomove, a place must be found to most effectively sell the product.Legal nonmedical drugs are packaged and made available at retailoutlets in such a way as to make their purchase as convenient aspossible. Wine coolers, for example, are a type of beverage aimedparticularly at women and young people. With its sweet, lighttaste, low prices, and convenient packaging, the wine coolercompetes with beer and soft drinks for occasions such as picnicsand sports events, where traditional wine products are unlikelyto be consumed. Wine cooler ads promote just these types of uses.Packaging has taken on a beer or soft drink look, and theindustry is successfully obtaining access to convenience storesand supermarket outlets to make purchases easier (6). Illicit drugs can also be packaged and made available at"retail" outlets where purchasers can convenientlyobtain the product(s) of their choice. One news account suggeststhat "mass marketing that would have made McDonald'sproud" is responsible for the evolution of crack cocainefrom a drug derided as "garbage rock" just a few yearsago into a national craze. Crack was not invented, it was created by a sharp crowd ofsinister geniuses who took a simple production technique to makea packaged, ready to consume form of the product with low unitprice to entice massive numbers of consumers. Cocaine powderrequired an investment of nearly $75 for a gram, but a hit ofcrack costs as little as $5. Equally alluring was crack'sincredible "high"--an instantaneous euphoria because itwas smoked--that could create addicts in weeks (16). Two kinds of retail drug markets exist in the United States:the private market place and the open-air or flagrant drugmarkets (3). The private drug market involves transactions thatoccur between people who are known to one another or are referredby a trusted acquaintance. Referrals in the private marketplaceare usually not very far removed from the original connection;they may be classmates in college, business associates,relatives, or persons belonging to the same club. The familiarity of the parties in the private drug marketusually means that there is a reduced level of public exposureand violence. The desire to keep the flow of traffic to the siteof transactions at a minimum means that sales in the privatemarketplace tend to be of larger quantities of drugs than thosein street transactions. Because most of the transactions takeplace "behind closed doors" or in some otherclandestine fashion, a high degree of impermeability exists inthe dealer-customer relationship (3). Examples of private drugmarkets include "speak easies" during prohibition andthe "traditional" (i.e., before crack) cocaine markets. Another aspect of the private drug market is the ritualisticaspect of procuring the product. Consider, for example, theritual associated with purchasing cocaine. One author describes"a day in the office" of a street-level cocainedistribution network. The office itself is a highly structuredoperation, complete with receptionists to screen potentialcustomers, guards, a "catcher"--held on retainer toretrieve cocaine thrown out of a window during a bust-- and themerchant who sets prices, arranges to barter goods and services,gives credit, and makes day-to-day decisions regarding sales(15). A typical transaction involves a positive identification ofthe buyer, a greeting and brief social contact (e.g., handshake,hug, kiss) between the merchant and the buyer, a formal requestfor an amount of cocaine, and a discussion of method of payment(e.g., cash, barter). Sometimes the transaction involves a briefdiscussion of the relative quality of the drugs in the street, asample of the drug available from this particular merchant, andpossibly some haggling over price. The public weighing andpackaging of the cocaine is central to this type of transaction.The scale, in fact, becomes a central point of power andauthority in the business; only those with the highest level oftrust and respect can operate the scale (15). Open air and flagrant drug markets, on the other hand, tendto be far more impersonal and much less ritualistic than theprivate marketplace. Many of the concepts used by mass marketersof licit products are used in the flagrant marketplace--targetedconsumer groups, small and widely affordable units of sale,prepackaged goods with fixed prices, convenient retail outlets.One research team describes the mechanics of a typical open-airdrug market transaction: A car drives down a residential street with enormousapartment buildings on either side. Young men wave to the car; afew of the more aggressive dealers step into traffic to signalautos to stop. Even before the wheels have stopped rolling,several young men are at the window; "You looking?"says one. "Smoke, smoke. I've got crack. Whatever youwant" says the other peering over his shoulder. The answerfrom the driver is simple and short: "Two dimes." Twosmall brown glass vials are exchanged for a 20 dollar bill andthe transaction is over in a matter of seconds (3). Although the exact method for conducting a transaction mayvary slightly from place to place around the country, the essenceof the transaction is remarkably similar across the UnitedStates. Flagrant or open-air drug markets have many of the samestructural characteristics as legal marketplaces: demographic andproduct segmentation, brand loyalty, cartel pricing, aggressivesalesmen working on commission, and careful recruitment of loyaland productive employees (3). Alcohol and Tobacco The marketing of legal yet addictive substances, especiallytobacco and alcohol, has become controversial in recent years.Issues stemming from the marketing of licit substances includeadvertising, taxation, and labeling. Advertising Alcohol and tobacco products have long been advertised in theUnited States. In the 1950s and 1960s, these products wereadvertised with minimal restrictions. Following the SurgeonGeneral's report on the hazards of smoking in 1964 (13), publicsentiment against cigarette advertising increased. The mostfamous example of Federal regulation is the ban on broadcastcigarette advertising in January 1971 resulting from the passageby Congress of the Public Health Cigarette Smoking Act of 1969(Public Law 91-222). In recent years, attention has focused onlegislative proposals to ban all forms of cigarette advertising,and to control the advertising of alcoholic products. Taxation The federal government currently levies excise taxes onalcoholic beverages and tobacco products. Excise taxes on alltypes of alcoholic beverages were raised in 1990 to their currentlevels. Currently, for example, beer (six pack 12-ounce cans)carries a 33 cent federal excise tax, a 750 ml bottle of winecarries a 21 cent federal excise tax. A pack of cigarettescarries a federal excise tax of 24 cents. A number of studies in the 1980s focused on the impact offederal excise taxes on cigarette consumption. A 1986 studyconcluded that an 8- to 16-cent increase in the federal cigaretteexcise tax would encourage from 1 to 2 million young persons and8,000 to 1.5 million adults to quit smoking or not to start.Thus, a tax increase could prevent hundreds of thousands ofpremature smoking-related deaths, while a tax decrease wouldcontribute to the disease burden of tobacco (14). The GeneralAccounting Office, in a review of the literature on teenagesmoking and excise taxes, concluded that an increase in thecigarette excise tax would be an effective way to reduce teenagesmoking (12). Labeling Federal law addresses the labeling of both cigarettes andalcoholic beverages. In both cases, Congress declared that thepurpose of such labeling is to make sure the American public isinformed about the potential health hazards that may result fromconsumption (36 USC 1331; 27 USC 213). Manufacturers ofcigarettes must use one of four rotating warnings on eachpackage, while manufacturers of alcoholic beverages must post aprescribed warning (see box 4-5). Proponents of labeling havestated that such warnings do not create legal restrictions, butonly help to inform the consumer about possible health risks.Opponents of labeling have argued that no scientific proof existsto link labeling with reduced use or improved health. SUMMARY The second set of preconditions for drug abuse and dependencyincludes availability and marketing. A person cannot become adrug abuser unless a drug is physically available to be used. Inaddition, however, availability is affected by social norms(e.g., factors within the community conducive to drug use,including level of parental or guardian supervision, lack ofconsequences for alcohol and drug offenses, lack of alternativeactivities, portrayals of alcohol and other drug use by friendsand the media as a glamorous and healthy activity), prices(economic availability), and personal values (subjectiveavailability). The primary focus of U.S. antidrug policy has been to attackthe physical availability of illicit drugs through lawenforcement efforts aimed at disrupting the production,transport, and sale of drugs. While this focus has increaseddrug-related arrests--nearly half of newly sentenced federalinmates in 1991 were imprisoned on drug charges--illicit drugsare still widely available. Marketing techniques for both licit and illicit drugs canalter social, economic, and subjective availability. Keycomponents of marketing include the promotion and advertising ofparticular product lines to appeal to particular subpopulationsof the consuming public; development of a product line that canbe targeted to subpopulations within the larger community ofconsumers; pricing strategies to attract new buyers; andidentification of retail outlets for sales. Federal law regulates the merchandising of licit yet abusablesubstances such as tobacco, alcohol, and prescription drugs byplacing a variety of restrictions on how such products may bemarketed. Despite current restrictions, debate continues as towhether and how a variety of legal drugs should be marketed. BOX 4-1: What Is Marketing? Marketing includes any activity involved in moving goods fromproducer to consumer. In the context of drugs, marketing includesa variety of activities covering a wide range of licit andillicit substances. For licit substances, such as alcohol, tobacco, andinhalants, it includes market research, advertising, pricing, andtaxation. A number of government policies in the marketingarena--taxes, advertising restrictions, point- of-sale controls,and age restrictions on certain products-- directly affects theavailability of licit, yet abusable, substances. For illicit drugs, such as marijuana, cocaine, andhallucinogens, marketing techniques can include street markets,gang activity, and private, closely controlled distribution andsales systems. Government control in this area--prohibiting thepossession, use, and sale of such substances--likewise affectsthe availability of these substances. SOURCE: Office of Technology Assessment, 1994. Box 4-2: Availability and Tobacco The evolution of tobacco from a relatively rare productrequiring preparation, thought, and ritual to a product that isubiquitous, prepackaged, and consumed without much fanfareprovides a graphic illustration of how increased physicalavailability of a product can dramatically increase drug use,abuse, and addiction. Three major developments in the history oftobacco use paved the way for making this drug imminentlyavailable for use by consumers: the invention of the cigarettemanufacturing machine, the invention and perfection of matches,and the proliferation of the use of vending machines to selltobacco products. The first successful cigarette manufacturing machine wasdeveloped in 1881 by James A. Bonsack. This machine had thecapacity to produce more than 200 cigarettes per minute. Prior tothe advent of this machine, smokers had to roll each cigarette byhand, a time-consuming and often ritualistic process. Once rolled, a cigarette must be lit to be consumed. This wasno easy task prior to the introduction of the safety match, firstinvented in 1896 but not perfected until 1912. Without matches,smokers were required to enter cigar stores to light cigarettesfrom gas or oil lamps provided specifically for the purpose oflighting tobacco products. These developments changed forever theway that cigarettes were consumed by making them readilyavailable for consumption at any moment during the day. Insteadof a thoughtful, often ritualistic exercise, cigaretteconsumption has evolved for some into an almost unconscioushabit. Following the invention of the manufacturing machine andthe safety match, the rate of cigarette consumption soared duringthe late 19th and early 20th century. The use of vending machines may be the most revolutionaryaspect of tobacco availability. First introduced in 1926, vendingmachines require no sales person, are not restricted by selectedhours of operation, and are not concerned with the age orlegality of the purchaser. Vending machines make cigarettesavailable almost anywhere, appearing in bars, hotels, train andbus stations, airports, hotels, and restaurants. By 1953, nearlyhalf a million cigarette machines existed and were responsiblefor sales of more than 3 billion packs of cigarettes a year. Theupward trend in sales from cigarette machines continued throughthe mid- 1970s: by 1973 more than 900,000 vending machines werein operation, selling almost 5 billion packs per year. Some earlyresearch indicated that the existence of vending machinesthroughout the physical environment is a major inducement toimpulse smoking. SOURCE: Office of Technology Assessment, 1994, based on J.Mosher, "The Environmental Approach to Prevention," TheCalifornia Prevention Network Journal 3, 42-44 (1990); R. Tenant,The American Cigarette Industry: A Study in Economic Analysis andPublic Policy (New Haven, CT: Yale University Press, 1950); R.Sobel, They Satisfy: The Cigarette in American life (Garden City,NJ: Anchor Press/Doubleday, 1978); Marshall, M.V., AutomaticMerchandising; A Study of the Problems and Limitations of Vending(Cambridge, MA: The Riverside Press, 1954). BOX 4-3: Survey Comments, Economic Availability Economic factors impact on perceptions of availability in anumber of ways. For example, because Sioux Falls, South Dakota,was experiencing a "strong economy . . . juveniles have hadan abundance of cash available for alcohol/drug usage." Morefrequent, however, were comments stating the opinion that a pooreconomy increased the economic availability of drugs and alcohol: Frankfort, Kentucky: "Profit motive due to nationaleconomy and lack of job training/jobs. Lack of hope andopportunity for some causes increased sale of drugs due to highprofit." Barbourville, Kentucky: "Drug dealers that cannot makeit flipping hamburgers, but are successful at selling drugs andhave a lot of material evidence of their success. Law enforcementneeds to confiscate these material items in prosecution of case.Also, involvement of drug dealing by law enforcement andpoliticians is a problem. " Harrisburg, Pennsylvania: "Teenaged drug dealers havestatus, money, jewelry, cars, designer clothes, etc., which manyof their peers cannot afford." Fort Worth, Texas: "Depressed economic conditions--Lackof legitimate means to obtain income. It's easy money withminimal consequences for conviction." SOURCE: Office of Technology Assessment, 1994. BOX 4-4: Survey Comments, Social Availability Conway, New Hampshire: "Our law enforcers are known andmake little inroads towards prosecuting drug traffickers orsellers. Many young adults supply liquor and drugs to underagekids in our area." Mount Holly, New Jersey: "The legal system does notfairly prosecute offenders. It gives some juveniles the messagethat depending upon your circumstances it is OK to use and selldrugs." Muskogee, Oklahoma: "The lack of prosecutive vigor inalcohol-related offenses (Minor in possession, publicintoxication, D.U.I.). District attorney does not vigorouslypursue and law enforcement treats D.U.I. as publicintoxication." Prineville, Oregon: "This community is basically a bluecollar community. There is an attitude of acceptance of juvenilesusing alcohol. Kind of a boys will be boys attitude." South Bend, Indiana: "We have seen an increase inalcohol consumption that appears to be tolerated or evenencouraged by adults (primarily parents)." Hillsboro, Illinois: "Lack of education, interest,cooperation of parents. Not enough interest with higher officials(e.g., school teachers, church members, government officials,businesses, and senior citizens)." Baraboo, Michigan: "Lack of appropriate teen activities.Lack of parental interest." Jacksonville, Illinois: "Decrease in the ability andwillingness of individual family units to educate, instruct, andmonitor juvenile behaviors." Nicholasville, Kentucky: "Alcohol is supplied willinglyto juveniles by a large number of adults. Inhalants are availableat any department store." Brownstown, Indiana: "Children, mostly high school age,come in contact with adults, ages 18-23, who are very willing tobuy alcohol or sell drugs to their younger friends. In addition,these children who do not have money on hand are likely to stealitems and trade them for drugs or cash to buy alcohol anddrugs." SOURCE: Office of Technology Assessment, 1994. BOX 4-5: Cigarette and Alcoholic Beverage Warnings It is unlawful for any person to manufacture, package, orimport for sale or distribution within the United States anycigarettes the package of which fails to bear one of thefollowing labels: SURGEON GENERAL'S WARNING: Smoking Causes Lung Cancer, HeartDisease, Emphysema, And May Complicate Pregnancy. SURGEON GENERAL'S WARNING: Quitting Smoking Now GreatlyReduces Serious Risks to Your Health. SURGEON GENERAL'S WARNING: Smoking By Pregnant Women MayResult in Fetal Injury, Premature Birth, And Low Birth Weight. SURGEON GENERAL'S WARNING: Cigarette Smoke Contains CarbonMonoxide. It is unlawful for any person to manufacture, import, orbottle for sale or distribution in the United States anyalcoholic beverage unless the container of such beverage bearsthe following statement: GOVERNMENT WARNING: (1) According to the Surgeon General,women should not drink alcoholic beverages during pregnancybecause of the risk of birth defects. (2) Consumption ofalcoholic beverages impairs your ability to drive a car oroperate machinery, and may cause health problems. SOURCE: 36 USC 1331; 27 USC 213. _ CliffSchaffer's Home Page WT01-B29-12IA030-000641-B024-41http://206.61.184.43:80/schaffer/LIBRARY/studies/ota/ch5.htm 206.61.184.43 19970122140236 text/html 35176HTTP/1.0 200 OKDate: Wednesday, 22-Jan-97 14:02:26 GMTServer: WebSitePro/1.1f (S/N wpo-0deb)Allow-ranges: bytesContent-type: text/htmlLast-modified: Saturday, 28-Dec-96 06:50:34 GMTContent-length: 34958 SUBSTANCE USE AND TRANSITIONS TO ABUSE AND ADDICTION TECHNOLOGIES FOR UNDERSTANDING AND PREVENTING SUBSTANCEABUSE AND ADDICTION US Government Office of Technology Assessment October 18, 1994 CHAPTER 5 SUBSTANCE USE AND TRANSITIONS TO ABUSE AND ADDICTION Substance use is another precondition and contributor toaddiction, since one cannot become dependent on a substancewithout first using it, continuing its use, and passing throughstages of progressively more serious use. Patterns of progression from use to addiction are not,however, consistent or predictable for all individuals. They canvary widely, depending on numerous individual and contextualfactors and on characteristics of the use itself, such as age ofonset and the type, frequency, and quantity of substance used.While other chapters in this report focus on individual andcontextual factors, this chapter focuses only on thecharacteristics of drug use itself that can contribute to theprogression to abuse and addiction. Researchers have failed to identify specific levels ofsubstance use or of substance-related problems that clearlydistinguish use from abuse (16). This is the case, in part,because substances can differ greatly in their abuse liabilityand, in part, because the same levels of use of a particularsubstance can affect the functioning of various individualsdifferently. For example, for some individuals, the initial useof certain substances may constitute substance abuse, because ofthe severe adverse consequences of the initial use itself.(Although abuse is usually associated with large quantities ofsubstance use per occasion, resulting in either the risk of harmto others (e.g., drunk driving) or to self (e.g., blackouts),some in the prevention field define any initial use of an illicitsubstance as substance abuse, because the substance being used isillicit and should not be used.) Although the distinction between use and abuse is unclear,the causes of substance use--especially initial or casualuse--are thought to differ in many cases from the causes ofsubstance abuse and addiction. Some researchers have assertedthat substance use results primarily from social influences(e.g., peer pressure), while abuse results more from internalpsychological and physiological processes (13). Others havereported, based on longitudinal data, that current substance usewas related more to the early modeling of use by adults and toone's own prior use, whereas problem use was related more toearly rebelliousness (22). A review of prevention programs alsosupports the conclusion that the factors associated with theinitiation of use differ from the factors associated withescalation to abuse (23). SUBSTANCE USE Because substance use is necessary as a precondition to abuseand addiction, prevention efforts can be directed at initial use,continuing use, or progression in use to block the laterdevelopment of addiction. Possible goals are: o Prevent initial use. One way to prevent substance abuse andaddiction is to prevent any initial use. The surest way tosucceed would be to keep abusable substances out of thecommunity, since, if they are unavailable, they cannot be used.However, once the substances are available in a community, otherpreventive approaches can be tried, including scare tactics (aswith a policy of zero tolerance, backed up by stern parental,school, and legal penalties for use), educational efforts(through media campaigns or prevention curricula in the schools),training in refusal skills, and promotion of safenonsubstance-using activities. The lack of clear standards andpenalties, credible information, and alternative activities maycertainly increase the vulnerability of youth to the appeals ofabusable substances, but the presence of such efforts has notguaranteed success in preventing initial use among all youth. o Delay initial use. Another goal is to delay initial use aslong as possible, thus delaying the point at which anyprogression from use to abuse to addiction can begin. Such anapproach can provide at least some protection for somechil-dren--i.e., those who might otherwise initiate use atearlier ages and then more rapidly progress to abuse and possiblyaddiction. Early onset of substance use is often more severe thanlate onset and, as is discussed later in this chapter, early useof substances is one of the better predictors of subsequentproblems. Thus, a delay in initial use may offer significantprotection even if substances are used later on. o Prevent, reduce, or control continued use. Another approachis to try to prevent current users from continuing or escalatingtheir use of one substance or moving on to other substances withgreater abuse liability. Many youth experiment with cigarettes,alcohol, and marijuana, but do not progress to problematic use ofthese or other substances. Others, however, do progress. Effortsto reduce, prevent, or control continued and progressive use, ifsuccessful, can protect individuals from the problems of abuseand addiction. Preventing, delaying, reducing, or controlling the use ofsubstances can help prevent abuse and addiction. Because of theirdirectness and apparent simplicity, these goals can be veryappealing. Detracting from their appeal, however, is that theycan be difficult to achieve, especially for multiproblemindividuals in communities where abusable substances are widelyavailable and aggressively marketed, and for individuals who maybe physiologically predisposed to the continued and escalatinguse of substances. In addition to being a precondition (without which abuse andaddiction become impossible), substance use can also be animportant contributor to later abuse and addiction, by affectingindividuals physiologically, psychologically, andsocioculturally. Physiological Effects Addictive substances affect processes in the brain, some ofthem operating through reward systems, and can produce drugtolerance and dependence. Tolerance manifests itself when, toproduce a given response (e.g., a high), an individual mustingest more of a substance. Physiological drug dependence has atleast two defining characteristics: the development of toleranceto the effects of the drug and the manifestation of symptoms ofwithdrawal on abrupt discontinuation or reduction in dosage. Thedevelopment of physiological tolerance and dependence cancontribute to the progression from use to abuse and addiction: astolerance to a substance increases, an individual must ingestmore of the substance to continue to obtain a given desiredresponse; as dependency develops, an individual must continue toingest the substance to avoid the unpleasant experience ofwithdrawal. Psychological Effects Substance use may contribute to further use and abuse throughpsychological means as well. For example, an initial successfulexperience of use may reduce an individual's fear about thesubstance, thus opening the way to continued use that can lead togrowing tolerance and dependence. Changes in expectations about the consequences of alcohol usehave also been associated with increases in behavioral tolerance.Specifically, less impairment from drinking alcohol occurredwhen, after the ingestion, successfully performing certain taskswas rewarded, while all other variables that increase tolerancewere controlled. Several recent studies and a literature reviewhave found that the ingestion of alcohol increased when therewards for alternative behaviors were constrained (24). Also,social drinkers who expect the effects of alcohol to be betterthan the outcomes of other activities may well be more likely tomake the transition to abusive drinking. Such a hypothesis issupported by several studies that found that alcohol abusersidentify a greater number of favorable conseqences of alcoholconsumption than do nonabusers (24). Continued use of substances can also impair the learning ofskills, especially among the young, and the ability to rememberlessons once learned. Developmental processes may be slowed,which may hamper decisionmaking, in general, and about the use ofsubstances, in particular. However, the progression from use toabuse may also, in many cases, not be simply linear, as whenindividuals move in and out of substance abusing patterns,depending on the developmental stages and social and culturalsituations and contexts that may be affecting them. Sociocultural Effects Sociocultural factors, triggered by substance use, can alsocontribute to progression in use. An individual who initiatesuse, for example, may begin to participate in a subgroup thatencourages use, such as the patrons of crack houses, groups ofheroin users, members of substance-using motorcycle gangs,adolescent peer groups, cocktail party groups, after-work beergroups, and groupies who follow certain rock bands. (In somecases, too, such groups and subcultures may provide the impetusfor the initiation of use as well.) Such social and culturalenvironments encourage, reinforce, maintain, and increasesubstance use and abuse--all of which can develop after theinitiation of use outside the group. Conversely, the lack ofrewarding, substance-free alternative groups and activities mayrender individuals more vulnerable to the appeals of substance-using groups and subcultures. STAGES IN THE INITIATION OF USE Do individuals first use one substance (e.g., alcohol ortobacco) and only later use another (e.g., cocaine or heroin)?Are stages in the first use of different substances similaracross cultures? Does the use of one substance (e.g., marijuana)directly increase the likelihood of later use of anothersubstance (e.g., heroin)? Or is progression in use caused more byother mediating factors, such as multiple behavior problems? Ifso, might these other problems contribute to later use of certainsubstances even in the absence of the use of other substancesearlier on? The basic question about whether there are stages in theinitiation of the use of different substances has been studied inthe United States (9,11,12,21,27) and in Israel and France (1).While study results vary somewhat, the sequence most oftenreported is that alcohol and cigarette use come first, followedby marijuana use and then by the use of other illicit substances.Some variations in this sequence have been found for individualsof different sexes, racial and ethnic groups, and cultures. Theidea that the use of some substances increases the likelihood ofthe use of other substances has led to several hypotheses. The Stepping Stone Hypothesis In its strongest form, the so-called "steppingstone" hypothesis asserted that the use of marijuana oftenor almost always led to violent crime and to the use of otherillicit substances (28). This hypothesis has never been proved.An even earlier version of the stepping stone hypothesis goesback to the beginning of the 20th century, when the presumedprogression from tobacco to alcohol to morphine use was presentedas an argument for prohibiting both alcohol and tobacco. Oneobserver commented that there was no strong evidence that the useof these substances causes progression from one to another;rather, some individuals are more prone to the use of multiplesubstances. Also, the criminalization of marijuana may havecaused some marijuana users to move on to other illicitsubstances through contact with the subculture of illicit users(14). The Gateway Hypothesis More recently, a more moderate hypothesis, the gatewayhypothesis, has been put forward. It asserts that use of certainsubstances increases somewhat the chances of progression to theuse of other substances. For example, in one longitudinal study,men who had used both alcohol and cigarettes by age 15 had a 52percent greater chance of using marijuana, compared to men whohad never used alcohol or cigarettes by age 25 (26). For women,the increased chance of marijuana use among alcohol and cigaretteusers was 46 percent. Similarly, for the next stage, men who hadused marijuana by age 15 had a 68 percent greater chance ofinitiating the use of other illicit substances, compared withthose who had never used marijuana. For women, the increasedprobability was 53 percent. Early and Frequent Use A still more constrained version, but one that may be morepredictive, suggests that early and frequent use increases theprobability of movement to later levels in the sequence (12). Forexample, researchers have reported that early use of substancesis associated with later problematic use (7,20). Nonuse of a Substance at an Earlier Stage Another hypothesis proposes that the nonuse of a substance atan earlier age reduces the chances of later use of othersubstances. A longitudinal study has found that the chance thatan individual who had never used marijuana would move up a levelto use other illicit substances was very low (26). This findingcorroborated conclusions reached earlier based on across-sectional study (18). Because of variations among communities and cultures, thesearch for a universally applicable sequence in the initiation ofthe use of different substances may be less fruitful than thestudy of why there may be somewhat different sequences, dependingon factors such as availability and social norms. The relativeease of availability of some substances (e.g., cigarettes, beer,wine) may well account for their frequent appearance at an earlystage in the sequence of use. However, this may vary amongcultures. In France, for example, wine is widely available andused both at an early age and at an early stage in the sequence.In other cultures, where wine is less available but inhalants arewidely available and inexpensive, inhalants are used at an earlyage and early in the sequence. Use at a young age may be amarker, at least in some cultures, for other risk factors, suchas parental substance abuse and other family problems, which cancontribute to later substance abuse problems, independently ofearly and frequent use. For example, one study found that,irrespective of the age of onset of use, individuals whoexhibited numerous behavioral problems in their youth moved on toproblem substance use, no matter how early or late in their youththey began to use substances (20). Limitations in the Research Research into stages in the initiation of the use ofdifferent substances has itself evolved through stages. A numberof issues, which have not been thoroughly addressed, remain: o The identification of stages in the progression from use toabuse and addiction is more a description of the stages someindividuals move through than a prediction of necessary stagesfor most individuals, since the majority of substance users donot move on to abuse. Reasonable questions are: What preventssome individuals from progressing from initial use to abuse andaddiction? Are the obstacles primarily due to the absence ofpreconditions, such as biological and pharmacologicalpreconditions or availability and marketing. Studying thoseindividuals who do not progress from use to addiction may provideinsights and lessons about how to prevent progression among thosewho do progress. Of particular importance are studies of thechanging vulnerabilities and resiliencies of individuals indifferent developmental stages from childhood throughadolescence, young adulthood, and adulthood. o What is the role of substance use in progression to abuseand addiction? The initiation of use of a particular substancemay often not be the most important contributor to the use of asubstance higher in the sequence. Other factors directly relatedto use may play a larger role. For example, age of onset,quantity, frequency, techniques, and purposes of the substanceuse may be more salient. Longitudinal risk factor and expectancystudies have begun to look at the role of these other elements. o Are some individuals more predisposed to use and abusesubstances than others? Individual biological and psychologicalfactors may also strongly influence which individuals progressfrom use to abuse. o What environmental factors contribute to substance use andabuse? Availability, marketing, social norms, peer groups,subcultures, and settings that encourage substance use may alsobe key in determining which individuals progress. Despite the need for greater understanding about the issuesabove, already completed research into stages in substance usehas been influential in providing the basis for policy andprogram recommendations. The gateway hypothesis has encouragedsome prevention advocates and program planners to focus onpreventing or delaying the use of gateway substances (e.g.,alcohol, cigarettes, marijuana) as a possibly effective way toprevent later use of illicit substances. Longitudinal studieshave found that the use of cigarettes by youth can be a strongpredictor of later problems with substances (17). STAGES IN THE CYCLE OF USE, ABUSE, AND ADDICTION One approach to the study of stages in substance use focusesnot just on the initiation of use; but also on the continuationof use, maintenance and progression of use within a class ofsubstances; progression across classes; and regression,cessation, and relapse cycles in use and abuse (2). Initiation of Use Initiation is clearly a key first step in the progression tomore serious levels of use. Because substance use is ofteninitiated during adolescence, most substance use research hasfocused on initiation of use among adolescents. However, mostindividuals who initiate substance use do not progress to harmfuluse. Also, the factors associated with such progression may oftendiffer from the factors associated with initiation. Thus, thefocus on the initiation of use during adolescence is notsufficient for an understanding of the progression from use toabuse and addiction. Continuation of Use After trying a substance for the first time, one person maysay, "I won't be trying that again," while another maysay, "That's for me." Although only limited researchhas been conducted on risk and protective factors associated withthe transition from experimentation to continued use, thecontinuation of use can apparently be influenced by thepharmacology of the substance (e.g., whether it produces desiredor pleasant experiences), the biology of the individual (e.g.,whether specific individuals have genetic or acquired biologicalpredispositions or intolerances to the use of specificsubstances), the availability and marketing of the substance(e.g., whether a substance is widely available, used, andaccepted for use), other characteristics of the individual (e.g.,at what developmental stage one is, and whether one has mental oremotional problems, which may be ameliorated at least temporarilyby substances), and community contexts (e.g., substance-usingsubcultures or settings that strongly encourage and reinforce acontinued use of substances). Maintenance and Progression of Use Within a Class of Drugs Maintenance and progression may include conformity with normsof consumption--for example, initial and continued heavy use ofalcohol in a college fraternity. Progressionwith cocaine couldentail movement from snorting to smoking or injection. Collegestudents in some fraternities and sororities with drinkingtraditions may be at higher risk for heavy substance use,especially of alcohol. But very little research has beenconducted on the risk factors for maintenance of high levels ofuse or for progression within classes of substances to excessiveuse among this age group. Progression in Use Across Classes of Substances At this stage, an individual may try different substances fordifferent, and often compensating, effects. For example, theantiemetic properties of tetrahydracannabinol in cannabis can beused to facilitate greater use of alcohol, alcohol or marijuanacan be used to smooth out the aftermath of snorting cocaine, andheroin can be used for similar purposes after a binge with crack. Regression, Cessation, and Relapse Cycles The transition away from abuse may occur a number of timesbefore an individual succeeds in getting off a substance or,failing that, remains dependent. It may also be influenced by thesame factors, or kinds of factors, that contributed to thesubstance abuse problem in the first place, including the fullrange of biological and pharmacological factors, availability andmarketing, individual emotional needs, or contextual factors. STAGES IN PROBLEM BEHAVIORS Does substance use itself contribute to conduct disorders,delinquency, and other problem behaviors? Do these behaviorsthen, in turn, contribute to the progression to more use and toabuse and addiction? Adolescents who use substances, especially those that areillegal, are more likely than nonusers to exhibit various problembehaviors, including: early sexual experimentation, delinquentactivities, eating problems, and psychological or psychiatricproblems, including suicide and suicidal thoughts (10). Less isknown, however, about the sequencing of these behaviors. Theinterrelations among the factors is likely to vary widely amongindividuals, but some sequences may predominate. Several suchsequences have been proposed. One suggested developmentalsequence, for example, includes six stages: oppositional(characterized by disobedience at home); offensive (includingdisobedience in school, fighting, lying); aggressive (physicalattacks on others, theft at home); minor delinquency (shopliftingand status offenses, such as alcohol use, truancy, running away);major delinquency (break-in and entry, car theft, substanceabuse, robbery, drug dealing); and violence (assault, rape,homicide) (15). One of the few studies of problem behavior sequences lookedat the order of initiation of four different substances,delinquency, and sexual activity, among a sample of blackadolescents (3). For males, it found involvement proceededgenerally from beer use to cigarette use, then to delinquency,sexual activity, marijuana use, and the use of hard liquor. Forfemales, the progression was generally from cigarette use, todelinquency, beer use, sexual activity, marijuana, and hardliquor. For both sexes, delinquency and youthful sexual activitytended to precede the use of marijuana and hard liquor. While a high correlation among problem behaviors has beenfrequently found, the sequencing of those behaviors is lessclear. The early use of so-called gateway drugs, such as beer andcigarettes, may contribute to later problem behaviors, while thelater use of marijuana, hard liquor, and other illicit substancesmay be more the result of extended participation in problembehaviors. More research is needed in this area if thesehypotheses are to be better understood and tested. KEY ASPECTS OF USE Some research has focused on characteristics of substance usethat can strongly influence the progression from use to abuse andaddiction. In addition to the age of first use, thesecharacteristics include the frequency, quantity, and type ofsubstance used, and the technologies and purposes andexpectations of use. Age of First Use Initiation into substance use at a young age is one of themost striking and often-found predictors of later problems,including abuse. For example, in one large community epidemiologystudy, men who first used substances before age 15 developedmental and behavioral problems in 51 percent of the cases,compared with 16 percent among those who began at age 18 orlater. For women, the comparable figures are 39 and 12 percent,respectively. Other studies have also found problems later onassociated with the earlier introduction to alcohol or other druguse (19). This pattern seems to hold specifically for later substanceuse and abuse as well. Early use of substances was found to beassociated with later problematic use (7,20). Another studyestimated that, of the men who had initiated the use of marijuanaby the age of 14, 71 percent would be expected to initiate theuse of other illicit substances by age 25, compared with 9percent of those who first started at age 21 (12). One report asserted that frequency of use was the mechanismthrough which early onset probably operates (12). However,another study concludes that preexisting conduct problems are abetter predictor of later substance abuse problems than is earlyuse (19). It found that, in individuals with many conductproblems, any use of a substance, no matter how late in youth,was followed by abuse. Frequency and Quantity of Substance Used When addiction occurs, it usually results from a period ofincreasing intensity and frequency of use (5,6). Althoughfrequency has often been employed as a measure of problematicuse, one study found that quantity of substance used, rather thanfrequency of use, was a more powerful predictor of disruptive andproblematic use (21). Quantity and frequency are often related,but they are not identical. An infrequent user could go on abinge, where large quantities are consumed, that could beextremely harmful. By contrast, a frequent user, such as someonewho drinks alcohol every day but in strict moderation, may notencounter substance-related problems (although a maintenancealcoholic may drink daily with no apparent intoxication, but withthe later development of associated health problems). Thequantity and frequency of substance use can be strongly affectedby the availability and marketing of the substance and by thetechniques or technologies for administering the drug. Type of Substance Used The type of substance used can also influence the chances oflater substance problems. More addictive substances--those withgreater abuse liability--will make restraint from continued andpossibly escalating use more difficult. Cigarettes provide anexample experienced by many individuals: nicotine is extremelyaddictive, and only a minority of those who try cigarettes andcontinue to smoke them will be able to control or easily cut backon their use. Techniques of Use Techniques of administration can also influence theprogression of substance use. The introduction of prewrapped,prepackaged cigarettes, together with widely distributed matches,was followed by the rapid escalation of cigarette use, andpresumably addiction to nicotine, in the United States in thelate 1800s and early 1900s. Similarly, the introduction ofsmokable free-base and crack cocaine, the administration of whichis much more efficient than the snorting of powdered cocaine, ledto an explosion of cocaine abuse and addiction. The Bahamas, forexample, experienced a hundredfold increase in cocaine-relatedhospital emergency room admissions following the introduction ofcrack and free-base cocaine in the 1980s (8). Expectations and Effects of Use The expectations and effects of use can also reinforce useand influence progression from use to abuse and addiction.Research reviews have discussed some examples of the expectationsand effects of using illicit substances that can reinforce theiruse and may increase the likelihood of progression to abuse andaddiction (13,25). These purposes include: o The reduction of negative feelings, including the use ofstimulants to alleviate depression and weakness; psychedelics tocombat boredom and disillusionment; alcohol to assuage feelingsof guilt, loneliness, and anxiety; and tranquilizers,amphetamines, and sedatives to reduce painful feelings. o The reduction of self-rejection. Some researchers havefound an association between substance use and indices ofinsecurity, dis-satisfaction with self, desire to change oneself,defensiveness, low self-esteem, and low self- confidence. o The increase in potency. Increases in physical and sexualpotency, daring, and toughness can be achieved by using specificsubstances in certain situations. This can be especiallyappealing to youth, who may be wrestling with feelings ofpowerlessness, dissatisfaction, and frustration. o The expression of anger. Substances can heightenexpressions of anger (e.g., in opposition to mainstream norms) orcan medicate away anger and rage. Narcotics and hypnotics mayhelp reduce rage, shame, jealousy, and impulses toward extremeaggressiveness. o The achievement of peer acceptance. Peers often play thelargest role in endorsing and encouraging substance use, and insupplying substances. The initiation, continuation, andprogression of use can be important ways for individuals to gainacceptance into peer groups. This can be true in school (e.g., ina fraternity), at work (e.g., in a sales force that demands thatone be able to "hold one's liquor"), in substance-usinggangs, and among certain groups of artists (e.g., somecontemporary painters and musicians). o The seeking of euphoria. Many substance users, especiallyaddicts, report favorably on drug-induced euphoria. Indeed, theprospect of euphoria may be the initial attraction of thesubstance. It can also encourage continued use, even to the pointof addiction and negative consequences. o The coping with problems. For some users, substancestemporarily alleviate problems they have been unable to resolvein other ways. While the problems may be causing emotional pain,the use of substances, especially for the young, can inhibit thedevelopment of other problem-solving skills and may alleviatesymptoms only in the short-run, since the underlying causes ofthe problems are likely to remain unresolved. o The reduction of overwhelming trauma. Post-traumatic stress(e.g., after a war, or after physical or sexual abuse) can resultin the use of addictive substances, since use may temporarilyreduce fears, flashbacks, and other negative feelings. o The suppression of appetite or hunger. Another function ofusing some psychoactive substances is appetite suppression. Anextensive literature exists on the use of nicotine, fromcigarette smoking, to control appetite and weight. Thisphenomenon often manifests itself in the negative: for example,current smokers (especially women) are reluctant to stop smokingfor fear they will gain weight (4). o The seeking of stimulus. Individuals who seek higher levelsof external stimulation can also turn to substances, for a high,for hallucinations, for unpredictable effects. o The regulation of affective and behavioral impairments.Those with mood disorders, such as depression, and behavioralimpairments may find that some substances alter moods and allowthem to modify behaviors. The above expectations and effects might well be expected tocontribute to more continued and progressively heavier substanceuse than would more casual purposes such as curiosity,experimentation, or recreational use. The more"serious" the expectations, effects, and functions ofsubstance use, the greater the likelihood of continued use andabuse may be. As noted earlier, the use of substances, especiallyby the young, to address problems or to achieve feelings mayimpede the development of skills for managing feelings andbehaviors and for solving problems, and thus may result indeficiencies in handling problems in life later on. Indeed, theuse of substances at very young ages may even contribute topermanent changes in the brain that may contribute to further useand abuse. More research is needed to clarify the connectionsbetween the expectations and effects of use and the progressionto heavier and more problematic use and abuse. SUMMARY Substance use, including the progression to heavier and moreharmful use, is a precondition and contributor to abuse andaddiction. Researchers have focused on stages in the progressionof substance use in several ways. They have studied stages in theinitiation of the use of different substances, finding a sequencethat moves from the use of cigarettes and wine or beer, to theuse of marijuana, then hard liquor, and finally other illicitsubstances. Because many individuals who use substances do not goon to substance abuse, and because use at one level does notguarantee use at a higher level, these stages are descriptive butnot predictive. In addition to the biologically and pharmacologicallyreinforcing properties of addictive substances that can lead totolerance and dependence, key aspects of substance use thatcontribute to abuse and addiction include age of first use, thefrequency, quantity, and type of substance used, and thetechniques and expectations and effects of use. _ CliffSchaffer's Home Page WT01-B29-13IA030-000641-B024-73http://206.61.184.43:80/schaffer/LIBRARY/studies/ota/ch6.htm 206.61.184.43 19970122140312 text/html 127567HTTP/1.0 200 OKDate: Wednesday, 22-Jan-97 14:02:37 GMTServer: WebSitePro/1.1f (S/N wpo-0deb)Allow-ranges: bytesContent-type: text/htmlLast-modified: Saturday, 28-Dec-96 06:50:25 GMTContent-length: 127348 CHAPTER 6 INDIVIDUAL RISK AND PROTECTIVE FACTORS TECHNOLOGIES FOR UNDERSTANDING AND PREVENTING SUBSTANCEABUSE AND ADDICTION US Government Office of Technology Assessment October 18, 1994 CHAPTER 6 INDIVIDUAL RISK AND PROTECTIVE FACTORS No single or generic set of variables explains the misuse ofsubstances for every individual. Depending on an individual'sbiological makeup, developmental stage, and interaction withvarious environmental forces, individual risk, vulnerability, andresilience to substance abuse and addiction will vary fordifferent factors at different times (3). Much of the research on substance abuse has focused onidentifying factors for drug and alcohol use (see table 6- 1),specifically among adolescents and young adults. Risk factors forsubstance abuse have been identified as those cognitive,psychological, attitudinal, social, pharmacological,physiological, and developmental characteristics that fosterinitiation of drug and alcohol use and abuse by an individual.There is some consensus in the field of risk factor research thatprobably two fairly distinct sets of risk factors affectindividuals differently. Social, situational, and environmentalfactors are likely to be more influential in initial or low-levelsubstance use, while individuals who progress from use to abuseor addiction are influenced to a greater extent by biological,psychological, and psychiatric factors (27). This distinctionbetween risk factors is more thoroughly discussed in chapter 5.Protective factors are those characteristics that reduce the riskof substance abuse and addiction and promote positive developmentsuch as, appropriate role models, involvement in positive peergroups, and a positive self-image and outlook for the future. This chapter focuses on a select group of individual factorsthat has been combined under the three headings: Demographics, Economics, and Psychosocial/Behavioral. Factors not directlydiscussed in this chapter are reviewed in either Part I or III ofthe report. These factors may not appear in every individual withsubstance abuse and addiction problems, nor will all individualsexposed to these factors use or abuse drugs. In addition,unanimous agreement is lacking within the field of substanceabuse and addiction on the importance, number, order ofappearance, or interactive effects of many of these factors. Where applicable, each of the factors has been reviewed inthe following manner: historical perspectives; currentprevalence; psychosocial and cultural antecedents; biological andgenetic antecedents; relevant prevention programs; and areas forfuture research. DEMOGRAPHICS Age The preponderance of substance abuse research points to thefact that children who use drugs and alcohol before the age of 15have a greater likelihood of becoming problem alcohol and otherdrug users, versus those youth who begin use at a later age (28). Highlights from the National Household Survey on Drug Abuse(NHSDA) provide a somber picture of substance use among theNation's children (77). Lifetime and past month substance use,rates for continued substance use, as well as differences inracial and ethnic substance use (see box 6-1) are reviewed inthis section. As part of NHSDA, data on lifetime use of alcohol andcigarettes (whose use is illicit for minors) has been collectedfor youth aged 12 to 17 since 1974; data collection on otherillicit drug use began in 1979 (see figure 6-1). The lifetime usefindings include: o Rates in 1991 for lifetime use of alcohol, cigarettes, orother illicit drugs were the lowest recorded since the surveyseries began 17 years ago. The highest rates for any substanceuse appeared in the late 1970s. o In 1979, 70 percent of youth aged 12 to 17 reported somelifetime use of alcohol compared to 46 percent in 1991. Since1979, lifetime cigarette use has dropped from 54 percent to 38percent. o Since 1979, the use of other illicit substances(methaqualone, inhalants, heroin, cocaine, phencyclidine (PCP),crack, tranquilizers, stimulants, other opiates, barbiturates,nitrites, lysergic acid diethylamide, hallucinogens, andmarijuana) has followed a similar trend with rates decreasingfrom a high of 34 percent to the 1991 rate of 20 percent. A complementary study of adolescents shows 1991 data forsubstance use within the past 30 days among a sample ofapproximately 17,500 eighth graders, 14,800 tenth graders, and15,000 twelfth graders (75). o Any alcohol use within the past 30 days was reported by 25percent of the eighth graders, 43 percent of the tenth graders,and 54 percent of the twelfth graders. Having had more than fivedrinks in the last two weeks was reported by 13 percent of theeighth graders, 23 percent of the tenth graders, and 30 percentof the twelfth graders. o Fourteen percent of the eighth graders, 21 percent of thetenth graders, and 28 percent of the twelfth graders reportedsmoking cigarettes within the past month. Those who smoked morethan one-half pack per day included 3 percent of the eighthgraders, 7 percent of the tenth graders, and 11 percent of thetwelfth graders. o The other most commonly used substance for eighth and tenthgraders was smokeless tobacco with 7 and 10 percent reported,respectively. Eighth graders had the highest percentage of pastmonth inhalant use (4 percent), and of those individuals,approximately 1 percent reported using inhalants on 3 to 5occasions within the past month. o For tenth and twelfth graders, the other most commonly usedsubstance was marijuana and/or hashish with 9 percent of thetenth graders and 14 percent of the twelfth graders reportingpast 30-day use. Of those individuals, approximately 2 and 3percent, respectively, had used marijuana and/or hashish on threeto five occasions. Another important indicator of potential substance abuseproblems among adolescents is the noncontinuation rate for theuse of certain substances. This is an indication of the extent towhich people who try a drug do not continue to use it, and isbased on the number of individuals who reported ever using a drugdivided by the those who have not used the drug in the past 12months (75). Among a sample of twelfth graders in 1991, the data show thatnoncontinuation rates vary widely among the different drugs, withthe highest rates observed for methaqualone and inhalants (62percent). As mentioned previously, inhalant use is higher amongyounger individuals. The noncontinuation of methaqualone may bedue, in part, to the decrease in its availability. A highnoncontinuation rate is also seen for heroin (56 percent),cocaine (55 percent), PCP (52 percent), and crack (52 percent).Marijuana has one of the lowest noncontinuation rates (35percent) in the senior year of any of the illicit drugs;primarily because a relatively high proportion of seniorscontinue to use it at some level over an extended period of time. Additionally, the noncontinuation rates for alcohol andcigarettes are extremely low. In other words, 88 percent of theseniors reported some lifetime use of alcohol, and of thoseindividuals, 78 percent have continued to use it within the pastyear, thus only 12 percent of the seniors reported no alcohol usein the preceding 12 months. Cigarette noncontinuation was definedsomewhat differently, as the percentage of those who said theyhad ever smoked "regularly" and who also reported notsmoking at all during the past month. Of the regular smokers,only 17 percent stopped smoking within the past month. An obvious drawback to these data is the fact that only thoseindividuals who have not dropped out of school are included inthe survey. It is not unrealistic to assume that those studentswith serious drug problems may well have left school before thetwelfth grade. More specific discussion of the factors thatinfluence the risk of adolescent substance abuse, as well asprevention programs targeting youth, are thoroughly reviewed inchapter 8. While the majority of attention is focused on adolescentsubstance use and abuse, young adults and older adults also showsignificant levels of substance use and abuse. The 1991statistics from the NHSDA reveal that heavy drinking (defined asdrinking five or more drinks per occasion on 5 or more days inthe past month) was reported by 2 percent of 12 to 17 year olds,11 percent of 18 to 25 year olds, 7 percent of 26 to 34 yearolds, and 4 percent of those 35 and older (77). For those sameage categories, smoking a pack or more of cigarettes per day wasreported by 1, 13, 17, and 17 percent, respectively. The illicitsubstances reported being used most often in the past month amongall age groups were marijuana and hashish. Individuals 18 to 25had the highest percentage (13 percent) and those 26 to 34 thenext highest percentage (7 percent). The second most commonlyreported illicit substance was the nonmedical use ofpsychotherapeutics, which was again highest among 18 to 25 yearolds (3 percent) followed by those 26 to 34 (2 percent); allother age groups reported less than 2 percent. Clearly then, the heavy use of some substances is notexclusive to adolescents. Young- to middle-aged and older adultscan also be exposed to stressful risk factors, such as loss of ajob, divorce, or death of a child, which could contribute toalcohol or drug problems. The adult population presents uniqueand often overlooked challenges for the planning andimplementation of substance abuse prevention programs. Gender Historically, the vast majority of biological and behavioralsubstance abuse studies were conducted on male participants,although that has begun to change. A distorted picture emerged,in which women were assumed to misuse the same substances, andfor the same reasons, as their male counterparts. It has onlybeen within the past 10 to 20 years that separate research hasbeen conducted on the causes and consequences of alcohol and drugproblems among women. Women have not been immune to the harmful effects of alcoholand other drugs. In the late 1800s twice as many women wereaddicted to narcotics as men. The majority of these women werewhite, middle-aged, and of upper-middle class status. Some hadbecome addicted through the prescription of narcotics for a hostof so-called female problems, while others knowingly misusedopium, heroin, morphine, and cocaine (53). The number of women drinking alcohol and experiencingalcohol-related problems has risen steadily since World War II.At least one-third of the estimated 18 million alcoholics andproblem drinkers in the United States are thought to be women.These figures, which many consider to be conservative, wouldsuggest that close to 6 million women are currently dealing withthe medical, legal, and social problems of alcohol misuse (53). Overall, men report more frequent use of alcohol, cigarettes,and all illicit substances (except nonmedical use ofpsychotherapeutics) than women (79,77). However, this does notmean that there is not substantial alcohol and drug use amongwomen (see table 6-2). Additionally, some gender and ethnicdifferences may be attributable to failure to survey hiddenpopulations. The risk status of women who are not in theworkforce, do not receive prenatal care, and are not visiblethrough arrest, is less reliably known. Neither men, nor women, should be considered homogeneous. Forexample, alcohol use and its misuse can vary widely betweendifferent racial and ethnic groups. Among men, Hispanics (60percent) were slightly more likely to have used alcohol withinthe past month than whites (59 percent) or blacks (52 percent)(77). In general, white women drink more frequently than otherwomen. Large numbers of Native American, Hispanic, black, andAsian women do not drink at all (70). Additionally, poor andminority women appear to come under closer scrutiny for alcoholand drug abuse than do financially secure or white women (see box6-2). These racial and ethnic differences are more fullydiscussed in the following section. Do men and women cite different reasons for the misuse ofalcohol and other drugs? Over the last several decades within theUnited States, the socially defined roles for men and women haveundergone substantial changes. When given a choice, many womenhave opted for the traditional role of a stay-at-home mother andhomemaker, while other women have pursued career paths that mayor may not include marriage and children, and still others haveattempted to combine the two. These fairly recent changes havebrought pressures and risks many women had not been subjected topreviously. Women in the workplace are more likely to encounter drinkingopportunities such as business lunches and office celebrations,where they may feel encouraged or even pressured to drink (53).Women have also been recently targeted by the beer, tobacco, andliquor industries, as well as by small-scale marketing bynightclubs and bars in the form of ladies' nights. In the early 1970s, researcher Sharon Wilsnack postulatedthat some women may abuse alcohol to submerge those aspects ofthemselves that did not conform to the traditional female sexrole, thereby allowing them to feel more acceptably feminine(53). More recently, several studies on female alcoholics haveshown that women, more frequently than men, can pinpoint aspecific traumatic life event that they believe precipitatedtheir problem drinking. The crises identified most often by womenincluded a partner's infidelity, the death of a family member, achild leaving home, postpartum depression, divorce or separation,infertility, gynecological problems, and menopause (39,53). A similar study focused on the impact of various life eventson alcoholic men and women. Alcoholic men placed significantimportance on work-related events, marriage issues, sexualdifficulties, and arguments with spouses. In addition to thoseevents cited by the men, alcoholic women focused on socialactivities, family troubles, stillbirth and adoption, and deathof a close relative (40). While much of the substance abuse research has focused onalcohol issues, various researchers have examined the differencesbetween men and women in their use of illicit substances with orwithout the presence of alcohol. For men and women cocaineaddicts in treatment, the following significant differences werenoted (40,41,35): o Women had started to use cocaine at a younger age than men,conversely to what is generally found among opiate users andalcoholics. o Women had a significantly lower level of social adjustmentthan male patients. o Women patients were less likely to be employed, to holdhigh status jobs, to be self-supporting, and to be financingtheir own drug use. o Women were more likely than men to cite specific reasonsfor their drug use: depression, feeling unsociable, family andjob pressures, and health problems; whereas men more often citedthe intoxicating effects of cocaine as a reason for their druguse. o Men reported experiencing more guilt (47 vs. 23 percent),whereas women noted that one of the desirable effects of cocaineuse was a reduction in their feelings of guilt. o Women were more often diagnosed with depression than men,and their depression took longer to treat, while men were moreoften diagnosed with antisocial personality disorder. o Most men and women reported that they used cocaine to bemore sociable. o Women demonstrated a slower recovery than men, and had moreresidual problems. Gender differences among opiate addicts have also beenexplored. Researchers have shown that female addicts are morelikely than male addicts to have first been introduced to heroinby family members or others close to them, and to haveexperienced severe family disruption (36). The development of thewomen's opiate dependence is also more likely to be linked to thefamily's approval of use or the absence of clear disapproval ofuse, in combination with easy access to the drug (35). Differences in marijuana smoking may also be partiallyattributable to gender. In a recent review, it was shown thatmen's marijuana smoking was tied more to the availability of thedrug, while women's smoking was affected to a greater degree bysocial influences, such as weekday versus weekend smoking, andthe smoking of their male partners. Women have also been shown toincrease their marijuana smoking during periods of anger andother unpleasant dispositions (41). In addition to discovering some socioculturaldissimilarities, gender differences in biological and geneticsusceptibility to substance abuse have been examined. The role ofheritability and genetics in influencing individualsusceptibility is more thoroughly discussed in chapter 3, thusthe discussion in this section will concentrate on biologicaldifferences. Again, a large portion of these studies hasconcentrated on alcohol and its effects. In the late 1970s it was reported that when men and women ofcomparable body weight were given equivalent doses of alcohol,women achieved higher blood alcohol levels. However, thesefindings have been challenged, as more recent studies have shownthat if the blood alcohol level is based on total body waterrather than weight, the difference in levels between men andwomen is insignificant (65). Another avenue that has been explored in explaining thegender difference in blood alcohol levels has to do with themetabolism of alcohol. Based on findings from animal research,Mario Frezza et al. (25) investigated differences in the"first-pass metabolism" between men and women. Datafrom animal studies reveal that a significant amount of ingestedethanol does not enter the circulatory system, but rather isneutralized in the stomach by the enzyme alcohol dehydrogenase.Using a small study sample (6 alcoholic and 14 nonalcoholic men,6 alcoholic and 17 nonalcoholic women) Frezza et al. investigatedwhether the first-pass metabolism and enzyme activity levelvaried between men and women, and alcoholic and nonalcoholicindividuals. They discovered that both gender and chronic alcoholabuse had statistically significant effects on the first-passmetabolism of alcohol, specifically, the first-pass metabolismwas considerably lower among alcoholic women compared toalcoholic men, which in turn was lower than nonalcoholic men.Similar findings were reported for the alcohol dehydrogenaseactivity level; with the highest activity levels (70 to 80percent) found in the nonalcoholic men and women, less activityamong the alcoholic men (37 to 46 percent), and the smallestactivity level among alcoholic women (11 to 20 percent). Tosummarize, the women in general had lower rates of first- passmetabolism and lower levels of alcohol dehydrogenase activity,which both lead to an increase in the amount of ethanol in thecirculatory system. The levels of enzyme activity furtherdecreased among the alcoholic women and the first-pass metabolismwas essentially nonexistent, indicating little neutralization bythe stomach. Researchers have also been studying the effect of hormonalchanges during the menstrual cycle on alcohol absorption rates.Alcohol absorption has been reported to vary during a woman'scycle--specifically, the rate of alcohol absorption increasespremenstrually. However, data from other clinicaland animaltrials have disputed these findings (65). What is clear from this type of biological research is thatfew firm conclusions can be made about gender differences inresponse to alcohol ingestion, and even fewer still aboutbiological responses to drugs other than alcohol. Nevertheless, the psychosocial differences that have beenidentified between the sexes could assist practitioners in thedevelopment of more gender specific substance abuse preventionprograms. For example, because many women can pinpoint specificevents in their lives that they believe contributed to theirheavy alcohol or drug use, it would behoove professionals workingwith women to be cognizant of these factors. General inquirescould be made at yearly physical or gynecological exams, whichcould also serve as informational sessions on the dangers ofalcohol and drug use (39). In addition, special attention shouldbe paid toward adolescent girls whose first experience withalcohol and drugs is often through a male family member orboyfriend. Broadly speaking, there are basic gaps in knowledgeconcerning gender differences and substance use within virtuallyall the parts identified in this report: Part I- necessarypreconditions; Part II-individual factors; and Part III-activitysettings. Until these gaps are addressed, the practice oftransferring data garnered from studies specific for one gender,to the other gender, is inaccurate and misleading. Race and Ethnicity Historically, racial and ethnic minorities have been linkedwith, and often blamed for, many of the drug problems within theUnited States. Throughout the late 1800s and early 1900s, thegeneral public associated the growth in opium addicts with thearrival of Chinese immigrants; although numerous physicians hadbeen freely prescribing narcotic preparations to their patients,many of whom were middle- to upper-class whites. The drug cocainehas long been associated with blacks. A popular image during thistime was one of cocaine-crazed blacks, although use of cocainewas widespread among whites as well (86). Throughout this sameperiod, marijuana was thought to have been brought into thecountry and promoted by Mexican immigrants and later picked up bythe subculture of black jazz musicians. Due in part to publicparanoia, the Marijuana Tax Act of 1937, which was a directattempt to control marijuana use, was born (45). In the minds of many individuals, this derogatory linkbetween minority populations and rampant drug abuse hascontinued. Certainly, many urban areas have high concentrationsof minorities, and within these areas the prevalence of alcoholand drug abuse may be high. Often over-looked, however, is theexistence of alcohol and drug problems in suburban and ruralareas throughout the United States, which have varyingpercentages of minorities. Prevalence rates for past month use of an illicit substancein 1992 (see figure 6-2) are not drastically different betweenwhites, blacks, and Hispanics, although it should be kept in mindthat this statistic does not accurately reflect abuse oraddiction. Even though the prevalence of illicit substance usewas highest among blacks, over three-fourths (76 percent) of thepast month illicit substance users were white. In other words,there were approximately 8.7 million whites, 1.5 million blacks,885,000 Hispanics, and 315,000 individuals of other racial andethnic groups who reported past month use of an illicit substancein 1992 (79). Also for 1992 among individuals aged 12 and older, whitesreported the highest percentage of alcohol use within the pastweek (21 percent), followed by blacks (19 percent), and Hispanics(18 percent) (79). The rates for heavy drinking were notstatistically different by race or ethnicity (5 percent forwhites and blacks, and 6 percent for Hispanics) (78). Until fairly recently, much of the analysis of substance usedata has concentrated on the correlations between the use of asubstance and one or two variables such as race and ethnicityand/or educational level. Often a positive association was foundbetween minority populations and the use of certain substances.While statistically correct, these analyses can be simplistic andmisleading (see box 6- 3). Clearly many risk and protectivefactors interact to produce substance use and abuse. If themajority of these variables are excluded from the analysis, askewed picture may arise as to the importance of certainvariables as risk factors for substance use and abuse.Additionally, to simplify the data collection, racial and ethniccategories are often broad. The most popular groupings areblacks, white non-Hispanic, Hispanic, and other. Though each ofthese categories contains many distinct cultures, grossgeneralizations are commonly made within each category. In recent years, there has been a shift toward analyzing morecarefully the complex relationship between cigarette, alcohol andillicit drug use, and socioeconomic and demographic variables.The previous research had drawn on relatively small databases.However, in 1992, the National Institute on Drug Abuse (NIDA)critically analyzed the national drug use data collected in its1988 and 1990 NHSDA. Predictors of drug and alcohol use includedan extensive array of both individual variables (e.g., age,educational level, marital status) and aggregate variables basedon the attributes of the census block, community, or region inwhich the respondent lived (see table 6-3 for a complete list). The effect of select variables such as race and ethnicitywere measured, while simultaneously controlling for all othervariables (e.g., age, educational level, employment status).Individuals of racial and ethnic minorities were found to be nomore likely than whites to use alcohol heavily (defined as havingfive or more drinks on five or more days in the past month) or touse marijuana, cocaine, or psychotherapeutic drugs (inclusion ofcrack or heroin in the analysis was impossible due to the smallnumber of respondents reporting use). In fact, when socioeconomicstatus was controlled for, both blacks and Hispanics had asubstantially lower likelihood of heavy alcohol use than whites(76). A reanalysis of the 1988 NHSDA data was accomplished by anindependent group of researchers who clustered the respondentdata into neighborhood risk sets. The original analysis on the1988 data revealed that for all ages, blacks and Hispanics weretwice as likely to have ever used crack cocaine than were whites.Once neighborhood clusters were established, the data revealedthat given similar social and environmental conditions, crack usedid not differ significantly for blacks or Hispanics comparedwith whites (9). However, the number of reported crack users inthe study was relatively small (138), and neighborhoods wereidentified as crack neighborhoods with as few as one reportedcrack user, thus the research findings should not be generalized. The new research hypothesized that the previous racialdifferences found in the prevalence of crack cocaine smoking mayhave been due to macrosocial environmental risk factorsincluding: differences in the availability of crack; employmentrates; premature death rates; community contact with the criminaljustice system; socially acceptable mechanisms for coping withlife stressors; distribution of wealth; and access to socialresources. While both studies had specific limitations, the importanceof these types of analyses cannot be understated. Focus should beplaced on the interaction between communities and individuals andthe relative influence on subsequent drug and alcohol use, ratherthan a person's race or ethnicity. Race or ethnicity has not been shown to be either abiological or genetic risk factor for substance use or abuse. Todate, the preponderance of investigative studies has focused onracial and ethnic differences in response specifically toalcohol. Virtually no study has been completed on differences inracial and ethnic biological responses to other licit or illicitdrugs. Individual metabolism of alcohol is essentially controlled bytwo enzymes, aldehyde dehydrogenase and alcohol dehydrogenase. Ifthe enzyme aldehyde dehydrogenase is inactive for any reason,ingestion of even a small amount of alcohol can cause rapid andprominent facial flushing. Continued drinking leads to nausea,dizziness, palpitations, and faintness. This reaction is seenamong many Asians (84,16). A mutant form of alcohol dehydrogenase will effect theefficiency of alcohol metabolism as well. Altered forms of thealcohol dehydrogenase enzyme have also been reported in severalAsian populations. The two enzymes, aldehyde and alcohol dehydrogenase, probablyinteract in some individuals to amplify the adverse reaction toalcohol consumption (57). Since this reaction discourages heavydrinking, the observation that it commonly occurs in somepopulations where alcoholism is relatively rare suggests thatalcohol and aldehyde dehydrogenase mutations might be a majordeterminant of alcohol consumption, abuse, and dependence. Thiswould seem to hold true for Taiwan and Japan where the reactionoccurs in 30 to 50 percent of individuals. Research on these twoenzymes among other racial and ethnic groups is scanty andinconclusive. The role genetics plays in the heritability of alcohol andother drug problems has been studied for the past 30 years. Whilethis topic is more thoroughly addressed in chapter 3, one pointis worth mentioning here. Of the more than 30 family, twin, andadoption studies that have been completed, the vast majority haveused white males as study subjects. Clearly, among differentracial and ethnic groups the relationship between geneticheritability and increased susceptibility to alcohol and otherdrug problems is an area that deserves further study. While race and ethnicity in and of themselves are notpredictive risk factors for future substance abuse, by reviewingwhen, how, and why certain substances became problematic withindifferent racial and ethnic groups, insight can be gained intothe generational impact drugs have had on these populations. Fourbroad racial and ethnic groups (and one multiracial and ethnicgroup, see box 6-4) are discussed below in the following manner:historical perspectives; prevalence statistics; psychosocial andcultural antecedents; and selected prevention programs. Aseparate section on areas for future research is also included. Native American Indians/Alaska Natives There are more than 1.5 million Americans Indians and AlaskanNatives throughout the United States, with vastly differentlanguages and cultural beliefs. Even within the same tribe theremay be a good deal of cultural diversity, since differences existbetween reservation and rural tribal members, and those residingin urban settings. While urban dwelling American Indians mayconstitute more than 50 percent of the total Indian population,little is known concerning their health status (59). The American Indians' introduction to alcohol dates back tothe early 1600s and their initial interactions with Europeantrappers and settlers. Much of the early trading between theEuropeans and American Indians involved an exchange of alcohol.It was not long before alcohol became a considerable problem formany American Indian tribes. Some researchers speculate thatbecause American Indians lacked a prior drinking history, or rolemodel for moderate drinking practices, many tribes adopted aquick and copious style of drinking, consistently drinking to thepoint of intoxication. However, in other tribes, it is appearsthat being intoxicated was deemed unacceptable, and over timethese tribes developed a "social" drinking style (35). Prevalence statistics Studies among American Indian adolescents have shown thatprevalence rates for licit and illicit drug use varyinsignificantly between tribes (5,4). However, compared tonon-Indian youth, Indian adolescents consistently begin usingalcohol, illicit substances, cigarettes, and inhalants at ayounger age, at higher rates, and in combination with each other(10,60,69). With regard to alcohol, there is often a great dealof peer pressure to drink as the Indian thing to do (42). Studieshave shown that Indian youth are three times more likely to beinvolved in alcohol-related offenses than their white or Hispaniccounterparts. A 1982 study indicated that alcohol was involved inas many as 58 percent of Indian juvenile arrests (63 percent formales, 37 percent for females)(60). In some tribes, up to 30 percent of American Indianadolescents have used inhalants, most notably, gasoline and glue.The age group with the highest rate of inhalant use was 11- to13-year-olds. Contrary to the popular belief that inhalant abuseoccurs primarily among boys, research among American Indiansrevealed that eighth grade girls and boys were equally likely tohave inhaled volatile substances. While the rate for Indianinhalant use decreases substantially among high school age youth(down to 4 percent), it is still 2.5 times greater than the ratefor non-Indian youth of that age. Interestingly, while the rateof inhalant use has remained relatively stable among Indian youthsince 1984, there has been a steady rise of reported use amongnon-Indian adolescents (66). While there is no substantial difference in alcohol use amongvarious tribal adolescents, rates do differ between the drinkingpatterns of tribal adults. Contrary to the still pervasivedrunken Indian stereotype, many tribes have levels of adultalcohol use below the national average (42). Consistent with theU.S. population as a whole, American Indian males are more likelyto drink than females (42,35). In some tribes it is permissiblefor adolescent females to experiment with alcohol, with theunderstanding that when adulthood is reached they are expected toabstain or drink only rarely. As is true for adolescents, adult Indians encounter anincreased rate of legal complications due to alcohol and druguse. Data on urban American Indians has shown that while underthe influence of alcohol and/or other drugs, they are arrested atfour times the rate for blacks and 10 times the rate for whites(44). Few statistics exist to quantify illicit substance use amongthe adult American Indian population. While alcohol is clearly amajor problem for some tribes, future research efforts shouldinclude data on the use of illicit substances. Psychosocial/cultural antecedents The relationship between the majority of American Indians andthe early settlers was suffused with violence, distrust, deceit,and perhaps more than anything, forcible and abrupt change. Thefood American Indians ate, how they dressed, where and how theylived, what language they spoke, tribal governing structures, andhow they worshiped were, for the most part, forcibly altered toconform with the newly dominant society's cultural and moralviews. While these involuntary changes occurred severalgenerations ago, their impact on the American Indian cultureshould not be underestimated. In some instances, tribal traditions, languages, and methodsof worship were lost. Thousands of American Indian children, someas young as 3 years old, were removed from their families andplaced in federally funded and run boarding schools, wherephysical, verbal, and sexual abuse were common. Nuclear andextended families were dispersed, and with them, a vital socialsupport system. Acculturation issues abounded. Children returnedhome from boarding schools unable to speak their native language,or understand the importance of their cultural traditions. Thesecultural problems are multigenerational, and current studiesreveal that American Indian children report more emotionalproblems, mental health problems, and low self-esteem thannon-Indian children (60). While the relationship between many ofthese psychosocial/cultural antecedents and increased substanceabuse levels has yet to be formally evaluated, clearly theAmerican Indian people have been, and in some may continue to be,subjected to cultural disruption. Prevention programs For substance abuse prevention programs to be effectivewithin the American Indian population it is important to realizethe diversity that exists between tribes and villages. Forexample, a specific program tailored to New Mexico Navajos livingon the Navajo reservation may be culturally unacceptable toWinnebago Indians living in urban Minneapolis, MN. However,several fairly universal themes permeate American Indian culture:the importance of tribal identity, which is an individual'smembership or affiliation with specific tribe(s); a belief thateach human is a multidimensional being made up of a body, mind,and spirit, and that the spirit world coexists and intermingleswith the physical world; the importance of sharing andgenerosity, allegiance to one's family and community, respect forelders, noninterference, orientation to present time, and harmonywith nature; the importance of an oral tradition as a primarymethod of teaching values, attitudes, legends, and stories; anemphasis on observant, reflective, and integrative skills whichlead to communication patterns that give virtue to silence,listening, nonverbal cues, and learning by example; and thepresence of rituals and symbols that are acknowledged for theirunderlying significance, which is expected to emerge as time andexperience go on (72). One example that assists communities in the development ofculturally sensitive programs is an instructional publicationcompiled by The Four Worlds Development Project in Alberta,Canada. Information has been collected on health promotion andprevention efforts by various indigenous people from around theworld. The text assists American Indian communities in tailoringprogram planning, training, and implementation techniques withtheir culture beliefs and specific needs (24). Blacks A great deal of diversity exists within the black community.One reflection of that diversity is the use of the terms AfricanAmerican and black. Some researchers use African American todefine black persons who are direct descendants of men and womenbrought to the United States as slaves, whereas blacks is used todefine all people and cultures of African descent, includingblack people from the West Indies, Africa, and the Americas. Attimes, the two terms are used interchangeably (72). For thissection, both terms will be utilized where appropriate. Historically Many of the first blacks to arrive in the United States didso as slaves. Plantation owners were responsible for regulatingmuch of their slaves' alcohol consumption. During holidays,alcohol was routinely distributed to the slaves in reward fortheir loyalty and hard work, and the subsequent drunken revelrieswere tolerated. This controlled permissiveness began to change inthe early 1800s, as clandestine groups of black slaves begantheir quest for freedom. It was at this point that blacks wereprohibited from owning stills, or even being in possession ofalcoholic beverages. These laws persisted after the Civil War,when technically, blacks had been granted citizenship (14). Spanning the late 1800s through the late 1960s, hundreds ofthousands of blacks left the South and, looking for work, headedfor northern cities. This period was later described as the"Great Migration," with a total outmigration estimatedat 4.3 million individuals (72,14). This outmigration contributedsubstantially to defining the large number of blacks currentlyfound in many of the northern urban areas. Unfortunately, many ofthose seeking work did not find it, nor did they find that theywere free from racism, discrimination, and oppression. Slowly,the numbersleaving the South decreased, and by the 1970s therewas actually some migration back into the southern states by bothnorthern-born blacks and individuals returning home afterunsuccessful moves to the North. Prevalence statistics Differences in adolescent drug use among high school seniorsby race and ethnicity were discussed earlier in this chapter (seebox 6-A). Among this group, alcohol, cigarette, and illicit druguse was lowest among black and Asian youth, even after inclusionof background and lifestyle factors. Obviously, a drawback tothis type of survey is that high school dropouts are not includedin the analyses. The 1991 event dropout rate (which measures theproportion of individuals who dropped out of school over aspecified time period) for grades 10 to 12, ages 15 to 24, revealdropout percentages of 3.2 for whites, 6.0 for blacks, and 7.3for Hispanics (63). While the event dropout rate for blacks isdouble that of white students, low alcohol and drug usage rateshave also been found among black eighth and tenth graders, so thelow rate of substance use among black twelfth graders cannot bedue entirely to dropout rates (75). While use of alcohol, cigarettes, and illicit drugs isrelatively low among blacks, data on heavy or frequent use ofsuch substances differs. The 1991 NHSDA data for individuals aged12 to 20 found that 7.3 percent of whites reported heavy alcoholuse (defined as having 5 or more drinks on one occasion on 5 ormore days in the past 30 days), Hispanics reported 3.9 percent,and blacks reported 2.7 percent. However, for those individualsaged 21 or older, heavy alcohol use did not differ significantlybetween whites and blacks (5.0 vs. 6.0 percent), but wassignificantly higher among Hispanics (6.6 percent) (77). Otherstudies on heavy alcohol use, by gender, have shown that whitemen aged 18 to 29 report the highest prevalence of heavydrinking, which then declined in subsequent age groups.Conversely, the abstention rate for black males was highest amongthose aged 18 to 29, while subsequent age groups showedsignificantly increased levels of heavy drinking--among whom halfreport either frequent heavy or frequent high maximum drinking(70). Similarly, white women in the 18 to 29 age group weresignificantly more likely to drink, and to drink heavily, thanwere young black women (67). Past-month use (which does not necessarily constitute abuse)of an illicit substance by race and ethnicity was discussed atthe beginning of this section (see figure 6-2). However, the 1992NHSDA also contains more specific data for some of the mostcommonly used substances such as marijuana and cocaine. Of theblacks age 12 and older surveyed, 3.2 reported using marijuanaonce a week or more compared to 2.5 percent for whites andHispanics. Blacks also had the highest reported weekly use ofcocaine (0.5 percent) compared to Hispanic and white percentages(0.4 and 0.3, respectively) (78). Persistence of drug use has also been used as anotherindicator of substance use severity and is measured by percent ofmonthly users divided by percent of lifetime users. It has beenshown that blacks and Hispanics have a different pattern of drugpersistence from that of whites. Data on cocaine use analyzedfrom the 1990 NHSDA showed that the persistence rate for blacksage 18 to 25 was almost three times that of whites (.29 vs.. 09),and among those aged 26 to 34, the rate for blacks was four timeshigher than that for whites (.21 vs.. 05). In both age groups,the persistence rates for Hispanics were between those of blacksand whites. It is important to note that the differences inpersistence did not appear to extend to alcohol and marijuana(32). Psychosocial/cultural antecedents At least initially, many blacks did not arrive in the UnitedStates voluntarily. The legacy of slavery has shaped much ofblack culture. Black slaves struggled with many of the sameissues as American Indians: loss of languages, traditions, andreligious beliefs; assimilation and acculturation issues; and thebreakup of nuclear and extended families. Not allowed to expresstheir original languages, cultures, and beliefs, blacks attemptedto establish new cultural identities amidst oppression,segregation, and racism. Hypotheses concerning alcoholism among black males have beenproposed by several studies. Some researchers believe that theincrease in the number of heavy drinkers among black males intheir thirties may be due to feelings of frustration and failureconcerning career expectations. A complementary view points tothe combination of high unemployment rates among black malescoupled with the large numbers of liquor stores found in manyurban black neighborhoods, as having contributed to the alcoholproblems faced by black men (14,82). Prevention programs With respect to the use of alcohol and other drugs, commonthemes link blacks. In general, social stratification, church andcommunity involvement, and racial identity are thought to beimportant variables in attitudes toward alcohol and drug use(72,14). The level of importance will vary between individualsand groups depending on environmental factors. One program citedas exemplary by the Center for Substance Abuse Prevention (CSAP)is called Super II, and targets primarily at risk, blackinner-city youths 11 to 17 and their parents. The design andimplementation of the program emphasizes holism and culturalcompetence, viewing them as crucial in reducing the strength ofrisk factors and increasing the strength of resiliency factors.The program takes place through already established agencies inthe communities (Boys Clubs and Girls Clubs) and incorporates thechildrens' caregivers, youth and recreational workers, policeofficials, local corporations, and a variety of social serviceagencies. The first-year evaluation report found reductions infour of five major categories of alcohol- and drug- relatedbehavior. These included frequency of use and amount of use,number of modalities of use, alcohol- and drug-related behaviorproblems, and media influenceability (71). Another antidrug abuse campaign is being waged by theCongress of National Black Churches, Inc. (CNBC), a nationalnonprofit religious organization comprised of a variety ofdenominations. Through a variety of programs, the CNBC clergy aremobilizing, creating, and coordinating groups of individualsinterested in bringing about positive change in theircommunities. Program strategies are implemented in partnershipwith the police, criminal justice agencies, school systems,social service agencies, private organization and businesses, andinformal community networks to reduce the supply of and demandfor drugs. Hispanics Historically The term Hispanic was first used by the U.S. Census Bureau in1980 to designate those individuals who resided in the UnitedStates and whose cultural origins were in Mexico, Puerto Rico,Cuba, Central America, and other Latin American countries. Notall members of this group accept the term and prefer to usephrases such as Latino or la raza (literally, "therace"). Data from the 1990 census reveal an Hispanicpopulation of more than 20 million, and projections indicate thatHispanics will be the largest minority group in the United Statessometime between the years 2000 and 2010. Hispanics of Mexicanorigin, by far the largest Hispanic group (63 percent), areclustered in the southwest, particularly California and Texas.Puerto Ricans, excluding those living on the island of PuertoRico, are the second largest subgroup (12 percent) and liveprimarily in the Northeast, especially in and around New YorkCity, New York. Cubans (5 percent) live primarily around theirport of entry, Miami, Florida, though large numbers are found inNew Jersey and New York. Dominicans, who reside primarily in theNortheastern Atlantic States, are also beginning to grow innumber. In the past 10 years, there has been a large immigrationof Central Americans to the United States. These individuals havecome primarily from civil war-plagued countries includingGuatemala, El Salvador, and Nicaragua. It is highly possible thatmany of the problems faced by newly arrived Hispanic immigrantsmay be exacerbated among this population who have left theircountries involuntarily. Refugees escaping political turmoil oropen warfare often show signs of Post Traumatic Stress Disorder(72). Prevalence statistics NIDA data collected from 1975 to 1991 on drug use amongtwelfth graders, as well as data from 1991 for eighth and tenthgraders, reveal the following for Hispanic students: as a group,Hispanic youth had the highest lifetime and annual prevalencerates in the senior year for PCP, cocaine, crack, heroin, ice,and steroids, compared to whites and blacks, and the rates forcrack and steroid use were particularly high; among eighthgraders, Hispanics had higher rates of past month use forvirtually all the drugs surveyed including, cocaine, heroin,inhalants, alcohol, marijuana, hallucinogens, and cigarettes. Inother words, in eighth grade, before a considerable number ofstudents has dropped out, Hispanic youth have the highestprevalence of nearly all drug use, but by twelfth grade, whiteshave the highest usage rates. The researchers suggest twopossible explanations, which are not necessarily exclusive. Thefirst being that the high dropout rate for Hispanics in latergrades (in some areas as high as 40 percent) is causing a shiftin the rates, and the second is that while Hispanic youth beginexperimenting earlier, white youth catch up by the later grades(75). National statistics for 1992 of past-month use of any illicitsubstance indicated that rates for Hispanics and whites were notsignificantly different, and were slightly lower than those forblacks (see figure 6-2). The same database also revealed that forthe illicit substances measured, Hispanic rates either fellbetween black and white rates, or were the lowest rates reportedby an ethnic group. The only exception would be the heavy alcoholuse data (defined as having 5 or more drinks on one occasion on 5or more days within the past 30 days) for 1991 (1992 data not yetavailable) which showed that Hispanics aged 21 or older reportedsignificantly more heavy alcohol use within the past month ascompared to whites and blacks (77). Psychosocial/cultural antecedents Dignidad, respeto, confianza--dignity, respect, and trust--are important elements in the Hispanic culture. Like manyimmigrants to the United States, Hispanics deal with language,cultural, racial, and economic barriers. These barriers and howthey are handled within the Hispanic culture have a great deal todo with subsequent alcohol and drug problems. To a large extent,drinking (at times heavily) among Hispanic males is not onlyexpected, but encouraged. Much of the research literature hastherefore centered around alcohol and its misuse. To be able todrink heavily and maintain "control" is a valuedcharacteristic among most Hispanic men (38). Personal identitiesfor a vast majority of Hispanic men are intricately entwined withthe notion of machismo, which generally connotes strength,masculinity, independence, and responsibility (1). The man of thefamily is expected to provide for and take care of his wife andchildren. For those who may be unable to fulfill this role, dueto difficulties learning English and/or procuring employment, thesocial drinking pattern can change from one of low frequency andhigh quantity, to high frequency and high quantity (38,1). Thisdrinking pattern varies between Hispanic groups, however. A studycompleted in 1981 found that drinking levels among newly arrivedDominicans, Guatemalans, and Puerto Ricans, when compared topreimmigration levels, decreased, increased, and remained thesame, respectively (1). As is relatively true for other cultures, heavy drinking isnot condoned for Hispanic women. This is not to say that it doesnot exist. While the majority of first generation Hispanic womengenerally abstain or drink very little, changes in drinkingpatterns among the following generations have been observed. Tothe distress of many first generational Hispanic families, astheir daughters and granddaughters become increasinglyacculturated, the drinking patterns and alcohol problems moreclosely mirror those found in the general population (26).Another change observed among more acculturated Hispanic women isthe diminishment of marianismo, which is the female complement tomachismo, and encompasses such behaviors as submissiveness,humility, tolerance, virtuosity, and devotion to the male(whether father, husband, or first son). Prevention programs Important intergroup differences need to be understood forthe planning, implementation, and evaluation of substance abuseprevention programs. For example, while two immigrants, oneMexican and the other El Salvadorian, may both speak Spanish andmay both be experiencing many of the same difficulties inadjusting to life in the United States, they are very likely tohave had vastly different lifetime and cultural experiences (72). Funds from CSAP as well as the National Institute on AlcoholAbuse and Alcoholism (NIAAA) have been distributed to severaldemonstration projects throughout the United States and PuertoRico that target high-risk Hispanic youth and their families.Many of these programs are similar to others previously outlinedin this report in their attempt to be as comprehensive aspossible through the coordination of families, schools, lawenforcement, and local social services and businesses. Several ofthe programs are creating their own audiovisual and writtenmaterials in Spanish, others are utilizing activities such asEnglish courses, puppet shows, and live theater performances,while others employ peer group counseling and mentoring programs(69). Asian and Pacific Island Americans Historically According to the U.S. Census Bureau, Asian and Pacific IslandAmericans are the fastest growing population in the UnitedStates. Between 1980 and 1988, the number of Asian and PacificIsland Americans increased by 76 percent compared with anincrease of 36 percent within the Hispanic population. Similar tothe other racial and ethnic categories, the term Asian andPacific Island American gives one the impression of homogeneity,while in reality, over 60 different racial and ethnic groups arelumped in this bracket. Some of the diverse populations includedin this group are Hawaiians, Guamanians, Filipinos, Thais,Bengalis, and Sri Lankans. Beside the obvious differences inlanguage, and cultural norms and beliefs, is the degree to whichdifferent subpopulations have acculturated and/or assimilated tothe dominant culture. Many Chinese and Japanese families havebeen in the United States for three generations or more, which isin sharp contrast to the majority of first-generation Vietnamese,Koreans, Asian Indians, and Filipinos (72,85). Prevalence statistics Research on substance use and abuse within the Asian andPacific Island American population appears to be sporadic, andoften limited to alcohol. While the three national surveys NHSDA,the National Adolescent School Health Survey, and the High SchoolSenior Survey, all collect separate data for Asian and PacificIsland Americans, only the High School Senior Survey routinelyanalyzes the data separately. Due to small sample sizes, theremaining two surveys included Asian and Pacific Islanders underthe racial and ethnic category of "other." Research on alcohol consumption patterns among adult Asianand Pacific Island Americans consistently shows that thispopulation drinks substantially less than whites and Hispanics,and slightly less than blacks. Though subgroup variation doesexist, as data reveal, native Hawaiians drink at levelscomparable to those of whites, among mainland Asian Americans,Japanese Americans drink the most, followed by Koreans andChinese Americans. However, Japanese, Korean, and Filipino menall have roughly the same percentage of heavy drinkers at 28percent. This style of heavy drinking is typically associatedwith business entertainment and after work socializing (68).Among Asian and Pacific Island American women, four-fifths ofKorean and Filipino women were reported to be abstainers, as weretwo-thirds of Chinese women, and one-third of Japanese women.Among women who drank, the percentage who did so heavily varied:12 percent for Japanese women; less than 4 percent for Filipinowomen; and virtually none for Chinese and Korean women (68). Asimilar statistic for white women showed 14.5 percent reporteddrinking heavily (73). Evidence suggests, however, that theprevalence of drinking may be on the rise among both men andwomen Asian and Pacific Island Americans, although the exactreasons for this remain unclear. Some researchers have suggestedthat paralleling other immigrant populations, the moreacculturated and assimilated generations will tend to adopt thedrinking patterns of the dominant culture. Yet other researcherspoint to the fact that a significant number of second and thirdgeneration Asian and Pacific Island Americans have not adopted amore copious style of drinking. For adolescent Asian Americans, the majority of the studiesmirrors the findings for the adults--this group consistently hasthe lowest prevalence of alcohol and other drug use for allracial and ethnic groups with the possible exception of blackyouth. Although, a prospective study conducted in North Carolinafound an alarming increase in reported alcohol and other drug useamong Asian Americans over a three-year period in the late 1980s.The reason for this increase at a time when prevalence rates forother races and ethnicities was decreasing remains unknown (72).Another study on youth in California reported that ChineseAmerican youth used quaaludes twice as often as white andHispanic youth, and five times as often as black youth (68).Drinking statistics for Asian American youth are again similar tothose reported by the adult population, that is, their overallprevalence rate is one of the lowest, but statistics for heavydrinking are similar to those found among white youth (72). Psychosocial/cultural antecedents Why does this population have such low overall rates ofalcohol and other drug use? The diversity present within theAsian and Pacific Island American group makes it impossible tolist all the different cultural factors that could influencealcohol and drug use patterns. However, among many of thesubpopulations, anthropologists and substance abuse experts havefound the existence of the following philosophies: moderation,family reputation, humility, keeping a low profile, negativecommunity sanctions on excessive drinking and behavior, and theimpact of parental drinking practices (83). Among Chinesespecifically, alcohol is in an important part of many religiousand celebratory ceremonies, yet excessive use is stronglydiscouraged. One study in California uncovered additional behavioralfactors that influenced drinking patterns among some AsianAmerican men. Japanese respondents were heavily influenced bytheir friends' drinking; among Chinese men, those with moreeducation were more likely to drink; and Korean men were stronglyinfluenced by their parents' drinking habits (68). Few researchers have examined psychosocial influences onAsian and Pacific Island American adolescent drinking or otherdrug use. One factor which has been mentioned, though, is thepressure Asian American youth, in particular, are under tosucceed, especially academically. Thirty-four percent of AsianAmericans are college educated, more than twice that of theUnited States population as a whole. Those with the least amountof college education were American Indians (7.7 percent) andPacific Islanders (9.3 percent). Asian parents are similar toparents, in general, in their hopes for their children's success.However, among some subpopulations (notably Japanese, Korean, andChinese) the feelings for their children are often tied to thechild's academic achievement. When their children perform poorlyin school, some parents respond with strongcriticism,disapproval, and shame. This can understandably add asubstantial amount of stress to an adolescent who may already becoping with language and cultural differences (72). Prevention programs Mainstream culture in the United States, to a great degree,emphasizes individuality, competitiveness, and monetary success.Conversely, for many Asian and Pacific Island Americans thequalities most stressed are the needs of the family, sharing andgenerosity, and a belief in who you are rather than what you own.Because the extended family is so important in many of thecultures, it is often the first group that an individual withproblems will turn to versus an "outsider" or socialservice agency. Substance abuse prevention practitioners need tobe aware of the strong resistance within many Asian and PacificIsland Americans to seek outside assistance. One innovative substance abuse program entitled Na Keiki OKa`Aina (Children of the Land) is being implemented in Oahu,Hawaii. Children attending the local Makaha elementary schoolwork several hours a week on a farm where they learn to care forthe land, their environment, and themselves as alternatives tolifestyles that rely on alcohol and other drugs. The program usesthe cultural values of native Hawaiians, which emphasize"warm, open friendship and love," love of the earth,and other spiritual values. Since the program's inception, classbehavior has noticeably improved, English scores have increased,and a survey measuring drug use in the district schools showedthat Makaha school was the only school that reported a decrease(74). Areas for Future Research Among Different Racial and EthnicGroups While this section of the report has reiterated the need toview racial and ethnic groups as heterogeneous, the majority ofsubstance abuse data is not collected or examined in this way. Todate, a variety of distinct cultures are usually grouped underone classification, and generalizations are made concerning thisgroup's drug use. While substance abuse prevention programs areoften better tailored to specific subpopulations and cultures, itis virtually impossible to adequately evaluate these programswhen little baseline substance abuse data exists for specificsubpopulations. There is therefore room for improvement in thecollection of prevalence data on alcohol and other drug use andabuse among distinct racial and ethnic groups. Furthermore, long-term prospective studies, which are essential for understandingrisk and protective factors specific to different groups, areextremely scarce. Biomedical research on different racial and ethnic groups hasalso been inconclusive and scanty (with the possible exception ofalcohol research and Asians). ECONOMICS Economics can be viewed as a factor in individual substanceabuse in two ways. In areas where substance abuse is already wellestablished and viable employment opportunities are scarce,selling illicit substances can seem very appealing. Severalquestions arise from this scenario. Are individuals lured intothe world of illegal drug sales by income potential? And, aredrug dealers more likely to become drug abusers because they aredealers? Both of these questions have been addressed under thefirst section. A parallel issue is that of poverty and the daily stressesencountered by individuals living in chronically poor areas. Doindividuals living in these poor areas abuse substances ingreater numbers or are fewer social services available in theseareas, and thus the consequences from substance abuse are moreacutely felt and visible? Generated Income While few studies have attempted to ascertain the individualincomes of drug dealers, two studies have concentrated on thestreet sale of illicit drugs by urban youth (21,52). The researchrevealed that individual dealers reported mean gross monthlyincomes of $3,558 to $5,934. Even if these self-reported earningswere exaggerated, this sum of money is clearly more than manyurban youth could hope to obtain in legitimate jobs at a medianof $7 per hour. This earning potential may be a serious obstacle toprevention, intervention, and treatment programs targeted towardurban adolescents. The staff at an innovative treatment programfor drug dealers in Baltimore, Maryland, has discovered thedifficulties former dealers have in giving up the fast lifestylesthey once led. Most dealers say they do it because of the money," saysa staff counselor. "They can't see working at McDonald's forminimum wage when they're making $500 to $1,000 per day," headds. Counselors try to help clients think beyond the idea ofmaking fast money to the moral, social and legal issuesassociated with drug dealing. They find, however, that the moralissue is not always clear-cut. In many cases, clients aresupporting their families and it is hard for them to see they aredoing something wrong when they are paying the bills. Overall, counselors say their clients are addicted to themoney. "What we do is help them see what is all around them,what they're doing to themselves and their community by sellingdrugs (48). The potential for monetary gain may be especially true withinthe crack trade. A young black male from San Francisco,California, explained his preference for the immediate rewards ofselling crack over the seemingly meaningless rituals of school: Forget about school. I'd rather have a life of selling drugs.?.?. When you go to school, you do nothing. You sit around, havebooks in your backpack, take`em home, do your homework, come backto school, get some grade. When you sell drugs, see, I hadsatisfaction of seeing my work, getting some money for it (22). It would appear then that for many urban youth, sellingillicit drugs supplies purpose, companionship, and income withoutcompromising dignity. More money can be gained from the sale ofillicit drugs than through petty crimes, and certainly more thanthrough minimum wage jobs. Another issue to be addressed is the dealer-turned-client.From the two previously cited studies, dealers were estimated tospend between 59 and 71 percent of their income each month on thepurchase of illicit drugs. For example, out of $3,558 gross permonth, $1,226 was spent purchasing additional drugs for business,$883 was spent on drugs for personal consumption, and anadditional $533 on expenses associated with drug dealing. The Urban Institute has also reviewed the relationshipbetween using and selling drugs. Its study population wascomposed of 387 inner-city adolescent males of ninth- and tenth-grade age. Of this sample, 79.6 percent reported that theyneither used nor sold drugs within the past year. Of theremainder, 19.0 percent reported both using and selling drugs,44.3 percent reported selling only, and 36.7 percent reportedusing only. They also discovered that the greater the level ofinvolvement in either using or selling, the higher the likelihoodof doing both (13). In summary, the research completed thus far neither confirmsnor negates the possible influence income potential has on luringindividuals into drug dealing. Nor can one conclude that drugdealers are more likely to become substance abusers thannondealers. Poverty Alcohol and drug problems are present not only among thepoor, but are poor individuals at greater risk for developingthese problems? While a relatively straight forward question, notonly is poverty difficult to define, but drawing conclusionsconcerning an individual's potential for future substance abusebased on one or two variables, such as family income oreducational level, is overly simplistic and deceptive. Toadequately review this question, a milieu of both individual andaggregate measures should be present in any analysis done. In recent years, great attention has been paid to the plightof the urban poor, many of whom are minorities. These inner- citycommunities are often riddled with high rates of crime, violence,unemployment, and inadequate social and medical services. Forindividuals living in these localities, the consequences of theseproblems are serious and far reaching. Yet according to the 1980census only 9 percent of all the poor, and 21 percent of all thepoor blacks, lived in these types of areas. To define the problems of the urban poor as predominantly"black problems" does a disservice to the two-thirds ofAfrican Americans who are not poor, as well as to the two- thirdsof the poor in our central cities who are not black (8). Poverty within rural communities, while lacking much of theviolence and crime of urban areas, is no less oppressive. In1987, compared with the general population, rural residents wereless likely to be employed and to have completed high school.They had lower average incomes and higher poverty rates than didurban residents, and one out of every six rural families lived inpoverty (compared with one in eight urban families). This ratioapproached one out of two for black rural families. Areas ofchronic poverty were concentrated in the South, where 25 millionof the Nation's 57 million rural residents live (48 percent), andwhere four out of every ten rural residents were poor, elderly,or both (61). To assess poverty and its relationship to alcohol and drugabuse problems, one must find appropriate measures. Someresearchers have utilized the Federal guidelines for poverty,while others employ measures of Socioeconomic Status (SES), suchas educational level and household income. To date, the largestand most comprehensive analysis of SES variables and substanceuse has been accomplished by NIDA (76). Both bivariate andmultivariate analyses were completed on data collected in 1988and 1990 from NHSDA (see box 6-C). The NIDA report has two major limitations. First, theanalysis focused on indicators of drug and alcohol use, ratherthan indicators of problem use or hard-core use. While the reporthas categories for frequent/heavy use and recent use, it cannotbe assumed that individuals who reported such use had alcohol ordrug problems. Secondly, the report lacks data for transient,homeless, or institutionalized individuals, many of whom haveserious alcohol and/or drug problems. Table 6-3 presents the findings from the multivariateanalysis of the NHSDA data. The SES variables pertinent to apossible link between poverty and substance use are educationallevel, occupation of chief wage earner, employment status, numberof jobs held in past 5 years, median housing value, and percentof housing that is owned. Neither personal income nor householdincome were included in the analysis, as personal income was mostmeaningful only for persons who worked and household income datawere not available in the 1988 survey. Alcohol consumption within the past month was measured onthree levels: abstinence; nonheavy use; and heavy use. Marijuanause was measured by any past-month use and cocaine use wasmeasured by any past-year use (both categories could includefrequent as well as casual users). Major findings from theanalysis include: o SES variables associated with poverty and predictive ofpast month abstinence from alcohol were: not having worked in thepast 5 years and having lived in a census block with a highpercentage of owner occupancy. For users, versus abstainers, SESattributes predictive of nonheavy alcohol use included havingattended college (regardless of completion) and living in censusareas with high housing values. Significant for heavy alcohol usewas not having completed high school, holding three or more jobsin the past 5 years, and living in a census area with low housingvalues. No employment status or occupational categories werefound to be independently predictive of heavy alcohol use. o For any past-month marijuana use the independent SESpredictors associated with poverty were being unemployed andhaving held three or more jobs in the past 5 years. Individualswho reported no marijuana use in the past month were more likelyto have had some degree of college participation. o Many of the SES predictors for cocaine use in the past yearwere similar to those identified for marijuana use: beingunemployed and having worked three or more jobs in the past 5years. SES characteristics predictive of no reported cocaine usein the past year were being a college graduate and having apart-time job. This type of analysis is an exercise in inclusion andexclusion. A myriad of individual and aggregate characteristicsare initially considered in the equation and, depending on theoutcome of interest, whether it be heavy alcohol use or marijuanause in the past month, different variables will show themselvesto be either predictive or not predictive of the outcome. Becausepersonal income and household income were not included in themultivariate analysis, but are often used as SES measures forpoverty, tables 6-4 and 6-5 depict the bivariate analysis done byNIDA (76). Again, this analysis reveals associations, notcausality. Personal income (which is highly correlated with anindividual's age and sex) was examined only for respondents whoreported working full time during the year prior to the survey.Associations between personal income and drug use weresignificant for most drugs. For every drug use measure (exceptpast-month use of alcohol), plus heavy use of alcohol, thepercentage of users declined as the income level rose.Differences between income levels for frequent use of marijuanaand cocaine, concurrent heavy use of alcohol with marijuana, anduse of psychotherapeutics, hallucinogens, inhalants, and crackwere all statistically significant and more than twice as commonin the lowest income group as in the highest. Low income was alsoassociated with higher rates of abstinence from alcohol as wellas higher rates of heavy drinking. The associations between household income (which is lessaffected by age and sex) and drug and alcohol use wereconsiderably weaker than those observed for personal income. Theonly statistically significant associations were for alcohol use,concurrent heavy alcohol use with marijuana, and use ofhallucinogens. Those with household incomes of $40,000 or higherwere about twice as likely as those with incomes of less than$12,000 to have used any amount of alcohol in the past month.However, the rates of heavy drinking differed little across theincome levels. Other categories of drug use appear to be slightlyless common among the wealthiest households, but, in general,drug use was not strongly related to household income. From these types of analyses, a straightforward "yes orno" response to the initial question, which linked povertyto increased individual risk for drug abuse, is clearlyimpossible. The NIDA analyses demonstrated that the type andquantity of an individual's substance use is correlated with avariety of both individual as well as geographic characteristics.Furthermore, while the NIDA report was the largest and mostcomprehensive to date, some segments of the population, many ofwhom were possible alcohol and drug abusers, were excluded fromthe survey. As one economist noted, "There is much we still need tolearn about poverty. Much of the past research has focusedprimarily on economic questions, reflecting the extensiveinvolvement by economists in this work. Research is much morelimited on topics such as the causes of changing familystructures, the impacts of neighborhoods and family structure onchildren's opportunities in life, personal and family copingstrategies among the poor, how expectations about futureopportunities are formed, and how these expectations influencebehavior" (8). PSYCHOSOCIAL/BEHAVIORAL Aggressiveness In much of the research literature the term aggression isused almost exclusively when referring to young children andadolescents between the ages of 13 and 15. Shortly after this agea divergence appears within this identified aggressive group. Thevast majority of children "outgrow" their aggressivebehavior, while a smaller percentage progress into or alsoexhibit, among other things, conduct disorders, antisocialbehavior, delinquency, and violence. Discussing each of theseareas is beyond the scope of this report. However, it should benoted that as is true for many individual risk factors, a numberof these behaviors are intricately meshed. Definitions for the term aggression vary considerably and mayinclude tardiness, breaking rules, fighting, vandalism, crueltyto animals, and verbal abuse of other children. Many studiessimply fail to define it. Wherever possible, study definitions ofaggression will be outlined. The children in the various studies on aggressiveness andsubsequent drug abuse ranged in age from 5 to 20 years old.Aggressive behavior in the majority of the studies was exhibitedalmost exclusively by boys. While girls were included in thestudy populations, the number exhibiting aggressive behavior wasvery small. However, the presence of aggressive behavior amongsome young girls has not been shown to be predictive of lateradolescent delinquency or substance use (49). This disparitybetween the sexes has not been addressed at any length. Of the preadolescent boys who exhibited aggressive behavior,30 to 40 percent maintained this behavior into adolescence. Thiscontinued aggression has been shown to be a strong predictor ofsubsequent alcohol and drug problems (28,33, 51). Interestingly,the combination of shy and aggressive behavior has also beencorrelated with later substance use problems. It has beenpostulated that aggressive boys may be more likely to be shunnedby conventional peer groups, but accepted by other aggressivechildren who could encourage drug and alcohol use. Anothertheory, while not confirmed, suggests that young childrenrejected by conventional peer groups gravitate toward each otherand that these groups of former so-called loners may fosterdelinquent behavior in later adolescence (28). Conversely, boys(but not girls) exhibiting shy behavior have been shown as lesslikely to partake in alcohol and drug using activities as theygrew older (28,33,51). Where does this aggressive behavior originate? Some studieshave shown that young children exhibiting sociable, spontaneous,and fearless behavior are at greater risk for future aggressiveand violent conduct. Factors that seem to be protective include ashy temperament, being first born, having a small and stablefamily characterized by low discord (i.e., effective familymanagement), and having parents who regularly attend religiousservices (51). Current psychological perspectives emphasize that aggressiveand violent behaviors are "learned" responses tofrustration, that they can also be learned as instruments forachieving goals, and that the learning occurs by observing modelsof such behavior. Such models may be observed in the family,among peers, elsewhere in the neighborhood, and through the massmedia (51). This observation could, in part, explain why so few younggirls are identified as aggressive. While socially defined rolesfor adults have changed considerably in the last several decades,the socialization of children's behavior to a large extent hasnot. Certain behaviors by boys are still classified by manyadults under the "boys-will-be-boys" axiom, while thesame behaviors by girls are oftenconsidered inappropriate. Biological and genetic precursors to aggressiveness have alsobeen explored. Events associated with brain dysfunction thatappear to increase an individual's potential for aggressioninclude: brain injuries; in vitro exposure to opiates, cocaine,alcohol, and tobacco; and early environmental exposure to lead(e.g., air contaminated by leaded fuels, lead-based paint, waterfrom older plumbing systems) (51). No genetic studies specific to aggressive behavior have beenconducted. Several Scandinavian countries have researched theassociation between genetics and violence, obtaining mixedresults. No such studies have been attempted in the United States(51). By understanding the antecedents of aggressive behavior,prevention programs targeted at reducing such behavior are muchmore likely to succeed. It has been asserted thatmultidimensional programs are more effective than those thatfocus on one or two components of aggressiveness. ResearcherKaren Dodge submits: Most intervention approaches are implemented without regardfor the type of aggressive behavior under scrutiny, and thatdifferent types of aggression are likely to respond differentlyto different types of intervention. Reactive aggressive childrenwho overly attribute hostility to others in provocativesituations may respond best to treatment aimed at training themto understand better others' thoughts and feelings. Proactivelyaggressive children may respond more favorably to consistentpunishment of aggressive behavior and reinforcement ofnonaggressive responses; this latter group many also have abetter prognosis than the former group. Three interventionprograms cited as being particularly suitable for differentialimplementation with these two types of aggressive childreninclude social problem-solving skills training, anger-controltraining, and parent training (17). Several unanswered questions point to areas for futureresearch. Why do boys disproportionately exhibit aggressivebehavior? Are specific aggressive behaviors unique to certainsubpopulations? What are the differences between thoseindividuals who "grow out of" their aggressive behaviorand those who do not? Answers to these questions and others will allow for moredetailed understanding of aggressive behavior and its connectionto alcohol and drug abuse, which could in turn provide for animproved structure for the planning of appropriate preventionprograms. Delinquency and Crime Similar to aggression research, studies define and collectdata on delinquency and crime differently. Some studies use thetwo terms interchangeably, while others define delinquent acts asthose less serious versus acts such as rape, armed robbery, andmanslaughter, which are clearly illegal. Self-reported data arerelied on by some studies, while others utilize only arrestrecords. These differences must be considered when attempting togeneralize delinquent behavior to subsequent misuse of alcoholand drugs. As is true for aggressiveness, males are at greater risk fordeveloping delinquent and criminal behavior. Delinquent behaviorfor most youths appears to peak between the ages of 15 to 17,while alcohol and drug use are on the rise. However, only a smallpercentage (2 to 6 percent) of these adolescents become youngadults who continue to engage in serious criminal activitycoupled with frequent drug use. Statistics reveal that manyarrests for property and violent crimes can be attributed to thissmall group of individuals (29). Several researchers have linked delinquent and criminalbehavior to alcohol and drug abuse and have concluded theseactivities precede the use and abuse of certain substances(28,29,13,56). One such study conducted on adolescents examined therelationship between later drug use and earlier individualdelinquent behavior and delinquent peer group bonding (DPGB).Females were found less likely to engage in individual delinquentbehavior before but not after participating in a delinquent peergroup. Additionally, minority students doing well in school hadlower rates of delinquent problems than did nonminority youth whowere also doing well in school. Strong positive belief systems(beliefs that committing illegal or rule-violating acts aremorally wrong) also decreased the potential for future use ofalcohol, marijuana, and other drugs. Conversely, thoseadolescents who had high DPGB levels had increased rates ofalcohol, marijuana, and polydrug use (20). A separate study of male and female cocaine addicts analyzedthe psychosocial factors present among individuals whosubstantially increased their cocaine use from adolescence toyoung adulthood. Those who progressed to heavier use displayed asignificant lack of law abidance or social conformity (46). Several points have come to light from studies on heroinaddicts. Studies conducted in the late 1970s found that whiledelinquency preceded illicit drug use, use of alcohol and firstalcohol intoxication took place before delinquency. In fact, anaverage of two years lapsed between first alcohol intoxicationand first criminal activity for both males and females who laterbecame heroin addicts (64). A further study on male heroinaddicts that grouped participants into low-crime versushigh-crime categories found that men who had been placed in thehigh-crime group admitted significantly more contact with thecriminal justice system before becoming addicted than did thosein the low-crime group. Also, the high-crime group showed earlierand more frequent use of substances, as well as use of a widervariety of narcotic and nonnarcotic substances (47). While a relatively small number of individuals who exhibitdelinquent behavior progress to serious alcohol and drugproblems, understanding the cause(s) of the delinquent behaviormay help to decrease this number further. Psychosocial elementsthat have been associated with later delinquent behavior include: o low parent-child attachment o family conflict o family social deprivation o school failure o parental and sibling drug use and criminal behavior o poor and inconsistent family management practices (e.g.,harsh or lax discipline, lack of supervision) o attitudes and beliefs o lack of neighborhood attachment and communitydisorganization o family mobility. Neurophysiological and cognitive dimensions have also beenexamined for serious delinquents, adult criminals, and childrenwith conduct disorders. However, the findings were scanty andinconclusive (29,37). When discussing prevention programs for these children, thereis the hazard of labeling them predelinquent. This concern couldbe applied equally to most risk factors linked to future alcoholand drug problems. Labeling children as aggressive, high risk,delinquent, or developmentally slow may be a self-fulfillingprophecy. Some researchers have suggested that broad,encompassing programs should be implemented in targeted areaswhere groups exhibit a number of the risk factors previouslydescribed. This type of approach would not single out individualsbut rather would assist communities, schools, and families (29). Physical and Sexual Abuse Researchers and clinicians have increasingly addressed thepossibility that physical and sexual abuse, especially inchildhood, may be associated with an increased likelihood oflater substance abuse and addiction. Although there are many gapsin this literature, and substantive and methodological issuesthat remain to be addressed, findings from several studies thathave measured the prevalence of substance abuse strongly suggestthat additional research and the evaluation of targeted clinicalinterventions are warranted. This section highlights selectedresearch findings on the relationship of physical and sexualabuse to later substance abuse. One review article on physical abuse found that childrensubjected to physical abuse had higher levels of later substanceabuse compared to children not physically victimized. The reviewalso cited another study which found that 84 percent of thefemales in treatment for alcohol or drug addiction reported ahistory of childhood abuse (18). Childhood sexual abuse appears to be rising. The NationalIncidence Study reported in 1988 that approximately 156,000children had been recognized by public agencies (such as childprotective service agencies, mental health agencies, and theschools) as being sexually abused each year, for an annual rateof about 0.3 percent (58). This is an increase in recognizedcases of child sexual abuse of more than 300 percent between 1980and 1988, and due to the sensitive nature of the topic, isprobably a gross underestimation of the actual numbers of cases. Prevalence statistics on childhood sexual assault specific towomen range from 6 to 62 percent, depending on the definitions,methodology, and study populations used (54). One study thatrelied on a random sampling method discovered that of the 391women who agreed to participate in the study, almost 34 percentreported being sexually assaulted by age 18, which provides alifetime prevalence rate of one out of every three women. Of therespondents, over 24 percent reported an experience such as rape,15 percent had been victims of molestation, and 10 percentreported some type of noncontact sexual assault (e.g., voyeurism,verbal threats of sexual assault, being forced to watchpornography) (54). Other researchers, measuring childhoodmolestation histories among women psychiatric outpatients, havecited figures of 50 to 70 percent, versus 20 to 30 percentreported by women in nonclinical populations (12). While causality has not been established between childhoodsexual abuse and later substance abuse problems, an associationbetween the two variables has been shown. Several review articleshave summarized the findings from researchers who consistentlyreport that children exposed to sexual abuse present with agreater number of symptoms and problems compared to children whoare not victimized (12,34,55). While substance abuse problems arenot measured in all the studies, where it is measured,individuals who have been sexually abused show a much higherincidence of later substance abuse than their study counterparts(55). For example, 60 to 80 percent of individuals in substanceabuse treatment programs report having been sexual abused (12).Other researchers have classified common symptoms by age group,discovering that among adolescents who had been sexually abusedat some time in their lives, 53 percent reported abusing somesubstance (34). Studies on sexually abused women have demonstrated similarlyhigh rates. One study of women requesting appointments at acrisis counseling unit of a community health center found that 44percent of the women walk-in clients reported a history of sexualabuse as children. The sexually abused women differed from thenonabused women in many ways, but they differed most in theirsubstance abuse. The abused women were about 10 times more likelythan the nonabused women in this population to report a historyof drug abuse (21.1 percent vs. 2.3 percent) and more than twiceas likely to report a history of alcoholism (26.9 percent vs.10.5 percent) (11). A review of four separate studies on women seeking treatmentfor alcoholism shows 34 to 85 percent of the women report ahistory of sexual abuse (30); and among recovering chemicallydependent women, the topics discussed most often are sexual childabuse, incest, and rape. Uncovering the memories of these earlychildhood experiences is thought to be a contributing factor indrug relapse for some women (31). Thus, early experiences ofabuse, especially sexual abuse, may require attention intreatment programs, since they may have been important precursorsand contributors to the substance abuse and addiction, and may bemajor obstacles to successful treatment and the prevention ofrelapse. Clearly, physical and sexual abuse are not uncommonphenomena. While this section has focused on the associationbetween abusive experiences and subsequent substance abuse, thereare many other psychopathologies that also arise from sexual andphysical abuse. The research question need not be whetherphysical and sexual abuse "cause" the later substanceabuse and addiction. Clearly, many factors interact, especiallyin the home, school, and peer settings of children as they growup. However, the consistent finding of higher levels of physicaland sexual abuse among substance abusers warrants furtherresearch to disentangle the many factors that are at work. Unlikerace, ethnicity, and poverty (which are not by themselvesstrongly and independently associated with substance abuse andaddiction, but must be understood in the context of subculturesand the availability and marketing of drugs in neighborhoods andcommunities), physical and sexual abuse may more directlycontribute to later behavioral problems, including substanceabuse. Mental Disorders The sheer number of Americans with mental disorderstransforms personal tragedy into a widespread public healthproblem. Nearly one in three American adults will experience amental disorder during his or her lifetime. Moreover,approximately 1.7 to 2.4 million Americans currently suffer froma persistent and severely disabling mental disorder, such asschizophrenia or bipolar disorder (commonly known as manicdepression) (62). There exists a wide array of behaviors classified assymptomatic of mental disorders, ranging from premenstrualsyndrome, hostility toward others, and other maladaptivepersonality traits, to full-blown psychosis (2). It can at timesbe difficult to delineate where mental health ends and mentalillness begins. While many alcohol and drug problems may not be attributableprimarily to mental disorders, they can certainly be exacerbatedby these disorders. One comprehensive study found a highprevalence of comorbid (i.e., occurring at the same time) mentaldisorders and alcohol or other drug disorders--including bothabuse and dependence syndromes as defined in the DSM-III-R. Usingdata from NIMH's Epidemiologic Catchment Area (ECA) survey of20,291 adults (aged 18 and older) in communities and in variousinstitutional settings (prisons, mental hospitals, nursing homes,and specialized treatment centers), they assessed the prevalenceof comorbid alcohol, other drug, and mental disorders.Schizophrenia, mood disorders, and anxiety disorders were amongthose studied. Specific drugs studied, in addition to alcohol,included marijuana, cocaine, opiates, barbiturates, amphetamines,and hallucinogens (50). Alcohol Disorder as the Primary Diagnosis An estimated 13.5 percent of all adults in the United Stateswill have a lifetime diagnosis of alcohol abuse or dependence(see figure 6-3). For these individuals, the rate of mentaldisorder was almost double that of persons with no history of analcohol disorder, and the rate of another drug disorder wasalmost six times greater. Specific comorbid mental disordersfound in people with alcohol abuse- dependence disorder includeanxiety disorders (19.4 percent), mood disorders (13.4 percent),and schizophrenia (3.8 percent). Drug Disorder (Other than Alcohol) as the Primary Diagnosis Some 6.1 percent of the total adult population will have hada primary diagnosis of drug abuse or dependency at some time intheir lives. Over half of these individuals have also beendiagnosed with a comorbid mental disorder such as anxietydisorder (28.3 percent), mood disorder (26.4 percent), orschizophrenia (6.8 percent). Compared to those persons without adrug disorder, these individuals are at more than four times therisk of having some type of mental disorder. Additionally, theseindividuals are also seven times more likely to be addicted toalcohol. Mental Disorder as the Primary Diagnosis In contrast, at some time in their lives nearly one-quarterof all adults in the United States will have had a primarydiagnosis of mental disorder. Compared with individuals having nohistory of mental disorder, people with a mental disorder facetwice the odds of having alcohol abuse- dependence and over fourtimes the odds of drug abuse dependence. Comorbid alcohol and other drug abuse or dependence disordersoccur frequently in people with the specific subtypes of mentaldisorders included in the study: o Of those who develop schizophrenia and related disordersduring their lifetimes (approximately 1.5 percent of the U.S.population), nearly half will abuse or be dependent on alcohol orother drugs, or both. o Thirty-two percent of people with mood disorders (8.3percent of the total adult population) will abuse or becomedependent on alcohol, other drugs, or both. o The anxiety disorders, as a group, occur at sometime in thelives of 14.6 percent of the population and are highly likely tobe associated with an alcohol or other drug abuse or dependencedisorder. For example, 35.8 percent of people with panicdisorder, and 32.8 percent of people with obsessive-compulsivedisorder will have some form of alcohol or other drug abuse ordependence disorder. People with both mental disorders and alcohol or other drugdisorders are likely to suffer more severe psychiatric symptoms,disruptive behaviors, aggression, and criminal behaviors. Theimportance of early detection for mental disorders is clear ifsubsequent alcohol and drug abuse problems are to be avoided. Inother cases, an individual's drug and/or alcohol problems mayprecede his or her mental disorder. In whatever order thesecomplications are distinguished, it is essential to remember thatmillions of men and women suffer through not one, but twoillnesses (62). Resiliency The majority of funding and research has been devoted tounderstanding and identifying those elements that appear to placeindividuals at a greater risk for substance abuse. However, manyof these same factors can, to some degree, be protective. Forexample, the vast majority of adolescents who have used alcohol,cigarettes, and other drugs do not grow up to become substanceabusing adults. The process of aging and successfully passingthrough various developmental stages is in itself protective. Inother cases, the lack of a particular factor is protective. Thisis true for many of the psychosocial factors such asaggressivity, delinquency, mental disorders, and physical andsexual abuse. But what about those individuals who live in stressful andchaotic conditions--who are constantly exposed to many of theserisk factors--yet who do not develop substance abuse problems.How do these individuals emerge relatively unscathed, while manyof their immediate family succumb to substance abuse? Thissection addresses a complimentary set of protective attributes,characteristics identified inindividuals who display resiliencyto the effects of various risk factors. The term resiliency can be described as the ability torecover from or adjust easily to misfortune or change. A 1991conference sponsored by the Children of Alcoholics Foundationreleased a report in which resiliency was conceptualized in thefollowing manner (15): o Resiliency is a dynamic process, not a static condition. o Resiliency is contextual; adaptive behavior in one contextmay be maladaptive in another. o Resiliency is the result of inherent personalitycharacteristics interacting with environmental factors. o Resiliency is more complex in multiple-risk situations. o Resiliency can be learned. For the most part, social science research on resiliency inchildren has not specifically addressed environmental substanceabuse, and where it has, the research has focused to a largeextent on alcoholism within the family. However, in general,resiliency studies have examined high-risk children from avariety of families and communities, of which many had substanceabuse problems. One of the largest longitudinal studies spanned a period of30 years and was completed by Emmy Werner on the Hawaiian islandof Kauai (80,81). An entire multiracial cohort of children wasfollowed from the prenatal period to young adulthood, revealinginvaluable information on resiliency in the presence of certainrisk factors. Of the 700 children originally included in thestudy, 200 were identified as at- risk for later problems basedon perinatal stress, poverty, family instability, and parentswith mental health problems. Through the children's first decadeof life, approximately 25 percent had at least one parent with aserious alcohol problem. Of these children, 41 percent laterdeveloped serious learning and behavioral problems by age 18,while the rest did not. All the children of alcoholic mothersdeveloped problems, with the exception of one. Conversely,children of alcoholic fathers "were represented in roughlyequal proportions among those who did and those who did notdevelop serious coping problems by age 18" (80). More general findings from the study highlighted thedifference between the prevalence of serious physical, learning,and behavior problems among girls and boys. Up to age 10, whenconfronted with a variety of risk factors, boys weresignificantly more likely to display a greater number ofchildhood problems requiring some type of social service and/ormedical intervention. However, this ratio changed markedly by thesecond decade (ages 10 to 18). While high- risk boys were stillthree times more likely than girls to have records of seriousdelinquency (77 vs. 26 percent), by age 18 more than twice asmany high-risk girls reported serious mental health problems.Additionally, of those children in the first decade identifiedwith serious learning and/or behavioral problems, a greaternumber of boys than girls had improved by age 18. Interestingly, the researchers also showed that some of theresilience factors identified differed between the sexes. Forexample among young girls, experiences that tended to fostergreater maturity and independence, such as absence of a father,responsibility for younger siblings, and maternal employmentoutside the home, also appeared to bolster resiliency andcompetence. On the other hand, resiliency among young boys wascorrelated with the presence of the father, little family discordor crowding, and the existence of adequate structure andsupervision. However, overall, a greater number of high-riskgirls than high-risk boys grew into resilient young adults. Several other studies have also identified factors associatedwith resiliency in children (6,19,23). One such factor isdescribed as adaptive distancing whereby the child accomplishestwo things: the child emotionally and psychologically detachesfrom the chaos of the family and resumes more "customarypursuits" in the outside world of school and friends, andthe child does not allow the caregiver's drug or alcohol problemto be the central focus of his or her world. These behaviors havebeen observed in children as young as 3 years old. A sense of purpose and future have also been identified withresiliency. Clinicians have observed very young childrenattempting to make sense of their situation upon experiencing anarray of hardships such as chronic poverty or familial substanceabuse. Resilient children display such attributes as hopefulness,hardiness, motivation, and a belief in a bright future even whenfaced with challenges and adversity. Researchers have also found that the ability to developcompetency skills was associated with resiliency. Competenceincludes "the qualities of responsiveness, flexibility,empathy and caring, communication skills, a sense of humor, andany other prosocial behavior" (6). Researchers haveconsistently documented the presence of these characteristicsamong resilient individuals, and equally important, have notedthe lack of these characteristics among individuals with severebehavioral, criminal, and mental health problems. Another element that has been associated with resiliency isthe ability to use support systems effectively. Those childrenwho tapped into school activities, spoke with counselors,actively sought an alternative parent figure or role model, andconfided in others were much more likely to be resilient thanthose children not involved in these supportive networks. Much of a person's resiliency depends on a variety ofelements including the individual's developmental stage, culturalperceptions, and "the acuteness or chronicity of the adversecircumstances" (19). Nonetheless, many men and women whohave gone on to lead productive and fulfilling lives, often didso in spite of their circumstances. By understanding how this wasachieved, prevention programs can incorporate activities tobolster the protective factors in the lives of all children. Spirituality/Religiosity The terms religiosity and spirituality are neither mutuallyexclusive nor inclusive. Both terms encompass an enormous arrayof fellowships and individual values, including institutionalizedreligion, new age religion or quasi- religious groups,traditional beliefs, and nonreligious persons. Within the drug and alcohol abuse research field, studieshave focused almost exclusively on the relationship betweeninstitutionalized Christian religions (with the exception of ahandful of studies on Judaism) and its effect on substance useamong adolescents and young adults. Virtually no data areavailable on other methods of worship, or discussion of theeffect spiritualism/religiosity may have on the progression fromadolescent alcohol and drug use to problem use and addiction. A succinct and thorough review of recent literature onreligion and substance use was completed by social psychologistPeter Benson (7). With rare exceptions, religiousness, in varyingdegrees, has been associated with decreased levels of substanceuse. The substances studied included alcohol, cigarettes, andnumerous illicit drugs. This protective factor held true for menand women across the four U.S. census regions, and to some extentamong blacks and Hispanics (although only a few studies analyzedrace and ethnicity). The most widely used measures of religiositywere church attendance, church affiliation versus nonaffiliation,and religious importance; yet it also appeared that such indirectassociations as parents' religiousness and belief in life afterdeath were correlated with decreased substance use. Multivariateanalysis was employed to examine the relative importance ofreligiousness by controlling for other demographic and socialvariables. In most instances the protective effect ofreligiousness was relatively small, but it did appear to be morepredictive than several personal factors (e.g., self-esteem,purpose in life, locus of control) and less predictive whencompared to social variables such as parental standards, peerpressure, and social tolerance. Benson puts forth severalexplanations for this apparent protective element, most of whichcenter around the idea that organized religion fosters andmaintains a certain set of morals and values. Depending on thereligion, deviating from these norms can be somewhat toleratedor, at the other extreme, considered a profound sin. For countless individuals, spirituality, while a morenebulous concept than religion, is intricately tied to emotional,psychological, and physical well-being. A practitioner of Zen(Buddhist) meditation and various New Age spiritualities stated: I think of health at every level: a healthy mind, a healthyspirit, as well as a healthy body. So that a person would have tohave energy, alertness, enthusiasm, a love of life, a love ofpeople, a love of themselves (43). Many traditional cultures think of illness and disease asindicators of personal spiritual discord. For example, theAmerican Indian Navajos strive for a state of personal wholeness,beauty, and well-being. The Blessingway rite, composed of sacredsongs and prayers, is often used to restore an individual'sharmony with those around him or her, the environment, and, in alarger sense, the universe. By ignoring different racial and ethnic religious andspiritual beliefs, their importance is minimized and/ortrivialized (perhaps inadvertently) by more dominant religions.From a drug and alcohol prevention point of view, it would seemboth cost-effective and relatively simple to encourage andcelebrate religious and spiritual differences among individualsand communities; and acknowledge the protective benefits thesefactors provide for many people. SUMMARY No single or generic set of variables explains the harmfuluse of alcohol and drugs for every individual. While this chapterreviewed a number of selected individual and protective factors,this information should be viewed in a broader context. To gain acomplete understanding of the complexity of the substance abuseissue, the information presented before and after this chaptermust be incorporated in any argument concerning factors that insome way effect an individuals potential for substance use andabuse. By reviewing the individual risk factors under the threebroad headings of Demographics, Economics, andPsychosocial/Behavioral, certain gaps in the literature appeared.Within the demographics section, the vast majority of theresearch to date has focused on identifying psychological as wellas social characteristics that place preadolescent and adolescentchildren at greater risk for the initiation and continuation ofdrug use. While the benefits of this type of research areobvious, the majority of data point to the fact that alcohol,tobacco, and illicit drug use are highest among those aged 18 to25 and 26 to 34. However, few research studies have been devotedto these age groups. Also, under the demographic section therewas a general paucity of data on risk factors that may be uniqueto racial and ethnic minority populations and to some extentwomen (although this continues to change). Within the economics section, while there may be quotes inthe general media of tremendous financial earnings by drugdealers, research substantiating these figures is scanty. Thereis also little known about whether those individuals dealingdrugs are at an increased risk for becoming drug abusers. Many of the psychosocial/behavioral factors reviewed in thechapter have been extensively studied, and their associations toalcohol and drug use documented. However, one of the sectionsthat has fairly recently been scientifically studied is that ofphysical and/or sexual abuse. Those studies that have beenrigorously conducted are beginning to yield data that positivelylinks childhood abuse to later alcohol and drug problems. Futureresearch in this area is probably warranted. Also included in thesection were select studies on resiliency and/or protectivefactors. While research has been conducted in this area for quitesome time, much of the literature is not specific to alcohol anddrug use situations, but rather, encompasses a wide array ofvariables that place individuals at a greater risk forbehavioral, developmental, and learning problems. BOX 6-1: Racial and Ethnic Differences in Adolescent Drug UseAmong High School Seniors Research on adolescent substance usehas documentedsubstantial racial and ethnic differences in useamong highschool seniors. On average, alcohol, cigarette, andotherillicit drug use is highest among American Indianyouth,somewhat lower among white and Hispanic youth,substantiallylower among black youth, and lowest among Asianyouth.Additional research explored the hypothesis thatthesedissimilarities could be partially attributed todifferencesin background (e.g., urban versus rural, familystructure,parental education) and lifestyle factors (e.g.,grades,truancy, evenings out, religious commitment).The findingsindicated that controlling for backgroundfactors alone did notaccount for most racial and ethnicdifferences in drug use, but itdid reduce American Indians'relatively high levels of use, whichsuggests that their usemay in part be related to disadvantagedsocioeconomicstatus. When both background and lifestyle factorswereincluded in the analysis, the racial and ethnicdifferenceswere substantially reduced. Educational valuesandbehaviors, religious commitment, and amount of time spentinpeer-oriented activities were particularly importantexplanatoryvariables.Racial and ethnic differences were also found in astudy ondrug-related attitudes and perceptions. Perceived riskofusing drugs, disapproval of drug use, and perceptionsofdisapproval of drug use by friends were typically highestamongblack seniors, at intermediate levels among Hispanicseniors, andlowest among white and American Indian seniors.Conversely,perceived peer use of drugs and exposure topersons using variousdrugs for "kicks" were generallylowest among black andAsian seniors, at intermediate levelsamong Hispanic seniors, andhighest among white and AmericanIndian seniors.While thesefindings are not applicable for thoseadolescents who drop out ofschool, researchers areconfident that the results are valid forthe majority ofadolescents who remain enrolled through the senioryear ofhigh school.SOURCE: U.S. Department of Health and HumanServices, PublicHealth Service, National Institutes of Health,Smoking,Drinking, and Illicit Drug Use Among AmericanSecondarySchool Students, College Students, and Young Adults,1975-1991, NIH Pub. No. 93-3480 (Rockville, MD: 1992). BOX 6-2: Racial, Ethnic, and Socioeconomic Discrepancies inMandatory Alcohol and Drug Use Reporting Practices for PregnantWomen In one county of Florida, anonymous alcohol and drugtestswere conducted on urine samples obtained from allpregnantwomen seeking prenatal care from both public healthclinicsas well as private obstetrical offices. White andblackwomen were discovered to have insignificantlydifferentprevalence rates for alcohol or illicit drug useduringpregnancy. While black women used cocaine morefrequentlythan white women (7.5 percent versus 1.8 percent),whitewomen had higher rates of marijuana usage (14.4percentversus 6 percent). The relative similarities betweenalcoholand drug use also held true for poor versusmiddle-classwomen. However, the study also documented thatafterdelivery, black women were 10 times more likely to havebeenreported to the health authorities for substance useduringpregnancy than were white women. Poor women also hadagreater chance of being reported than middle-class women.Thisstudy reflects a discrepancy in reporting practicesamong staff atsome public clinics and private obstetricaloffices, which appearsto be influenced by an individual'ssocial status as well asrace.SOURCE: I.J. Chasnoff, H.J. Landress, and M.E. Barrett,"ThePrevalence of Illicit-Drug or Alcohol Use DuringPregnancyand Discrepancies in Mandatory Reporting in PinellasCounty,Florida," The New England Journal of Medicine322(17): 1202-1206, 1990. BOX 6-3: Bivariate Versus MultivariateAnalysis Bivariate analysis is the process of taking onevariablesuch as employment status and testing its correlationandstatistical significance to reported alcohol or drug use.Amajor drawback to this type of analysis is itsrelativesimplicity; it does not control for the potential effectsofother variables. For example, if a relationship betweenbeingunemployed and heavy alcohol use was shown to bestatisticallysignificant, one could not be certain of thenature of therelationship. Perhaps the individual wasunemployed due to his orher heavy drinking. Alternatively,a person's unemployment couldhave caused his or her heavydrinking. Furthermore, if moresophisticated analyses usingadditional variables were completed,the originalassociation between being unemployed and heavydrinkingcould disappear altogether.Multivariate analysis, whilehaving its own limitations, isa much more comprehensive way inwhich to study therelationships between several variables andalcohol and drugconsumption. The multivariate analysis used bythe NationalInstitute on Drug Abuse systematically incorporatedavariety of individual variables such as educationallevel,employment status, race and ethnicity, and sex, inadditionto certain aggregate variables including region(South,Northeast, North Central, West), metropolitan status,andracial and ethnic composition of census blocks. Each oneofthese variables was then separately analyzed for itspotentialpredictive value for alcohol and drug use, whilethe othercontributing variables were also taken intoaccount. Whilemultivariate analyses fall short ofdemonstrating causality,because additional variables areused to control for plausiblealternative explanations, moreconfidence can be placed in thesignificant correlationsfound.SOURCE: Office of TechnologyAssessment, 1994. BOX 6-4: A Population at Risk--Migrant and SeasonalFarmworkers Migrant and seasonal farmworkers (M/SFWs) areindividuals"whose principal employment is in agriculture ona seasonalbasis [and who have] been so employed within the last24months" (Public Law 100-386). Migratory workers arethose"who establish ... for the purposes of such employmentatemporary abode," while seasonal workers are those whomeetthe seasonal definition but are not migrant workers(PublicLaw 100-386). While seasonal is not explicitly definedinthe public law, the Department of Agriculture defines aseasonalfarmworker as one who performs 25 to 149 days offarm wage work inone year, and does not migrate.Due to the transitory nature ofthe job and the employees,obtaining a precise estimate on thenumber of farmworkers isdifficult. State data suggest thatupwards of 4 millionfarmworkers are in the United States andPuerto Rico, and ifratios from the late 1970s hold true,approximately 30percent (or 1.2 million) of these aremigrants.The racial and ethnic background of the farmworkersvarieswith the so-called "stream." The East Coaststream isprobably the most diverse with American blacks,Haitians,Jamaicans, Dominicans, Mexicans, Puerto Ricans,anincreasing number of Central American Indians, and asmallpercentage of whites. In the Midwest and West, thegreatmajority of migrant farmworkers are of Mexicandescent,although increasingly, Asian immigrants are making theirwayinto the stream. American Indians make up asubstantialproportion of the farmworker population in the WestandSouthwest.Farmworkers are most often hired through amiddle-person or"crewleader" who is usually in chargeof negotiating lengthof employment, transportation, wages,housing, and meals. Itis not uncommon for migrant farmworkers tomove anywherefrom two to eleven times in a year. Besides thephysicallytaxing nature of the work, numerous environmentalstressors(some unique to this population) increase the likelihoodforalcohol and drug abuse. Some of these stressorsincludephysically and socially isolated camp locations;unsanitary,overcrowded, and unsafe camp conditions; towns whichoftendo not welcome the presence of farmworkers; long periodsofseparation from family members; feelings of boredom,isolation,and powerlessness; and language and culturaldifferences.The job'shigh mobility requirements hamper the collectionof health data onthis population. Anecdotal informationfrom health care providerslocated at Migrant/CommunityHealth Centers (M/CHCs) and localhealth departments citealcohol and drug abuse problems as some ofthe mostsignificant health issues faced by M/SFWs, followedbyanxiety and depression (McCaw 1991). However, fewquantitativeor qualitative studies have documentedsubstance abuse within thispopulation. One study of blackand Haitian farmworkers in upstateNew York found that themajority of the heavy drinking on themigrant camps was doneby older, single, black males, and that thedrinkingpatterns of the study participants who traveled withtheirfamilies differed little from individuals in thegeneralpopulation. To a large extent, this was attributed tothesocial controls family members exerted on one another(Matteraet al. 1983). This is an important point, as thegreatermechanization of farmwork has reduced the need formanual labor,and many of the farmworkers who previouslytraveled with theirfamilies can no longer afford to do so.Anecdotal evidencesuggests that the composition of themigrant workforce has beenshifting toward one of singlemales, rather than families. Withthis shift, a generaldecrease in social control among the migrantcamps is likelyto occur, and a greater number of alcohol and drugproblemsmay begin to appear.Providing substance abuse preventionprograms to M/SFWs is achallenge. Few M/CHCs have the financialor personnelcapabilities to implement substance abusepreventionprograms. Many farmworkers simply do not stay inonelocation long enough. Language and cultural differencesarevast, not to mention the geographical distancessometimesrequired to reach the camps, which often are located 20to30 miles away from the nearest social service and/or eachother.Two organizations (BOCES Geneseo Migrant Center inNew York, NY,and Tri-County Community Health Center inNewton Grove, NC) havesuccessfully implemented similartypes of programs based on thepremise of providing weekendactivities as an alternative todrinking and drug use. Full-day programs are normally held awayfrom the camps, andinclude educational, creative, athletic, andculturalactivities. The activities are free and transportationisoften provided. However, farmworkers can attend only iftheyhave not been drinking or using drugs.Clearly, greaterresearch is necessary to adequatelydocument the prevalence ofalcohol and drug use within themigrant streams, as well as thechanging composition of thestreams, and how this may affectsubstance use. Little isknown about the differences in substanceuse between thevarying racial and ethnic groups within thestreams, and howthe growing number of immigrants from war-torncountrieswill affect the health problems seen within thestreams.SOURCES: U.S. Congress, Office of TechnologyAssessment,Health Care in Rural America, OTA-H-434 (Washington,DC:U.S. Government Printing Office, September 1990). K.McCaw,"Migrant Workers," Clinical Manual of SubstanceAbuse, J.Kinney (ed.)(St. Louis, MO: Mosby-Year Book, Inc.,1991). G.Mattera, J. Watson, S. Kunitz, et al., "Alcohol UseAmongMigrant Laborers," unpublished report for the New YorkStateHealth Research Council, Albany, NY, 1983. _ CliffSchaffer's Home Page WT01-B29-14IA030-000641-B024-98http://206.61.184.43:80/schaffer/LIBRARY/studies/ota/ch7.htm 206.61.184.43 19970122140328 text/html 47174HTTP/1.0 200 OKDate: Wednesday, 22-Jan-97 14:03:16 GMTServer: WebSitePro/1.1f (S/N wpo-0deb)Allow-ranges: bytesContent-type: text/htmlLast-modified: Saturday, 28-Dec-96 06:49:59 GMTContent-length: 46956 CHAPTER 7 ETHNOGRAPHIC DRUG STUDIES TECHNOLOGIES FOR UNDERSTANDING AND PREVENTING SUBSTANCEABUSE AND ADDICTION US Government Office of Technology Assessment October 18, 1994 CHAPTER 7 ETHNOGRAPHIC DRUG STUDIES Ethnographic techniques allow researchers to study howenvironmental and cultural factors affect values, attitudes, andbehaviors of individuals and groups. Historically, ethnographyhas roots in both anthropology and sociology (see box 7-1). ETHNOGRAPHIC STUDIES OF ALCOHOL AND OTHER DRUG USE Since the 1960s the number of drug ethnographies has grownsteadily. Many of the nation's social issues were in one way oranother associated with drug use: poverty, urban unrest amongminorities, counter culture, failure of social programs, AIDStransmission, and urban violence. Research conducted byanthropologists and qualitative sociologists was an importantpart of understanding new drug-related social problems andtrends. By the mid-1970s, "street ethnography" orsimply "ethnography" were the terms commonly used todescribe the drug research they were conducting in the UnitedStates (60). Alcohol Nineteenth century and early twentieth centuryanthropologists conducted comprehensive community studies innonindustrial societies in which they recorded ritual and socialuses of alcohol. This extensive but generally unfocuseddocumentation provided data for later cross- cultural analysesrelating alcohol use patterns to other cultural variables. The contribution of ethnographic studies conducted outsidethe United States was to provide data on the social conditioningof alcohol's effects. The findings from one such study conductedin Bolivia during 1958, alerted the alcohol research communityto the existence of culturally accepted alcohol use patternsquite different from those customarily encountered in the UnitedStates. For example, "virtually all of the Camba (of easternBolivia) drink to the point of passing out, at least twice amonth." Although the beverage they drink is stronger inalcoholic concentration than that customarily drunk by otherpopulations, there appeared to be no major health or socialproblems associated with their drinking (35). These data along with findings from research on four othersocieties (the Aritama of Colombia, the Ifaluk of Micronesia, theTakashima of Japan, and the town of Juxtlahuaca in Oaxaca,Mexico), support the view that the experiential effect of alcoholis socially conditioned (37). Each of these societies possesseddistinct messages regarding the use of alcohol, which were clearand consistent. In contrast, individuals in modern societies areinfluenced by overlapping, and sometimes contradictory, socialmessages based on religious, ethnic, occupational, generational,regional, and class differences. Drinking habits and behaviorswithin the United States vary enormously. Since the 1970s, ethnographic research on alcohol use in theUnited States has concentrated on specifying and explaining thevariations in American drinking patterns. Some ethnographers havefocused on specific subcultures defined by their problematicalcohol use (53). Other ethnographers have focused on alcoholbeliefs and behaviors in ethnically, religiously, andprofessionally constituted subcultures-- usually exploring theadaptation of culturally sanctioned drinking patterns, passed onthrough family and community modeling, to changing socialcontexts (5). Heroin The majority of ethnography studies conducted in the 1960sfocused on heroin use. Several of these studies challenged theaccepted perception "that heroin provides an escape for theuser from his psychological problems and from theresponsibilities of social and personal relationships--in short,an escape from life" (47). Researchers documented drug useas a way of life, rather than just as an escape from life. Twosuch articles, based on three years of field work in Oakland,California, detailed several distinct patterns or styles amongheroin users. Varying levels of prestige were associated withthese different styles, and heroin users at the top of thehierarchy were observed to work hard to maintain their lifestyles(54,55). Another study in New York City, New York, in the late 1960s,asked why heroin use periodically mushroomed, in epidemicproportions, in lower class communities. The data revealed that,regardless of ethnic background, in poor neighborhoods"there are pressures on adolescent boys to live up to theideals of toughness, strength, daring, and the willingness tochallenge the bleak fate of being poor." Simply put,"movement into heroin use was one route to becoming a`somebody' in the eyes of the important people who comprised theslum social network" (20). Later articles elaborated on theidea of so-called street status. Based on 4 years of research, ahierarchy of illicit drugs was defined by perceived riskcomponents, such as physical harm, addiction potential, parentaldiscovery, police, and intragroup dangers. The use of drugsperceived by the group to be risky, increased a user's personalstatus within that group. The researcher concluded that relianceon legal sanctions and scare tactics to reduce the use of certaindrugs will only make the use of these drugs appear more daringand hence to some, more attractive (21,23). Cocaine and Crack Although ethnographers noted that cocaine use was on the riseamong some middle-class professionals and drug experimenters bythe mid 1970s, it was not until the 1980s that extensive studieson cocaine users were begun. While some of these early users, many of whom were white,progressed from experimental use of cocaine to heavy use withsubsequent biological and behavioral problems, many others didnot (57,58). Several years later, though, middle- class userswith cocaine-related problems were becoming more common,prompting many would-be experimenters to steer clear of the drug.During this same time period, cocaine smuggling escalated,resulting in increased availability, lower prices, and higherquality. Within low-income, minority communities, cocainesmoking, first as free-base and then as crack, grew soprecipitously that it was commonly called an epidemic. In NewYork City, ethnographers provided complementary perspectives onthe rapidly changing crack culture. In a series of ethno-historical articles, Ansley Hamiddocumented the history of cocaine smoking as it evolved in lowerincome minority neighborhoods in New York City. Among theelements identified as central to the widespread diffusion ofcrack smoking was the interest shown by heroin injectors withcollapsed veins in the concentrated high of smoked cocaine; theentry of Rastafarian marijuana distributors into the cocainetrade; the emergence of young, nonusing street distributors ableto sell unit doses in vials at relatively low prices; and therise in crack prices due to increased demand combined withsuppliers who had greater control over the market. Hamid believesthe rise and fall of cocaine smoking to have followed adevelopmental cycle similar to that of heroin use between 1964and 1972 and marijuana use in the 1960s and 1970s (31,32,33,34). A 1992 study of crack use focused on the children of crackusers. It found that the extended family networks in the AfricanAmerican community, a major source of stability and support, werebeing overwhelmed by the drug crisis as the number of childrenwhose mothers were no longer able to care for them because ofincreased drug use. Further, children exposed to drug-takingbehavior by adults may be more likely to display similarbehavior. In one family headed by a 60- year-old woman, an adultson was a crack dealer and a daughter was a crack-abusingprostitute (18). Hallucinogens Most ethnographic studies of hallucinogens and mind-alteringdrugs (e.g., peyote, mescaline, mushrooms) have focused on tribalsocieties. Anthropologists have uniformly found that the use ofhallucinogens was socially approved and integrated into thereligious and social life of the community. If one defines abuseas use of a drug in such a way that it interferes with physical,economic, or social functions, then little if any evidence pointsto drug abuse among tribally organized peoples (1,27,15,42). Other than scattered studies of hallucinogenic drug use amonghippies (12,14,45,46), few ethnographic studies have beencompleted on use of hallucinogenic substances in Americansociety. However, the persistent use of lysergic aciddiethylamide (LSD) by some young people, and concerns that itsuse may be increasing, have sparked new interest amongethnographers (30,38). Marijuana As with hallucinogens, most of the ethnographic research onmarijuana use has been conducted outside the United States. Muchof it was initiated in the 1960s and 1970s, when increasing useof marijuana among American youth led researchers to question thesocial and medical consequences of marijuana use, especiallylong-term use. Research was conducted in countries in whichmarijuana use was long standing and widespread, such as Brazil,Colombia, Costa Rica, Egypt, Jamaica, Mexico, Rwanda, and SouthAfrica (11,16,17, 51). In Jamaica, for example, anthropologists Vera Rubin andLambros Comitas directed a research team of 45 social scientistsand medical professionals to conduct original ethnographicresearch at several field sites, in addition to medical,psychological, and psychiatric testing in hospitals and clinics.Their controversial findings were that none of the deleterioussocial or medical consequences believed by many to be associatedwith the drug in the United States could be found among Jamaicanusers: .?.?. There is no evidence of any causal relationship betweencannabis use and mental deterioration, insanity, violence orpoverty; or that widespread cannabis use in Jamaica produces anapathetic, indolent class of people. In fact, the ganja complexprovides an adaptive mechanism by which many Jamaicans cope withlimited life chances in a harsh environment (52). Other than a few studies of middle-class users (10,39) andyoung African American dealers (24,25), substantial U.S.ethnographic research on marijuana use in the United States hasbeen generally lacking, despite the fact that marijuana has beenthe most commonly used illicit substance for decades. Phencyclidine (PCP) An ethnographic study in 1979 of PCP users is frequentlycited for its substantive findings and methodologicalcontribution as the first multisite ethnographic drug study.Initiating the study when PCP use was believed to be spreadingamong white working-class and middle-class young people, theNational Institute on Drug Abuse (NIDA) contracted for afour-city ethnographic study of PCP users not in treatment. After3 months of working in Miami, Florida, Philadelphia,Pennsylvania, Chicago, Illinois, and Seattle, Washington,ethnographers documented groups of users and the underlyingsocial processes. They found that it was relatively rare for ayoung person to use PCP exclusively. Use occurred mainly withinsocially distinctive groups of young people who displayed "akind of restlessness, an orientation for action, and a sense thatlife generally was boring, uninteresting, and lacked recreationalactivities" (22). The young people studied were very knowledgeable about drugeffects and understood that the PCP drug experience varieddramatically with dosage. Low doses of the drug were reported bydifferent user groups to be mildly euphoric and hallucinogeniclike LSD, or sedating like barbiturates. What concerned regularPCP users was not the acute adverse effects reported in the media(e.g., psychotic episodes, assaultive outburst, irreparableharm), but rather "burning out"--a "spacey"state accompanied by incoherent thoughts, forgetfulness, andmemory loss. As burnout became apparent, individual users andgroups of users consciously cut back their PCP use. Within thisgroup, violent episodes were found to be rare, mainly involvingefforts by law enforcement or hospital treatment staff torestrain users, thereby seeming to set off panic reactions andstruggle. The study suggested that a significant gap existed betweenofficial agencies responsible for drug education and preventionand street drug users. When PCP use increased dramatically in themid 1970s, there were no official responses because quantitativenational data sources, such as surveys of high school studentsand hospital emergency reports, failed to include PCP as aseparate drug. When the official agencies recognized thewidespread use of PCP, their prevention efforts were viewed byusers as distorted and were discounted. Ethnographers attributethe eventual decline in PCP use to "the general consensusamong users themselves on the negative features of its long-termeffects rather than the kind of expert opinion that accompanieslegitimate efforts at prevention" (22). SOCIAL CONTEXT OF DRUG USE Specificity in Drug Abuse Research As more questions are asked about alcohol and other drug use,it becomes clear that drug use is not one phenomenon, but many.There is no generic pattern of drug use; rather, there is use ofspecific drugs in specific situations. Quantitative researchers frequently use ethnic categories toincrease study specificity. While studies on different ethnicgroups are useful, often the definitions of ethnicity vary andthe concept is employed uncritically. Moreover, most of thequantitative researchers using the concept of ethnicityimplicitly assume what anthropologists call a "static"concept of culture, viewing ethnicity as a trait one is bornwith, an unchanging characteristic, like hair color or body type.In contrast, most ethnographers view culture as "a dynamicprocess through which individuals and societies learn the sumtotal of their society's behaviors and associated belief systems,including those encompassing drug use practices and beliefs"(4). Many recent ethnographic studies focus on socially meaningfulunits in which members share social statuses, behaviors, andattitudes. For example, a recent book on drug use among Hispanicsincluded ethnographic accounts of Cuban so-called streetside druguse in Miami, Florida, drug use among male and female gangmembers from the East Los Angeles, California, barrios, and druguse and dealing among low-income Puerto Ricans in New York City,New York, and Chicago, Illinois. (28). Inclusiveness in Drug Abuse Research One drawback of studying increasingly specific drug-usingcommunities is losing sight of the larger whole. Ethnographicdrug studies at times fail to link the customs of the specificstudy communities to customs in other communities or to place thecustoms in a larger framework. A way that both highlights andcritiques the contribution of ethnography in the field of drugresearch is to focus on the social relationships around drug use,specifically, on the pattern of use in relation toself-identification with a social group. In the ethnographicliterature, four basic patterns appear: o Individuals who use drugs with others who share anidentification with a lifestyle or subculture in which drug useis the central component. o Individuals who use drugs with others who share anidentification with a lifestyle or subculture in which drug useis customary and openly accepted, but not the central component. o Individuals who use drugs with friends and acquaintances,but there is no self-identification with a drug-using lifestyleor subculture. o Individuals who use drugs by themselves while maintainingself-identification with a group that stigmatizes drug use (seetable 7-1). Drug Use Within a Drug Subculture Numerous studies have documented that, for pragmatic andsocial reasons, individuals whose lives have become oriented to adrug often associate with others who use the drug in a similarfashion. Over time a subculture develops with specializedknowledge, norms, and expectations. Individuals think ofthemselves as belonging to the subculture, and others define themas such. "Where subcultures exist, social-psychologicalbarriers separate participants from onlookers" (13). It hasoften been noted, for example, that for many heroin users, use ofthe drug overrode background characteristics, such as race,class, and national origin, to become the definingcharacteristic. As one heroin user related: I always refer to myself as a junkie, even when I'm nothooked on anything. And when you're introduced to somebody forthe first time the first thing you find out is whether he's ajunkie or not. It's like belonging to some fantastic lodge, youknow, but the initiation ceremony is a lot rougher (57). However, even within a drug-using subculture variationsexist, especially with regard to frequency and amount of use.This difference was emphasized by a 38-year-old regular heroinuser from New York City: .?.?. all heroin addicts are not heroin abusers, okay? Andyou get the abuser, he's a dog, right? He's the one who sits inthe drug house and shoots all day long. That's an abuser. I'm avisitor, you never catch me in the drug house. Not me, no (41). A similar distinction was made by a female crack user, who,although her life revolved around crack, was still attractive,healthy, in a relationship, and the social center of a network ofusers. In contrast, for her: The crack addict is the person who's lost all sense of what'sgoing on. They are like zombies. They are out there standing inthe pouring rain. If it's cold and snowing, they'll be walking upand down out there .?.?.?. They are .?.?. to the point ofdesperation where they will take off [rob] people they know. Theywill set you up. It comes to the point where they will set upfamily, friends, anybody--the point where they don't care anymore(61). One ethnographer noted that these types of individuals wereattempting "to become `visitors' in social networks of otherusers, to establish a degree of contact and membership whileremaining somewhat detached from the network. Their attempts toremain partially marginal to both street and straight society area central part of their strategies for controlling their use andtheir own lives" (41). Drug Use as Part of a Lifestyle or Identity Drug use often occurs within a lifestyle or subcultureinwhich drug use is common and accepted, but is not the definingcharacteristic. The subculture may be professionally oriented.For example, some of the earliest drug research was done amongjazz musicians (2,62). Anabolic steroid use was common amongprofessional and amateur athletes in certain sports (29). Duringits peak, cocaine use was rampant among entertainers. In one study, a waitress at a rock-and-roll bar calledcocaine use an "occupational hazard." She and otherrestaurant workers in the study described how groups of workerswould pool funds to purchase small amounts of cocaine for usewhile working: "For them. ?.?. hard work, constant activity,and long, late hours seemed instrumental to their cocaineuse" (59). Recent research has documented that at times the nuclear orextended family may act as the subcultural unit in which illicitdrug use is common and accepted. We was with my mother over her girlfriend's house when AuntJeannie came by and she had some coke. She cooked it up and toldMa and Ruth to try it. After that things started goin' crazier. Ihad to take care of my oldest sister's two sons, my son, and myyounger brother. I had to do everything. Most of the time wedidn't have nothin' to eat. We stayed hungry all the time. When Iwashed clothes I'd find vials in her [mother's] pockets.. ?.?. I`member comin' home one day and she'd been smokin' for awhilethen, but the house was full of people smokin' all over theplace. I went to go to my bedroom and close the door and it wasfull too. I said to her, `what's happenin'? I just turned roundand left. I was tired, the house was dirty with vials on thefloor and the tables and I'd just had my son.. ?.?. I just wantedto get away.. ?.?. At first I had smoked some crack to kill myappetite, to keep me from bein' hungry. ?.?. I just felt like Icouldn't take it no more so I took my son to my sister and left .?.?. I went on a binge and smoked for three months. Nobodyknew where I was, but I was out smoking crack and gettin' moneyanyway I could get it (18). Drug Use With Partners and Peers Drug use can also occur when there is no subcultural supportor membership in a group that approves of drug use. In somecases, an orientation toward, or acceptance of, drug use may havebeen acquired earlier in life when the individual was part of adrug-accepting subculture: former hippies, student drug users, orparticipants in street life. Such individuals may continue theirdrug use long after ending their other associations with thesubcultures. Recently reported by ethnographers is the recreational use ofMDMA (Ecstasy) by some middle-class individuals. Some professionals, particularly those whose ideas aboutdrugs were formulated during the 1960s, quietly view psychoactivesubstances as one of many ways to relax, to relate, to "kickback." It is within this context, coupled with the need torelax fast and relate quickly, that Ecstasy is used (50). Drug Use in Social Isolation Last, some individuals use illicit drugs primarily bythemselves. Often they identify themselves with a professionalsubculture or social group that is opposed to drug use. Onewell-documented pattern is that of physicians, nurses, and otherhealth workers who illicitly use psychoactive pharmaceuticaldrugs, especially narcotics (63,64). Other patterns of use in social isolation are known butpoorly documented in the ethnographic literature. Unsuperviseduse of pharmaceutical drugs is fairly common and often the linebetween licitly obtained and illicitly obtained drugs can beblurred. Emergency room and family physicians, for example,encounter suspected middle-class prescription drug abusers. Onemiddle-class housewife interviewed as part of a study ofemergency room drug episodes began her use of prescription painkillers because of a back problem, and then continued chronic(and essentially unsupervised) use of the drug for years byobtaining prescriptions from multiple physicians (49). Typology as a Whole The ethnographic method of describing how and, to someextent, why people use drugs differs from the purely quantitativemethod that analyzes the association of drug use with the socialand demographic characteristics of the users. To date, most of the ethnographic research has concentratedon drug-focused subcultures or on crime-related subcultures.There are few studies on other populations, and many of these arenow dated. For example, there have been no significantethnographic studies of student drug use in almost two decades.The drug problem has been defined in the public mind and amongsome funding sources as a problem of poor minority communities.Some ethnographers acknowledge that, to some extent, their ownattitudes have contributed to the skewing of the drug research aswell. Ethnographic field work with drug-focused and criminalsubcultures is considered by some to be more adventurous andprofessionally rewarding. Also, in its own way, it may be easierthan field work in the general population, since studyparticipants can be readily delineated from onlookers andsubjects can be relatively easily located on the street orthrough their relationship with treatment and law enforcementagencies. One consequence of the absence of information concerning druguse within the general population is that, like a self-fulfilling prophecy, attention continues to be paid almostexclusively to minority drug use. Drug use and drug users aredefined as the "other," different from the rest ofsociety. Ethnographers have paid relatively little attention tothe relationship between culturally approved drug use (e.g.,caffeine, nicotine, alcohol, psychoactive prescription drugs) andillicit drug use. Another consequence is that there are few data available onwhich to base prevention programs for individuals who areunlikely to become members of a drug or criminal subculture.Virtually nothing is known about experimenters, casual users,controlled users, or chronic users not associated with a drugsubculture. POVERTY, RACISM, AND CYCLE OF ABUSE The preceding section outlined a variety of drug usingcontexts in the United States and documented the presence of druguse and abuse among different social, racial, and ethnic classes.Equally important, however, is the realization that theconsequences of drug abuse are especially devastating inchronically poor, often minority, communities. While poverty asan individual risk factor for substance abuse is described inchapter 6, this section considers ethnographic observations onthe links between the poverty of the inner-city communities andsubstance abuse. The Social Context of Poverty Drug ethnographers have noted that urban poverty means morethan lacking money. Often it means living in substandard housingin communities that lack basic municipal services, and for youngpeople it usually means attending overcrowded, underfunded,demoralized schools. Researchers regard illicit drug use,especially the use of heroin, cocaine, and crack, as both aresult of oppressive social conditions and a cause of theworsening of these conditions. To cope with difficult social circumstances, ethnographershave documented the effective utilization of extended familynetworks and kin relationships. However, even with thesesafeguards, it is not uncommon for children to encounteralcoholism, other drug use, depression, physical abuse andneglect, sexual abuse, and other traumatic experiences. Lack of Opportunity In ethnographic life histories of men and women who becomedeeply involved with illicit drugs, the characteristic ofinner-city life most often mentioned is the lack of opportunityfor meaningful work. For example, an ethnographer studying heroinaddicts in the early 1970s noted: Often in interviews with addicts I have thought that thisantiwork attitude was a sour-grapes defense because so few havehad meaningful work experiences and many do not considergood-paying or creative jobs work, but I think that theseattitudes are more than psychological mechanisms. They are, Ibelieve, deeper in the fabric of our society and arise out ofpoverty and the reality of poor, uneducated persons who can onlyexpect the most dull, stultifying, and meaningless work. Most, Iwould expect, held these attitudes before their addiction andwhen they became addicted simply added another good reason not topursue something that offered so little (56). More recently, ethnographers studying the crack subculture,have related changes in drug use patterns to structural changesin the world economy. For many inner-city residents the difficulteconomic situation of the 1950s and 1960s became impossible inthe 1970s and 1980s, as many of the secure semiskilled andunskilled jobs shifted overseas. New York City, for example, losta half million manufacturing jobs and 100,000 jobs in wholesaleand retail trade between 1967 and 1987 (36). For individualswithout post secondary degrees, jobs that could support a familybecame scarce. Because of the structural shifts, basic expectations aroundwork have changed dramatically: The option of a steady, legal job appears so distant forinner-city high-school dropouts (and even graduates), that theycease job searches after a few attempts or experiences inlow-wage jobs. Adult household members can rarely provideconcrete assistance in finding jobs or help in accessing networksof employers (19). Racism Clearly a person need not be a member of a racial or ethnicminority group to use drugs. Much of the early ethnographicresearch was done on white heroin-using individuals (20,21,48) orwith mixed ethnic and racial backgrounds samples (47, 20,56).Nonetheless, many ethnographers introduce race as an explanatoryelement. It is not used in the genetic or biological sense butrather that racial discrimination has shaped the social contextand opportunity structure for many people of color. Ethnographerscite the indirect racism of some politicians who have beenunresponsive to the worsening social conditions of schools,housing, and municipal services in many minority communities.Also reported is the active racism encountered by many minoritypeople in daily life (9,8). Ethnographers describe inner-city minority residents ashaving a pervasive sense of not fitting into white mainstreamsociety. Within most poor inner-city communities, whites arerarely encountered except as representatives of conventionalinstitutions such as police, teachers, and social workers. Development of an Oppositional Culture While oppressive social conditions, limited economicopportunities, and racism are identified by ethnographers ascontributing to the high prevalence of drug abuse in the innercity, in and of themselves they offer little insight into thespecific attitudes and behaviors of those involved in illicitdrug use. For this, ethnographers have often relied on the notionof an oppositional culture, one of resistance or refusal. Some ethnographers argue that amidst oppression andexclusion, minorities, such as blacks, Hispanics, and AmericanIndians, develop "a collective identity or sense ofpeoplehood in opposition to the social identity of whiteAmericans." Developed in tandem with this oppositionalsocial identity is a cultural frame of reference that defines"certain forms of behavior and certain activities or events,symbols, and meanings" as not appropriate because they arecharacteristic of white Americans while "other forms ofbehaviors and other events, symbols, and meanings [are defined]as more appropriate because they are not a part of whiteAmericans way of life. To behave in the manner defined as fallingwithin a white cultural frame of reference is to `act white' andis negatively sanctioned" (26). Many ethnographers studying inner-city communities argue thatillicit drug use is embedded in an oppositional culture, formedin response to oppressive social conditions and lack ofopportunity. Ethnographer Terry Williams explains: .?.?.?to some extent, it is possible to see the violence,crime, and substance abuse that plague the inner city asmanifestations of resistance to a society perceived as white,racist, and economically exclusive. This could be called aculture of refusal. The young people in the crackhouses refuse tobe part of the system, refuse to obey their parents, rejectschool or any adult-controlled education or training, spurnprevailing social values and most authority. In the crackhouses,teenagers and adults refuse to obey the law, refuse to staysober, refuse to engage in safe sexual practices--even thoughthis refusal leads them to behaviors that are manifestly harmfulboth physiologically and psychologically (61). Cycle of Abuse Attraction of the Drug Ethnographers have emphasized three factors to help explainthe use of illicit drugs, especially heroin and crack by poor,inner-city, and minority populations. First, ethnographers report that as the use of a drug beginsto spread through a community, its use is seen as a status symbolwithin the street hierarchy. Many ethnographers attributed thequick expansion of cocaine smoking that occurred in the middle1980s to cocaine's reputation as a high-status drug, especiallywhen smoked or free based (23). Second, initiation into drug use almost always occurredthrough an established friendship or kin relationship. Virtuallyevery ethnographic study of drug use quotes users as saying: Iwas at a party (or with a friend) and someone offered me someheroin (cocaine, crack), so I tried it. The third theme is simply that many people, when they tryheroin or crack cocaine, like it. For some individuals, at leastin the beginning, their drug experiences are more highly valuedthan anything else in their lives (6,61). Several ethnographers have suggested that once crack becameavailable at relatively low cost in the late 1980s, the sharprise in its use was due primarily to the intensity of the drugexperience, comparable in somatic effect to arterial injection.The drug's effects attracted intravenous drug users withcollapsed veins or with concerns about HIV transmission, as wellas many nonintravenous drug users (23,40,43). Slide Into Abuse In explaining the slide of inner-city residents into drugabuse, addiction, and dependency, ethnographers have highlightedtwo complementary themes. One theme explains the function drugdependency serves in simplifying and giving meaning to a druguser's life. Stated succinctly: "The euphoria of heroin andthe excitement of hustling serve many addicts in the same waythat jobs, sex, and consumption serve nonaddicts" (56). A similar conclusion was drawn by another ethnographerstudying crack use patterns: Substance abuse in general, and crack in particular, offerthe equivalent of a millenarian metamorphosis. Instantaneouslyusers are transformed from being unemployed, depressed highschool drop-outs, despised by the world--and secretly convincedthat their failure is due to their own inherent stupidity,"racial laziness" and disorganization-- into being amass of heart palpitating pleasure, followed only minutes laterby a jaw-gnashing crash and wide awake alertness that providestheir life with concrete purpose: get more crack--fast! (8). The complementary perspective emphasizes the lack of a viablelifestyle alternative to drug use. One researcher contends thatdue to the unequal distribution of viable nonaddict social rolesin society, some groups will have more difficulty in recoverythan others: For example, a white, middle-class, high-school-educated,male addict will have more personal and social resources to drawfrom when he decides to give up drugs than will a Chicano addictliving in a barrio. In fact, a relatively uneducated Chicanoaddict may opt to retain the junkie- dealer role and identitybecause it provides him with greater status and financial rewardsthan any other social role available to him (7). End of the Cycle Despite little improvement in the social conditions of manyinner cities, recent journalistic accounts, ethnographic studies,and reports from surveillance systems indicate that theprevalence of crack use may be decreasing. Ethnographers reportthat for many individuals, the initial appeal of crack use hasfaded. "Youths under 16 have made a new pastime ofridiculing or beating up crackheads who they say disgraceneighborhoods or are nuisances or thieves. Five years ago,youngsters their age had initiated crack use after first becomingdistributors, as youngsters had previously been drawn into heroinuse" (34). Ethnographers present several possible explanations for thisdownturn. Epidemiologically, a parallel could be drawn to thedecrease seen in bacteria-based epidemics, where all individualsmost likely to be infected have been. Economically, it could beargued that all possible wealth to be extracted from the innercity has been. There are simply fewer resources for drugtraffickers, smugglers, and importers. A complementary explanation is based on concepts put forward25 years ago (3). It was argued that the social consequencesresulting from a drug's use could be related to the historicalstage of the drug's introduction in society. Most importantly,over time, a subculture of drug users develops ".?.?.material on how to obtain and ingest the drug, definitions of thetypical effects, the typical course of the experience, and thepermanence of the effects.. ?.?." In the case of marijuanaand LSD, this type of shared information may have accounted forthe sharp decrease in reported psychotic reactions even thoughthe actual number of users was increasing. This subculture can also define certain drugs or styles ofuse as dangerous. For example, ethnographers argue that thedownturn in cocaine use in the late 1980s among middle- andworking-class individuals was due to the belief that"cocaine can mess you up," and that this subculture ofusers understood this warning as more than just propaganda ofprevention proponents (59). This same process may be occurring in inner-city communitiesamong the subculture of crack users. Researchers note that thecrack epidemic has followed a predictable developmental cycle,previously seen with heroin use, "characterized by periodsof onset, incubation, widespread diffusion, peak, and decline.The final stage is stabilization at reduced levels of use"(34). In exploring the devastation caused by crack epidemics oninner-city communities, ethnographers have called attentionto theprocess through which harm-reducing information develops within asubculture of users. For example, among middle-class,cocaine-using individuals, many users gained information fromconventional sources (such as books, magazines, and evenscholarly journals) on the progression of cocaine dependence,long-term negative consequences, danger signals, and methods tocontrol or end use. This information then spread through thewider user community. In contrast, researchers note that theinner-city subculture of crack users paid little attention toconventional information sources and were ideologicallypredisposed to discount what information did reach them. Whilethere was no deficit of warnings about the dangers of crack usein the popular media, ethnographers observed that little effortwas made to translate prevention information into moreappropriate media messages for inner-city communities. FUTURE RESEARCH Over the past 30 years, ethnographers have contributed to theunderstanding of substance abuse research through their workamong different countries and among different subpopulations inthe United States. However, some additional contributions couldbe made in the following areas. Filling in the Gaps The earlier sections on the social contexts of drug useemphasized that drug use in the United States is much more thanheroin and cocaine in the inner cities and LSD in the suburbs.Research is needed, for example, on middle-class prescriptionabusers, substance abusers in rural areas, and hidden populations(e.g., homeless, runaways, dropouts); since many of theseindividuals are either excluded from, or under sampled in, thenational drug abuse surveys. To further complete the matrix ofsubstance use and abuse in the United States, future researchcould address not only those individuals whose use isunmanageable, but individuals and communities who do not use, orwhose use is moderate and controlled. Expanding Research Hypotheses The documentation that cultural and societal norms, to alarge degree, shape individuals' and groups' behaviors towarddrugs use, could be used to formulate new substance abuseresearch hypotheses, or expand on existing hypotheses. Forexample, understanding the etiology of drug use through studiesof children will help explain initiation of drug use and provideguidance for prevention efforts. Basic studies that document howchildren come to perceive drugs are lacking. "...when ithappens, how it happens. How they conceptualize, for example,what is a drug and what is a poison, and how that changes whenthey begin experimenting with drugs" (44). Planning Prevention Programs The insight gained by ethnographic research on a community'sor subculture's view on substance use could be incorporated to agreater degree in the needs assessment, planning, implementation,monitoring, and evaluation components of substance abuseprevention research. The information gained from ethnographicresearch could help assure that the prevention information isculturally appropriate not just in a generic ethnic sense, but interms of the specific cognitive framework and concerns of thetarget audience. Additionally, the qualitative tools used inethnography can assist quantitative researchers in theinterpretation of substance abuse data in varying contexts. Identifying Emergent Trends Ethnographic research is also useful in its ability torelatively quickly document changes in existing drug use patternsor identify the use of new drugs by a particular subculture. Thistimely information could assist in the planning of appropriateprevention strategies. SUMMARY Studies on drug-using subcultures have provided a wealth ofknowledge on why, how, and who uses and abuses drugs.Experience-based methods of data collection, such as ethnography,provide the field of substance abuse research with uniqueinformation on drug abuse among individuals, groups, andcommunities. Some of the contributions discussed in this chapterhave been theoretical, substantive, and programmatic. Ethnographic studies have documented drug use patternsworldwide and in so doing have assisted the understanding ofsocietal influences on drug use. These insights have, forexample, been utilized in the planning, implementation, and tosome extent, evaluation of drug prevention programs in a varietyof different social contexts. Researchers have also utilized ethnographies to followconstantly changing drug use patterns. Moreover, ethnographersprovide valuable data on new drug use such as who is using it,how the drug is being used, and where the probable epicenters ofthe drug use are. While not without methodological limitations, ethnography andother experience-based research provide new insights intosubstance abuse, as well as complimenting more quantitativemethods of data collection. BOX 7-1: What is Ethnography? Ethnographic research isdescriptive, subjective, analytical, and comparative. The focuson context is central to the ethnographic approach, explaininghow a particular behavior, institution, or process is acted on bylarger forces outside of the control of the participants. Itdescribes how events happen and the social life of the studyindividuals. While qualitative interviewing and other more formalmethodologies are usually part of an ethnographic study,participant observation (i.e., informally interacting withparticipants and observing events as they naturally occur) is ahallmark of ethnographic research. Studies are subjective in thatthey focus on the understandings, interpretations, and worldviews of the participants. Ethnographic accounts describe notonly what occurs, but also the multiple levels of distinctions bywhich individuals and groups make sense of and purposively act inthe world. Ethnographic studies are also analytical. Theobservations, interviews, and documents are raw data, as formsand responses are raw data for survey statisticians. Theethnographer's analytic responsibility is to condense and orderthese data. The analytic work can include the identification ofnonobvious patterns, associations, and themes, as well as theconstruction of typologies, process models, or explanatoryframeworks. Finally, ethnographic research is comparative in twosenses of the term. First, it often explores how attitudes andbehaviors are shaped by social forces in two or more contexts.The contexts are at times spatial (two different cultures orsubcultures), at other times temporal (the same culture orsubculture at different times). Ethnographic studies are alsoconducted within a research tradition, so that each new projectdraws on the methods and findings of previous research. Overtime, a corpus of work develops regarding a particular culturalcommunity (e.g., Samoans, inner-city drug users) or a particulartopic (e.g.,witchcraft, ethnic boundaries). As new work appearsit is scrutinized for fit with the existing corpus. Lack of fitmay be attributed to differing circumstances, methodologies,theoretical concerns, or possibly to inferior research oranalysis._ CliffSchaffer's Home Page WT01-B29-15IA030-000641-B024-130http://206.61.184.43:80/schaffer/LIBRARY/studies/ota/ch8.htm 206.61.184.43 19970122140340 text/html 88784HTTP/1.0 200 OKDate: Wednesday, 22-Jan-97 14:03:28 GMTServer: WebSitePro/1.1f (S/N wpo-0deb)Allow-ranges: bytesContent-type: text/htmlLast-modified: Saturday, 28-Dec-96 06:49:47 GMTContent-length: 88566 COMMUNITY ACTIVITY SETTINGS TECHNOLOGIES FOR UNDERSTANDING AND PREVENTING SUBSTANCEABUSE AND ADDICTION US Government Office of Technology Assessment October 18, 1994 CHAPTER 8 COMMUNITY ACTIVITY SETTINGS This chapter reviews substance use and abuse-related researchon factors and interventions in homes, schools, workplaces,recreational and other developmental settings, and community-widesettings. These community activity settings are the majorphysical and social arenas in communities where individualsinteract and learn their values, attitudes, and behaviors, someof which can increase or reduce the likelihood that individualswill use and abuse substances. The addition of treatment settingsof all types and correctional settings would provide a fairlycomprehensive and systematic overview of all the major settingsin communities. Those settings are not discussed at length inthis report, however, because of its focus primarily onprevention, even though comprehensive prevention strategies willalmost always want to include treatment and correctionalcomponents as well. By focusing on any one of these settings, researchersinterested in substance use and abuse can study the interplay ofmultiple factors in a context, and practitioners can implementprograms designed for specific settings. By examining all ofthese settings together, policymakers and practitionersinterested in substance abuse and the healthy development ofindividuals and communities can identify and, within availableresources, implement concrete, systematic, and comprehensivepreventive interventions for communities as a whole. Thedevelopment and strengthening of community-wide norms against theuse of substances may well be one of the more important ways toprotect individuals against the use of substances. The section oncommunities discusses some of the issues and tools forcommunity-wide prevention planning and coordination. HOMES AND FAMILIES Although American society expects families in their homes totake the lead in dealing with substance abuse and other problembehaviors (69), families in this country generally receive onlylimited outside support in protecting themselves againstsubstance abuse. This situation may result in part from thebelief that most nuclear families can raise their childrenlargely independently and therefore do not need outside support,and in part from the belief that teens and young adults are moreinfluenced by their peers. The first belief, however, is notsupported by long- standing practices in most societies, whereextended families and life-long neighbors have traditionallyhelped raise children (although in the United States many parentsdo not have access to these additional child-rearing resourcesbecause of urbanization, high technology, and family mobility).And the second belief is being questioned by growing evidencethat certain parenting practices and family intervention programscan significantly reduce the risk of substance abuse amongadolescents and young adults. An extensive and growing body of research strongly suggeststhat many families do need, and can benefit from, support fromoutside the family, and can often protect their children fromsubstance abuse, even into adolescence and adulthood. While someof the findings reported here may appear to be commonsensical,they are presented because they have been addressed byresearchers as part of a growing body of increasingly rigorousresearch. Some of the studies focus on risk and protectivefactors that are known or thought to be associated with substanceuse and abuse, while others focus directly on substance use andabuse. To reduce redundancy, factors and programs discussedelsewhere in this report are for the most part not consideredhere. Protective Factors Families can protect against substance use and abuse byproviding close family relationships, sufficient monitoring,clear messages about substance use and abuse, and attractivealternatives to substance use and abuse. Close Family Relationships Family relationships can help protect against substance useand abuse when they are characterized by closeness and warmth,effective and positive discipline, and successful problem solvingand communications. For example, young people who report feelingclose to their families are less likely to abuse substances thanthose who report not feeling close to their families. Parents insuch families are more likely to comfort their children when theyare afraid, have two-way communications, and give children somesay in what happens to them (83,86,152). Because such parentsspend more time with their children, there can be more conflict,but the time spent together can also lead to greater mutualunderstanding and acceptance (23,59). Parents can better channel their children away from substanceuse and abuse if they have routinely used effective,age-appropriate discipline methods, including clear expectationsand rules about homework, television, curfews, and drugs andalcohol. Such methods are particularly effective when they areenforced by praise and encouragement, instead of by threatening,nagging, and blaming (42,47). In contrast, ineffective orprovocative family management practices, including overly harshor reluctant discipline practices and inconsistent followthrough,are associated with early sampling of substances and later abuse(8,115). Unruly behaviors in childhood can lead children to poorachievement in school, social rejection by more conventionalpeers, and greater association with other children with behaviorproblems (46). Skillful handling of problems by families helps childrenlearn how to distance themselves from problems and address themwith specific problem-solving strategies (77). Such skills canhelp children later avoid the use and abuse of substances. Bycontrast, families where children eventually abuse substances donot make decisions and solve problems as well as other families(97). Positive caregiving and discipline can prevent negativeoutcomes even for highly stressed, minority, low socioeconomicstatus (SES), urban families (177). When the birth parents arenot available, effective parenting by a surrogate, relative, orneighbor can also be protective (173). Sufficient Monitoring When parents or parent surrogates know how their children arespending their time, the risk of substance abuse is low (47).Such monitoring may prevent abuse by reducing access tosubstances, preventing use of substances, or allowing parents toidentify substance use earlier and to apply sanctions. Monitoringmay also entail greater involvement by parents in theirchildren's lives, which may help render substance use and abuseless appealing by enhancing feelings of trust, warmth, andcloseness in the family. Such monitoring prevents substancesampling across ages, ethnicities, and settings. Single parents and working parents are often less able tomonitor their children thoroughly, because they can be in onlyone place at a time. However, grandmothers, aunts, after-schoolpersonnel, and other caring and supportive adults can alsomonitor children and help reduce deviant behaviors (59,88). Earlyautonomy and unsupervised leisure time apparently increase therisk of substance use and abuse by children. Clear Messages About Effects of Substances, IncludingSanctions Children are more likely to avoid the use of substances ifthey know that use will bring negative outcomes, such as adversephysical and psychological effects, disapproval, and penaltiesimposed by parents. Many children develop expectations about theeffects of substances as early as the preschool years (100),influenced primarily by their parents. Frequent parental use evenof aspirin, cold pills, prescribed psychotropic medications (85),and cough medicine can give children positive expectations aboutthe effects of substances (61). When parents apply reliable penalties, such as revokingprivileges, and coach their children about the adverse effects ofsubstances, use is likely to discontinue (6). By contrast, if thepossible adverse effects (e.g., illness and depression) are notemphasized and few negative sanctions are applied whenadolescents first use marijuana, while the immediate experiencesare to feel pleasantly stoned and potent (87), then continued useand adult drug problems are more likely (37). Parentaldisapproval of children's alcohol use has been found to beprotective across ethnic groups (33). Increased appreciation ofrisks and social disapproval of substance use is credited withthe recent downturn in cocaine and marijuana use nationally (5). Attractive Alternatives to Substance Use and Abuse Participation in religious and other conventional andchallenging activities can protect against substance use andabuse (26,81,111,173). Especially important are activities aboutwhich youth are passionate. Parents are more likely to guide their children away fromsubstance use and abuse if parents have instilled hope in theirchildren to succeed as adults (172). By contrast, some childrendo not look forward to and plan for adulthood, but learn onlyshort-term thinking (see box 8-1) and have been encouraged bytheir parents to believe they cannot succeed. Parents of inner-city African American children face specialdifficulties in holding out hope for their children's successthrough traditional opportunities. Unemployment among AfricanAmerican men is almost 50 percent (24) and the marriage rateamong African American women is low and still declining (10),with substance use and abuse among African Americans increasingas they reach 26 to 34 years of age, instead of decreasing aswith other racial and ethnic groups (164). Risk Factors Families also face risk factors, such as parental neglect andrejection, behavioral problems and crime, physical and sexualabuse, substance abuse in the family, failure in school,emotional problems, negative life events, early use ofsubstances, substance abuse in the neighborhood, and poverty,unemployment, and homelessness. Because some of these factors arediscussed elsewhere in this report, this section will focus onlyon parental neglect and rejection, physical and sexual abuse,substance abuse in the family, negative life events, and drugtrafficking in the neighborhood. Parental Neglect and Rejection Children who are neglected anytime, but especially fromearliest childhood, are at greater risk of substance abuse(17,142). When children have been continually rejected, theybecome immune to parental guidance. Such children fail to formclose relationships, get along with others, solve problems, andregulate impulses. Physical and Sexual Abuse Physical or sexual abuse in childhood leads to greatervulnerability to substance abuse in adolescence and adulthood(38). Rape victims, particularly those with Post Traumatic StressDisorder (PTSD) symptoms, are 20 times more likely to havesubsequent substance abuse problems (165). Substance abuserehabilitation programs report that as many as 60 to 70 percentof the female patients and 25 percent of the male patients havebeen sexually victimized, while 43 percent have been beaten(45,99,92). Victims of sexual or physical abuse often reportwishing to avoid unpleasant memories, including flashbacks to theabuse (126). The use of substances may help some victims forgetfor awhile (see box 8-2). Substance Abuse in the Family The biological children of alcoholics have a higher thanaverage chance of abusing alcohol, even if they are reared awayfrom their alcoholic parents (40,63). Thus, a part of thevulnerability to alcohol abuse, at least for some, may beinherited. Children of alcoholics, for example, may experiencemore positive effects or fewer negative effects from the use ofalcohol. Either of these responses could result from individualdifferences in experienced pharmacological effects of drugs (135)or differences in temperament that can be modified by the use ofalcohol and other drugs (154). In addition to friends and acquaintances, relatives are acommon source of alcohol and other drugs for teens. Familymembers and other relatives can be very persuasive when theyoffer such substances to teens. One study, that included bothabstainers and heavy users, found that young people refusedavailable substances, mainly alcohol, 46 percent of the time whenfriends offered them, but only 18 percent of the time whenrelatives outside the family offered them. When their own parentsoffered such substances, the young people never refused (9).Family members who use substances can also inadvertently makethem available to teens by leaving family cabinets containingalcohol or pills unlocked (35). Family members can learn how to use alcohol and other drugsby watching and listening to abusing family members; they canalso adopt the abusing members' expectations about the effects ofthese substances. For example, children of alcoholics are morelikely to think that the purpose of drinking is to get drunk(107). They also have greater expectations for the use of alcohol(143), and sometimes believe they can do things better after afew drinks. Families with a substance abusing parent experiencesignificant disruptions in many aspects of their lives, includingchild rearing (160). Substance abusing parents and spouses oftenhave difficulties guiding their children, especially away fromsubstances, because of inconsistent nurturing, monitoring, anddisciplinary practices (36,47). Their abuse of substances canalso rob children of stability in life and of competent adultrole models. Even a nondrinking spouse can become so involvedwith the drinking spouse and so depressed and isolated fromsocial support that children feel neglected (13). Marital qualitycan be affected (160), and the level of conflict and verbal andphysical aggression can be high (151). In addition, adolescentand adult children of substance abusers are less influenced bytheir parents and have lower parental attachment, lessinvolvement with other people, more difficulty getting along withother people (84), lower self- esteem, lower academicachievement, higher depression (128), and a greater number ofother psychiatric symptoms (143). Major Negative Life Events Substance use and abuse often increase as children experiencemore negative events (106,174) (see table 8-1). Adult alcoholicsreport a significantly higher number of severe life events justbefore their alcohol dependency begins (65), with seven out ofeight of them reporting disruptions in important personalrelationships, such as with friends, lovers, or spouses. Amongthe elderly, late- onset alcoholism is reportedly preceded by newfeelings of loneliness and depression, perhaps also due to recentlosses of important relationships (120,134). Such negative life events may heighten vulnerability tosubstance abuse by increasing depression (174). For instance, onestudy found that children who had lost a parent to death had a7.5 times greater risk of developing a depression than otherchildren (60). Negative life events may also occasion perceptionsof helplessness and decreased personal control; these too can beoffset, at least for awhile, by some drugs (91). Families are likely to have the greatest difficultypreventing substance abuse if friends abuse substances (86,109)or if substance use is rampant in the neighborhood(39,44,51,124). Such conditions encourage substance use andreduce the barriers against use by making drugs continuouslyavailable and socially acceptable (even appealing) and byproviding temporary escape from the frequent hassles andtragedies of life among highly transient and troubled (ratherthan stable and helpful) neighbors (146). Programs To Enhance Protective Factors This section discusses some of the numerous programs thathave been developed for families with infants, school-agedchildren, and young adults. Few of these programs specificallytarget substance abuse and addiction, but many have been found toenhance family-based protective factors and/or reduce riskfactors that can be associated with drug abuse. Unlike someschool-based programs, methodologically rigorous studiescorrelating the efficacy of these programs to the level ofsubstance abuse and addiction have yet to be done. Families With Infants Parent education, prenatal and infant care, and socialsupport programs help strengthen involved and responsiveparenting (4), which in turn can significantly reduce substanceabuse risk factors such as child abuse and neglect and childhoodaccidents. Parents who had participated in such programs attained moreeducation, had fewer other children, and were less likely to beon welfare by the time their children were 10 years old, thanparents who had not participated in such programs. Participatingparents reported less stress and more confidence in theirparenting (175). Most importantly, children were dramaticallyless likely to experience attendance, behavior, or academicproblems in school (112,138,139). These programs can take many forms: o a neighborhood house where parents and their infants cancome during the day for companionship, child care advice, socialservices, and health care from a stable professional staff (139); o twice-a-week home visits by the same nurse, from pregnancyuntil the child is 2 years old (112); o home visits, with child development advice, help inacquiring other services, and time-limited family counseling tolower conflict and increase support from the extended family; o a public school dedicated to pregnant teens and new mothersand that provides health and child care education, socialservices, and intensive high school education (138); and o parent meetings in the hospital where the baby was born(175). Families With School-Age Children Parent training and support programs can help parents ofschool-aged children motivate their children to more willinglypay attention to and accept parental guidance and to developskills for success outside the family. A parent training programcalled WINNING, provided through a Texas school system, increasedpositive and corrective feedback from parents to children,increased parent-child interactions, and decreased the attentionparents gave to inappropriate child behavior. Concomitantly, theportion of their children's behavior that was inappropriatedecreased (43). Another parent training and support program, "How toHelp Your Child Succeed in School," was offered throughSeattle, Washington schools to increase protective factors andreduce risk factors for substance use and abuse. After theprogram, parents spent more time reading with their children andprovided more consistent positive and negative consequences forbehavior (70,71, 72,73,74). Involving parents more in schools can furthersupportparenting and prevent it from being undermined by peersand by school environments. In the School Development Program inNew Haven, Connecticut, for example, parents serve as members ofthe School Advisory Council and as employees or volunteers inclassrooms. Significant improvements have been seen in studentattendance, language skills, math scores, and social competence,and virtually all classroom behavior problems have beeneliminated (34,41). A community grassroots effort to provide these and otherresources for parents began 17 years ago in the Ravendale sectionof Detroit, Michigan. The "Joy of Jesus" programs nowsupport families living in more than 30 contiguous blocks. Everyday after school about 250 youth of all ages participate inscheduled activities such as tutoring, music, dance, gym,writing, teen sex education, cultural field trips, universitytours, and an entrepreneur's club (for 30 teens who are startingtheir own businesses). This program provides several substanceabuse protective factors and prevents the risk factor of schoolfailure, by monitoring report cards and enrolling students in anindividualized after-school motivational learning program, ifnecessary. In Los Angeles, California, an after-school tutoring andactivities program has been developed in a for profit apartmentbuilding. The program, called EEXCEL, provides a room in thebuilding and live-in counselors and tutors who offer children a"sanctuary for education [and]...incentives forlearning." When report cards come out, good grades arerecognized at parties. Only those families that want thisresource for their children are accepted as tenants in thebuilding (108). Atlanta, Georgia-based Inner-City Families in Action has beenpresenting comprehensive information in a series of 2- hoursessions about how specific drugs, such as alcohol or crack,affect every system in the body, to residents in two Atlantahousing projects. The curriculum is called "You Have theRight to Know." After 2 years of using the curriculum inmany locations, the narcotics arrests in both housing projectsare down (52). Through flyers, personal invitations from schools, and a 1-hour television special, parents were recruited to 87 local sitesaround Seattle, Washington, for workshops on "Preparing forthe Drug (Free) Years," led by trained parents. Surveysshowed that parents' attitudes and behaviors were changed in thedirection of providing protective factors. Parents also ratedhighly the workshops' content, process, and leaders (71). The Midwestern Prevention Project (Project STAR) in KansasCity, Missouri, used the local media to recruit parents to becomeinvolved in a school and parent substance abuse education courseand to repeat the messages for more than one year. This intensiveeffort reduced the rate of increase in initiation of alcohol,tobacco, and marijuana use among seventh and eighth graders whohad participated in the program, as compared to those who had notparticipated (116). Families With Young Adults Job Corps, Peace Corps/VISTA programs, American Conservationand Youth Service Corps, National and Community Service Programs,universities, and the military all provide young people shelteredwork experiences, educational training if necessary, andopportunities to live away from home with other young people instructured environments. Research shows that such experiencesenhance the confidence of participants in their ability to workhard (48). Programs To Reduce Risk Factors Reducing Drug-Trafficking and Substance-Using Peers Operation Clean Sweep, now being run by the Chicago,Illinois, Housing Authority, is designed to reduce drug dealingand other crimes in housing projects. Staff approach onehigh-rise building at a time, spending at least a whole day atthe building. State and local law enforcement officers andhousing authority security officers search apartment units (ifthere is reasonable cause) for illegal weapons and unauthorizedresidents. Authorized residents are given photo I.D. cards, whileothers are put on the lease, given a 2-week pass, or asked toleave. The maintenance staff makes repairs, cleans graffiti,encloses lobbies, and builds a security station for 24-hour-a-daysurveillance and review of photo I.D.'s and passes foradmittance. The program is being replicated in cities across thenation, with funding and technical assistance from the U.S.Department of Housing and Urban Development (HUD). Reducing Physical and Sexual Abuse Physical and psychological security is important for theemotional well-being of children (30) and may well reduce theirrisk of later substance abuse. Mandatory arrest and briefincarceration for physical and sexual abuse of children ormothers has been shown to deter more repeat offenses than dowarnings or counseling alone (144), and court-mandated treatmentfor convicted offenders seems to reduce later abuse even further(50). Since 40 to 87 percent of adult sexual or physical abusersalso report alcohol or drug abuse, individuals treated for familyviolence should perhaps also be screened and, if appropriate,treated for substance abuse (176). Reducing Substance Abuse in the Family Substance abuse treatment for the family can reduce substanceabuse in the short-term and maintain those reductions in thelong-term (27,75, 101,147,149,153,). Substance abuse treatmentfor married adults is more effective when both spouses areinvolved (96), and especially with a behavioral approach tomarital problems (110). Clearly, families can help rehabilitatesubstance abusers, thereby reducing the risk of substance abusefor other family members. Reducing Impact of Negative Life Events Linking people with modest community supports during crisesor adjustments can reduce risk factors and enhance protectivefactors. For example, when widows were contacted individually bytrained, previously widowed persons to discuss grief anddecisions to be made, 61 percent accepted the widow-aide services(145) and one month after bereavement were less depressed andless preoccupied with the past than widows who had received nointervention. One year later, the intervention group wassignificantly more resocialized in their roles as singles; twoyears later, the health of the intervention group members wassignificantly better than that of control group members (168). Also, a 6-month program for newly separated or divorcedpeople in Colorado (which included both one-to-one counseling bytrained volunteers and group meetings about practical problems,such as career planning and child- rearing) significantly reducedthe participants' problems and their anxiety, nervousness, andfatigue. It also improved their psychological adjustment (lessguilt and self-blame, more competence), as compared with arandomly selected control group (18). More indirect approacheshave also been tried. For example, socially isolated and lonelyindividuals, who were provided a free blood pressure station inthe lobby of their innercity single room occupancy hotel, wereintroduced to each other by the nurse and later formed a"Senior Activities Club." In another example, a surplusfood distribution service, that required individuals to worktogether to get their food, produced new friendships (117). Reducing Parental Neglect Parents whose children failed to maintain gains after parenteducation or family therapy are often socially isolated andsubject to seemingly insurmountable daily problems (49). Anexperimental program--with weekly follow-up sessions withisolated parents, to discuss environmental problems that affectedhow parents saw their children's behavior--reduced maternalcriticisms of children, negative responses by children tomothers, and child problem behaviors (170). When the weeklydiscussions stopped, however, the negative interactions resumed. In a more comprehensive program for low SES parents believedby Child Protective Services to be at high risk for child abuseor neglect, Project 12-Ways held meetings with parents in theirhomes (95). Treatment goals were developed and, as needed,behavioral training was provided in stress reduction,assertiveness, self-control, leisure time planning, maritalcounseling, and job finding. Social support groups, alcoholtreatment referral, homemakers, physicians, and mental healthworkers were also involved. Parent compliance and involvement inthis 5- to 6-month program were high. Twenty months aftertreatment, only 2 percent of Project 12-Ways parents abused orneglected their children, while 10 percent of a nonprogramcomparison group did. Families on the verge of having children placed in foster-care, group homes, or psychiatric hospitals can benefit fromfamily preservation programs. Children have fewer behavioral andacademic problems when they are raised by birth-parents in safehomes (130). Thus, the goal of a family preservation counselor isto help the family out of the crisis and learn how to retain thechild safely at home. The interventions are typically intensiveand brief--for example, a counselor is available for meetings inthe home 24 hours a day, 7 days a week, for about 6 weeks. Thecounselor deals with any relevant problems, helping the familyclarify values, set goals, and solve problems, and helps connectfamily members with community resources (see box 8-3). Many families, especially those with substance abuseproblems, need more prolonged help. A family support program thatprovides such longer term support is Camden House, in theRavendale section of Detroit, Michigan. A rundown house waspurchased, renovated, and made the center of an outreach anddrop-in program for about 10 local families with multipleproblems that included substance abuse, lack of skills, chronicunemployment, early pregnancy, and crime. After staff had workedwith the families for one to two years, taking one problem at atime and actively mentoring the parents, six out of 10 of theoriginal parents were out of the Camden House program, drug-free,trained and employed, and safely and responsibly raising theirchildren. SCHOOLS AND PEERS Millions of school-age youth in the United States experimentwith alcohol, tobacco, and other drugs annually, often(especially with alcohol) in ways that can cause overdose deaths,accidental injuries or deaths, and permanent impairments. Manyschool-age youth continue to use substances and later developlong-term addictions. To address these substance abuse problems,schools provide the most important settings for reaching youngpeople with standardized, broadly applied educational andpreventive messages. Because school-age youth are especially likely to initiatethe use of alcohol and other drugs, much of the research hasfocused on use, rather than on abuse and dependency. Suchresearch is nevertheless relevant to an understanding of abuseand dependency, since use is a precondition and contributor toabuse and dependency and even experimental use can be harmful.For example, nearly half of all youth who experiment withcigarettes develop long-term smoking habits, and alcohol andmarijuana use by youth with no chronic problems still contributesto highway deaths, crime, and violence. This section summarizesresults from an analysis of survey research on the causes ofschool-age substance use and discusses school-based preventionprogramming. Analysis of Survey Research on Causes of School-Age SubstanceUse OTA commissioned a review of the survey research literatureon school-aged substance use that compiled, classified, andexamined 9,930 statistical analyses from 242 separate studies.This is by far the most extensive systematic examination of thisbody of research conducted so far. Most of the studies dealt withschool-based populations, but some focused on school-age armyrecruits, dropouts, children of alcoholics, and individualsinvolved in clinics. The studies reported statisticalrelationships between substance use and its postulated causes.Statistical findings from the study reports were sorted into 11major categories and 50 subcategories (see table 8-2), and thenanalyzed to identify strong, moderate, and weak statisticalrelationships, as well as those that had been insufficientlystudied. Characteristics of Database The studies tended to focus on so-called gateway substances,with tobacco, alcohol, and marijuana analyses accounting for 82percent of the completed analyses (see figure 8-1). Cocaine,inhalants, heroin, and prescription drugs, which have recentlyreceived extensive social attention, have been relatively ignoredby quantitative researchers to date; none of these lattercategories of substance use accounted for more than 5 percent ofthe analyses in the research reports examined. Gateway drugs areindeed important, since they may lead some individuals to laterabuse. Nevertheless, the literature has gaps. Inhalants, forinstance, may well be one of the most commonly used and abusedsubstances among some youth, but they have received almost noattention from survey researchers. Although the primary measures were of use, not abuse, thedatabase included some measures of alcohol abuse (e.g., drunkdriving and impairment from alcohol use). Abuse of cocaine,heroin, and analgesics was not measured. The percentages ofanalyses in the database for each of the 11 major types ofindependent variables is displayed (see figure 8-2). The types ofindependent variables most studied were personality, use byothers, and cognitive factors (including attitudes, beliefs, andvalues). Results of Analysis After being sorted into the 11 major categories and 50subcategories, the average of all the correlations in eachsubcategory was calculated. Then, each subcategory was ranked byits average correlation and the rankings were divided into threegroups, defined by ranges of correlations: primary (withcorrelations over .30), secondary (with correlations betweenabout .20 and .30), and tertiary (with correlations under about.20) (see figure 8- 3). Primary correlates The four variables that dominate as correlates of andpossible contributors to substance use are: 1) prior andconcurrent use of substances, 2) substance use by peers andfriends, 3) perceived peer attitudes about substance use, and 4)offers to use substances. The prominence of prior and concurrentuse is consistent with the reinforcing nature of substance useitself. The prominence of the other three variables emphasizesthe importance of the social environment in contributing to andreinforcing substance use among school-age youth. Secondary correlates Of the 15 variables judged to be of secondary importance,seven are social variables: 1) susceptibility to peer pressure,2) resistance skills, 3)??perception of social pressure to usesubstances, 4)? beliefs that such pressure can be effectivelyhandled, 5) beliefs about social consequences of use, 6)bondedness (especially to school), and 7) peer groupcharacteristics. With the exception of parent attitudes aboutsubstance use, other parental variables--such as parentalsupervision, monitoring, and relations--are notably missing asprimary or secondary correlates. Tertiary correlates Of the 38 variables found to have no more than a minor rolein substance use, 10 were included in at least 100 of thecorrelational analyses in the database for this review. They are:1) substance use by parents, 2) personality traits, 3)intelligence, 4) social personality traits, 5) parentalrelations, 6) affect, 7) participation in structured activities,8) bonding with the peer group, 9) beliefs about healthconsequences of using substances, and 10) self-esteem. Variables requiring further study Several of the secondary and tertiary variables in thestudies reviewed here were insufficiently examined to allowgeneral conclusions to be drawn. However, they may later prove tobe useful to the field. For example, religious affiliation andthe development of substance use-specific values, while notextensively studied as separate variables, both address issuesrelated to social norms and influences that have often been foundto be associated with substance use; thus, an association betweenthese two variables and the onset of substance use might beexpected. Also, availability may prove to be important,especially if it is defined in future studies more broadly (e.g.,as physical and social availability, as discussed in ch. 5)rather than as potential availability (that is, how easy itappears to be to get a substance, if motivated), as many currentsurveys define it. Preventive Interventions Schools can seek to prevent substance use and abuse throughcurriculum-based drug prevention programs and through other, morenovel approaches, such as school-based clinics, studentassistance programs, and holistic environmental interventions.School-based prevention efforts have been hampered, however, by alack of good evaluation data on the most widely marketed programsand by insufficient information about and dissemination of themore promising programs. Numerous studies of the effectiveness of curriculum-baseddrug prevention programs have been completed and reviewed (67).Studies of prevention programs focusing on tobacco have beenextensively reviewed (16,20,54,58,94,132,155) and alcohol studieshave been reviewed several times (62,64,102). Reviews ofschool-based prevention curricula that specifically targetmarijuana or cocaine do not exist. However, several reviews haveexamined studies of programs designed to prevent the use ofmultiple substances (7,25,102,131,156). Even these reviews,however, typically focus primarily on tobacco and alcohol. Effectiveness of Drug Abuse Resistance Education Program Three merchandised curriculum programs have captured asizable share of the prevention program market: DARE (Drug AbuseResistance Education); Quest: Skills for Living; and Here'sLooking at You 2000. Of these, evaluations only of DARE have beenreported in sufficient numbers to allow conclusions to be drawn. The DARE program is delivered in schools by uniformed policeofficers who have been trained in any of five regional trainingcenters. It was designed by the Los Angeles, California, UnifiedSchool District, which borrowed from research-based programsdeveloped in the early 1980s. DARE is delivered annually to about5 million students in all 50 States, at a total cost of about $50million (an average annual cost of about $10 per student) (93).DARE is thus one of the better funded drug prevention programs inschools. One research team examined 17 published and unpublishedevaluations of DARE (53). For the 11 studies that met minimalstandards of methodological rigor, the average reductions insubstance use were very small. Use among control schools and DAREschools was roughly equal. The few studies that were longitudinalfound neither short-term nor long-term reductions. DARE has important strengths, including favorable reactionsamong students who have participated in DARE programs, widespreadpolitical support, substantial funding, uniformly reportedimprovements in school-police relations, highquality of programimplementation, and expert marketing. However, these strengthshave not guaranteed that DARE is always effective as a drugprevention program. A scientific advisory group has beenestablished to review research and evaluation of the DARE programand to consider changes in the curriculum. The General Accounting Office (GAO) estimated that aboutone-fourth of the funds given to the States and local schoolsunder the Drug-Free School and Communities Act went towardpurchasing and delivering school curricula (163). However, widelyadopted curriculum packages (such as Quest: Skills for Living;Here's Looking at You 2000; Project Adventure; BABES; ProjectCHARLIE; and Children Are People) have presented no adequateevaluation results that allow program effectiveness to be judged.Evaluations conducted to date have been primarily short-termreviews for dissertations and theses, and they lack interpretablebehavioral end-points. Given the widespread dissemination ofthese curricula, quality evaluation studies would be important. Conclusions About Curriculum-Based Prevention in Schools Curriculum-based drug prevention efforts to date can becharacterized as showing promise (67,156), but critics point outthat the effectiveness of these programs, especially those thatare being commercially marketed, has not yet been proven and thatsignificant difficulties remain (102). Some of these aremethodological difficulties intrinsic to all field trialresearch, while others relate to the possibly intrinsiclimitations of curriculum approaches when used alone. Individualstudies suggest that curriculum-based prevention programs in theschools may ultimately be proven to be effective for preventingsubstance use among some youth, especially when used ascomponents in more comprehensive substance use preventionefforts. However, school-based prevention technologies currentlyin use have not been refined and tested enough to demonstratetheir effectiveness for reducing substance use for students ingeneral, and especially not for multiproblem youth, who are athigher risk of substance abuse. Clearly, for DARE and for theother major school-based curriculum prevention programs,resources must be set aside to properly evaluate program results. Noncurricular Approaches to School-Based Prevention Curriculum-based efforts have dominated the field, largelybecause they are relatively simple to understand, implement, andreplicate, and because methods to evaluate them have becomestandardized. However, curriculum-based prevention programs havenot been demonstrated to be effective, and several noncurricularapproaches have recently emerged, including student assistanceprograms, school-based clinics, and more holisticschool-community collaborations and alterations of psychosocialenvironments in schools. These approaches have been evaluatedonly rarely, but interest in them has been growing. For example,although student assistance programs remain largely unevaluated,they accounted for about half of the spending, under the Drug-Free Schools and Communities Act, in six recently evaluated urbanschool districts (163). Student assistance programs try to identify substance-usingstudents early on and then provide social support, build skillsfor dealing with life problems, or refer to treatment, asappropriate. Peers often help as crisis managers, small groupfacilitators, and referral agents, while adults often act asprogram facilitators and counselors. Programs typically counselstudents who are children of alcoholics, who use alcohol or drugsabusively, and who are performing poorly at school. Programs canalso help parents address their children's needs. Only three evaluations of student assistance programs werefound by OTA for this review. Two focused on process issues only(89,118), while one addressed program outcomes (90). The outcomestudy focused on interventions for students in six residentialfacilities, including a locked correctional facility. Althoughthe sites are atypical for student assistance programs, theprogram otherwise resembled student assistance programs inschools. The outcome study found that marijuana and tobacco usedeclined among program participants in five of the sixfacilities. Alcohol use declined in half of the sites, whilealcohol use in two sites remained unchanged and in one site roseslightly. The declines in use were observed at about nine and 15months after participation in the program. Although these resultsare promising, one study (especially a study conducted innonschool settings) cannot support general conclusions about theeffectiveness of student assistance programs in schools. Many schools, either directly or through community agencies,are bringing services into schools to help deal with social andhealth problems that are often interrelated, such as depression,violence, substance use, and sexually transmitted diseases.School-based clinics and youth service centers are being set upto provide comprehensive and integrated health and socialservices. This new wave of programming has been supported byState governments, local school districts, and privatefoundations. School-based clinics have been developing in response togrowing poverty, widespread lack of insurance, and increases inhealth and social problems among youth. One study indicates thatthe percent of adolescents defined as living in poverty increasedfrom 15 percent in 1979 to 19 percent in 1986 (22). Not all youthliving in poverty are covered by Medicaid or other healthinsurance, and millions of other youth (e.g., in near-poor orrecently unemployed families) also lack health insurance.Violence, teen pregnancy, and substance use and abuse remain highor are increasing in many communities, and these problems oftenrequire direct one-on-one medical or social interventions, ifthey are to have a chance of being resolved. Self-referral and other data suggest that school-basedclinics are providing health care and social support. Forexample, a survey of 306 such clinics in 33 States and PuertoRico (22) found that about half the visits were for medicalproblems, such as injuries and illnesses, with 40 percent of thevisits for counseling and 10 percent for birth control suppliesor counseling about reproductive issues more generally. Noevaluations seem yet to have focused on the effectiveness ofschool-based clinics for assisting with the treatment andprevention of substance use and abuse. School-based clinicsperhaps should not focus primarily on these problems, but asclinics expand in numbers questions will naturally and morefrequently arise about their role in addressing substance use andrelated problems. Several notable collaborations between schools and othercommunity agencies and resources have been supported and, atleast in part, studied. For example, the Community PartnershipProgram, administered by the Center for Substance AbusePrevention, has supported more than 250 local partnerships forthe prevention of substance use and abuse, with over 60 percentactively involving schools as coalition members. Each site musthave a local evaluator that will monitor primarily programactivities, and a national evaluation to monitor programactivities and outcomes has begun. The local evaluations areexpected to vary widely, in part because uniform, acceptedstandards for community-wide program evaluation have yet to bedeveloped. Outcome findings are expected by 1997. The Midwest Prevention Project (116) provides and studiesschool-based interventions in the greater Kansas City, Missouri,metropolitan area and in Marion County (Indianapolis), Indiana.Due to constraints in the study design, the evaluation results todate speak directly only to the impact of the school-basedcurricular interventions; the impact of community organization,parental, and media components cannot be evaluated. Nonetheless,this approach suggests the potential for communities to supportschool- based prevention efforts. Cities-in-Schools is a national nonprofit organizationdevoted to preventing students from dropping out, throughpartnerships among schools, local governments, and businesses.Cities-in-Schools operates in 122 communities in 21 states with384 schools participating in the program. The nationalorganization strives to bring health, social, and employmentservices into schools across the nation, to help youth find jobs,tutors, and counseling and to motivate them to stay in school. Anational staff assists local boards. A prominent person inbusiness presides over each local program, directs fund-raising,and organizes a team of professionals to help potential dropouts.In most programs, a case manager is assigned to each high-riskchild. Beyond these basics, programs vary greatly, focusing on adiversity of prevention and intervention strategies. SeveralCities- in-Schools sites have achieved national attention.Although little concrete evaluation data are available about theeffects of these programs in general or on substance use, themodel appears promising and warrants further study. Changing the social or physical climate in schools may alsohelp reduce substance use and abuse. Future research andevaluation studies could focus on the impacts on substance useand abuse of this and other holistic models, such as open versusclosed campuses, alternative schools, and after- school careprograms. These models may be especially promising for high riskyouth suffering from multiple risk factors and limited protectivefactors, many of which are rooted in problematic (often substanceusing and abusing) homes, neighborhoods, peer groups, and othersubcultures, which cannot easily be influenced by more limitedschool- based prevention approaches alone. WORKPLACES Workplaces can also contribute to and protect against alcoholand drug abuse. This section reviews literature on factors andinterventions associated with substance abuse in the workplace,with a special focus on the role of workplace settingsthemselves. Researchers have investigated the causes of substanceabuse among workers for nearly four decades, and U.S. managementand labor have been concerned about workplace substance abuse forover a century (150,158,159). Alcohol has been the drug moststudied in workplaces and appears to be the drug most commonlyused. Magnitude of Problem The prevalence of substance abuse among the employed remainsinadequately documented, based on a small number of flawedstudies. For American workers more information exists on theextent of alcohol use and dependence (although gaps remain) thanon the use and abuse of illegal substances (57, 68,114). The 1988 National Health Interview Survey found that about 13percent of employed men and 6 percent of employed women werealcohol dependent (68). This nationwide household survey ofalmost 27,000 individuals found that, for both men and women, thepercentage of white-collar workers who drank was greater than thepercentage of blue-collar workers who drank. However, among thosewho drank, blue-collar workers drank more than white-collarworkers. Consistent with an earlier survey in Detroit, Michigan,alcohol-related disorders were also found to be greater amongblue-collar workers, with the rates highest for men who werecraftsmen, laborers, and service workers, and for women who weremachine operators, laborers, and service workers (114). Anotherinvestigator has reported that the rate of on-the- job substanceuse among young men in the 6 months prior to the study was about28 percent (105). Substance abuse contributes to workplace problems, such asaccidents, injuries, absenteeism, turnover, lost productivity,compensation claims, and insurance costs (11). The total cost tothe American economy related to substance abuse has beenestimated to be more than $144 billion a year, with about 60percent due to alcohol abuse and 40 percent due to the abuse ofother drugs (121). Costs to the economy include costs due tomedical care, prevention, law enforcement, and lost productivity.The 1985 National Household Survey on Drug Abuse found thatsubstance-using employees were 3.6 times more likely to haveaccidents than nonusing employees. They had 2.5 times moreabsences of 8 days or more. They were three times more likely tobe tardy than nonusing employees and were 2.2 times more likelyto ask for early dismissal. They requested sick leave three timesas much as nonusing employees. They were five times as likely tofile for worker compensation. The total cost of lost productivitydue to alcohol and other drug abuse has been estimated at morethan $33 billion in 1985 and a little more than $43 billion in1988 (122). Factors Affecting Individuals in Workplaces Substance abuse in workplaces can be affected by nonworkplacefactors and workplace factors. Nonworkplace Factors Early research attributed drinking and other drug problems onthe job to factors outside the workplace. Substance abuse wasseen as a problem brought to the workplace but not caused by theworkplace, and some believed that substance abusers selectedworkplaces where they could conceal their problems. This viewassumed that substance abusers had the knowledge and freedom tochoose jobs on this basis, an assumption unlikely to apply toall, given the limits of education and work experience among manysubstance abusers, especially blue-collar workers (113). In anycase, family and community experiences interact with workplaceexperiences (2), and workers from families and other subgroupsthat drink may find that drinking influences their work lives aswell. As noted earlier, drinking problems are more common amongthose with lower SES, although drinking occurs more frequentlyamong higher SES individuals (31). Workplaces that employ morelower SES employees may therefore be expected to have morealcohol abusers (157). The acceptance of alcohol and other drugs in the largersociety outside the workplace can also influence substance useand abuse in the workplace. This can be seen in the new attitudesin American society toward smoking. Consumers used to be assailedconstantly by advertisements presenting smoking in a positivelight, but are now more informed about its negative effects onhealth. As a result, smoking has been banned from many airplaneflights, restaurants, stores, and public and private workplaces. The availability of alcohol in the local community from whicha work organization derives its employees can also influenceworkplace drinking (157). Higher rates of drinking problems existin communities where alcohol is cheaply and widely available andalcohol outlets remain open for long hours. Workplace Environment Factors Several decades ago, researchers distinguished fourcategories of workplace factors that place employees at risk forexcessive drinking (127). They are: o lack of work visibility, o absence of job structure, o lack of social controls that discourage alcohol use, and o job stress. A more recent review (157) of risk factors internal toworkplace environments identified the following elements: o alienation and powerlessness, o work stress, o structural features of the workplace, o influence of administrative subcultures, o poorly implemented intervention programs, and o union-management conflict. It has also been suggested that individual factors andperceived work situations may be more important for alcohol usethan objective work situations (136). Those with boring androutine jobs, or jobs over which they have little control, may bemore likely to drink (3,76). For example, a study of auto factoryassembly line workers found that 40 percent drank alcohol at work(129). Other research found a consistent relationship betweenpowerlessness and alcohol use, and no evidence that workexperience or social support moderated alcohol use (137). Workplace subcultures, whether administrative oroccupational, may also encourage drinking or the use of otherdrugs at work. Administrative support for heavy drinking canexist throughout the work organization or can be limited tospecific sites or occasions. Subcultures that can support theheavy use of alcohol, but strongly discourage the use of illicitdrugs, are found in the military (28,119). Anecdotal reportssuggest that other occupational settings have encouraged the useof cocaine (e.g., entertainment industry). Although availableresearch does not support the conclusion that workplacesubcultures are the primary cause of substance abuse, there isevidence that at least alcohol problems vary widely according tooccupation (148). Workplaces can offer protective factors as well. For some,the fact of being employed, with the income and stability andstatus that employment can convey, may offer protection againstsubstance use and abuse. If unemployment and underemployment areviewed as risk factors, then employment by itself, at a decentwage in a decent job, may offer protection. In addition, thespecific characteristics of a workplace can be protective. Forexample, the risk factors listed above could be viewed as theextremes on a continuum, the other end of which could be expectedto offer protection. Thus, work visibility, job structure,manageable stress, worker involvement and empowerment, supportiveadministrators, well implemented treatment and preventionprograms, and union-management harmony could be expected to beprotective factors. Interventions Two primary ways of dealing with employee substance abuse andhealth have emerged: traditional employee assistance programs(EAPs), which seek to help employees with identified problems,and health promotion programs, which seek to prevent illness andpromote health (56). Employee Assistance Programs EAPs help employees with personal problems at the employer'sexpense, by providing services directly (through the workorganization) or indirectly (through a provider in the community)(140). In some workplaces, for example, EAPs are located inmedical departments, which generally provide emergency medicalcare and may also provide preventive or rehabilitative care.Medical departments, however, appear to be declining as sites forEAPs (141). EAPs rely on a strategy of constructive confrontation, whichassumes that supervisors or coworkers of substance abusers willhelp refer them to the EAPs. In addition, workers are encouragedto refer themselves to EAPs for assistance. A review of what works in fighting substance abuse in theworkplace stresses that an employee assistance program is a keyto a good workplace program (167). It also recommends a writtendrug-free workplace policy, management and supervisory training,drug testing in workplaces where appropriate (one example ofwhich is when substance abuse may be dangerous to self orothers), and employee education programs focused on substanceabuse. Testing may well prevent substance use and abuse inworkplaces. Some studies suggest that EAPs can be cost-effective forbusiness. The Department of Labor has reported thatemployersgenerally find that for every dollar invested in an EAP, savingsof from $5 to $16 are achieved (167). Other reviews of thelimited evaluations of the economic and other benefits of EAPshave found that health care costs and absenteeism, for example,decline after employees have been served by EAPs (178). However, EAPs have also been criticized in some cases, fortheir inability to reach those at greatest risk, their incompletecoverage of lower status employees, their failures to identifyproblem drinkers early enough, their inadequate handling ofsituation-dependent drinking problems, and their uncertaineffectiveness in rehabilitating problem drinkers (140). Therelative lack of EAPs in medium and small workplaces is animportant constraint on the ability of EAPs to offer morewidespread protection to the employed. Health Promotion Programs Health promotion programs seek to prevent illness and promotewellness through behavior change. For example, they provideinformation and support activities to help individuals increaseexercise, quit smoking, change diets, and manage stress andhypertension. There are several advantages to using such generalworkplace health promotion programs to prevent substance abuse inthe context of promoting positive life-style changes for allemployees. These include: o little or no stigma; o the use of positive, optimistic approaches; o ease in selling to employees and generating enthusiasm;and, o generous corporate financing of health promotion programs(103). The use of health promotion programs to prevent substanceabuse can also present problems, however. For example, preventionhistorically has been one of the lowest priorities for Federalfunding (104). When implemented by businesses, health promotionprograms may inadequately deal with the needs of a particularwork organization's employees, since the programs often come fromoutside and have not been tailored to fit the needs of aparticular group of employees. Decision makers within a workplacemay decide on the basis of intuition, whim, or trendiness to buya health promotion program from the increasing number ofpurveyors of programs (140). Furthermore, many of the proponentsof marketed health promotion programs have failed to adequatelyevaluate their programs. Unfortunately, this has beenparticularly true of activities intended to prevent substanceabuse. Environment-Oriented Approaches to Substance Abuse Prevention A third approach, often associated with Scandinavia, focusesless on changing employee behaviors and more on alteringworkplace factors that influence worker health. The Swedish WorkEnvironment Fund, established in 1972, supports research,workplace innovations, information dissemination, and training toachieve better working environments. Grants that supportoccupational health centers and research programs in Sweden arefinanced through a combination of employer fees, payroll taxes,and government financial assistance. By contrast, the goal of alcohol policy in the workplace inthe United States has for centuries been to change individualdrinking behavior (1). Researchers have recently begun to focuson how the workplace environment influences problem drinking. TheHarvard School of Public Health, jointly funded by the NationalInstitute on Alcohol Abuse and Alcoholism and the Robert WoodJohnson Foundation, is surveying thousands of managers and workgroups in up to 10 large multinational corporations (171). Thestudy will determine corporate and work site patterns ofdrinking, levels of work site drinking problems as they relate toattitudes and practices of management, how corporate cultureaffects managerial behavior and drinking problems in theworkplace, and what role the work group plays in promoting orpreventing problem drinking. RECREATIONAL SETTINGS Recreational and other developmental activities and settingsmay also contribute to the prevention of substance use and abuse,or by their absence increase the risk. Examples of suchrecreational and other developmental activities and settingsinclude Boys and Girls Clubs, Boy and Girl Scouts, organizedsports, cultural activities, and local park and recreationdepartment programs. Organized Activities and Drug Abuse Research on the impact of organized youth activities onsubstance use and abuse is limited, and only a few studies haveaddressed the issue directly, while others have addressed it moreindirectly. One study (which relied extensively on reports from employeesof Boys and Girls Clubs) found that public housing developmentsserved by Clubs had 22 percent less drug activity thandevelopments not served by Clubs. The presence of crack inparticular was 25 percent lower, and even lower in developmentsserved by new Clubs with SMART Moves, a substance abuseprevention program (133). A more extensive investigation has been conducted by theSearch Institute, which has surveyed 180,000 6th through 12thgrade youth in 430 school districts since 1988. Analysis of thedata found that as developmental assets increased (includinginvolvement in music, school team sports, nonsport school-basedcocurricular activities, nonschool clubs or organizations, andchurches) at-risk behaviors decreased, including the use ofalcohol, tobacco, and illicit drugs (12). Specifically, thecorrelations: o tend to be small; o are strongest for tobacco use and weakest for alcohol use;and, o are slightly higher for church involvement than for otheractivities. Involvement in youth programs and activities has been foundto be associated with fewer at-risk behaviors among youth. Onestudy found that higher levels of four youth assets (perceivedpositive school climate, family support, involvement instructured youth activities, and involvement in church orsynagogue) were associated with lower levels of 20 at-riskindicators, contained mainly in eight at-risk domains (alcohol,tobacco, illicit drugs, sexuality, depression/suicide, antisocialbehavior, school, and vehicle safety) (12). High school studentswho listed no assets, for example, reported an average of 5.6at-risk indicators, while students listing all 4 assets reportedonly 1.7 at- risk indicators. A study of different communities found that 55 percent of theyouth in the healthier communities (defined by fewer at- riskbehaviors among youth) were involved in structured activities,whereas only 39 percent of the youth in the least healthycommunities were involved in such activities (19). Qualitative assessments across prevention disciplines supportthese findings. For example, although a review and analysis ofdelinquency, adolescent pregnancy, substance abuse, and schoolfailure and dropout prevention programs did not directlyinvestigate connections between youth development programs andsubstance abuse prevention, its authors concluded that theelements in youth development organizations can play a criticalrole in preventing each of these problem behaviors (48). The Carnegie Council on Adolescent Development has identifiedseveral successful prevention efforts launched by nationalyouth-serving organizations, including the adolescent pregnancyefforts of the Association of Junior Leagues and of Girls, Inc.,and found that participation in such programs was associated withfewer at-risk behaviors (32). The Carnegie Council's Task Forceon Youth Development and Community Programs concluded that, takentogether, current social science theory and field evaluationsprovide a solid rationale for strengthening and expanding therole of community-based programs in promoting healthy adolescentdevelopment, since unsupervised after-school hours represent aperiod of significant risk, with young adolescents standing agreater chance of engaging in substance abuse. Another study tested whether inactivity or boredom wasassociated with substance abuse. It compared adolescents who hadbeen clinically diagnosed as substance abusers with a comparisongroup of nonsubstance abusers, and found that the substanceabusers experienced their leisure activities as more boring, eventhough they had participated in more leisure activities(including such activities as going to concerts and going for adrive). Available leisure activities may, for some youth, fail tosatisfy "their need for optimal arousal," leaving themmore vulnerable to the appeal of drugs (78). Thus, being active does not by itself protect againstsubstance abuse. Some activities, such as those that areunstructured and unsupervised, may even increase the risks ofsubstance use and abuse through association with a wider range ofpeers, some of whom are using substances. In addition, activitiesperceived as boring may not protect against substance use andabuse. More research is needed, to clarify the aspects ofrecreational and other leisure activities that may protectagainst substance use and abuse. Research might profitably focuson whether activities that are supervised, structured, drug-free,empowering, skills- building, self-esteem-promoting, active,shared, and nonboring (or some combination of those) areassociated with lower levels of substance use and abuse. Elements of Notable Programs Several of the most important elements of notable substanceabuse prevention programs are provided by youth developmentprograms as well. These include: o Promoting social and life skills. Programs that relyexclusively on transmitting information about the health, legal,and social risks of substance use and abuse are generallyineffective (79). If, as the author of a recent longitudinalstudy contends, substance use is a symptom rather than a cause ofpersonal and social maladjustment, promoting social andpsychological well-being may help prevent substance abuse (66).Many alcohol and other drug prevention programs focus on thedevelopment of social and life skills, as a way to help youthunderstand their emotions, control their anger, curbaggressiveness, and presumably reduce their inclination to turnto substances (66,166). o Strengthening families. Increasingly, alcohol and otherdrug prevention programs are recognizing and addressing familyfactors. Youth development organizations afford opportunities forinvolving parents in recreational and other nonschool, nonfamilyactivities. o Promoting healthy peer interactions. Several studies haveshown the value of using peers as role models in preventionprograms. One study conducted a meta-analysis of 143 adolescentdrug prevention programs and collapsed prevention programs into 5strategies or types: knowledge only, affective (i.e., addressingfeelings) only, peer programs, knowledge plus affective, andalternatives. Peer programs that highlight peer influences andemphasize skill building were found to be the most successful(156). Peers are often the best positioned to help others buildresistance skills and bring about significant results in reducingsubstance use, as compared to teachers or other adults. Peercounseling and student assistance programs, for example, offerunique opportunities for youth to cope with difficult issues anddevelop skills to resist peer pressure (33). o Indirect and participatory approaches to substance use.Substance prevention programs are more likely to be effective ifthey develop creative ways to reach and connect with theirparticipants. Many programs incorporate lessons concerningsubstance use into activities such as games, theatricalperformances, creative arts, and sports. Some programs avoidstating in their names that they are focusing on substance useprevention, and in this way often attract more youth and precludethem from feeling stigmatized (161). Because youth spend so muchtime in school, where didactic, lecturing approaches so oftenpredominate, these approaches may well be less effective innonschool activities. GAO has recommended that programs engageyouth in activities that are more motivational and participatory,such as support groups, dramatic productions, leadershiptraining, and role- playing (161). o Alternative activities. Communities are beginning to createhealthy, substance-free alternative activities, such as teencenters or drug-free parties, for youth who may feel there isnothing else to do. This alternatives approach grows from theidea that youth who turn to substances to meet certain social andpsychological needs can meet those needs in more positive andhealthy ways without chemicals. In its guide book, PreventionPlus III, CSAP stresses the importance of incentives for youth toparticipate in such alternative activities. At a minimum,activities should reflect the interests and preferences of theyouth involved. A 10-year study with over 500 subjects found thatthe largest percentage (67 percent) of assuredly recoveredsubstance abusers, defined as those who have been clean for fiveyears, used alternative activities to cope with or improve theirmoods (169). However, although it remains a promising strategy,many agree that more substantial research is needed. The elements of notable programs suggest that youthdevelopment organizations may be able to play a greater role inthe prevention of substance abuse. First, they can providespecific information about substances and training in refusalskills. Second, they can address life skills development,emotional issues, and academic remediation. Further, they caninvolve both youth and their families, as well as peers, insettings for collaborative, substance-free interactions. Researchhas shown the importance of building supportive communitiesthrough such networks of social support that can diminishsubstance use and abuse and promote healthy youth development(14,19,133). PLANNING, IMPLEMENTING, AND EVALUATINGCOMMUNITY-WIDE PROGRAMS If substance abuse and addiction problems in a particularcommunity affect individuals via multiple risk and protectivefactors interacting in multiple settings, then efforts to preventthese problems may require multipronged efforts involvingschools, parents, media messages, and other community resources(116). While it is possible that an assessment of problems may becarried out by relatively few individuals, it is extremelyunlikely that the planning, implementation, and evaluation ofcommunity-wide efforts can be achieved without participation ofresidents and leaders throughout the community. Widespreadcoordination and cooperation are intrinsic to community-wideefforts. To help achieve such community-wide coordination andcooperation, several different types of community coalitions havebeen created. The CSAP has studied the ability of 7 pilot testcommunities, under Community Partnership grants, to gatherinformation on 15 community-wide indicators of alcohol and otherdrug abuse (see table 8-3). Some of these indicators are directlyrelated to and measure the extent of substance abuse andaddiction among subpopulations in a community (e.g., number ofdrug positive urine samples from pregnant women at time ofdelivery). Some of the indicators measure the extent of behaviorsor outcomes that may be directly related to substance abuse(e.g., number of single vehicle nighttime accidents and number ofdeaths due to alcohol and other drugs). Some of the CSAPindicators relate to community activity settings, such asworkplaces and schools. CSAP has recently supported, through the CommunityPartnership program and the High-Risk Youth program, the use ofnonquantitative techniques to gain insights into substance abuseand addiction and related problems in communities. Thisinformation can be garnered by ethnographers and citizeninformants, who can report on the values, attitudes, purposes,behaviors, and experiences of individuals in the subcultures ofcommunities. The Robert Wood Johnson Foundation has funded 13 communitycoalitions in its "Fighting Back" program to reducesubstance abuse and addiction. About 600 coalitions now belong toa national organization, Community Anti-Drug Coalitions ofAmerica (CADCA). Some coalitions have been formed to addressother health and social issues, including the ASSIST and COMMITcommunity tobacco control programs, funded by the NationalInstitutes of Health, and the Planned Approach to CommunityHealth (PATCH) program, funded by the Centers for Disease Controland Prevention to encourage local coalitions for community healthplanning and implementation (29). HUD now has funds to supportCommunity Coalitions Against Crime, which also address substanceabuse and addiction. And CSAP has supported numerous activitiesconducted by approximately 250 coalitions through its CommunityPartnership program (see table 8-4). A recent review of some of the Community Partnershipsrevealed the wide range of activities they have so farimplemented, including general prevention programs, publiceducation, alternative activities, community organizing andempowerment, advocacy for policy change, and other communityactivities. Although coalitions have not been extensively evaluated asyet, and although the evaluations that are now in process willnot produce outcome results for several years, there is reason tobelieve that community coalitions offer promise forcommunity-wide efforts to prevent substance abuse and addiction.First, as documented by this report, the factors contributing tosubstance abuse and addiction are multiple and interactive.Second, these factors interact in subcultures and communityactivity settings that can encourage or inhibit substance abuseand addiction and are widely dispersed. Thus, especially incommunities severely impacted by these problems, multiple effortsaddressing multiple factors in multiple settings may be required.A recent report from the General Accounting Office concluded that"preliminary research results indicated that acommunity-based approach may hold promise in preventing druguse," and went on to emphasize the need for comprehensiveevaluations of such efforts (162). Community coalitions could make use of the framework in thisreport to develop plans for preventive interventions addressingtargeted populations in selected community activity settings.Building on a systematic quantitative and nonquantitativeassessment of needs, a coalition could identify optionalpreventive interventions that address selected populations andsettings, and then phase them in as resources permit. However,some community coalitions may need additional support andtechnical assistance to help them resolve conflicts, formconsensus on goals and plans, and sustain cooperative,coordinated efforts that are subject to more rigorous evaluationsand midcourse corrections. Each community coalition needs to takea critical look at what works and what does not work, and needsto be flexible enough to try promising and proven analytical andprogrammatic technologies, even if they are somewhat new to thecoalition. SUMMARY This chapter has reviewed research on factors andinterventions relevant to the onset and prevention of substanceuse, abuse, and addiction in the four principal communityactivity settings--homes and families, schools and peers,workplaces, and recreational and other community settings.Research indicates that families may influence whether familymembers, especially (but not limited to) the young, initiatesubstance use and progress to abuse and dependency, and can bethe target of a wide range of increasingly tested preventiveinterventions that can help family members resist the use ofsubstances. Similarly, schools, especially through peer groupnorms and behaviors related to substance use, can also beimportant locations for the onset of substance use (includingalcohol use) and for preventive interventions, especially thosethat focus on social influences, including peers. Factors inworkplaces, although less studied, can also contribute to andprotect against substance use and abuse, and workplaceinterventions that focus on individuals and environments provideopportunities for prevention. Finally, an emerging literature onthe role of recreational settings and activities, especially foryouth, suggests that the availability of attractive andcompelling substance-free activities can play a role indissuading youth from becoming heavily involved in the use andabuse of substances. BOX 8-1: Example of Short-Term Thinking Eighteen-year-oldLyle is a senior at an inner-city highschool. In four weeks, hewill receive his high schooldiploma. In six months, he willbecome a father.Lyle has a significant history of delinquentbehavior,including assault, drug dealing, and grand larceny. Hehasrecently withdrawn from a gang because "it's gottencrazyand it's gotten really out of hand" and "I don'twant todie." However, he adds, "I still hang with thefellows andstuff like that."Because he "feels likeworking," Lyle is looking forward togetting out of highschool. He has no plans for college,which he regards as "toomuch hassle, to tell you thetruth." His plans for the futureare vague--to "work, makemoney, you know"--but he triesnot to think about it muchbecause, "you know, you mightdie." For Lyle, "the wayeverything's happening now, youcan't really think about thefuture...the way things happen now,you can get shot comingout of your house. You can be shot in thewindow, you know."Lyle is a daily smoker of ten or morecigarettes, a habit hedescribes as "like a everydayroutine--whenever I can gettime to smoke one, I'll smokeone." He drinks a couple beersalmost daily, and also smokesmarijuana "most likely" everyday.But Lyle avoids harderdrugs, like cocaine, because "I don'twant to killmyself." By way of explanation, he adds "I'drather killmyself slowly than fast."SOURCE: H. Stauber, "I've GotPlenty of Cells to Waste:"Perceptions of danger andinvulnerability among reckless-behaving adolescents, Unpublishedpaper, Harvard GraduateSchool of Education, in progress. BOX 8-2: Janice Janice, a 28-year-old, white, married female,was inoutpatient treatment for bulimia nervosa, abinge-purgepattern of eating that began when she was 18 yearsold. Shealso had an intermittent history of alcohol abusedatingfrom midadolescence. Janice appeared to be well-motivatedintreatment. She used the psychoeducational approach taught byhertherapist to increase her knowledge of how her binge-eating andmoodiness were related to her restricted dailycaloric intake. Shemade progress quickly, using cognitivebehavioral techniques tochallenge her distortions andunderstand her behavior; she beganto eat consistent mealsin adequate amounts. These changes led toa decrease in herbinge-eating and self-induced vomiting. However,along withthis progress she became increasingly anxious, fearful,andagitated about weight gain (despite the fact that littleornone had occurred). At the same time, she became overwhelmedbythe intensity of the feelings she experienced, was havingbaddreams, and withdrew from her support system in waysthat angeredher friends. She once more resorted toinconsistent meal patterns,dieting, poor nutrition, and--inevitably--binge-eating andvomiting. Her alcohol useincreased.Janice's symptomatologyshifted once she significantlydecreased her bulimic behavior.Instead of dealing witheveryday feelings, behavior, and thoughts,she began torelive memories from her unresolved traumatic past.Thesememories started with vague feelings of uneasiness,whichgrew more intense as she binged less. She then begantoremember her dreams, which, as they came into clearerfocus,caused her to be suspicious of her friends, andparticularlyof the men around her. Janice reported feeling fineoneminute and then very frightened the next. Whereas she usedtobe flattered by any male attention, she now felt fearfulwhen menlooked at her. She started to remember multiplesexual assaults inher past, both by persons known to herand by strangers. She feltincreasing urges to suicide, andobserved the reality of herinternal suffering as being "tooawful." As she said,"If this is what recovery is all about,I don't think it'sworth it; I'll take my chances andstruggle with addictions. If Ican't stand that, there'salways suicide."SOURCE: M.P. Root,"Treatment Failures: The Role of SexualVictimization inWomen's Addictive Behavior," AmericanJournal ofOrthopsychiatry, 59(4), 543, 1989. BOX 8-3: Dara Dara (20) was the natural mother of Christina(9 months).Christina was in danger of placement in foster caredue tothe cocaine addiction of her mother. Her father, Matt,wasserving time in jail on a drug charge. Christina'solderbrother, Jason, was placed in foster care priortoHomebuilder involvement. Dara's addiction prevented herfromproperly caring for herself and the children. Dara rentedtheupstairs apartment in her parent's home. Her19-year-oldboyfriend, Brian, spent a great deal of time with herandChristina.I helped Dara find out about drug treatment centersand aschedule for Narcotic Anonymous (N.A.). She missed herfirstdrug evaluation because of having an abortion. She andBrianwent to one N.A. meeting and then missed many days. TheCPScaseworker met with me and Dara and stressed the importanceofher drug recovery. Dara agreed to complete the evaluationas wellas attend N.A. meetings. Initially I accompanied herto the N.A.meetings for moral support. Sometimes Brianwould go and the restof the time her mother would accompanyher. Dara successfullycompleted her drug evaluation andattended regular counselingsessions with a drug counselor.She volunteered for urinalysis,"just to keep her honest."Dara got involved with otheryoung adults in N.A. They wentto eat together and went out todances and movies. She beganassociating with a new peer group.The CPS caseworkerauthorized maximum day-care to be paid for soshe couldattend her meetings and counseling. Dara'smothervolunteered to baby-sit Christina if Dara was withherfriends from N.A.Dara's husband got out of jail and wanted adivorce. Hefiled for custody of both of their children. I helpedDaraarrange for legal aid. She said she was more determinedthanever to "stay straight so she would look good incourt" overthe custody of the children.Dara asked herboyfriend to move out so she could live byherself. She and Briancontinue to stay in contact from timeto time. Dara retainedcustody of Christina. She and Mattagreed on joint custody oftheir son, Jason, and Dara sawhim every other weekend. Shecontinued drug counseling andattending N.A. Her urinalysis alwaystested negative.SOURCE: J. Kinney, D. Haapala, and C. Booth,KeepingFamilies Together, (pp. 22-23) (New York: Aldine DeGruyter,1991)._ CliffSchaffer's Home Page WT01-B29-16IA030-000641-B024-159http://206.61.184.43:80/schaffer/LIBRARY/studies/ota/ch9.htm 206.61.184.43 19970122140351 text/html 47105HTTP/1.0 200 OKDate: Wednesday, 22-Jan-97 14:03:40 GMTServer: WebSitePro/1.1f (S/N wpo-0deb)Allow-ranges: bytesContent-type: text/htmlLast-modified: Saturday, 28-Dec-96 06:49:29 GMTContent-length: 46887 CHAPTER 9 POLICY OPTIONS TECHNOLOGIES FOR UNDERSTANDING AND PREVENTING SUBSTANCEABUSE AND ADDICTION US Government Office of Technology Assessment October 18, 1994 CHAPTER 9 POLICY OPTIONS Issues related to substance abuse and addiction have longoccupied the attention of the American public. Congress has:authorized a multitude of federal programs aimed at reducing orpreventing the supply and demand of illicit drugs and to regulatethe availability of illicit substances, appropriated billions ofdollars each year to federal agencies, provided oversight offederal programs, and passed broad-based legislation tocoordinate programs as part of the war on drugs. Congress faces several fundamental difficulties in addressingthe causes of substance abuse and addiction: o No scientific consensus exists as to what is the drivingcause of substance abuse and addiction. A range of risk andprotective factors have been associated with drug use, abuse, andaddiction. o Federal antidrug efforts, though coordinated by the WhiteHouse Office of National Drug Control Policy (ONDCP), are spreadamong many federal agencies, whose authorization andappropriations are the subject of action by numerouscongressional committees and subcommittees. ONDCP efforts in drugdemand reduction efforts alone involved the efforts of federalagencies across at least 11 Cabinet-level departments. This makescoordinated legislative action difficult to achieve. o The federal budget deficit is an obstacle to the creationof new domestic programs that target known risk and protectivefactors in individuals and communities. The framework andliterature reviews presented in this report make clear thatmultiple factors in individuals, groups, and substance abuse andaddiction can arise and be influenced by communities. Thus,effective intervention requires prevention practitioners toselect from a variety of options, so they can target the specificfactors that are especially important for the particularpopulations and communities they are addressing. This does notmean that everything must be done at once nor that everything beknown in advance of taking action. To the contrary, policymakersand practitioners can take small steps at a time, and then, asresources and new knowledge permit, take additional steps thataddress a fuller range of factors and contexts in greater depth. o Current drug prevention programs lack scientificallyaccepted standards for determining their success or failure.While federal supply-side efforts yield hard data (e.g., amountof illicit drugs confiscated, number of persons incarcerated), itis much more difficult to demonstrate and quantify the impact ofa domestic program designed, in part or in whole, to prevent drugabuse. Whatever methods are developed, tested, and incorporatedinto prevention programs, a critical component of success iscareful, rigorous evaluation. Answering "what works?"is essential in making advances in preventing substance abuse. This chapter addresses some of the policy issues brought tothe Office of Technology Assessment's (OTA's) attention duringthe course of this assessment, and possible options forcongressional action. The issues and options are broken into fourbroad categories: federal focus and prevention program structure,research needs, community activity settings, and availability.Given the broad nature of federal antidrug efforts, manyimportant issues relating to federal antidrug efforts remainbeyond the scope of this report. Such topics include drugtreatment, interdiction and enforcement, and drug legalization. The order in which the issues and options are presented doesnot imply priority. Moreover, the options presented under eachpolicy question are intended as a short menu from which Congresscan choose one or more options for consideration andimplementation, and they are not necessarily mutually exclusive. FEDERAL FOCUS AND PREVENTION PROGRAM STRUCTURE Supply vs. Demand Reduction The federal substance abuse control policy has as its primaryfocus the eradication of the supply of drugs. The federalgovernment currently spends over $12 billion annually on antidrugefforts, with approximately two-thirds of this amount supportingdrug interdiction and law enforcement activities, and theremainder supporting demand- side activities, such as drugtreatment, research, and prevention programs. While ONDCP's mostrecent National Drug Control Strategy argued for a slightlyincreased percentage of funds for demand-side reduction, thelarger percentage of funds remain devoted to supply-side efforts.Congress could decide that existing levels of effort and programapproaches in interdiction may need to be continued for a longerperiod of time before they can succeed in reducing theproduction, distribution, and local availability of illicitsubstances. Congress could direct that interdiction efforts, andthe balance between supply and demand efforts, continue on thesame track. If Congress decided to increase federal efforts in demandreduction efforts, it could adopt any of three methods: 1)increase appropriations for treatment and prevention programs; 2)redirect some of the interdiction funds to increase support fortreatment and prevention programs; or 3) require that assetsforfeited in drug seizures be increasingly used to supporttreatment and prevention programs. If Congress chose to simplyincrease appropriations for additional treatment and preventionprograms, this option would require raising the current level offederal spending for drug control efforts at a time when thefederal deficit is a key concern. Since costly interdiction andincarceration programs have not eliminated either the supply ofillicit substances or the demand for and use of such substances,Congress could decide to increase appropriations for treatmentand prevention programs by reallocating funds currently spent indrug interdiction and law enforcement activities; this would meana drop in supply-side efforts such as drug interdiction and lawenforcement activities. The reallocation of assets forfeited indrug seizures to treatment and prevention programs, if donetogether with closer coordination of local antidrug efforts amonglaw enforcement and treatment and prevention practitioners, maybe an attractive small step. Congress could direct that ONDCPmonitor the reallocation of such assets, to ensure the flow offunds to programs that directly focus on substance abuse andaddiction and, programs that do not directly address substanceabuse and addiction but that target risk and protective factorsknown to be associated with abuse and addiction. Many stakeholders agree that the federal antidrug effortshould be more focused on treatment and prevention. Widespreaddisagreement exists, however, as to whether such additionaltreatment and prevention efforts should be created at the expenseof, or in addition to, current supply-side efforts. Structure of ONDCP Since its creation in 1988, ONDCP has served as the mostvisible federal entity in the war on drugs. The Director, theso-called drug czar, has the opportunity to galvanize publicattention on federal antidrug efforts, and to propose andadvocate policies within the White House. ONDCP's effectivenessis limited, however, both in its statute and through itsoperation as a White House office. Congress could choose toreauthorize ONDCP, and in so doing maintain or alter its missionand authority; or allow ONDCP to expire. If Congress chooses to reauthorize ONDCP, a number of optionsexist for altering its mission. Congress could: o Direct ONDCP to address the full range of the most harmfulabusable substances, including alcohol, tobacco, and inhalants.Although federally funded prevention programs address the rangeof abusable substances, the statute creating ONDCP emphasizedillicit substances. As a result, ONDCP has historically providedlimited attention on abusable substances that have beenassociated with higher levels of death and injury than illicitdrugs. More recently, ONDCP increased the focus in its NationalDrug Control Strategy on the illicit use of alcohol and tobaccoby minors because of the extensive damage to the health andsafety of minors, resulting from the use and abuse of thesesubstances. This approach could be enhanced through congressionalauthorization. o Alter ONDCP's leadership structure. ONDCP by statute has aDeputy Director of Supply Reduction and a Deputy Director forDemand Reduction. This structure has, in part, resulted in anongoing public policy debate regarding the overall federal focuson antidrug efforts, with supply-side and demand-side reductionefforts seen by some as philosophically incompatible (seediscussion on supply versus demand reduction earlier in thischapter). By creating an alternative structure, ONDCP may beencouraged to adopt programs that more closely link variouselements of the antidrug strategy (e.g., a focus on drugavailability could link current supply-side elements that targetphysical availability of a drug with current demand-side effortsthat focus on economic and social availability, as discussed inchapter 4). Despite the advantages that may result from a neworganizational structure, the simplicity of the current structuremakes it easier to provide a sharper focus on supply and demandelements of the National Drug Control Strategy. o Give ONDCP increased authority over federal agency antidrugprograms. Although ONDCP is charged with leading a war on drugs,its authority is limited to a coordinating function. Congresscould provide the Director of ONDCP with specific authority overcertain elements of various federal programs, or with additionalauthority over federal agency budget proposals. Such actionswould give the drug czar more substantive authority to direct thewar on drugs, but would likely be viewed by some federal agenciesas an unwarranted intrusion in agency matters. o Mandate the size of ONDCP. Because it is part of theExecutive Office of the President, ONDCP is subject to increasedpolitical manipulation by each administration. Recently, forexample, ONDCP took the largest personnel cut of any White Houseoffice to meet President Clinton's pledge of a 25 percentreduction in overall size of White House staff. While mandating aspecific size for ONDCP might lead to increased effectiveness forthe office, it would hamper White House efforts to control staffsize. Alternatively, Congress could allow the authorization forONDCP to expire. While ONDCP has produced National Drug ControlStrategies that summarize and set policy for federal efforts, theoffice lacks the authority to shape the antidrug policies of thefederal agencies. Coordination of antidrug efforts is difficultat best when the number of relevant agencies is so large; sinceantidrug policy involves many federal agencies, it might makesense to disband ONDCP and rely on efforts by diverse federalagencies to continue to address the many aspects of the drugproblem. Recent reductions in the size of the ONDCP staff, as apart of the down-sizing of the White House staff, could make thisan opportune time to eliminate the office altogether. TerminatingONDCP would, however, be viewed by many as federal abdication ofthe war on drugs. Structure of Federal Substance Abuse Prevention Programs Federal efforts supporting substance abuse preventionprograms are housed at a number of agencies. Congress recentlyreorganized the Alcohol, Drug Abuse, and Mental HealthAdministration (ADAMHA), splitting service-based components intothe Substance Abuse and Mental Health Services Administration(SAMHSA) and research-based components--the National Institute onAlcohol Abuse and Alcoholism (NIAAA), the National Institute onDrug Abuse (NIDA), and the National Institute on Mental Health(NIMH)-- into the National Institutes of Health (NIH). Morerecently, the Centers for Disease Control (CDC) has been renamedthe Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDCP), which hasalready expanded its title and mission to include prevention.Congress could maintain the current structure if it determinesthat substance abuse is a problem that has many aspects anddeserves to be addressed by many agencies and in many settings. If Congress decided to create a more centralized structure,it could enact legislation designating a single federal entity asthe chief agency for prevention efforts, or merge the componentsof various agencies under one federal roof. Possibilitiesinclude: o Merging NIDA and NIAAA into a single National Institute onSubstance Abuse and Addiction. The use of multiple substances(including alcohol, tobacco, marijuana, cocaine, and heroin) isincreasingly reported by researchers and practitioners. Indeed,the gateway theory or hypothesis focuses on the progression inthe use of substances, beginning with alcohol and tobacco (whichare illegal for youth, but legal for adults) and moving tomarijuana, cocaine, and heroin. Since clinicians and researchershave increasingly commented on the progression in substance useand on the co-occurrence of the use of multiple substances, theseparation of the major federal research agencies into an alcoholagency (NIAAA) and a drug agency (NIDA) is more and moreinconsistent with the shape of the problem. The Center forSubstance Abuse Prevention (CSAP) is an integrated substanceabuse agency that explicitly focuses on alcohol, tobacco, andother drugs, and all state alcohol and drug abuse agencies arenow integrated or located in the same place. To facilitate moreintegrated and coherent research on the range of abusablesubstances, NIDA and NIAAA could be combined into a nationalinstitute on substance abuse and addiction. Such a merger wouldfurther integrate the federal research efforts in substanceabuse, but might be seen by some as downplaying the emphasisgiven to illicit substances. o Place CSAP in CDCP or in the Health Resources and ServicesAdministration (HRSA). CDCP could give the substance abuseprevention field a solid base in the health and medical sciences,especially in the tracking and prevention of diseases. HRSA couldgive CSAP a broader health care environment to work within, whichincludes Community Health Centers and the National Health ServiceCorps. One disadvantage to the merging of CSAP into either ofthese other health agencies is that it would emphasize themedical aspects and interventions of drug prevention and downplaythe many nonmedical factors and interventions that are importantin the onset of substance use and abuse. Merger would alsopresent problems of moving people--CSAP is headquartered inRockville, Maryland, while CDCP is headquartered in Atlanta,Georgia--and threaten the loss of identity that some proponentsof CSAP say is found in an agency that solely addresses substanceabuse and prevention. However, the fragmentation of the federaleffort on substance abuse prevention has been viewed by some asextreme and counterproductive, and the efforts of ONDCP have notsucceeded in achieving coordination across departments. o Merge federal substance abuse prevention efforts into asingle agency, such as CSAP. CSAP has been workingcollaboratively with the staff in many other federal agencies,and would be seen as a natural leader for this effort. Inaddition, its recent efforts to begin to develop standards ofpractice for substance abuse and addiction prevention programscould be continued and more effectively infused into thecomponents of programs currently in other agencies anddepartments. Evaluation of Prevention Programs Current drug prevention programs lack scientifically acceptedstandards for determining their success or failure. Mostevaluations focus on the processes used in formulating andimplementing a prevention program (e.g., who was involved, whattype of program was used) and outcome evaluation (e.g., how manypeople were part of the program, how the program was replicated).Congress could allow the current level of process and outcomeevaluation related to substance abuse prevention programs tocontinue. If it chose to improve the quality of program evaluation,Congress could direct NIDA and NIAAA, or CSAP to design, lead,and support a multiyear national process (involvingrepresentatives of other federal agencies and of outsideorganizations) to forge consensus on standardized definitions andoutcome measures, using technical reviews, consensus-formingtechniques, and technical assistance monographs. Thesedefinitions and measures could include substance use, heavydrinking, substance abuse, substance addiction or dependency, andrelated behavioral problems such as school truancy, unemployment,delinquent and criminal behaviors, and the like. CSAP, NIDA,NIAAA, the Department of Education (DOE), and other federalagencies could be required to increase funding and technicalassistance for process and outcome evaluations through grants andcontracts. CSAP could focus on process evaluations that mayassist program managers throughout the course of a program. NIDAand NIAA could focus on outcome evaluations that are morerigorously designed and conducted by individuals who areindependent of the programs being evaluated. DoE could requireboth process and outcome evaluations by states and by schools,using Drug-Free School monies. NIDA, NIAAA, or CSAP could bedirected to provide incentives for researchers and programs toparticipate in a national program database, using consistentdefinitions and including data from multiple evaluations. Thecreation of such a database would allow researchers to extendtheir own analyses by tapping into data from other program sitesand populations that have used consistent definitions andmeasures. States could be required by legislation to use a portion oftheir 20 percent prevention set-asides under the Alcohol and DrugAbuse Block Grant program and a portion of their Drug- FreeSchools funds for evaluation of substance abuse preventionprograms. Since evaluations of prevention programs can beexpensive, Congress could consider increasing block grant fundinglevels to allow increases in evaluation studies without requiringdecreases in programs. If such an option were enacted, Congresscould mandate that evaluations be conducted by independentbodies, such as university-based researchers, rather than bystate government agencies that have vested interests indemonstrating program effectiveness. RESEARCH NEEDS Data Collection The National Household Survey and the National Survey of HighSchool Seniors have developed credibility over the years fortheir regular reporting of substance use in households and highschools. These surveys could be allowed to continue, with nosubstantial changes in the cost, frequency of data collection,focus on target groups, analysis, and sharing of the database. Because of the methodology employed, national surveys miss orunderreport various populations. Much of the data now collectedfocuses on substance use (e.g., any use within the past 30 daysor anytime in a lifetime), rather than on more intense substanceabuse and addiction. In addition, questions aresubstance-specific, and less oriented to the use and abuse ofmultiple substances. Such polydrug users and abusers areincreasingly being identified by researchers and clinicians.While substance use is a key precondition to later abuse andaddiction, most individuals who use illicit substances do not goon to addiction. Thus, an important question for the developmentof prevention policies and programs is: What are thecharacteristics of individuals who abuse and become addicted tosubstances, and how do they make the transition from use to abuseand addiction? If Congress felt that current data do not provide adequateinformation, it could direct that the Household and High SchoolSurveys be conducted less intensely or less frequently. Theexpense of these surveys, especially the National HouseholdSurvey, is high. In 1992, the High School Survey cost about $3million, and the Household Survey costover $12 million. Spendingcould be reduced if the survey data were compiled less intensely(e.g., with fewer questions or from a smaller sample) or lessfrequently. Alternatively, Congress could direct NIDA to developand support survey methodology that reaches populations missed bycurrent surveys (notably the homeless, school dropouts, andresidents of some inner-city and rural areas), or throughlegislation, create a mechanism, comparable to the release ofeconomic indicators, for the regular and nonpolitical release ofsurvey data. Data could then be released through a well-definedprocess that includes careful and timely technical reviews forcompliance with high standards of data collection and analysis,rather than being subjected to bureaucratic or political reviewsthat may delay the release of or bias the data. Individual Risk and Protective Factors A substantial body of research has been developed regardingpotential risk and protective factors for children andadolescents. A variety of theories has been developed concerninghow many and which risk factors increase the chances for a childor adolescent to first use alcohol or other drugs. Historically,one of the flaws with much of the risk and protective factorresearch has been that studies analyzed one factor in isolationfrom all others. Increasingly though, researchers are examining awider variety of factors among different populations, as well asusing more complex data analysis procedures. Even so,sophisticated multifactor research studies are still in theminority. While a substantial amount of risk and protective factorresearch has focused on children and adolescents, not as much isknown about factors among other populations. Recent research hasled to interest in the possibility of further analyses inselected populations and/or selected risk or protective factors.Some examples: o Adults. Additional research in this area could result inlearning more about factors associated with long-term drug abuseand addiction as well as the importance of factors more oftenfound in adult populations (e.g., effects of aging, death of aspouse or child, divorce). Data from a recent National HouseholdSurvey on Drug Abuse show that individuals aged 18 to 25, and 26to 34, respectively, have the two highest reported rates forheavy drinking and smoking, past month use of cocaine, crack,marijuana and hashish, or psychotherapeutic drugs. Additionally,gender, racial, and ethnic substance use differences appearwithin the adult population. Some research has indicated thatwomen who drink heavily do so several years later than men,although the reasons for this remain unclear. Researchers alsoindicate that black men who drink heavily, do so in their latetwenties and early thirties, in contrast to white men whosedrinking peaks at age 15 to early twenties. Increased research onthe adult population could be useful in developing appropriatesubstance abuse prevention and treatment programs for adults. o Race and Ethnicity. The biological and genetic substanceabuse studies completed on different racial and ethnic groupshave been few in number, mostly limited to alcohol, andinconclusive. While race and ethnicity have not been shown to bebiological or genetic predictors for substance use, abuse, oraddiction, certain risk factors appear to be unique for specificcultures. To date, however, the racial and ethnic categories usedin many large-scale studies are so broad that many researchersconsider them useless. Increased federal funding for studies ofspecific subpopulations living in geographically different areas(e.g., urban versus rural, reservation versus nonreservation)will provide much needed baseline data on which to plan,implement, and evaluate appropriate substance abuse services. o Poverty. Disagreement exists on the appropriate definitionof poverty and its exact relationship to substance abuse. Whilefew researchers deny that the daily stresses associated withliving in chronic poverty probably contribute to substance abuse,poverty is certainly not the only factor, or perhaps even themost important. There are after all, more individuals living inpoverty who do not abuse substances than who do. However, theconsequences of substance abuse appear to be worse in chronicallypoor areas. Additional research to study the complex relationshipbetween poverty and substance abuse could provide substance abusepractitioners with a framework from which to build programs mostsuitable for the special needs of chronically poor areas. Congress can, through its reauthorization and oversightpowers, monitor the amount and scope of risk and protectivefactor research that is being conducted, and redirect federalefforts toward more extensive multifactor research and analysis,as appropriate. Such focus could include factors other thansubstance use that may contribute to later abuse and addiction,such as other problem behaviors, availability, marketing,psychological factors, social norms in communities, andsubcultures. The increased use of ethnographers as part of amultidisciplinary drug abuse prevention research teams could alsobe encouraged. Biomedical Research Biomedical research on substance abuse helps explain theacute and chronic biological effects of substances on the brainand other organs, and also points to appropriate short- andlong-term medical treatments for substance abuse. This in turnhelps treatment providers understand treatment outcomes andrelapse rates for long-term abusers. Most federally supportedbiomedical research is administered by the 17 institutes thatcomprise the NIH. With the passage of the Alcohol, Drug Abuse,and Mental Health Administration Reorganization Act of 1992(Public Law 102-321), NIDA and the NIAAA were moved to NIH.Research targeting substance use, abuse, and addiction issupported primarily by these two institutes, whose combinedappropriation level ($580.7 million in fiscal year 1994) isapproximately 5 percent of the NIH total. Congress has historically increased annual appropriations forbiomedical research at NIH; if Congress continues this trend,both NIDA and NIAAA annual appropriations will rise, although notat the dramatic levels many scientists would like. If Congresswere to decide that substance abuse and addiction should commandmore of the nation's biomedical research budget, it couldsubstantially raise appropriation levels for NIDA and NIAAA. Suchan action would allow increased levels of research in a number ofareas including: genetics; drug development; identification ofbiological factors related to transitions from casual drug use toabuse, addiction, and dependence; the pharmacology of multipledrug use; environmental factors and their effect on individualbiological susceptibility; and the biological effects of drug useand abuse on the development of children and adolescents. Givenbudget realities, however, an increase in the funding levelsavailable for basic biomedical research could mean a decreasesomewhere else. A number of budgetary pressures have recently slowed robustNIH budget growth, including the need to fund disease- specificresearch (e.g., acquired immunodeficiency syndrome), indirectcosts of research, and the increasing pressure to limitdiscretionary spending. Some scientists identify stable budgetgrowth--as opposed to sporadic increases targeted at particulartopics--as most important for continued progress in research. Infiscal year 1994, both NIDA and NIAAA received a 5.2 percentincrease in appropriations, following an Administration requestthat would have raised NIDA's appropriation by less than 1percent, and decreased NIAAA's appropriation by 1.6 percent.Fluctuations in appropriation levels could impede the developmentof scientific advances that are necessary to the creation of newmedications and therapies. The Congressional Budget Office (CBO), in its March 1994report to Congress, Reducing the Deficit: Spending and RevenueOptions, identified a reduction in funding for NIH research asone of nearly 200 policy options. As noted by CBO, a reduction inNIH funding could have adverse effects on biomedical research andmight cause some researchers to leave the field. NIH cannotcurrently fund the majority of grants it approves; in addition,funding is insufficient to support some important areas ofresearch. According to a 1992 General Accounting Office report onDrug Abuse Research: Federal Funding and Future Needs, antidrugresearch appears now to have a very modest role, with only about4 percent of total drug strategy spending devoted to research anddevelopment. COMMUNITY ACTIVITY SETTINGS Substance abuse and addiction occur in communities around ourNation. Those who believe that drug abuse and addiction areclosely related to social and economic problems argue thatantidrug programs should more directly address the risk andprotective factors that have been identified by researchers. Manyprevention program providers also argue that the most successfulprograms are those that are more comprehensive in scope (i.e.,tailored to address the many community settings in which drugabuse can occur) rather than addressing one or two risk factorsin isolation. In conducting this assessment, OTA surveyed literaturesaddressing substance abuse and addiction in various communitysettings--families and homes, schools and peers, workplaces, andrecreational settings (see ch. 8). The literature reviewspresented in this report make clear that substance abuse andaddiction can arise and be influenced by multiple factors inindividuals, groups, and communities. Thus, effectiveintervention ideally should be comprehensive, employing multipleservices and addressing the many factors that cause drug abuseand addiction; and community-based, sensitive to and directed atthe needs of the local population. Still, three problems arise in assessing policy optionsrelated to community settings: 1. There is the inherent difficulty in drawing a link betweenmany social services and their effect on drug abuse andaddiction. 2. Since broad-based social services are provided through thework of many federal agencies, further analysis (e.g., by ONDCPor a congressionally enacted national commission) could identifywhich federal agencies are best suited to implement the varietyof options that Congress may wish to employ. 3. The federal budget deficit is an obstacle to the creationof new domestic programs that target known risk and protectivefactors in individuals and communities. Schools and Peers The primary focus of federal efforts at community-based drugprevention is programs aimed at our nation's schoolchildren. Infiscal year 1993, Congress appropriated $598 million to DOE underthe Drug-Free Schools and Communities Act of 1986. The federalgovernment could continue to fund school-based preventionprograms, with a continued emphasis on prevention curricula andevaluations that are limited to substance use prevention. Thelikely limited effects on preventing abuse among high-risk youthwould continue. Other school-based prevention programs wouldcontinue to be implemented sporadically, without significantevaluation and with few or unknown effects. If Congress decided that more rigorous evaluation of school-based programs was called for, it could mandate DOE to spend aset percent of its Drug Free Schools monies on research andevaluation of prevention curricula and the dissemination offindings. A special initiative could be launched to testprevention curricula for high-risk youth and for different racialand ethnic groups, since most of the research and evaluation todate has been based on samples of schools with middle incomewhite youth. Special expertise would need to be brought in, onstaff and as advisers, to assure the research and evaluation meethigh standards of methodological rigor. This could be achieved byhiring staff with research and evaluation expertise, detailingstaff from the NIDA, setting up an interdepartmental advisorygroup that guides and oversees a research and evaluation program,or appropriating funds directly to NIDA (e.g., as a set- asidefrom the Drug-Free Schools appropriation) to support such aresearch and evaluation program. Also, easier access toinformation about the many drug prevention curricula that existcould help school personnel select curricula that fit theirneeds. DOE could be directed to prepare and disseminate morewidely information about the purposes, design, methods, resourcesrequired, and evaluations (if any) of drug prevention curriculacurrently available, and to inform school personnel of thelimitations of school- based curriculum approaches and thegrowing availability of supplementary and alternative approaches.If Congress decided that Drug-Free Schools funds should be usedmore widely to target risk and protective factors found inschool-aged populations, it could require DOE to set aside acertain percentage of Drug-Free Schools funds for a variety ofactivities that target high-risk youths and to work individuallywith them and their families. Such targeting could enhanceactivities already carried out under the Drug- Free Schools Act(e.g., Drug Abuse Resistance Education, replication of successfulprograms, local programs for high- risk youth, school personneltraining). However, congressional mandates could reduce state andlocal flexibility in tailoring programs best suited to localneeds, and could increase administrative costs associated withimplementing the Drug-Free Schools Act. In addition to Drug-Free Schools programs, comprehensiveprimary health, mental health, and social services can beprovided in many school-based clinics. School-based clinics canbe supported by a variety of federal funding sources, includingMedicaid, the Maternal and Child Health Block Grant, Drug-FreeSchools, and Special Education funds. DOE and the Department ofHealth and Human Services could be encouraged or directed tocollaborate on the support of such services in schools. Since researchers have found that peers and other socialinfluences strongly affect substance use, programs thatstrengthen total school environments may be potent in preventingsubstance use and abuse. Models that involve schoolrestructuring, parent involvement, mental health components, andelevated expectations for achievement have been developed and arebeing tested. The hypothesis is that engaging high-risk youth inpositive educational environments and experiences can profoundlyinfluence their behaviors for the better. Congress could expandresearch on the effects of restructuring of school environmentson substance abuse by appropriating funds for extensive large-scale longitudinal research that could be supported by DOE, NIDA,the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDCP), and otherfederal agencies that conduct and support research on youthoutcomes. Homes and Families Congress appropriates funds for federal programs addressingsubstance abuse and addiction in homes and families, which aresupported by the HUD and HHS' Administration on Children, Youth,and Families (ACYF) and CSAP. Also relevant to the health andwelfare of families are health funding programs (e.g., Medicaidand Medicare) and welfare programs (e.g., Aid to Families withDependent Children). Through its oversight, authorization, andappropriations of these programs, and others that impact on thequality of family life, Congress can support a number ofpreventive interventions that are both comprehensive andintensive. Programs can be initiated by almost any local serviceor support setting, such as health care, school, familypreservation, juvenile justice, and housing authority, withcoordination with other services and settings. Such interventionscan include health care, counseling, intensive in-home services,neighborhood patrols, clean sweeps of public housing, and familyand parent education for all family members. Because substance abuse and other related problems can beinfluenced by so many family factors and programs, a long- termeffort to identify family needs may be desired. Congress couldenact legislation to create a Presidential commission or taskforce to formulate a national family policy and create ablueprint for long-term national efforts to shore up the manyfamilies, rich and poor, that would benefit from more guidance,skills, and support. Such a national policy could be framed inthe near-term, based on the many studies and programinterventions that have been documented so far. Alternatively, itcould be formulated later, after additional research and programinterventions have been supported and major gaps in knowledgehave been filled. Workplaces Congress could allow current activities that focus onproviding workplace employees with information, development ofdrug-free workplace policies, drug testing, and employeeassistance programs to continue. These programs are scatteredamong many federal agencies, with some leadership by theDepartment of Labor (DOL), CSAP, and the Office of Management andBudget. If Congress chose to increase efforts in workplace antidrugprevention, it could mandate that federal agencies increase theinformation that is made available to workplaces about drug-freeworkplace programs and policies. For example, DOL is implementingan electronic database, with information about workplacesubstance abuse treatment, prevention, and other control programsand research. Such a database, if properly supported, publicized,and accessed by businesses and unions, could help workplacesidentify and implement approaches that can meet their needs inaffordable ways. Recreational and Community Settings Congress currently funds community partnership demonstrationprograms administered by CSAP. These partnerships fosterpublic/private sector partnerships that create and preservecomprehensive strategies for addressing substance abuseprevention within communities. A major advantage of thesepartnerships is the ability to create programs that addresssubstance abuse prevention within individual communities. As withother drug prevention programs, however, evaluation has generallybeen limited. Congress could, through appropriations andauthorization, direct CSAP to expand the provision of technicalassistance and expand the national process and outcome evaluationof partnerships. More site visits would be possible, withadditional resources for national and regional workshops,conferences, and training. Other federal activities in this area remain limited andlargely uncoordinated. Major current programs are administered bythe Department of Agriculture's Cooperative Extension Service(with its 4-H program, which is refocusing its efforts onhigh-risk youth) and CSAP (through some of its High Risk YouthDemonstration Grants). The President's Council on PhysicalFitness addresses one aspect of recreational and leisureactivities--that is, physical fitness. If Congress decided toprovide more information and support more research onrecreational, leisure, and other youth development programs, aninformation clearinghouse could be established to shareinformation about federal and non-federal recreational, leisure,and youth development activities. The purpose would be to helpcommunities and program developers identify and develop suchprograms especially for youth at risk of drug use and abuse. Theclearinghouse could be managed in-house or under contract, andcould be located in the Cooperative Extension Service (which isnow attempting to redirect 4-H programs to address high-riskyouth); ACYF; or CSAP (perhaps in the existing National Centerfor Alcohol and Drug Information, a federally sponsoredclearinghouse). The dearth of recreational places, especially in highlydeveloped urban areas, can be remedied by an enhanced nationaleffort to acquire land and facilities for park and recreationpurposes. Such an effort could focus especially, but notexclusively, on rural and inner city areas where low propertyvalues make the acquisition of such properties financiallyattractive as long-term investments in the future development andenrichment of communities. Such a national effort could becomparable in scope and long-termcommitment to the development ofthe national park system, but could contribute to a broadernational system of parks owned and managed by the federal, state,and local governments specifically for more intense human uses.Such a system could focus on the developmental needs of youth,especially in urban areas, where usable open spaces are often inshort supply. Congress could designate a lead federal agency forsuch an effort (e.g., Department of Interior or HUD), and couldacquire properties outright or by encouraging and subsidizing theacquisition of properties by nonprofit groups and by state andlocal governments. The latter approach would require less federalfunding and administration. Possible sources of land andfacilities include: closed military bases, holdings of theResolution Trust Corporation, assets forfeited through drugseizures, individual gifts and bequests, and corporate andphilanthropic gifts. AVAILABILITY The primary current focus of federal antidrug efforts isstemming the physical supply of illicit drugs. A multitude ofpolicy issues arise in addressing drug availability, most ofwhich are beyond the scope of this report. The discussion inchapter 4, however, touches on two availability issues currentlyon the congressional agenda. Taxes The federal government currently levies excise taxes onalcoholic beverages and tobacco products. Excise taxes on alltypes of alcoholic beverages were raised in 1990 to their currentlevels. Currently, for example, beer (six pack, 12-ounce cans)carries a 33 cent federal excise tax, a 750 ml bottle of winecarries a 21 cent federal excise tax. A pack of cigarettescarries a federal excise tax of 24 cents. If Congress takes noaction, current federal levies will remain in effect. Congress could enact legislation raising the federal excisetax on a variety of tobacco and alcohol products if it sought todecrease consumption of such products, to recover estimatedsocietal costs (i.e., health costs, injury, death) resulting from consumption of such products, or toraise revenue for federal spending programs. Such tax hikes couldbe targeted at all tobacco and alcohol products, or at selectedproducts in these industries. Advocates of increased excise taxeshave argued that abuse of and addiction to tobacco and alcoholproducts cost the United States more than any illicit substance;that increased taxes would make such products less economicallyaffordable and hence less used and abused; that increased taxescould be used to pay for financial damages arising from the useof such products; and that such excise taxes, which haveincreased less rapidly than the general rate of inflation, shouldbe adjusted upward to reflect inflation. Opponents of taxationhave argued that excise taxes are regressive in that they targetprimarily low- and middle- income taxpayers, that increased taxeswould result in significant losses to major companies that areimportant players in the American economy, and that targetingso-called sin taxes unfairly singles out millions of Americanswho use tobacco and alcohol products. Alcohol Labeling Federal law currently requires that each alcoholic beveragecontainer bear a specific warning statement that is conspicuouslyand prominently located (27 USC 215). This requirement wasenacted by Congress in 1980. Both Congress and States haveauthority regulating alcohol advertising. At least 35 statesregulate alcohol advertising, and self-policing by segments ofindustry places some limits on advertising (e.g., the distilledspirits industry code prohibits the advertising of liquor onradio or television). Congress has considered legislation that would requirewarnings on all alcohol beverage advertising, both print andelectronic media. Congress could amend current alcohol labelinglaw to require stricter labeling (e.g., multiple labels, rotatinglabels, specific messages). Opponents of such action argue thatno significant relationship has been found between exposure ofindividuals to alcoholic beverage advertising and/or labeling anddrinking behaviors. _ CliffSchaffer's Home Page WT01-B29-17IA030-000641-B024-181http://206.61.184.43:80/schaffer/LIBRARY/studies/ota/appa.htm 206.61.184.43 19970122140400 text/html 26050HTTP/1.0 200 OKDate: Wednesday, 22-Jan-97 14:03:51 GMTServer: WebSitePro/1.1f (S/N wpo-0deb)Allow-ranges: bytesContent-type: text/htmlLast-modified: Saturday, 28-Dec-96 06:51:29 GMTContent-length: 25832 APPENDIX A: DRUG CONTROL POLICY IN THE UNITED STATES:HISTORIC TECHNOLOGIES FOR UNDERSTANDING AND PREVENTING SUBSTANCEABUSE AND ADDICTION US Government Office of Technology Assessment APPENDIX A: DRUG CONTROL POLICY IN THE UNITED STATES:HISTORICAL PERSPECTIVES The United States has always been a drug-using country. Incolonial days, people drank more alcohol than they do today, withestimates ranging from three to as many as seven times morealcohol per year (13) While public drunkenness was a criminaloffense, it was generally considered a personal indiscretion.(1). The temperance movement began in earnest after theRevolution, when heavy drinking was revealed to be a problem, andreligious figures became committed to temperance. (1). Sincethen, the American experience with both licit and illicit drugscan be viewed as a series of reactions to the public's shiftingtolerance toward their use (9). THE EARLY 1900s: NARCOTICS AND COCAINE In the late 19th century it was possible to buy, in a storeor through mail order, many pseudomedical preparations,containing morphine, cocaine, and even heroin (9). The ubiquitoussoft drink Coca-Cola used to contain cocaine until 1903, when itwas replaced with caffeine (9). Pharmacies sold cocaine in pureform, as well as a number of opium-derived drugs, such asmorphine and heroin, the latter of which became well-known whenit was marketed by the Bayer Co. beginning in 1898 (10).Physician prescriptions of these drugs increased from 1 percentof all prescriptions in 1874 to between 20 to 25 percent in 1902;they were not only available but they were widely used, withoutmajor concerns about negative health consequences (14). Cocaine and narcotic preparations were taken off the marketfor various reasons. Increasing awareness of the hazards of druguse and adulterated food led to such regulations as the Pure Foodand Drug Act of 1906 that required that fraudulent claims beremoved from patent medicines, as well as disclosure ofhabit-forming substances. The passage of several antinarcotic andpharmaceutical labeling laws was spurred on by these healthconcerns, a growing temperance movement, the development of safepain relievers (such as aspirin), a broader range of medicaltreatments, and the growing immigrant population thought to beassociated with specific drug-using practices. However, theselaws did not make patent remedies, cocaine, and opium illegal.Some individual states imposed tighter restrictions on theiravailability, but there was no uniformity among state laws. Itwas United States involvement with international narcoticsconcern that led there (9,10,14). In 1909, the International Opium Commission called by theUnited States, met in Shanghai, to begin an internationaldiscussion concerning the problems of narcotics and the narcoticstrade. Twelve nations, in addition to the United States, werepresent to discuss problems relating to opium. At that time theperception in the United States was that Chinese immigrants wereto blame for the opium smoking problems. This angered theChinese, who had instituted strict campaigns against the sale anduse of opium within their own country. The Chinese were seekingU.S. assurances for help in ending Western opium trafficking intoChina. The State Department not only wanted to support China'sdrug control efforts, but thought that international drug controlmeasures would help stanch the flow of drugs into the UnitedStates, and thus the nonmedical consumption of these drugs. Itwould not be until two years later, in the Hague, that a treatywould be signed stating that all the signatories would enactdomestic legislation controlling narcotics trade, specificallylimiting the use of narcotics for medicinal purposes (9,10). Hamilton Wright, the State Department's opium commissioner,attempted to draft legislation but met opposition from theStates, the medical profession, pharmacists and pharmaceuticalcompanies. After nearly three years of debate, Congress passedthe Harrison Act in December 1914 (named for RepresentativeFrancis Burton Harrison, who introduced the initial form of thebill for the Administration). The bill provided for strictcontrol of opium and coca and their derivatives: both their entryinto the country and their dispersion to patients. Maintenance ofaddicts by physicians was allowed until 1919. Opposition to theHarrison Act came mainly from pharmaceutical companies andpharmacists, who objected to what they called the Act's confusingand complex record keeping requirements (9). Passage of the Harrison Act reflected, in part, growingpublic sentiment that opium and cocaine were medicines to betaken only in times of illness (and then only when prescribed bya physician) and that these substances could cause insanity andcrime, particularly in foreigners and minorities. Smoking opiumwas associated with Chinese immigrants; popular belief also heldthat cocaine would affect blacks more forcefully than whites andincite them to violence. Marijuana was believed to have beenbrought into the country and promoted by Mexican immigrants andthen picked up by black jazz musicians. These beliefs played apart in the 1937 Marijuana Tax Act, which attempted to controlthe drug's use (9). As early as 1910, many people argued againstany nonmedical use of narcotics. PROHIBITION AND BEYOND Focus on Alcohol Ratification in 1919 of the 18th amendment prohibited themanufacture, sale, transportation, importation, and exportationof alcohol and shifted the Nation's focus for more than a decadefrom the dangers of narcotics to the Nation's alcohol problems.Prohibition had its roots in the Temperance Movement, which beganshortly after the Revolution. In 1784, Benjamin Rush, a physicianand signer of the Declaration of Independence, published apamphlet entitled, "An Inquiry Into the Effects of ArdentSpirits on the Mind and Body," which was widely disseminatedamong Temperance leaders. In it he described a "diseasemodel" of excessive drinking, which characterizeddrunkenness and alcohol addiction as a "disease of thewill," in addition to causing many physical diseases. By themid-19th century, the American middle class had become more awareof the dangers of alcohol to the family, the nation, and thefactory (1). By the late 19th century and early 20th century, theTemperance Movement came to be associated almost exclusively withAmerican Protestantism as a political mechanism to control thegrowing numbers of non-Protestant immigrants. This political andsocial strength helped, in 1919, to ratify the 18th amendmentwhich forbade the sale of alcoholic beverages, and to implementit by means of the Volstead Act in 1920 (1). The shifting tolerance of Americans toward substance use isevidenced by the successes and failures of the Prohibition era.In 1919, many were optimistic that the prohibition of alcoholwould solve many of the country's social problems. If alcoholcontributed to the crime and unemployment associated with thecities, then removing it from the market might help solve thoseproblems. However, despite evidence that consumption declined(based on declining rates of death due to cirrhosis and ofalcoholic psychosis in State mental hospitals), there is alsoevidence that widespread dishonesty existed in the enforcement ofdry laws. Jobs to enforce Prohibition were doled out as politicalfavors, which may have contributed to graft, corruption, and thesurge in underworld crime (9,17). In addition to the perceivedrise in corruption, the passage of progressively stricter lawsregarding violations of the Volstead Act also contributed towaning public support of prohibition (17). The 1933 repeal ofProhibition signaled that public sentiment had once again becomefavorable toward alcohol, and alcohol and its related problemsreturned to private, rather than public, arenas. The scientific literature of the 1930s and early 1940sconcentrated mainly on captive alcoholic populations in jails,mental hospitals, and skid row, allowing many Americans todistance themselves from alcoholism (1). During this same period,Alcoholics Anonymous (AA) was founded, but lacked mainstreamrecognition until the 1950s and 1960s when the scientists lentsupport to the disease model of alcoholism, which has always beenthe central tenet of AA (1,11). Focus on Narcotics While alcohol experienced a transition period in respect topublic tolerance, negative attitudes toward narcotics and otherdrugs remained constant, or became even more severe. During the1920s, the Federal government expanded its antidrug effortsthrough new Treasury Department regulations (8). In 1930,President Hoover created the Federal Bureau of Narcotics andappointed Harry Anslinger as the Commissioner of Narcotics, aposition Anslinger held from 1930 to 1962, a precursor, perhaps,to the modern day drug czar. For more than three decades,Anslinger oversaw all aspects of drug control, from interdictionto domestic supply, to public relations. He effectively usedreligious and other antidrug groups to maintain a high antidrugsentiment in the country. He also controlled the flow of legaldrug supplies, by keeping watch over doctors who might prescribeunusually large amounts of narcotics. Anslinger was opposed tothe medical treatment of addiction, and addicts, like alcoholics,were seen as deviants (9,15). Prior to the mid-1960s, marijuana use in the United Stateswas mostly confined to various subgroups such as Mexicanlaborers, jazz musicians, and beatniks. Although portrayed as akiller weed and a menace by antimarijuana reformers, there islittle evidence that it was either at this time. In 1937, theMarihuana Tax Act (the Federal government then spelled marijuanawith an "h"), became law, making the use and sale ofmarijuana without a tax stamp Federal offenses. Some companieswere permitted to apply for a license to use cannabis products(e.g., for birdseed, paint and rope), and doctors could stillprescribe marijuana in limited circumstances. However, startingin 1937, recreational use was punished with greater severity(15). Some speculated that the passage of the Marihuana Tax Actresulted from strong anti-Mexican sentiment in the Southwest andthe political power of Anslinger (5). Intolerance toward drug use was very strong in the 1930s and40s. Federal laws concerning the sale and use of drugs gotprogressively stricter, culminating in the introduction of thedeath penalty for the sale of heroin to anyone under 18 years oldby anyone older than 18 (10). Illicit drug use during thesedecades was low in the mainstream population. Thismarginalization of narcotics (or at least, of the people who usedthem) may have played a part in the resurfacing of these drugsafter the 1930s. There was a concern during World War II thatAmerican soldiers in Asia would succumb to drug suppliesavailable in those countries and return home with drug habits.The Bureau of Narcotics received no budget increases, sinceCongress apparently believed it was well equipped to deal withthe current drug levels (9). In the 1950s, however, heroin was brought into the country inlarger quantities than at any time since it was outlawed. Dealerslearned that poor quality heroin could be sold at inflatedprices, and this higher cost pushed users into criminallifestyles heretofore not seen on such a wide scale (12). Anationwide scare that drug use would spread from the urban poor(mostly minorities) to the rest of the country erupted. The factthat young people appeared to be the biggest users of heroin wasparticularly alarming. This fear was reflected in the passage ofthe Narcotic Control Act of 1956, which increased penalties forthe sale and possession of marijuana and heroin (15). The reaction to this rise in drug use was not entirelyfearful, however. Scientific and technological advances offeredalternative answers to coping with the drug problem a switch fromthe past tactics of law enforcement. Even though thestereotypical heroin user was still a poor minority, new ideasfor treating and helping these people emerged as part ofincreasing acceptance of the medical model of addiction. In the1960s, methadone maintenance pilot programs were launched. Byusing the long-acting opioid methadone for treatment of addictionto the short- acting opiate heroin, these programs offer a wayfor heroin addicts to control their addiction (6). 1960s-PRESENT In the 1960s, white middle-class youths, who were morevisible than their minority counterparts, began experimentingwith drugs, including marijuana and heroin, causing wide publicconcern and demand for more treatment approaches and additionallaw enforcement (17). Some of this new interest in drug use maybe attributed to the intolerance toward it in the precedingdecades. Marijuana had never been widely used, and after the1930s its use was not a widespread concern. It was rediscoveredby young people in the 1960s, who had grown up with parents whoused alcohol. Some of the drug consumption may also be linked toan increase in consumption generally during the late 1960s andearly 1970s, the Vietnam War protest movement, and the rapidchanges in American society that occurred in those years(9,10,17). Despite the image of the sixties as a time of widespreadexperimentation, the increase of drug use activated many who hadbeen quiet on the issue. Marijuana, the drug of choice among manyyoung people, was seen by some researchers as the gateway to moredangerous drug use. Richard Nixon was elected President in 1968on a law and order platform, and it is said that no otherPresident has campaigned as hard against drug abuse (9). Asduring World War II, concern rose that soldiers serving inSoutheast Asia would develop drug habits while there. In thiscase, the fears were well- founded, as many servicemen did availthemselves of cheap supplies of heroin and marijuana. However,even among those who became addicted, many stopped their drug useupon returning to the United States. During the 1960s, the oldlinkages between corruption, Asians, and opium surfaced onceagain in public opinion, leading to more stringent measures tostop the flow of drugs into the United States from both Asia andLatin America (8). Public support of law enforcement against drugs was highduring the late 1960s and early 1970s, and President Nixon spokeof mounting "a frontal assault on our number one publicenemy [drugs]," but long mandatory minimum sentences forpossession of small amounts of marijuana disturbed manyAmericans, even those who did not approve of marijuana use. TheComprehensive Drug Abuse Prevention and Control Act of 1970lessened penalties for possession of marijuana. It alsoestablished a system for classifying drugs into five schedules,which is still used today. Drugs are placed in each schedulebased on their potential for abuse, their known harmfulness, andmedical value. Marijuana and heroin are listed in schedule1--drugs with high potential for addiction and no recognizedmedical value. There have been, however, limited experimentalprograms approved by the DEA and FDA for the use of marijuana intreatment of nausea due to chemotherapy and of ocular pressuredue to glaucoma. Cocaine is listed in schedule 2--drugs withpotential for addiction for acceptable for some medicalapplications. Subsequent to the establishment of this system,drug policies and laws for individual drugs have been based onthe drug's schedule (3,16). In 1972, the President's National Commission on Marijuana andDrug Abuse recommended that the laws against the use of marijuanabe relaxed, since the enforcement of these laws was becoming tooburdensome to police in some areas, and was considered intrusiveon individual privacy in others. The drug was increasinglythought to be innocuous in its effects, both by scientists andothers (4). Several States passed decriminalization laws, whichallowed possession or use of small amounts of marijuana andimposed fines instead of prison sentences for transgressions ofminor possession laws (10). The Commission remained strict oncocaine, which was also seeing a surge in use, but few expertsthought it was physically addictive or should be classified inthe same category as other narcotics. Despite President Nixon's emphasis on "law andorder" responses to drug use, his drug budget favoredprevention, education, and treatment. The National Institute onDrug Abuse (NIDA) was created as the lead agency for demandreduction, directing Federal prevention and treatment servicesand research. The Drug Enforcement Administration was created asthe lead agency for supply reduction, and single state agencieswere created to guide Federal funds into state and local antidrugprograms (3). From the mid-sixties to the late seventies, the compositionof drug users changed substantially. While drug use was stillassociated primarily with minorities and the lower classes, druguse by middle-class whites became a widespread and more acceptedphenomenon. As in the late nineteenth and early twentiethcenturies, when middle class whites haphazardly used narcoticpreparations, this new group of drug users down-played or ignoredthe dangerous effects of drugs, and extolled their virtues asagents of nonconformity and mind-expansion. Cocaine was anexpensive and high-status drug, used mainly for recreation byupper- and middle-class whites. From the drug experiences of this cohort, which were by nomeans entirely positive, the public of the late seventies wasbetter educated about the effects of drugs, and publicdisapproval of drug use began once again to increase. Drug use,however, particularly of cocaine and marijuana remained high. TheFord Administration (1974-1977) focused on the drugs it thoughtposed the greatest danger--heroin, amphetamines, andbarbiturates. Some even thought that drugs such as cocaine andmarijuana should be legalized, "so as to end the enormousgovernment expenditures of money and time on a problem that onlyseemed to bring profits to drug dealers and elicit contempt forthe law from an ever-growing body of drug users" (9). During the Carter Administration (1977- 1981), Peter Bourne,a special assistant for health issues, argued for Federaldecriminalization of possession of small amounts of marijuana,while focusing interdiction efforts on heroin. But Bourneresigned over a scandal involving criticisms over his prescribingpractices. His resignation forced President Carter to take aharder position on drugs, and Federal decriminalization neveroccurred. There were still States in which marijuana wasdecriminalized, but these decreased in numbers through 1990, whenthe last State--Alaska--to have decriminalization repealed thoselaws. The departure of Bourne coincided with the emergence ofseveral parents' groups concerned about drug use by their preteenchildren. One group in particular, in Atlanta, Georgia, becameenraged when they found that in addition to drug use at parties,their children were able to buy drug paraphernalia and prodrugliterature in local stores. The group formed the Parent ResourcesInstitute on Drug Education, National Families in Action, and theNational Federation of Parents. These groups were instrumental inprodding NIDA to publicize more widely the dangers of marijuanaand other drugs once thought of as harmless. The Administration of Ronald Reagan (1981-1989) favored astrict approach to drug use and increased law enforcement. FirstLady Nancy Reagan actively campaigned against drug use, urgingschool children to "Just Say No." At the same time,funding for research and treatment decreased, while theavailability of cocaine, heroin, and marijuana remained the same(9). The budget for antidrug related activities rose from $1.5billion in 1981 (split nearly equally between supply reduction(domestic law enforcement and international/border lawenforcement) and demand reduction (research, prevention andtreatment) to $4.2 billion by the end of President Reagan'ssecond term. Two-thirds of the funds were now allocated for lawenforcement activities, with the remaining third allocated fordemand reduction (2). In 1984, the Crime Control Act increaseddramatically Federal mandatory minimum sentencing provisions fordrug- related crime, including the manufacture, distribution, orpossession of controlled substances. It also expanded thecriminal and civil asset forfeiture laws to penalize drugtraffickers and increased Federal criminal penalties fordrug-related offenses (3). This trend continued through theremainder of the Reagan administration as well as that ofPresident Bush. The 1980s saw significant shifts in patterns of cocaine use.The negative effects of cocaine use, especially long-termuse, hadpreviously been masked, but middle-class users with drug-relatedproblems suddenly were more common. Concurrently, cocainesmuggling escalated, resulting in increased availability, lowerprices, and higher quality. Low-income, minority communitiesbegan experiencing major drug problems, first with powderedcocaine, then in the mid- eighties especially with the new formof cocaine--crack. Commonly called an epidemic, the spread ofthis smokable cocaine inspired both President Reagan and antidruggroups to heightened drug intervention efforts. Crack appeared tobe highly addictive, as well as affordable, and fear of itsconsequences forced many lawmakers into action. The Anti- DrugAbuse Act of 1986 authorized more funds than ever before for thewar on drugs, most of which was designated for internationalinterdiction activities (9), and the establishment of the Officeof Substance Abuse Prevention (OSAP). The AIDS epidemic has alsoaffected patterns of drug use, since some intravenous (IV) drugusers may have switched to smoking crack in order to avoidexposure to the AIDS virus. Other IV drug users, however, havecontinued to inject, and comprise a large percentage of theAIDS-infected population. While the main focus of drug control policy in the 1980s wasinterdiction of illicit drugs, significant policy initiativesconcerning alcohol were also implemented. For example, the goalof the national minimum drinking age of 21 was stated in 1984 andachieved by 1988. Warning labels were required on all retailcontainers of alcoholic beverages beginning in 1989 (7). When George Bush was elected President in 1988 the climatewithin the country was highly intolerant to the use of illicitdrugs. President Bush echoed President Nixon when he declaredthat the drug epidemic was "public enemy number one"(16). The Anti-Drug Abuse Act of 1988 mandated the creation ofthe Office of National Drug Control Policy (ONDCP), to be headedby a director, sometimes called the drug czar, who wouldcoordinate U.S. drug control and abuse policy, resources, andoperations (Public Law 100-690). The first director was WilliamBennett, former Secretary for Education under President Reagan.He was followed by Robert Martinez, former Governor of Florida.The director, in conjunction with the President and CabinetSecretaries, sets Administration policy on drug control. However,ONCDP lacks budgetary authority, and under President Bush thedirector of ONDCP was not a Cabinet position. During the BushAdministration, additional funds were authorized for the war ondrugs, including increased funds for treatment and prevention.However, most of the funds were designated for law enforcementactivities. Spending for antidrug-related activities rose fromthe high of $4.2 billion under President Reagan, to a proposed$12.7 billion in the last year of President Bush's term. Again,the monetary split was roughly two-thirds for law enforcement andinternational interdiction activities and one-third for demandreduction (2). While "The War on Drugs" has remained part of thepolitical lexicon, President Clinton, after taking office in1993, cut the Office of National Drug Control Policy from 146positions to 25. He elevated the director of ONDCP to cabinetstatus, and Lee P. Brown, former Police Commissioner of New YorkCity was appointed to this position. During his campaign for thepresidency, Clinton advocated drug treatment on demand, and theaddition of 100,000 new police officers to the streets. _ CliffSchaffer's Home Page WT01-B29-18IA030-000641-B024-232http://206.61.184.43:80/schaffer/LIBRARY/studies/ota/appc.htm 206.61.184.43 19970122140422 text/html 22824HTTP/1.0 200 OKDate: Wednesday, 22-Jan-97 14:04:14 GMTServer: WebSitePro/1.1f (S/N wpo-0deb)Allow-ranges: bytesContent-type: text/htmlLast-modified: Saturday, 28-Dec-96 06:51:40 GMTContent-length: 22606 Perspectives On Defining Substance Abuse Contents | Feedback | Search DRCNet Library | Schaffer Library | Major Studies Technologies for Understanding andPreventing Substance Abuse and Addiction TECHNOLOGIES FOR UNDERSTANDING AND PREVENTING SUBSTANCEABUSE AND ADDICTION US Government Office of Technology Assessment APPENDIX C: PERSPECTIVES ON DEFINING SUBSTANCE ABUSE Four broad arenas that encounter substance abuse-relatedissues include, mass communications, criminal justice, medicine,and public health. These entities often operate independently ofone another and use substantially different terms when describingthe use of illicit substances or the illegal use of licitsubstances. MASS COMMUNICATIONS The traditional realm of mass communications includestelevision, radio, and popular journals and newspapers. Withinthese media, the term substance abuse has become a catch-allphrase, with no clear boundaries. Much of the general public hasbecome familiar with the term substance abuse within thisambiguous context. CRIMINAL JUSTICE While it is well-known that many crimes are committed bypersons with substance use disorders and that these disorders canbe major contributors to their crimes, there is no systematicpolicy within the criminal justice system for the evaluation ofthese disorders. In many jurisdictions, whether federal, state,or local, the prevailing sentiment is that any use of an illicitsubstance and/or use of a licit substance in an illegal manner,is considered criminal abuse. A limited set of quantitativeanalyses including blood, urine, and breath tests can beperformed to detect illegal levels of alcohol and/or the presenceof illicit substances. The Blood Alcohol Concentration (BAC) is0.10 grams/deciliter for all States excluding Oregon, California,Utah, Vermont, and Maine, where the level is 0.08grams/deciliter. As of December 1992, 15 states had lower BAClevels for youthful offenders charged with driving whileintoxicated. These levels range from 0.00-0.02 grams/deciliter,which is considered "zero tolerance," up to 0.04grams/deciliter (6). The alcohol breath test, while a differentprocedure from the BAC, converts the results into BAC units.Thus, the levels of intoxication for BAC and breath test areidentical. However, there are limitations to these analyses. In somejurisdictions, these tests can be performed only with the writtenconsent of the person. In others, the urine test measures thepresence of only one or two drugs rather than looking for theentire range of abusable substances. Besides the limited amount of testing and evaluation, there islittle use of psychological screening examinations or structuredinterviews to determine the level and severity of use, abuse, ordependence. PUBLIC HEALTH The traditional public health model incorporates the host-agent-environment relationship. Each of these factors has anindividual, as well as an interrelated role in the potential useand/or harmful use of a substance. Host factors may include possible genetic, psychological, andbiological susceptibility. Agent factors incorporate thesubstance's abuse liability capacity, as well as how thesubstance is marketed. Lastly, environmental factors encompassnot only the availability of the substance, but the social,cultural, political, and economic climate as well (3,4). Over the past 20 years, professionals within the field ofpublic health have attempted to deemphasize the strict medicalconcept of substance abuse. Attention had previously focusedalmost exclusively on individual drug use patterns, rather thanfeaturing the diverse problems of drug, alcohol, and tobacco useas being intimately tied into communities and society as a whole. Even the term "substance abuse" has come underscrutiny. While the word "substance" may at firstappear quite generic, in many fields, this term has come toincorrectly infer illicit drug use--reinforcing the misperceptionof many individuals that alcohol and tobacco are not drugs."Abuse" generally denotes the more severe forms ofaddiction. In reality, there is a continuum that begins withinitial drug use and may progress to harmful use and addiction,with various problems present along the spectrum. In lieu of theterm "abuse," public health professionals prefer termssuch as "alcohol and drug problems" or the"harmful/hazardous use" of a drug. The focus of the public health perspective is to understandthe importance social norms, environment, and availability playin the shaping of alcohol- and drug-related problems both on anindividual and societal level. MEDICAL Within the fields of medicine, the two most frequently citedtexts for the definitions of substance abuse and dependence arethe Diagnostic and Statistical Manual of Mental Disorders (DSM)issued by the American Psychiatric Association and theInternational Classification of Diseases (ICD) published by theWorld Health Organization (WHO). Each successive version of theDSM and ICD has been given a number signifying its order in theoverall sequence of manuals; DSM uses Roman numerals and ICD usesordinary numbers. The newest version of ICD, ICD-10, waspublished in 1992. The current version of DSM is the ThirdEdition- Revised (DSM-III-R), which will shortly be superseded byDSM-IV. ICD While the current ICD and DSM definitions of substancedependence are nearly identical, the two manuals differ sharplyon the concepts of abuse, which ICD classifies as harmful use. The ICD manual is intended to be used on an internationalbasis, and the socially defined "American" criteriapresent in the DSM manual for substance abuse cannot beadequately transferred to a wide range of cultures. The currentICD-10 category of harmful use, while applicablecross-culturally, is limited to: "A pattern of psychoactivesubstance use that is causing damage to health. The damage may bephysical (as in cases of hepatitis from the self-administrationof injected drugs) or mental ( e.g.,episodes of depressivedisorder secondary to heavy consumption of alcohol)." DSM In the early 1950s the first DSM manual grouped alcohol anddrug use disorders under the broad category of "SociopathicPersonality Disturbances." At that time, a substance usedisorder was considered a moral weakness or the manifestation ofa "deeper" psychological problem, rather than adisorder in-and-of itself with social, psychological, and perhapseven genetic determinants. Throughout the 1970s and 1980s clinical research identifiedthe need for separate categories for substance use disorders. TheDSM-III manual, in 1980, was the first manual in this series toclearly identify substance abuse and dependence as pathologicalconditions different from substance use alone. DSM-III alsoalluded to the fact that social and cultural factors arecontributors to the onset and continuation of abuse anddependence. The DSM-III definition of dependence emphasizedtolerance (needing to take much higher doses of the substance toobtain the same effect) and withdrawal (having a distinct patternof physiological arousal upon abrupt discontinuation or reductionin dosage), and required the presence of one or both of thesephenomena to make a dependence diagnosis. Substance abuse wasdefined as problematic use with social or occupationalimpairment, but with the absence of significant tolerance and/orwithdrawal. In both disorders, impairment in social andoccupational function was a prominent aspect of the definitions,creating a significant overlap between the criteria for substanceabuse and dependence. In 1987, DSM-III was revised (DSM-III-R) togive the behavioral aspects of substance use disorders equalweight to the physiological components. This shift away from the physiological to the behavioralelements of dependence was strongly influenced by the work ofresearchers Edwards and Gross, who had extensively studiedpersons with alcohol problems. These researchers conceptualizedalcohol dependence as a syndrome of graded severity that involvedan interconnected complex of behavioral, psychological, andphysiological elements associated with loss of control overalcohol consumption. Contributing to the emphasis on behavioral aspects ofdependence was work by Brady, Thompson, and others who had shownthat animals can be taught to self-administer substances ofabuse. Once taught, it was observed that most animals will expendtremendous amounts of energy to obtain additional doses and thatthis "drug-seeking behavior" is very difficult toextinguish. Efforts to repeat drug self- administration wereespecially prominent if the experimental drug was one with a highabuse liability such as morphine, methamphetamine, or(especially) cocaine and was difficult to extinguish. This body of work was among the first in a line ofinvestigation studying the behavioral aspects of drugs. Thisfield of research became known as "behavioralpharmacology" and was strengthened by additional studies byOlds and others. Thus, both the work of Edwards and Gross, that of behavioralpharmacologists, and of basic scientists pointed toward thepresence of a definable and independent syndrome that can resultafter an organism has learned to self-administer abusablesubstances. This syndrome was not dependent on the ability of thedrug to produce tolerance and withdrawal, but rather on itspositive reinforcing effects. These effects were evident byobserving the behavior of the organism, and could be measured byquantifying the work that the organism would produce to obtainthe substance. The development of the substance use disorders section forDSM-IV began in 1988 and involved the most extensive process yetundertaken for such a task. The major change in DSM-IV is in thedefinition of substance abuse. Unlike DSM-III and DSM-III-R, DSM-IV clearly separates the criteria for dependence from those ofabuse. Dependence in DSM-IV is a syndrome involving compulsiveuse, with or without tolerance and withdrawal; abuse isproblematic use without compulsive use, significant tolerance, orwithdrawal. Preliminary data from the DSM-IV field trialsindicate that this change will probably increase the number ofpersons diagnosed as having substance abuse, especially for thoseusing hallucinogens, inhalants, sedatives, and amphetamines. Substance Use and the Transition to Abuse/Harmful Use orDependence One problem in developing criteria for this second,nondependent category, whether called abuse or harmful use, isthat though dependence has been well-studied, the progressionfrom use to abuse has not been adequately researched (except inthe case of alcohol); and depending on the perspective, may notalways be linear. For example, using the DSM-IV classifications,it is possible that substances such as opiates may follow a paththat begins with use and progresses to dependence beforeabuse-related problems are identified. Within the field ofalcohol research, the consensus of studies is that consumingthree to four standard-sized drinks/day by males (equal to 40 ormore grams of alcohol at 12 grams/drink) is associated with anincreased probability for the development of problems. As femalestend to absorb alcohol more quickly, studies have shown thatproblems typically begin at about two to three drinks/day(1,2,5). Little work has been done on other substances. All persons whoend up with abuse, harmful use, or dependence begin with use. Useof a substance, whether licit or illicit, does not constitute asubstance use disorder even though it may be unwise and stronglydisapproved of by family, friends, employers, religious groups,or society at large. Use by itself is not considered a medicaldisorder. For a disorder to be present, use must become somethingelse such as: occur more frequently; occur at higher doses; orresult in a magnitude of problems. Though there have been someconceptual models developed for how one might approach a betterunderstanding of this transition, there are few data available toclearly point out where the border lies. DSM-IV AND ICD-10 DEFINITIONS DSM-IV Diagnostic Criteria: Abuse A. A maladaptive pattern of substance use leading toclinically significant impairment or distress, as manifested byone or more of the following occurring over the same 12- monthperiod: 1. Recurrent substance use resulting in a failure to fulfillmajor role obligations at work, school, or home (e.g., repeatedabsences or poor work performance related to substance use;substance-related absences, suspensions, or expulsions fromschool; neglect of children or household). 2. Recurrent substance use in situations in which it isphysically hazardous (e.g.,driving an automobile or operating amachine when impaired by substance use). 3. Recurrent substance-related legal problems (e.g.,arrestsfor substance-related disorderly conduct). 4. Continued substance use despite having persistent orrecurrent social or interpersonal problems caused or exacerbatedby the effects of the substance (e.g.,arguments with spouse aboutconsequences of intoxication, physical fights). B. Has never met the criteria for Substance Dependence forthis substance. Dependence: A maladaptive pattern of substance use, leading to clinicallysignificant impairment or distress, as manifested by three ormore of the following occurring in the same 12- month period: 1. Tolerance, as defined by either of the following: a. need for markedly increased amounts of the substance toachieve intoxication or desired effect b. markedly diminished effect with continued use of the sameamount of the substance 2. Withdrawal, as manifested by either of the following: a. the characteristic withdrawal syndrome for the substance b. the same (or closely related) substance is taken to relieveor avoid withdrawal symptoms 3. The substance is often taken in larger amounts or over alonger period than was intended 4. Any unsuccessful effort or a persistent desire to cut downor control substance use 5. A great deal of time is spent in activities necessary toobtain the substance (e.g., visiting multiple doctors or drivinglong distances), use of the substance (e.g., chain- smoking), orrecover from its effects 6. Important social, occupational, or recreational activitiesgiven up or reduced because of substance use 7. Continued substance use despite knowledge of having had apersistent or recurrent physical or psychological problem that islikely to be caused or exacerbated by the substance (e.g.,current cocaine use despite recognition of cocaine- induceddepression, or continued drinking despite recognition that anulcer was made worse by alcohol consumption) Specify if: o with physiological dependence: Evidence of tolerance orwithdrawal (i.e., either items (1) or (2) are present). o without physiological dependence: No evidence of toleranceor withdrawal i.e., neither items (1) nor (2) are present). ICD-10 Diagnostic Criteria for Clinical Use: Harmful Use: A pattern of psychoactive substance use that is causing damageto health. The damage may be physical (as in cases of hepatitisfrom the self-administration of injected drugs) or mental(e.g.,episodes of depressive disorder secondary to heavyconsumption of alcohol). The diagnosis requires that actual damage should have beencaused to the mental or physical health of the user. Harmfulpatterns of use are often criticized by others and frequentlyassociated with adverse social consequences of various kinds. Thefact that a pattern of use or particular substance is disapprovedof by another person or by the culture, or may have led tosocially negative consequences such as arrest or maritalarguments is not in itself evidence of harmful use. Acute intoxication or "hangover" is not in itselfsufficient evidence of the damage to health required for codingharmful use. Harmful use should not be diagnosed if dependencesyndrome, a psychotic disorder, or another specific form of drug-or alcohol-related disorder is present. Dependence Syndrome A definite diagnosis of dependence should usually be made onlyif three or more of the following have been experienced orexhibited at some time during the previous year: 1. A strong desire or sense of compulsion to take thesubstance. 2. Difficulties in controlling substance-taking behavior interms of its onset, termination, or levels of use 3. A physiological withdrawal state when substance use hasceased or been reduced, as evidenced by: the characteristicwithdrawal syndrome for the substance; or use of the same (orclosely related) substance with the intention of relieving oravoiding withdrawal symptoms. 4. Evidence of tolerance such that increased doses of thepsychoactive substance are required in order to achieve effectsoriginally produced by lower doses (clear examples of this arefound in alcohol- and opiate-dependent individuals who may takedaily doses sufficient to incapacitate or kill nontolerantusers). 5. Progressive neglect of alternative pleasures or interestsbecause of psychoactive substance use, increased amounts of timenecessary to obtain or take the substance or recover from itseffects. 6. Persisting with substance use despite clear evidence ofovertly harmful consequences, such as harm to the liver throughexcessive drinking, depressive mood states consequent to periodsof heavy substance use, or drug- related impairment of cognitivefunctioning; efforts should be made to determine that the userwas actually, or could be expected to be, aware of the nature andextent of harm. Narrowing of the personal repertoire of patterns ofpsychoactive substance use has also been described as acharacteristic feature (e.g., a tendency to drink alcoholicdrinksin the same way on weekdays and weekends, regardless of socialconstraints that determine appropriate drinking behavior). It is an essential characteristic of the dependence syndromethat either psychoactive substance taking or a desire to take aparticular substance should be present; the subjective awarenessof compulsion to use drugs is most commonly seen during attemptsto stop or control substance use. This diagnostic requirementwould exclude, for instance, surgical patients given opioid drugsfor the relief of pain, who may show signs of an opioidwithdrawal state when drugs are not given but who have no desireto continue taking drugs. The dependence syndrome may be present for a specificsubstance (e.g., tobacco or diazepam), for a class of substances(e.g., opioid drugs), or for a wider ranger of differentsubstances (as for those individuals who feel a sense ofcompulsion regularly to use whatever drugs are available and whoshow distress, agitation, and/or physical signs of a withdrawalstate upon abstinence). The diagnosis of the dependence syndrome may be furtherspecified by the following (the following roughly correspond tothe course modifiers and relapse section of DSM-IV): o Currently abstinent. o Currently abstinent, but in a protected environment (e.g.,in hospital, in a therapeutic community, in prison, etc.). o Currently on a clinically supervised maintenance orreplacement regime (controlled dependence, e.g., with methadone;nicotine gum or nicotine patch). o Currently abstinent, but receiving treatment with aversiveor blocking drugs (e.g., naltrexone or disulfiram). o Currently using the substance (active dependence). o Continuous use. Episodic use. _ Contents | Feedback | Search DRCNet Library | Schaffer Library | Major Studies Technologies for Understanding andPreventing Substance Abuse and AddictionWT01-B29-19IA030-000641-B025-184http://206.61.184.43:80/schaffer/LIBRARY/studies/redfern/rf1.htm 206.61.184.43 19970122140631 text/html 4463HTTP/1.0 200 OKDate: Wednesday, 22-Jan-97 14:06:20 GMTServer: WebSitePro/1.1f (S/N wpo-0deb)Allow-ranges: bytesContent-type: text/htmlLast-modified: Sunday, 19-Jan-97 10:55:20 GMTContent-length: 4248 Beyond Prohibition - Executive Summary Contents | Feedback | Search DRCNet Library | Schaffer Library | Major Studies | BeyondProhibition Beyond Prohibition Report of the Redfern Legal Centre DrugLaw Reform Project September 1996 Executive Summary The Redfern Legal Centre Drug Law ReformProject began in mid 1994. Its objectives were to promoteinformed public discussion about drug law reform, and tocontribute to bringing forward reform of the drug laws. The Project's main achievements over the pasttwo years are: Published discussion papers, fact sheets,stickers and a poster promoting a range of initiatives to end thecurrent prohibition policy on currently illicit drugs and movetowards a model of controlled availability; Convened a series of community forums in SouthSydney and Cabramatta on ways that drug laws impact on the workof community and health organisations; Held discussions with a number of NSWParliamentarians, including Ministers and their advisors; Participated in several conferences andseminars, including the International Conference on the Reductionof Drug Related Harm Provided formal, detailed submissions to arange of inquiries including the Wood Royal Commission into theNSW Police Service and the Victorian Premier's Drug AdvisoryCouncil (Pennington Committee). This report includes two of the Project's mostsignificant publications: Steps Towards Harm Reduction Harm Reduction Model of Controlled DrugAvailability. In addition, this report provides summaries ofcomments on these publications from a diverse range oforganisations and individuals. The comments show that the Projectand its publications have made a significant contribution to thedebate about reform of the drug laws in NSW. Future activities for the Redfern Drug LawReform Project are likely to include closer links to othercommittees and organisations working on drug law reform in NSWand other parts of Australia. Contents | Feedback | Search DRCNet Library | Schaffer Library | Major Studies | BeyondProhibitionWT01-B29-20IA030-000641-B025-204http://206.61.184.43:80/schaffer/LIBRARY/studies/redfern/rf2.htm 206.61.184.43 19970122140639 text/html 11793HTTP/1.0 200 OKDate: Wednesday, 22-Jan-97 14:06:29 GMTServer: WebSitePro/1.1f (S/N wpo-0deb)Allow-ranges: bytesContent-type: text/htmlLast-modified: Sunday, 19-Jan-97 10:55:25 GMTContent-length: 11577 Beyond Prohibition - History of the Project Contents | Feedback | Search DRCNet Library | Schaffer Library | Major Studies | BeyondProhibition Beyond Prohibition Report of the Redfern Legal Centre DrugLaw Reform Project September 1996 1 . History of Project Background The Redfern Legal Centre Drug Law ReformProject began in mid 1994. Its objectives were to promoteinformed public discussion about drug law reform, and tocontribute to bringing forward reform of the drug laws. Redfern Legal Centre provided funding to payone part-time worker to coordinate the Project and to carry outmany of its tasks. The Project was oversighted by a small buttypically enthusiastic committee, which reported to the Centre'sManagement Committee. The funding for the Project came (untilFebruary 1996) from the Centre's own resources, primarilylitigation costs. From March until September 1996, the Projectwas funded by a grant from the Law Foundation of NSW Redfern Legal Centre undertook this Project forseveral reasons: 1. Drug prohibition fosters crime (becauseprohibition artificially inflates prices for drugs on the blackmarket). Abandoning prohibition would be the simplest single wayto achieve a noticeable reduction in property crime, and to alesser but still important extent, violent crime. 2. Those affected by drug-inspired crime areprimarily the socially disadvantaged. Drug law reform isdesirable as a social equity measure. 3. Prohibition contributes to policecorruption. It is no accident that the clear majority of policenamed adversely in evidence before the Wood Royal Commission intopolice corruption are in some way connected to drugs - policestealing drugs or money from drug suppliers, police sellingdrugs, police planting drugs on suspects as false evidence.Prohibition makes the drug trade so extravagantly profitable (itis the second largest trade in the world) that it createsenormous temptations for police and other officials. We cannothope to significantly reduce the opportunities for policecorruption while the drugs prohibition continues. 4. Prohibition has a significant negativeimpact on the legal system. Dealing with people facing drugcharges, or charges of property crime generated by the drugsblack market, creates an enormous drain on the courts, and inparticular on public funds available to provide legal servicesfor the poor and disadvantaged. Reducing drug-related crime wouldfree up law enforcement resources for other activities, and wouldimprove the resource capacity of the Legal Aid Commission andcommunity legal services to pursue other matters, such asconsumer claims and antidiscrimination cases. 5. Public health outcomes are compromised bylaws which drive drug use underground. In particular, the druglaws hamper efforts to contain the spread of HIV and Hepatitis Band C. 6. Despite years of community debate and thestrength of the case for reform, prohibition has been fiercelyresilient . Reliance on the criminal law to control behaviour inother areas of moral or personal choice gambling, sex work,abortion, censorship - has generally receded in recent decades,with the drug laws the notable exception. The demise ofprohibition is not as inevitable as it perhaps once appeared tobe. We believe that meaningful reform of our druglaws necessarily involves reconsidering the laws about supply aswell as possession and use of drugs, and laws about other drugsas well as cannabis. Harm reduction is a pragmatic approach whichemphasises reducing the personal and social harms associated withdrug use, while accepting that eliminating drug use isimpossible. Harm reduction has been officially the central goalof Australian drugs policy since the mid 1980s, although mostpublic resources devoted to the drug problem continue to promoteprohibition (eg, funds to police and customs services andunrealistic, wholly negative drug education). We believe thatharm reduction (in any meaningful definition) is incompatiblewith prohibition. The Project has attempted to develop coherentharm reduction strategies, focusing on measures which wouldreduce or eliminate the drugs black market. Community Forums The Project convened a series of communityforums at which service providers in the health and communitysectors in particular were invited to identify, from theirperspective, the ways in which existing legal approaches to drugsimpacted on their work, and to identify which legal frameworkcould best support drug treatment and education programs. Theseforums were held in both South Sydney, where the Legal Centre islocated, and in Cabramatta, Sydney's major heroin distributionpoint. The discussion at these forums was invaluable in assistingthe Project to developing strategies and proposals for change. Publications Two discussion papers were written anddistributed in the course of the Project. The Harm Reduction Model of Controlled DrugAvailability, published in May 1995, attempted to tackleconcretely the question of what exactly drug law reform couldlook like. Most previous proposals for law reform were eitherinadequate (eg, the on-the spot fine model adopted in variousforms in South Australia, the ACT and the Northern Territory), orairy generalisations about the possibility of regulating orderegulating the drugs market (with the idea of controlledavailability little more than a slogan). We considered it apriority to do the work of systematically applying harm reductionprinciples to all aspects of drug consumption, production anddistribution - in an open-minded but hopefully not fanciful way.The Harm Reduction Model therefore represents a detailedprojection of what controlled availability might look like inpractice. The Harm Reduction Model was widely circulatedand was endorsed by a number of community organisations andindividuals. An updated and expanded second edition of TheHarm Reduction Model was published in July 1996. Importantly, thesecond edition included a set of Principles for Controlled DrugAvailability to complement the essentially practical proposalsillustrating some possible means of regulating drug supply andconsumption. The Project's other discussion paper was Stepsto Harm Reduction. A companion document to the Harm ReductionModel, this paper addressed the present and short-term future. Itprovided an analysis of the possible immediate steps which couldand should be taken in drugs policy and drug law reform. Again,the value of the paper lay in its attempt to be detailed andspecific. The paper is a blueprint for reform, providing a listof proposals to achieve a graduated replacement of prohibitionwith harm reduction. These two papers form the major part of thisreport. The Project also produced: Two very popular bumper stickers (slogans EndProhibition: Support Drug Law Reform and Break the Crime Cycle:Support Drug Law Reform) A full colour poster, a graphic presentation ofwhat the future of drugs policy might look like. A series of Fact Sheets with statistics andother information detailing the social impact of existing druglaws. Discussions with politicians Throughout the Project, we held discussionswith a number of NSW Parliamentarians, including Ministers andtheir advisors. It must be said that the political climate provedto be not conducive to change on drug policy, despite some earlyencouraging if ambiguous statements from the incoming CarrGovernment. Issues discussed included many of the issuesdealt with in this report, including the desirability ofintroducing a trial of legal safe injecting spaces, and apossible Parliamentary motion on prioritising harm reduction indrugs policy. Inquiries The Project also provided formal, detailedsubmissions on proposals for law reform to the followinginquiries. Wood Royal Commission into the NSW PoliceService Victorian Premier's Drug Advisory Council(Pennington Committee) Commonwealth Access to Justice Inquiry. Conference papers During the life of the Project, we participatedin a number of conferences and seminars. Perhaps the mostsignificant conference papers we presented were a paper inSeptember 1995 to the NSW Corrective Health Services Symposium onDrug-Related Crime, and the two papers to the 7th InternationalConference on the Reduction of Drug Related Harm, in Hobart inMarch 1996. Contents | Feedback | Search DRCNet Library | Schaffer Library | Major Studies | BeyondProhibitionWT01-B29-21IA030-000641-B025-228http://206.61.184.43:80/schaffer/LIBRARY/studies/redfern/rf3.htm 206.61.184.43 19970122140657 text/html 29181HTTP/1.0 200 OKDate: Wednesday, 22-Jan-97 14:06:38 GMTServer: WebSitePro/1.1f (S/N wpo-0deb)Allow-ranges: bytesContent-type: text/htmlLast-modified: Sunday, 19-Jan-97 10:55:05 GMTContent-length: 28965 2. Steps to Harm Reduction Contents | Feedback | Search DRCNet Library | Schaffer Library | Major Studies | BeyondProhibition Beyond Prohibition Report of the Redfern Legal Centre DrugLaw Reform Project September 1996 2. Steps To Harm Reduction INTRODUCTION Our existing drugs policy, grounded inprohibition, is failing. Drug use continues at significantlevels, the drug trade continues to flourish, and the socialconsequences of a thriving drugs black market - includingsignificant property crime and police corruption - continue tocause concern. We need to continue the process begun a decadeago with the introduction of legal needle and syringe exchanges.That is, we need to continue to shift the primary policy focusfrom prohibition to harm reduction: to rely less on the criminallaw to discourage drug use and supply, and more on education,treatment and research to make drug use as safe and responsibleas possible. Our current approach to drugs confuses legalstatus with questions of safety. Both alcohol and marijuana arewidely used in social situations, both methadone and heroin arehighly addictive, both Prozac and ecstasy induce comparablefeelings of well-being. Yet the differing legal status of each ofthese drugs skews social attitudes to their appropriate use, anddistorts accurate education messages about their effects and thedangers of misuse. There is a limit to the constructive harmreduction measures which can be undertaken without changes to thelaw. We have probably already reached the point at which the lawscriminalising drug use represent a real impediment to programmesaimed at minimising the personal and social harm which can becaused by drug use. Reducing Drug-related Harm Harm reduction means aiming at reducing theharm that drugs can cause to users and to the broader community.It involves accepting that drug use will never be eliminated,even if we do not approve of it. Harm reduction should be thestandard against which we measure the success or failure ofexisting drug laws, and proposals for change. Redfern Legal Centre has proposed that in thelong term, we should implement a system of controlledavailability for most currently illicit drugs. The Centre's HarmReduction Model of Controlled Drug Availability sets outprinciples for controlled availability which would produce thegreatest degree of harm reduction, and sketches some case studiesto illustrate what these principles might mean in practice. In the immediate future, we should take someless dramatic steps towards reducing drug related harm. Here weoutline some immediate steps we should take to implement harmreduction principles in the short term. Policy Objectives Although drugs policy could never be describedas uncontroversial, there is some common ground. Most would agreethat drugs policy should be framed in the context of healthobjectives and social policy, not with the criminal law as thestarting point. Where drug use is problematic, it should beaddressed as a health issue, not a legal issue. What does this mean in concrete terms? The changes we recommend here address what weconsider to be the most significant drug policy issues impactingon public health. The particular objectives of the proposals madehere are 1. To establish the legal environment for theimplementation of effective education and other health programsto: reduce overdose deaths reduce the number of new Hepatitis C infectionsassociated with injecting drug use at least maintain (and if possible reduce)existing low levels of new HIV infection through injecting druguse improve the level of responsible disposal ofused needles 2. Reduce socially harmful impact of criminaljustice system on users of currently illicit drugs. Taking the steps detailed below will not solveall the problems associated with drug use. Change to the existinglegal framework must of necessity be made gradually. Once theproposals for change outlined here are implemented and evaluated,we can consider what further changes to drug law and policy arenecessary. These measures would have only a small initialimpact on crime rates and police corruption. These social harmsresult directly from the drug laws particularly laws about drugsupply. We need to move towards greater regulation of the drugsmarket to enable us as a society to influence the size andoperation of the drugs market. Achieving the maximum publichealth benefits will require regulatory control over matters suchas purity, weight, recommended dosages, and labelling. The greatest source of social harm associatedwith drugs is the black market. The black market, with itsextraordinary profits, fuels police corruption, and generatesproperty crime. And the black market is an unregulated market,with no controls on drug quality, multiplying the dangers of druguse. The enormous profits to be made will always draw a steadystream of new entrepreneurs to the production and distribution ofdrugs. The size of the black market is determined bythe laws we make about drug supply. While it is likely that wewill never be able to completely eliminate the drugs blackmarket, changes to the legal approach to drugs can reduce andmarginalise the negative social impact of a contracted illicitmarket. We must explore alternative strategies tocontrol the size of the black market, including consideringalternative changes to the law about supply. But we cannotsensibly undertake that consideration without first resolvinglegal and policy issues about use and possession. Each of the measures outlined below wouldrepresent an important step on the way to creating the legalframework for a comprehensive harm reduction strategy. PROPOSALS FOR CHANGE 1 . Personal Use and Possession Penalising drug users for the activity of druguse does little if anything to discourage drug-taking. Criminalising drug using behaviour adds to thesocial and personal burden on drug users without anycorresponding social benefit. The current laws force drug useunderground, compounding health problems and making it moredifficult to implement effective public health programs. Police drugs strategy states that policeresources should be directed towards drug traffickers andlarge-scale suppliers, rather than drug users. However, the factis that 60% of drug matters prosecuted involve drug use orpossession offences. Because there is a distinct socioeconomic biasin the manner in which different communities are policed, thereis a differential outcome in how these charges are laid. Thismeans that the drug laws impact unfairly on the poor, thehomeless, Aborigines and the young - disproportionately to theiractual patterns of usage. Changing our approach to the legal treatment ofdrug use would assist in HIV/Hepatitis C prevention by allowinginjecting drug users to access (and dispose of) new needles andsyringes without fear of police harassment. It would also removeexisting disincentives for drug users (such as marijuana smokers)to openly discuss their use with doctors and other healthprofessionals. There are a number of constructive alternativesto the criminalisation of personal use and possession of drugs. The options are to: a. abolish the offences of use and possession; b. abolish the offence of self administrationonly; and/or c. vary enforcement practices We will briefly discuss the merits of thesealternative approaches. Option a. Abolish the offences of use andpossession The most straightforward solution is to removethe offence of drug using and possession. That is, it would nolonger be a criminal offence to use an illicit drug, nor topossess a small quantity for personal use (say 30 grams forcannabis, 1 gram for heroin, amphetamine and other powders). Inorder to minimise the number of cannabis users accessing theblack market, cultivation of up to five cannabis plants perhousehold should also be allowed. Removing these offences would remove the legalobstacle to drug users seeking appropriate health care, includingthe estimated 600,000 cannabis users in this State. It wouldreduce fear of police harassment by injecting drug usersaccessing needle and syringe exchanges and, especially,contribute to responsible disposal of used needles. Becausepossession of a used needle is evidence of the offence of druguse, the law currently creates incentives to dispose of usedneedles quickly rather than thoughtfully. Removing these offences would be consistentwith existing police strategy which states that police resourcesshould be directed towards drug traffickers, not drug users. Option b. Abolish the offence of selfadministration only Because drug use ("selfadministration") and drug possession are separate offencesunder the Drugs Misuse and Trafficking Act, it is possible toremove the offence of use without any change to the lawprohibiting drug possession. Removing the criminality of the act of using adrug would improve the capacity of educators and researchers tocommunicate in direct and plain terms with people about theirpast and present levels of drug use, and use behaviours. In practical terms, it would mean that a personwho had recently consumed a drug but had no other drugs in theirpossession, would be not subject to arrest or criminal charges.This would encourage larger numbers of injecting drug users toresponsibly dispose of used needles and syringes, positivelycontributing to reduction in new HIV and hepatitis infections,and to community perceptions of public safety. Most self administration convictions resultfrom the person admitting having consumed a drug, without otherevidence (blood or urine tests are not undertaken to supportthese charges). This law is selectively enforced against thosewho are most vulnerable and least aware of their civil rights(especially the right to silence). If the self administration provision iswithdrawn, there would remain ample legal power for the police tocontrol offensive or anti-social behaviour which might accompanydrug use. Appropriate community policing strategies would addresscommunity concerns about unacceptable behaviour in public placesby people under the influence of illicit drugs, while alsoachieving desirable public health and social equity results. Option c. Vary enforcement practices The alternative to legislative amendment is tochange how these laws are enforced. There are several ways inwhich this might be done. (i) Better directed police discretion The police have the discretion not to arrest orlay a charge in a wide range of circumstances, subject to theirduty to protect the peace and to uphold the law. This exercise ofdiscretion applies in the enforcement of the drug laws. Inpractice this means that many police officers choose, in manycircumstances, not to lay charges where they become aware ofminor drug offences. The anecdotal evidence is that the policeare increasingly exercising their discretion in this way, perhapsespecially with cannabis. The exercise of police discretion in this wayis not only legitimate but desirable. It contributes positivelyto public health outcomes, and reduces what would otherwise be aliterally intolerable burden on criminal justice resources ifevery episode of drug use or possession which came to policenotice were prosecuted. It is desirable however that there be somestandardisation of this exercise of discretion, to achievegreater uniformity of police practice (and therefore socialequity) and to better target particular public health objectives. We propose that the Commissioner's Instructionsshould be amended to give guidance to police on the exercise oftheir discretion. Some suggestions are: Police guidelines should specificallydiscourage arrest in overdose and similar medical emergencysituations, of either the overdose patient or their associates.Knowing that there was no risk of arrest would encourage peopleexperiencing overdose, or their friends, to seek medical help asearly as possible. People suffering overdose, or other physical orpsychological distress, should be able to access medical serviceswithout fear of arrest. There are some 220 drug overdosefatalities in NSW each year. Many of these deaths arepreventable. Studies show that one in three heroin users reporthaving had at least one overdose experience. Police should be encouraged not to harassclients of methadone clinics, even if known drug users are likelyto congregate there. [This would be an extension of existingguidelines which discourage police harassment of clients ofneedle and syringe exchanges.] Existing Commissioner's Instructions(Instruction 16.02), say that police should not interruptinjection, nor deliberately break syringes. In fact, thesepractices still occur. Relevant police instructions should bemade the subject of training and greater management direction. The Police Service should undertake acomprehensive examination of its practices and protocols as theyimpact on drugs policy. The fact that there are existingCommissioner's Instructions which are not being applied raisesquestions about the capacity of the Police Service to respondflexibly and appropriately in this area, in the absence oflegislative reform. If measures are taken to develop theapplication of police discretion in drugs policy, it must beclosely monitored to assess the degree of compliance withguidelines. If this approach does not significantly improve thecurrent negative impact of law enforcement on effective drugspolicy, the only alternative is to legislate change to laws. (ii) Formal police cautions The recent Victorian Premier's Drug AdvisoryCouncil Report (the Pennington Report) recommended that the useand possession of illicit drugs be dealt with through a system ofautomatic formal police cautions for first offenders (withvoluntary referral to drug assessment and treatment services).Mandatory good behaviour bonds would be imposed as a sentence forsecond offenders. Third offenders would be dealt with by a courtin the normal way (ie, by decision of the magistrate to imposefines, community service orders, or other appropriate penalty). A mandatory caution/bond system for drug useand possession offences would make police contact with drug usersless negative than it is now (except for repeat offenders), andwould allow law enforcement to be accompanied by referral totreatment or counselling services in appropriate cases. If introduced, this system should be closelymonitored for its effect on the number and type of cases broughtbefore the courts. (It should be noted that introducing a systemof police referral to drug treatment services may result in anincreased demand for those services, which are now significantlyunder-researched.) (iii) On-the-spot fines Some jurisdictions (South Australia, theAustralian Capital Territory and the Northern Territory) haveintroduced a system of on-the-spot fines as a method of"decriminalising" the personal use and possession ofmarijuana. Since this system was implemented in SouthAustralia in 1987, there has been a 450% increase in the numberof fine notices issued (although research shows that marijuanausage has increased only slightly, in line with increases inother States). Half of the 18,000 people issued with notices lastyear did not pay their fine on time, exposing them to the risk ofarrest, prosecution and incurring a criminal record. In practice therefore, this initiative hasactually increased the cost of police and court time devoted tomarijuana law enforcement. In the ACT and NT, it is too early to saywhether there will be a similar escalation in the number ofnotices issued. There are few apparent advantages in adoptingthis measure. The other alternatives offer either more completeand systematic solutions, or the opportunity for more flexiblepolicing practices.  Remove prison as a sentencing option fordrug use or possession If the offences of drug use and possession arenot abolished, then at the least, imprisonment should be removedas an available sentencing option. Prison sentences are a completely inappropriatepenalty for minor drug possession and use offences. Imprisonmenthas never been evaluated for its effects on drug use orpossession recidivism, although anecdotal evidence suggests thatit does not deter ongoing drug use. Research into the questionshould be encouraged. About 150 people are gaoled each year in NSWfor drug use or possession of small quantities of drugs. In 1995(the most recent figures available), there were 62 people gaoledfor use or possession of marijuana, 61 were gaoled for use orpossession of heroin, and 44 were gaoled for use or possession ofother drugs. Although custodial sentences of up to eight monthswere imposed, the period of imprisonment for most was less thantwo months. In relative terms, these prison terms would beconsidered short. However, considering the minor nature of theoffences and prevailing social attitudes, they areextraordinarily harsh. 3 . Allow use of cannabis for medical purposes If the offences of drug use and possession areremoved, there is no need for separate treatment for those whouse cannabis for genuinely therapeutic purposes. However, ifthose offences remain, an exception should exist for the medicalapplications of cannabis. Cannabis in smokable form is a valuablealternative to other medical treatments for people living withAIDS and for some cancer and glaucoma patients. It is useful fornausea and pain relief, and to stimulate appetite. Smokablecannabis is now used in the community for these purposes withoutrecognition, support or medical supervision. Synthetic cannabis products in tablet form areavailable on prescription, but they are not satisfactory. Theyare expensive and reported to be less effective in achieving thedesired therapeutic results. Many patients who smoke marijuana tocontrol nausea are unable to swallow tablets. For some conditions(eg, weight loss associated with AIDS), there are no effectivealternatives. As well, numerous people living with hepatitisuse cannabis as a social alternative to alcohol. 4 Allow possession of drug equipment as well asneedles and syringes Possession of equipment intended for use ofprohibited drugs is illegal - needles and syringes are the onlyexception. It is anomalous to publicly fund thedistribution of needles and syringes, but not to allow thepossession of swabs, sterile water and tourniquets for thepurpose of using illegal drugs. Allowing the legal possession of allintravenous drug using equipment would assist in HIV prevention.It would also assist in preventing Hepatitis C infection, whichoften results from sharing equipment other than needles andsyringes., and it would assist in holistic harm reduction (eg,using sterile water to reduce the risk of injecting bacteriawhich can cause a range of illnesses). The sale and possession of bongs for thesmoking of cannabis is also illegal even though using a bong isprobably less harmful than smoking cannabis cigarettes. Furtherresearch should be undertaken into the relative physical harms ofdifferent methods of consuming cannabis (eg, in cigarettes,through bongs, or in foods). Legalising the sale and possession of cannabissmoking equipment would assist education strategies aimed atencouraging cannabis users to use in relatively safe ways. 5 . Provide safe injecting spaces Legal safe injecting spaces (or "shootingrooms") would considerably reduce the harm associated withinjecting drug use in public places like parks and laneways. Safeinjecting spaces could reduce drug overdose deaths, and shouldalso reduce the number of used syringes unsafely disposed of inpublic places. Publicly funded, safe injecting spaces shouldbe introduced on a trial basis in areas of existing highintravenous drug use. The trial should be conducted over twoyears, with an initial review after six months. Potential benefits include: i. Reduction in injecting drug use in publicplaces (such as parks and laneways), with the consequent publichealth dangers posed by used needles being left in those places. ii. Improved access and personal safety forambulance officers and other health workers treating overdoses. The difficulty with introducing such a trial isthat the authorities are wary of funding, even tolerating,facilities at which people would break the law (ie by selfadministration). We have made a number of suggestions above aboutreform of the law, or at least law enforcement practices, arounddrug use and possession. Introducing any of those proposals wouldclear the way legally for the introduction of safe injectingspaces. The proposal for safe injecting spaces is alogical extension of existing needle and syringe exchangeprograms. The legal framework to allow shooting rooms to operate(in the absence of more far-reaching changes to the law), wouldbe similar to the arrangements for needle and syringe exchangeprograms, namely: legislative amendment to make it not an offenceto inject a prohibited drug on site at an approved safe injectingplace (at least for the duration of a trial); instructions to police to not harass theclients of the facilities (just as existing instructions directpolice to not harass needle exchange clients) statutory amendment to protect workers in safeinjecting places from prosecution for aiding and abettingoffences. 6 Allow use, possession and supply of Narcanwithout prescription Narcan is an anti-narcotic used to revivepeople in the event of narcotic overdose. It has no pleasurableeffects, and no effect on someone who has not used heroin orother narcotics. Wider availability of Narcan has beenrecommended by researchers at the National Drug and AlcoholResearch Centre as an effective way to reduce fatal heroinoverdoses. If Narcan were to be made more readilyavailable, it should be accompanied by an appropriately targetededucation campaign to ensure that Narcan is understood to be afirst aid measure only. The person revived from the overdose by ashot of Narcan requires further medical attention, involvingeither calling an ambulance or attendance at a hospital. FUTURE CHANGE The implementation of these proposals should befollowed by continuing attention to laws and programmes whichimpact adversely on public health and other social programmes.Relevant government agencies should undertake a comprehensivereview to identify which laws require amendment to further reducedrug related harm. Key agencies to be involved in such a revieware the Departments of Health, Attorney-General's, Police, andSchool Education. In the longer term, the nature and pace offurther changes to drug law and policy will need to be consideredand debated. Implementing some or all of the above proposalswould significantly improve public health outcomes. Making thesechanges would allow the community to decide whether and how totake further steps. We should begin now, in a measured way, toexplore and implement workable alternatives to the failure ofdrugs prohibition. Contents | Feedback | Search DRCNet Library | Schaffer Library | Major Studies | BeyondProhibitionWT01-B29-22IA030-000641-B025-256http://206.61.184.43:80/schaffer/LIBRARY/studies/redfern/rf3a.htm 206.61.184.43 19970122140705 text/html 18180HTTP/1.0 200 OKDate: Wednesday, 22-Jan-97 14:06:56 GMTServer: WebSitePro/1.1f (S/N wpo-0deb)Allow-ranges: bytesContent-type: text/htmlLast-modified: Sunday, 19-Jan-97 10:55:10 GMTContent-length: 17964 3. Comments on Steps to Harm Reduction Contents | Feedback | Search DRCNet Library | Schaffer Library | Major Studies | BeyondProhibition Beyond Prohibition Report of the Redfern Legal Centre DrugLaw Reform Project September 1996 3. Comments on Steps to Harm Reduction A version of the Steps towards Harm Reductionsection of this report was provided to people and organisationswith expertise or interest in the area of drugs policy and drugslaw, together with a questionnaire (see Appendix 2) seekingcomments on the paper. Responses were sought from 55 individuals andorganisations (see Appendix 1). Written responses were receivedfrom 21 respondents and eight responses were obtained byinterview (29 responses in all). Given the low response rate andthe ways that respondents were selected, this survey is notdesigned to provide research evidence about support for oragainst changes to drug laws. However, the responses allow us tosee where support appears to be forming and what areas continueto be the subject of intense debate. Responses were received from the followingindividuals and organisations. Organisations are listed when theyprovided an organisational response: otherwise the individualslisted spoke only in a personal capacity and not on behalf of anyOrganisation: Uniting Church Board for Social ResponsibilityAnglican Church Catholic Archdiocese of Sydney AIDS Council of NSW Hepatitis C Council of NSW Australian Federation of AIDS OrganisationsAustralian IV League NSW Bar Council Australian Medical Association UN Association of Australia (NSW) Drug AbuseControl Committee HEMP Nimbin Dr Lisa Maher Meriel Schultz Garth Popple James Pitts Lory Price Greg Chilvers Don Weatherburn David McDonald Dr Alex Wodak Bill Stronach Professor Peter Baume Dr Robert Marks John Howard (lecturer, not PM) Dr Wendy Lox1ey Major Brian Watters Ken Marslew Angela and Tony Wood Dr Peter B Paisley (Total responses do not always add up to 29because some respondents did not answer all questions and somegave overall support or opposition, rather than provide detailson specific points.) Do you support some change in the legal currentapproach to personal use and possession? All respondents agreed that some change wasnecessary. The overwhelming majority favoured change in thedirection of some liberalisation of existing legal approaches.One respondent supported change in the form of higher penaltiesfor use and possession offences. One supported additionalintervention (eg, education) as well as police intervention. Comments: "There is (and has been for decades)overwhelming evidence that the current system not only does notwork but is cataclysmically harmful." "[Supported] for cannabis use/possessiononly. Population use of cannabis has reached the point whereprohibition does more harm than good." "Counterproductive and contrary toprinciples of harm minimisation and National Drugs Strategy tocriminalise users." "Should be less criminal records for theseoffences, shorter time for expungement of criminal records." It is important to note that almost allrespondents support some change, as one of the findings of thisprocess is that views are polarised on the points contained inthe Steps Towards Harm Reduction. While most respondentssupported the need for changes in all of the areas covered by thedocument, several respondents opposed most such changes. Thosegenerally in favour of change included some church groups,doctors, lecturers, researchers, drug educators, drug treatmentstaff and community based organisations. Those generally opposedincluded some church groups, doctors association, drug treatmentstaff and some community members. Several respondents chose to write letters insupport of their general position. These general commentsincluded: "Issues of dependency could be more easilyaddressed and the transmission of blood borne viruses could bemore efficiently reduced by taking the Steps Towards HarmReduction." "Too much attention is focused on thequestion of whether the present system of drug prohibition isworking. In my view, the answer is clearly that prohibition isnot working ... But accepting that prohibition has failed is notenough. Whether we should get rid of it depends on what we cancome up with as a replacement. Criminal law is not the only meansof regulation nor is its central presence in drug controlstrategy inevitable ... The real choice is about what type ofstate control is to replace prohibition as the dominantstrategy." (original emphasis) "The case here tends to be overstated byextrapolations and generalisations ... There cannot be a blanketapproach to encouraging safe and responsible drug use ... Thereis no clear evidence that either more restrictive or more liberalpolicies have achieved significant impact on the prevalence ofillicit drugs." "The (United Nations) conventions doreflect consensus and, with the problem of substance misuse,there has to be a line drawn somewhere. I believe that drug lawreform, at its worst, acts to destroy all the lines and to leaveonly confusion to those who desperately seek direction." Option a. Abolish the offences of use andpossession Eighteen respondents supported this change, sixwere opposed, three were unsure. Comments: "It's a victimless crime. What you do toyourself in the privacy of your own home is no-one'sbusiness." "[The current law is] counterproductivesocially and economically." "It would equal approval - a message thatdrug use is OK." "There needs to be community consultationsbefore progress can occur." Option b. Abolish the offence of selfadministration only The proposal to abolish the offence of selfadministration only was not included in the questionnairecompleted by respondents. However, one response noted that themost recent Ministerial Council on Drug Strategy meeting hadresolved to form a Working Party of the National Drug StrategyCommittee to examine the self administration laws in everyjurisdiction. This Working Party is chaired by Mr Neil Bridge ofthe NSW Police Service. Option c. Vary enforcement practices (i) Betterdirected police discretion The version of the paper circulated for commentdid not include this section, so most respondents did not havethe opportunity to comment on the proposals. The proposals werediscussed with a small number of respondents, who indicated somesupport. (ii) Formal Police cautions Twenty respondents favoured this proposal,three were opposed. Among the supporters, two indicated broadsupport for the concept, but disagreement with the detailsproposed. Two supporters expressed the view that this proposalwas a poor alternative to the repeal of the offences. Anotheradvocated this approach before considering legislative amendmentat a later time. Comments: "Police contact, if it is a deterrent,would be just as effective with a caution or bond as with aharsher penalty." "Diversion of users away from criminalcharges should be used wherever possible. Unfortunately [theDepartment of] Health does not resource sufficient treatment orcounselling services. Magistrates cannot refer if there are noservices. Neither can police." "Less intrusive and punitive. Gives someoption for the individual" "It should remain a court matter, but withno convictions recorded." (iii) On-the-spot fines Seven respondents were in favour of thisproposal, with another one "half in favour" and 15opposed. The respondent who was partially in favoursuggested that the South Australian experience was not a fairtest of the effectiveness of this approach because the law theredoes not allow the police to demand identification. Thisrespondent suggested a variation on the proposal, with no finesor other police attention for amount of less than 25 grams (forcannabis), and fines for quantities in the range of 25 grams to,say, 100 grams. Comments: "Although I favour legalisation, on thespot fines may be a half way house" "Fines are overused as a sanction." "They would just fill up the fines yardsand periodic detention centres." "It is too difficult,apparently, to prevent net-widening." V) Other suggestions Respondents were invited to make othersuggestions for legal change concerning personal use andpossession. Six respondents offered comments. Comments: "Policing priorities (I guess goes with(b)) Licensing of IV users (?), pot smokers(?)" "Some process for referral for assessmentfor treatment/ rehabilitation. Need to look at withdrawingdriving licences, eg for methadone patients." "Let people grow what they like. Let themarket place sort it out. Supply good quality seed - kill theblack market. Keep it cheap. Get away from needles." "Referral options - jobs - safehousing." "Legalise heroin and cannabis." "Continue education and encouragement ofnon-use, and not starting to use: eg, experiment." Remove prison as a sentencing option for druguse or possession Twenty respondents were in favour of thisproposal, and four were opposed. Two of those in favour of this change supportedthe establishment of secure, custodial rehabilitation facilitiesfor some drug users as an alternative to prison. Comments: "What's the point of putting users ingaol?" "[Yes] But it should be seldom if everused." "Minimise or modify prison sentence,deviation/direction to rehabilitation or treatment agencies whenpossible." 3 Allow use of cannabis for medical purposes Eighteen respondents were in favour of thisproposal, three were opposed. One of those in favour supportedcannabis for medical purposes on prescription only. Comments: "Even if it is only a third rate drug -why not allow some people to benefit?" "Cannabis in smokable form is not the bestavailable treatment for patients suffering from anyillness." "For some conditions (eg, AIDS relatedweight loss), there is no good alternative." 4. Allow possession of drug equipment as wellas needles and syringes Nineteen respondents favoured the proposal(including one who supported legal change for bongs, but wasuncertain about injecting equipment), four were opposed. One ofthose opposed to this proposal thought that a new offence shouldbe introduced for irresponsible disposal of used needles andsyringes. Comments: "Don't want to encourage drug use." "It's a proven public healthsuccess." "Present situation is patentlyludicrous." 5 Provide safe injecting spaces Eighteen respondents were in favour of thisproposal, five were opposed. Comments: "Definitely. Works towards increased safedisposal (by centralising use), decrease in overdoses (monitoreduse), takes away IV use from public facilities like publictoilets, provision of counselling, health monitoring. Highpriority change." "Safe for whom? These could assist incollection of used needles which a good thing. If illegalsupplies of drugs which are being trafficked, these may proveunsafe for users." "Socially unworkable. The practicalitiesof their location and operation are enormous." "Cannot assume beneficial public healtheffect especially if current prohibitions remain in place. Alsohave to ensure that such places are truly 'safe' and clients arefree from identification and police harassment." "What about non-metro towns? They may needthem more." 6 Allow use, possession and supply of Narcanwithout prescription Eleven respondents were in favour of thisproposal, four were against. Most others were unsure. Comments: "This is well supported in research. Thereare practical difficulties with its availability. Needs to beworked on rather than talked about!" "I don't want to see kids die." "100% for it." "I'm not sure about this, but I suppose Ishould logically support it." Contents | Feedback | Search DRCNet Library | Schaffer Library | Major Studies | BeyondProhibitionWT01-B29-23IA030-000641-B025-287http://206.61.184.43:80/schaffer/LIBRARY/studies/redfern/rf4.htm 206.61.184.43 19970122140717 text/html 29998HTTP/1.0 200 OKDate: Wednesday, 22-Jan-97 14:07:05 GMTServer: WebSitePro/1.1f (S/N wpo-0deb)Allow-ranges: bytesContent-type: text/htmlLast-modified: Sunday, 19-Jan-97 10:55:31 GMTContent-length: 29782 4. Harm Reduction Model of Controlled Drug Availability Contents | Feedback | Search DRCNet Library | Schaffer Library | Major Studies | BeyondProhibition Beyond Prohibition Report of the Redfern Legal Centre DrugLaw Reform Project September 1996 4. Harm Reduction Model of ControlledDrug Availability (Second Edition) This paper is in two Parts. Part A sets outPrinciples which should apply to the social and legal managementof currently illicit drugs. Part B provides some examples of howthese Principles might be applied for particular drugs.Individuals and organisations are invited to endorse thePrinciples of Controlled Availability contained in this proposal.(An earlier version of this paper was published in May 1995.) PART A: PRINCIPLES Preamble Prohibition causes enormous social damageincluding: Vastly increased drug-related property crime bydrug users to pay prices inflated by the black market Law enforcement costs to apprehend drug usersand sellers, and those who commit drug-related crime, andincreased costs and delays in the court system to process thesecases Corruption flourishing at all levels and inmany forms: profits are so great that few police or otherofficials are able to resist the enormous sums offered as bribes Violent crime developing from suppliercompetition Thousands of Australians jailed for drugrelated crimes, leading to increased costs for correctiveservices and the need for more jails Prohibition contributes to the spread of HIVand other blood-borne diseases such as Hepatitis B and C in thefollowing ways: Needle sharing among injectors of somecurrently illicit drugs can spread these infections: many drugusers begin to inject to receive the greatest effect from thesmallest quantity of the expensive drug Some users of illicit drugs are forced intohigh-risk forms of sex to pay for drug use Needle and syringe supply programs aredifficult to establish and operate under regular threat ofclosure, despite significantly reducing the spread of HIV andother blood-borne diseases Unsafe disposal of used needles and syringesincreases because drug injectors believe that police will usethese articles as the basis for prosecution Drug injectors sent to prison continue to usedrugs but have virtually no means to protect themselves frominfection Laws prohibiting certain drugs have drivenusers of currently illicit drugs from their social supportnetworks, making it hard to reach them with education messagesabout protecting themselves and others from infection Marginalisation of drug users (encouraged byprohibition) has led most Australians to care little what happensto drug users Prohibition causes damage to the health of drugusers (and consequently increases health costs to society) by: Users paying black market prices for drugs,leading to increasing malnutrition and other health deficitsrelated to poverty Adulterants and inconsistent drug type or dose(caused by unregulated manufacturing due to prohibition) causinghealth damage, overdose and death among users of currentlyillicit drugs Marginalisation of drug users leads to lowerself esteem and decreases motivation for self-care Goals of Rational Drug Policy Drug policy should: Have realistic goals Take account of the different patterns andtypes of harms caused by specific drugs Be shown to be effective or be changed Separate arguments about the consequences ofdrug use from arguments about morals Be developed in the light of the costs ofcontrol as well as the benefits Ensure that the harms caused by the controlregimes themselves do not outweigh the harms prevented by them Recognise the existence of multiple goals, butensure that contradictory goals are minimised We believe that this proposal achieves each ofthese policy objectives. The specific goals of this proposal are tosimultaneously reduce the size and profits of the illicit drugmarket by the greatest amount; and provide the greatest level ofharm reduction for users of currently illicit drugs; and minimisethe number of users of these drugs who experience problemsrelated to their drug use Defining Harm Reduction We use the term "harm reduction" tomean: A policy or programme directed towards reducingthe adverse health, social and economic consequences of drug useto the community and to the individual user, even though the usermay continue to use psychoactive drugs at this time. Harm reduction policies and programmes must bepart of a public health approach to managing drug use. Protectingthe health of the community must include protecting the health ofdrug users. Principles of Controlled Availability Applying these policy goals under the abovedefinition of harm reduction, we propose that a system ofcontrolled availability of currently illicit drugs be introduced. Such a system should have the followingprinciples as its key elements: 1. The use and possession of currently illicitdrugs should be made legal, in an environment of controlledavailability. 2. The regulated manufacture, supply and saleof selected drugs should be allowed. 3. The drugs selected for controlledavailability should include cannabis, heroin, amphetamine,ecstasy and anabolic steroids. 4. The drugs selected for should be madeavailable either: a) Over the counter from licensed premises inspecified (generally low) dosages of known purity, clearlylabelled with ingredients shown; or b) By prescription. 5. The age limit for the regulated supply ofcurrently illicit drugs should be the same as it is for alcohol. 6. Advertising and marketing should be theminimum necessary (eg, for brand identification) to ensure thatnon-users are not attracted into drug use by marketing. 7. Prices of regulated drugs should be set sothat least harmful forms of the drug (usually lower dosages) aresubstantially less costly than more harmful forms of the drug. 8. Users must demonstrate adequate knowledgeabout the effects of the drug they intend to purchase, and aboutsafe usage. 9. Profits earned from the commercialproduction or supply of drugs should be taxed. Revenues obtainedfrom taxes and licence fees must be applied (in whole or in largepart) to education, and to treatment for those drug users whowant it. 10. Controlled availability should operate in aframework of: a) education in which doctors and other healthprofessionals, licensed drug sellers and drug users allparticipate in baseline and follow-up education based on validresearch; and b) widespread, easily accessible treatment fordrug-related problems, with funding to be provided to a widevariety of non-coercive options for positive change. 11. The prescription system should have thefollowing characteristics: a) Appropriate criteria for a drug to beprescribed to an individual would be: i. regular frequent use (usually daily); ii. clear evidence of dependence; iii. continued use having a severe effect onlifestyle; iv. the harms associated with non-prescribeduse being significantly greater than those associated withprescription. b) A variety of forms for oral, smokable orinjectable use be made available, in a range of doses up to anegotiated maximum dose. Users must also have access toappropriate drug using equipment. C) Users of the prescription system beregistered. d) The prescription system would operate in aframework of: i. Harm reduction and full consumerparticipation. ii. Entry assessment to ensure that theindividual wants to be maintained on the drug: this assessmentmust be carried out by a trained, qualified drugs worker and mustinclude a full and frank discussion of the likely consequences ofa range of options including maintenance, detoxification,selective detoxification, and controlled using. iii. Options for dispensing which may include: Pharmacy dispensing Drug clinic dispensing Home delivery or mobile van for long-termillness, palliative care or isolated individuals Safe injecting spaces ("shootingrooms") in areas with a high concentration of druginjectors, especially those who are homeless. iv. Reasonable cost to the consumer. Servicesto clients on low incomes would be delivered through the publichealth system. PART B: CASE STUDIES In this Part we propose some concrete examplesof how these Principles might be applied for particular drugs. We do not suggest that the proposals in thisPart describe the only possible application of these principles. Cannabis We use the term "cannabis" to referto the complete range of cannabis products including marijuana,hashish resin and oil, and other preparations, as well asindustrial hemp. It would be legal to grow up to 10 cannabisplants for personal use. It would be legal to consume cannabisproducts or to possess up to 50 grams (dry weight) of cannabisfor personal use. It would be legal to supply in small quantities(up to 50 grams) to people aged 18 and over for no payment. It would be legal to grow larger quantities ofcannabis under licence to a State Government Office of DrugRevenue (ODR). Officially sanctioned cannabis growers would beallowed to sell their products to cannabis shops or Kafes, or tomanufacturers of other cannabis products such as biscuits andcakes, rope, paper, textiles, etc. A regulation system wouldensure that grades of cannabis (principally by THC content) areadhered to, providing quality assurance for end users. Adifferential tax could operate with different grades beingsubject to different tax. A system of cannabis Kafes would be establishedfor retail sales of cannabis, both for consumption on thepremises and for take-away consumption to people aged 18 andover. A range of cannabis products from rolled cigarettes tobiscuits might be available, together with smoking implementsdesigned to reduce the level of harm associated with smokingcannabis products (eg bongs). Other retailers (eg tobacconists) would belicensed to sell take away cannabis products. Cannabis seeds, andinformation about home cultivation, would also be available. Commercial cannabis suppliers would be requiredto label their products with consumer information concerningweight, THC content, recommended dosage, and approved healthwarnings. Profits earned from the commercial manufactureor supply of cannabis would be taxed. Prices for cannabis products should becomparable with prices of alcoholic spirits. Prices should be setto encourage users to eat cannabis products rather than smoke. Sales to people under 18 and unlicensed (ieuntaxed) sales would be illegal. Advertising and marketing of cannabis productswould be restricted to the minimum necessary (eg for brandidentification). It might include a statement outside and insideKafes that "cannabis products are sold here", orperhaps a discrete symbol indicating availability of cannabisproducts. Cannabis smoking would be banned in placeswhere tobacco smoking is banned. A realistic education campaign about thehazards of using cannabis, concentrating on safe cannabis use,"dope-driving", the effects of both shortterm andchronic use, and the use of cannabis and alcohol together, wouldbe carried out at regular intervals. The cost of this campaignand ongoing campaigns directed at school students, homeless andworking youth and visitors to the State would be paid for by taxrevenues from cannabis sales. Revenues from taxes and licence fees would beused to administer the regulatory system and to provide educationand treatment services through services funded by the HealthDepartment. It would remain an offence to drive while underthe influence of cannabis, unless further research proves thatcannabis does not impair driving ability. Research should beconducted to determine what (if any) level of cannabisintoxication would not adversely affects drivers' ability. It would remain illegal to import or exportcannabis. Heroin & other opioids In this section, we refer to heroin and othercurrently illicit opioids such as opium, as well as currentlyrestricted drugs such as methadone. It would be legal to use heroin and allcurrently illicit opioid products, and to possess smallquantities (2 grams) for personal use. It would remain illegal to supply, manufactureor traffic in currently illicit opioid drugs except as follows: Opiated teas, tinctures, tonics and otherproducts, clearly showing the percentage of opioid per volumewould be manufactured under licence to a State Government Officeof Drug Revenue (ODR) and sold through pharmacies to people overthe age of 18. All ingredients of these products would be listedon their packaging. Taxes raise from the sale of these productswould be used to fund treatment and education programs. Smokable opium and heroin would be manufacturedunder licence to the ODR and sold in pharmacies to people overthe age of 18, together with smoking implements designed toreduce the level of harm associated with opium and heroin smoking(ie. smoke cooling equipment such as hookahs and long pipes).Prices of these products would be set so that they would: (a) encourage opium use over heroin use, butwhich (b) encourage opioid smoking over opioidinjecting. Sales of these products would be in smallquantities only (enough for 3-4 episodes of intoxication). Taxesraised from sales would be used to fund treatment and educationprograms, and to subsidise the prescription system. By prescription (see below). The pharmacy sales of opiated products, opiumand heroin would be regulated by officers of the ODR, not by thepolice. The retail system would be accompanied by aneducation, information and referral system. A general educationcampaign would be carried out to provide the rationale for thissystem and to explain its workings. Commercial suppliers would be required to labeltheir products with consumer information concerning weight,recommended dosage, and approved health warnings. Profits earned from the commercial manufactureor supply of heroin and other opioids would be taxed. There would be no advertising or marketing ofopioid products except for the minimum necessary for brandidentification. Realistic education materials would be availablein a range of formats to opioid product buyers. Training would also be provided to pharmacistsin early identification of opiate-related problems, assessment ofthese problems, and referral for assistance via prescribedopioids, drug treatment or other help as negotiated with theconsumer. Part of this training would be in obtaining informationfrom new buyers about their level of knowledge of opioid use, andensuring that new buyers especially have access to appropriateeducation materials. It would remain an offence to drive while underthe influence of heroin or other opioids. Prescription The prescribing system should be establishedfor registered "dependents" (people who are or believethat they are dependent on a drug). Such a prescription systemwould have the following as its essential elements: The system should have as its core values harmreduction and full consumer participation. The system should havean entry assessment to ensure that the individual wants to bemaintained on an opioid drug. Assessment must be carried out by atrained, qualified drugs worker. A full and frank assessment ofthe likely consequences of a range of options includingmaintenance, detoxification, selective detoxification, controlledusing, etc should be negotiated with the individual. The prescription system should make available achoice of the five most popular opioid drugs in a variety offorms for oral or injectable use, in a range of doses up to anegotiated maximum dose when they so desire. To avoid "double" prescribing, acomputerised register would be kept of the dependent person'sname, address, preferred drug(s) and maximum dose(s). Options for dispensing should also benegotiated. They may include: Pharmacy dispensing Drug clinicdispensing Home delivery for long-term illness or palliativecare. Safe injecting spaces ("shooting rooms") in areaswith a high concentration of drug injectors, especially those whoare homeless. The system should be costed at a reasonable feeto the consumer. Services to clients on low incomes should bedelivered through the public health system. Operating costs willbe supplemented by some of the revenues from the ODR. It would remain illegal to import or exportheroin and opioids. Amphetamine It would be legal to consume amphetamine and topossess small quantities (2 grams) for personal use. It would remain illegal to manufacture, supplyor traffic in currently amphetamine except as follows: Amphetamine would be manufactured under licenceto a State Government Office of Drug Revenue (ODR) and sold inpharmacies to people over the age of 18. Prices of these productswould be set so that they are much higher than cannabis products.Sales of amphetamine would be in small quantities only (enoughfor 3-4 episodes of intoxication). Taxes on sales would be usedto fund treatment and education programs and to subsidise thatprescription program. By prescription. The pharmacy sales of amphetamine would beregulated by officers of the ODR, not by the police. The retail system would be accompanied by aneducation, information and referral system. A general educationcampaign would be carried out to provide the rationale for thissystem and to explain its workings. Profits earned from the commercial manufactureor supply of amphetamine would be taxed. Realistic education materials would beavailable in a range of formats to amphetamine buyers. There would be no advertising or marketing ofamphetamine except for strictly limited brand identification. Commercial suppliers would be required to labeltheir products with consumer information concerning weight,recommended dosage, and approved health warnings. It would remain illegal to import or exportamphetamine. It would remain an offence to drive while underthe influence of amphetamine. Training would also be provided to pharmacistsin early identification of amphetamine-related problems,assessment of these problems, and referral for assistance viaprescribed amphetamine, drug treatment or other help asnegotiated with the consumer. Part of this training would be inobtaining information from new buyers about their level ofknowledge of stimulant use, and ensuring that new buyersespecially have access to appropriate education materials. The prescription system should be establishedfor registered "dependents" (people who are or whobelieve they are dependent on a drug). Such a system should havethe same essential elements as the opioid prescribing systemdescribed above. Ecstasy It would be legal to consume ecstasy and topossess up to 2 grams or 10 tablets. Ecstasy may be manufactured and sold underlicence in pharmacies to people over the age of 18. Licences tomanufacturers, distributors and pharmacists would be issued by aState Government Office of Drug Revenue (ODR). Pharmacists licensed to sell ecstasy would berequired to complete suitable training in the pharmacologicaleffects of MDMA. Part of this training would in obtaininginformation from new buyers about their level of knowledge ofecstasy use, and ensuring that new buyers especially have accessto appropriate education materials. Commercial suppliers would be required to labeltheir products with consumer information concerning ingredients,recommended dosage, and approved health warnings. Ecstasy shouldbe manufactured for sale in standardised doses. Profits earned from the commercial manufactureor supply of ecstasy would be taxed. Rave parties would be allowed subject topromoters obtaining a licence. To qualify for a licence,promoters must demonstrate that arrangements have been made toprovide adequate supplies of free water, chill out rooms, andother appropriate health measures. [If a significant black marketpersists, it may be necessary to have a pharmacologist on-site toanalyse tablets and powders on the request of patrons.] Health information should be made available inappropriate formats at places where ecstasy use is predictable(eg raves). This information would include advice to drinkadequate water and to rest and cool down regularly. It would remain an offence to drive while underthe influence of ecstasy. It would remain illegal to import or exportecstasy. Anabolic Steroids Steroids represent a separate and differentphenomenon of drug use to traditional psychoactive drugs. Therelationship between effect desired and effect obtained isspecific, and has less to do with the social and environmentalcontext of drug use. A harm reduction approach to steroid usewould include medical supervision of training and diet, as wellas psychological and physical monitoring (such as testing forliver and kidney function). It would be legal to use or possess smallquantities of anabolic steroids, provided the user holds acurrent prescription from a medical practitioner authorisingtheir use. Prescriptions may be issued for a maximumsingle period of one month. Prescriptions could be renewed onlyafter consultation with the prescriber. Training in the physical and psychologicaleffects of steroid use would be provided to those medicalpractitioners who wish to be steroid prescribers. Commercial suppliers would be required to labeltheir products with consumer information concerning ingredients,recommended dosage, and approved health warnings. Education campaigns should be undertaken aimedat encouraging steroid users to moderate the quantities anddosages used, and to use steroids only under medical supervision. Research should continue into the physical andpsychological effects of use of anabolic steroids, especiallylong term use. The results of this research should be promotedwidely among steroid users. Sporting organisations would be able tocontinue to ban steroid users from competition, and to testcompetitors for steroid use. It would remain illegal to import or exportanabolic steroids. Contents | Feedback | Search DRCNet Library | Schaffer Library | Major Studies | BeyondProhibitionWT01-B29-24IA030-000641-B025-309http://206.61.184.43:80/schaffer/LIBRARY/studies/redfern/rf5.htm 206.61.184.43 19970122140724 text/html 9035HTTP/1.0 200 OKDate: Wednesday, 22-Jan-97 14:07:16 GMTServer: WebSitePro/1.1f (S/N wpo-0deb)Allow-ranges: bytesContent-type: text/htmlLast-modified: Sunday, 19-Jan-97 10:55:14 GMTContent-length: 8820 5. Comments on the Harm Reduction Model Contents | Feedback | Search DRCNet Library | Schaffer Library | Major Studies | BeyondProhibition Beyond Prohibition Report of the Redfern Legal Centre DrugLaw Reform Project September 1996 5 Comments on the Harm Reduction Model Respondents were asked to comment in broadterms about the desirability of controlled availability, andabout the Principles for Controlled Availability outlined in thepaper. Responses were received from the same groupunder the same conditions outlined in Chapter 3. General remarks General comments on the Model included: "I would argue that we need to examinespecific regulatory options in terms of their potential for harmminimisation and, in particular, to assess the relationshipbetween drug-related harm and particular forms of markets andsystems of distribution. As Nicholas Dorn and Nigel South haverecently suggested in the UK context, we need to ask: 'What sortof markets do we least dislike, and how can we adjust the controlmix so as to push markets in the least undesired (harmful)direction." "Some of the specific goals proposed forrational drug policy have still to be tested. The means ofimplementing controls on age, advertising and marketing, andadequate knowledge about safe use are unknown. There shouldcertainly be a framework of treatment for drug related problems.The prescription system is untested, as is the assessmentprocess." "I wish to endorse (the Model's) contents,especially the point that prohibition has had no positiveresults. I am not competent to suggest any amendments except toadd that I was a registered nurse for about thirty-fiveyears." "Unfortunately, the (Model) goes muchfurther than the harm minimisation principles of the NationalDrug Strategy, to the point of having few controls onavailability at all." "In general, harm reduction strategiespresuppose the impossibility of addressing the undesirablebehaviour and hence direct attention to the consequences. What isnot clear, in my mind, is how we define the I undesirablebehaviour' with which we are dealing. In other words, is drug usea cause or result of other social or behavioural problems?" Controlled availability Should we adopt a "controlledavailability" approach in the long term as the best policydirection for currently illicit drugs? Fourteen were in favour of the concept ofcontrolled availability as outlined in the paper, six wereagainst. Comments: "Supported, because it's sensible." "(Controlled availability) is needed asthe next step in harm minimisation." "We need education about drug effects, andresearch too. Controlled availability provides a means both ofgenerating data and of informing users." "Sends the wrong message to youngpeople." "Supported, provided that: it isresearched for each drug group research is open and rigorous onlymove to next group if research is favourable" "Controlled availability as defined seemsmore like 'uncontrolled availability' when over-the-counteroptions are included. All drugs with a medical purpose that canhelp people with an addiction problem should be available onprescription, but not over-the-counter." "Can't answer for all drugs at this stage.Support idea for cannabis." "I am unconvinced as to the merits of a'blanket' approach to controlled availability. More convinced asto the merits of controlled availability of cannabis, perhapsecstasy, and favour prescribing system for heroin." Internal consistency Is the Harm Reduction Model of Controlled DrugAvailability internally coherent? For example, are the principlesconsistent with the stated goals? Seventeen said yes, four said no. Comments: "Good effort in putting all this together... the way you've done it contains a lot of common sense." "I don't think the mechanisms ofcontrolled availability have been spelt out in enough detail tomake a judgment about harm minimisation for all drugs." "They're the best considered proposalsI've yet seen coming from an Australian source ... May theseproposals enjoy wide readership." "Raises all the right questions which needto be addressed. The current system needs to be challenged." "The document could be strengthened bydescribing the pros and cons of each method of delivery (Eg,prescription and over the counter)." Principles Do you broadly support the Principles ofControlled Availability set out in the Harm Reduction Model ofrug Availability? Eighteen were in favour, five were opposed. Comments: "The closest to the mark we've seen sofar." "It is this kind of extremism that offersopponents of harm minimisation strategies a platform from whichto jump." "You should be congratulated for doing theexercise. By being specific about details, you give everybody achance to tear it apart. But that is positive." "We congratulate the Drug Law ReformProject on the production of such a positive and practical Model,one that if fully and successfully implemented by governments andother decision makers, would most certainly contribute to asubstantial reduction of hepatitis C transmission. We lookforward to hearing of progress on its implementation." Contents | Feedback | Search DRCNet Library | Schaffer Library | Major Studies | BeyondProhibitionWT01-B29-25IA030-000641-B025-339http://206.61.184.43:80/schaffer/LIBRARY/studies/redfern/rf6.htm 206.61.184.43 19970122140753 text/html 8918HTTP/1.0 200 OKDate: Wednesday, 22-Jan-97 14:07:39 GMTServer: WebSitePro/1.1f (S/N wpo-0deb)Allow-ranges: bytesContent-type: text/htmlLast-modified: Sunday, 19-Jan-97 10:55:18 GMTContent-length: 8703 6. Future Drug Law Reform Activities Contents | Feedback | Search DRCNet Library | Schaffer Library | Major Studies | BeyondProhibition Beyond Prohibition Report of the Redfern Legal Centre DrugLaw Reform Project September 1996 6. Future drug law reform activities Future -activities for the Redfern Drug LawReform Project are -likely to include closer links to othercommittees and organisations working on drug law reform in NewSouth Wales. These groups are growing in number and diversity andinclude in their members the parents, siblings and friends ofpeople who have died from overdose, AIDS or other drug-relatedcauses, doctors, lawyers, professors and emeritus professors ofmedicine and pharmacology, drug users, health care workers,clerks, needle exchange workers, historians and artists. In turn, these NSW groups are working closelywith groups in other States and with the Australian Drug LawReform Foundation to address issues of drug policy and relatedlaw reform in every jurisdiction in Australia. The documentscontained in this report will be examined again next year to seewhether further changes and refinements are needed. Anotherreport of people's comments on the documents will also bereleased at some point in 1997. Individuals and organisations are invited toendorse, abuse or otherwise comment on the documents and to sendthese comments to: Drug Law Reform Project Redfern Legal Centre 73 Pitt St Redfern 2016 New South Wales Australia Fax: 61-2-9310-3586 Acknowledgments The main author of this report was Steve Bolt,who served as project officer from mid-1994 until August 1996.Dave Burrows, was the main author of the Harm Reduction Model ofControlled Drug Availability, and assisted Steve in finalisingthis report and preparing it for publication. Timothy Mooreassisted in writing the report and Harriet Grahame of RedfernLegal Centre carried out crucial work in facilitating manyaspects of the Project. Members of the Redfern Legal CentreManagement Committee assisted the Project in many ways from itsinitial funding to monitoring its activities, providinginstitutional support and attending Project committee meetings.Thanks also go to the many people who provided comments for thisreport, and to the many people who participated in the Projectcommittee over the past two years. Appendix 1 Comments were sought from the followingorganisations/individuals (asterisk means a response wasreceived). Where individuals are identified, they spoke asindividuals and not necessarily as representing theirorganisations: Hepatitis C Council of NSW* AIDS Council of NSW* Australian Federation of AIDS Organisations* NSW Users and AIDS Association Australian IV League* HEMP Nimbin* National Drug and Alcohol Research Centre: Dr Lisa Maher* Professor Wayne Hall Paul Dillon Dr Shane Darke Centre for Education and Information on Drugsand Alcohol: Meriel Schultz* We Help Ourselves Garth Popple* Odyssey House* NSW Law Society NSW Bar Association* Lawyers Reform Association Australian Medical Association* Doctors Reform Society Pharmacy Guild of Australia NSW Police Service Supt Frank Hansen Chief Supt Mal Brammer Lory Price* Police Association of NSW Greg Chilvers* Justice Action David Heilpern, solicitor Don Weatherburn* David McDonald* Peter Homel Dr Alex Wodak* Dr Nick Crofts Mike Lodge Owen Westcott Frank Quinlan Corrections Health Service Dr Peter B Paisle * Australian Drug Foundation Bill Stronach* University of NSW School of Community Medicine Professor Peter Baume* University of NSW Graduate School of Management Dr Robert Marks Macquarie University, School of Drug DependenceStudies John Howard* Professor Bill Saunders National Centre for Research into thePrevention of Drug Abuse Dr Wendy Loxley* Salvation Army Major Brian Watters* Ken Marslew* Angela and Tony Wood* United Nations Association* South Sydney Community Aid Cabramatta Community Centre Aboriginal Medical Service Youth Advocacy and Policy Association Parents and Citizens Federation Local Government Association Catholic Church* Uniting Church* Anglican Church* NSW Ambulance Service NSW Ambulance Officers Association Contents | Feedback | Search DRCNet Library | Schaffer Library | Major Studies | BeyondProhibitionWT01-B29-26IA031-000651-B017-339http://206.61.184.43:80/schaffer/history/om/omintro.htm 206.61.184.43 19970122121853 text/html 14015HTTP/1.0 200 OKDate: Wednesday, 22-Jan-97 12:18:46 GMTServer: WebSitePro/1.1f (S/N wpo-0deb)Allow-ranges: bytesContent-type: text/htmlLast-modified: Saturday, 28-Dec-96 05:40:38 GMTContent-length: 13797 The Opium Monopoly -- Introduction Contents | Feedback | Search DRCNet Library | Schaffer Library | Historical Research THE OPIUM MONOPOLY BY ELLEN N. LA MOTTE INTRODUCTION We first became interested in the opium traffic during a visitto the Far East in 1916. Like most Americans, we had vaguelyheard of this trade, and had still vaguer recollections of a warbetween Great Britain and China, which took place aboutseventy-five years ago, known as the Opium War. From time to timewe had heard of the opium trade as still flourishing in China,and then later came reports and assurances that it was all over,accompanied by newspaper pictures of bonfires of opium and opiumpipes. Except for these occasional and incidental memories, wehad neither knowledge of, nor interest in the subject. On our wayout to Japan, in the July of 1916, we met a young Hindu on theboat, who was outspoken and indignant over the British policy ofestablishing the opium trade in India, as one of the departmentsof the Indian Government. Of all phases of British rule in India,it was this policy which excited him most, and which caused himmost ardently to wish that India had some form ofself-government, some voice in the control and management of herown affairs, so that the country could protect itself from thisevil. Without this, he declared, his country was powerless to puta stop to this traffic imposed on it by a foreign government, andhe greatly deplored the slow, but steady demoralization of thenation which was in consequence taking place. As he produced hisfacts and figures, showing what this meant to his people-thisgradual undermining of their moral fiber and economic efficiencywe grew more and more interested. That such conditions existedwere to us unheard of, and unbelievable. It seemed incrediblethat in this age, with the consensus of public opinion sternlyopposed to the sale and distribution of habit-forming drugs, andwith legislation to curb and restrict such practices incorporatedin the laws of all ethical and civilized governments, that here,on the other side of the world, we should come upon opium trafficconducted as a government monopoly. Not only that, but conductedby one of the greatest and most highly civilized nations of theworld, a nation which we have always looked up to as being in thevery forefront of advanced, progressive and humane ideals. Soshocked were we by what this young Hindu told us, that we flatlyrefused to believe him. We listened to what he had to say on thesubject, but thinking that however earnest he might be, howeversincere in his sense of outrage at such a policy, that he must ofnecessity be mistaken. We decided not to take his word for it,but to look into the matter for ourselves. We did look into the matter. During a stay in the Far East ofnearly a year, in which time we visited Japan, China, Hong Kong,French IndoChina, Siam and Singapore, we looked into the matterin every country we visited. Wherever possible we obtainedgovernment reports, and searched them carefully for thosepassages giving' statistics concerning the opium trade-the amountof opium consumed, the number of shops where it was sold, and thenumber of divans where it was smoked. We found these shopsestablished under government auspices, the dealers obtainingtheir supplies of opium from the government, and then obtaininglicenses from the government to retail it. In many countries, wevisited these shops and divans in person, and bought opium inthem freely, just as one goes to a shop to buy cigarettes. Wefound a thorough and complete establishment of the opium traffic,run by the government, as a monopoly. Revenue was derived throughthe sale of opium, through excise taxes upon opium, and throughlicense fees paid by the keepers of opium shops and divans* -Acomplete, systematic arrangement, by which the foreign governmentprofited at the expense of the subject peoples under its rule. InEuropean countries and in America, we find the governments makingevery effort to repress the sale of habit-forming drugs. Here, inthe Far East, a contrary attitude prevails. The government makesevery effort to encourage and extend it. Two notable exceptions presented themselves. One was Japan. There are no opium shops in Japan, and theJapanese Government is as careful to protect its people from theevils and dangers of opium as any European country could be. Itmust be remembered, however, that Japan is a free and independentcountry. It has never been conquered by a European country, andperhaps one explanation as to why the Japanese are a powerful,virile people, is because Japan is the one Oriental nation thathas never been dominated by a European power, and in consequence,never drugged. The other exception is our own possession of the Philippines,which although a subject country, has never had the opium trafficestablished as part of the machinery of an alien government. On our return to America, we were greatly exercised over thesefacts which we had unearthed. We continued our researches as tothe opium traffic in the New York Public Library, and in theLibrary of Congress, in Washington, in both of which places thereis a rich and abundant literature on the subject. We obtainedready access to official blue books and government reports,issued by the British Government, and it is from these sourcesthat the material in this book is largely drawn. We were somewhathampered in our investigations by the fact that because of thewar, these blue books have not always been of recent date, someof them being two or three years old. For this reason, it has notalways been possible to give the most recent figures as to opiumconsumption and distribution in the various countries. However,we feel that we have obtained enough information to uphold ourcase, and in any event, there is no doubt that the opium traffic,as fostered by the British Government, still continues. Inlooking over the list of British colonies where it isestablished, we may find here and there a diminution in theamount of opium consumed, but this is probably due to theexigencies of war, to the lack of shipping and transportation,rather than to any conscientious scruples or moral turnover;because the revenue derived from the opium trade is precious. Insome instances, as in the case of the Straits Settlements, thelocal British Government derives from forty to fifty percent ofits revenue from this source. Yet, taken in relation to thewhole, it is not large. However valuable it may be, however largethe percentage in the case of any particular colony, it cansurely never be large enough to compensate for the stigmaattached.- It is a blot upon the honor of a great nation to thinkthat she deliberately runs her colonies on opium: No revenue,whether large or small, can be justified when coming from such asource as this. In all these blue books and official reports, the question ofthe Opium Monopoly, as it is called, is dealt with freely. Thereis no attempt to hide or suppress the facts. The subject isreported frankly and fully. It is all there, for any one to readwho chooses. How then, does it happen that we in America knownothing about Great Britain's Opium Monopoly? That the facts arenew to us and come to us as a shock? One is because of ouradmiration for Great Britain. Those who know and there are afew-hesitate to state them. Those who know, feel that it is apolicy unworthy of her. We hesitate to call attention to theshortcomings of a friend. There are other reasons also for thisconspiracy of silence-fear of international complications, fearof endangering the good feeling between the two countries,England and America. Consequently England has been able to relyupon those who know the facts to keep silent, either throughadmiration or through fear. Also the complete ignorance of therest of us has been an additional safeguard. Therefore, fornearly a century, she has been running her Opium Monopolyundisturbed. It began as a private industry, about the time ofthe East India Company, but later on passed out of the hands ofprivate individuals into the department of Opium Administration,one of the branches of the colonial government" But, loyalas we have been all these years, we can remain silent no longer.The time is now rapidly approaching when the two countries,England and America, are to become closely united. How can webecome truly united, however, when on such a great moral questionas this we stand diametrically opposed? There is still another reason why we should break silence. Thewelfare of our own country is now at stake. The menace of opiumis now threatening America, and our first duty is to ourselves.Little by little, surreptitiously, this drug has been creeping inover our borders, and to-day many thousands of our young men andyoung women are drug addicts, habituated to the use of one of theopium derivatives, morphia or heroin. The recent campaign againstdrug users, conducted by the New York Department of Health, hasuncovered these addicts in great numbers; has brought them beforeus, made us see, in spite of ourselves, that thousands of themexist and that new ones are being created daily. The questionarises, how do they obtain the drug? It was the fortune of thewriter to be present during the first week of the opening of theHealth Department Clinic for Drug Addicts, and her work consistedin taking the histories of these pitiful, abject wrecks of menand women who swarmed to the clinic in hundreds, seeking suppliesof the drug which they could not obtain elsewhere. The history ofthese patients was almost invariably the same-there was amonotony in their tragic, pathetic recital as to how they becamevictims, how they first became acquainted with the drug. As arule, they began in extreme youth, generally between fifteen andtwenty years of age, one boy having begun at the age of thirteen.In nearly every case they had tried it as a lark, as anexperiment. At "parties,' they said, when some one of thecompany would pass round a box full of heroin, inviting them tosnuff it. To snuff it, these children, very much as a small boygoes behind the barn to try his first cigarette. In manyinstances those who produced the box were peddlers, offering itas a gift at first, knowing that after a dose or two the fatalhabit would be formed and another customer created. Thesepeddlers doubtless obtained their supplies from smugglers. Butthat takes us back to our argument, namely, the part played bythat great nation which grows and distributes opium to the world.For that nation produces an oversupply of opium, far more than isneeded by the medical profession for the relief of pain. Opium isnot profitable in its legitimate use. It is only profitablebecause of the demands of addicts, men and women deliberatelydebauched, either through the legalized machinery of colonialgovernments, or through the illegal activities of smugglers. Amoral sentiment that will balk at this immense over-production,the sole object of which is to create drug victims, is the onlyweapon to fight it. In giving this book to the public, we arecalling upon that moral sentiment. We feel that we shall numberamong our staunchest supporters that great body of men and womenin England who have for years been vainly fighting the opiumtraffic. No more bitter opponents of this policy are to be foundthan amongst the English people themselves. From time to time, inParliament, sharp debates have arisen as to the advisability ofcontinuing it, and some of the greatest men in England have beensteadfastly opposed. The great Gladstone has described it as"morally indefensible." The time has now come for us,people of both countries, to unite to stop it. Contents | Feedback | Search DRCNet Library | Schaffer Library | Historical Research WT01-B29-27IA031-000651-B017-367http://206.61.184.43:80/schaffer/history/om/om1.htm 206.61.184.43 19970122121940 text/html 8884HTTP/1.0 200 OKDate: Wednesday, 22-Jan-97 12:19:23 GMTServer: WebSitePro/1.1f (S/N wpo-0deb)Allow-ranges: bytesContent-type: text/htmlLast-modified: Saturday, 28-Dec-96 05:41:46 GMTContent-length: 8667 Great Britain's Opium Monopoly Contents | Feedback | Search DRCNet Library | Schaffer Library | Historical Research THE OPIUM MONOPOLY BY ELLEN N. LA MOTTE I - GREAT BRITAIN'S OPIUM MONOPOLY In a book shop in Shanghai, we came upon a small book with anarresting title, "Drugging a Nation," by Samuel Merwin.It was published in 1908, eight years before we chanced upon it,shabby and shop worn, its pages still uncut. The people ofShanghai, the great International Settlement of this largest cityand most important seaport of China, did not have to read it.They knew, doubtless, all that its pages could disclose. We,however, found it most enlightening. In it there is thisdescription of the British Opium Monopoly: "In speaking of it as a 'monopoly' I am not employing acant word for effect. I am not making a case. That is what it isofficially styled in a certain blue book on my table which bearsthe title, 'Statement Exhibiting the Moral and Material Progressof India during the year 1905-'6,' and which was ordered by theHouse of Commons to be printed, May 10, 1907. . . . Now to getdown to cases, just what this Government Opium Monopoly is, andjust how Goes it work? An excerpt from the rather ponderous bluebook will tell us. It may be dry but it is official andunassailable. It is also short. "'The opium revenue'-thus the blue book-'is partly raisedby a monopoly of the production of the drug in Bengal and theUnited provinces, and partly by the levy of a duty on all opiumimported from native states. . . . In these two provinces, thecrop is grown under the control of a government department, whicharranges the total area which is to be placed under the crop,with a view to the amount of opium required.' "So much for the broader outline. Now for a few of thedetails: 'The cultivator of opium in these monopoly districtsreceives a license, and is granted advances to enable him toprepare the land for the crop, and he is required to deliver thewhole of the product at a fixed price to opium agents, by whom itis dispatched to the government factories at Patna and Ghazipur.' "The money advanced to the cultivator bears no interest.The British Indian government lends money without interest in noother cases. Producers of crops other than opium are obliged toget along without free money. "When it has been manufactured, the opium must bedisposed of in one way and another; accordingly: 'The supply ofprepared opium required for consumption in India is made over tothe Excise Department . . . the chests of " provision "opium, for export, are sold at monthly sales, which take place atCalcutta.' For the meaning of the curious term, 'provision opium'we have only to read on a little further. 'The opium is receivedand prepared at the government factories, where the out-turn ofthe year included 8,774 chests of opium for the ExciseDepartment, about three hundred pounds of various opiumalkaloids, thirty maunds of medical opium; and 51,770 chests ofprovision opium for the Chinese market.' There are about i4o poundsin a chest. . . . Last year the government had under poppycultivation 654,928 acres. And the revenue to the treasury,including returns from auction sales, duties and license fees,and deducting all 'opium expenditures' was nearly $22,000,000. As the blue book states, this opium is auctioned off once amonth. At that point, the British Government, as a government,washes its hands of the business. Who buys the opium at thesegovernment auctions, and what afterwards becomes of it? "Themen who buy in the opium at these monthly auctions and afterwardsdispose of it are a curious crowd of Parsees, Mohammedans,Hindoos and Asiatic Jews. Few British names appear in the opiumtrade to-day. British dignity prefers not to stoop beneath thetaking in of profits; it leaves the details of a dirty businessto dirty hands. This is as it has been from the first. Thedirectors of the East India Company, years and years before thatsplendid corporation relinquished the actual government of India,forbade the selling of its specially-prepared opium direct toChina, and advised a trading station on the coast whence the drugmight find its way 'without the company being exposed to thedisgrace of being engaged in illicit commerce."' "So clean hands and dirty hands went into partnership.They are in partnership still, save that the most nearlyChristian of governments has officially succeeded the company asparty of the first part." You will say, if the British Government chooses to deal inopium, that is not our concern. It is most emphatically ourconcern. Once a month, at these great auction sales, the BritishGovernment distributes thousands of pounds of opium, which arethus turned loose upon the world, to bring destruction and ruinto the human race. The buyers of this opium are not agents of theBritish Government. They are merely the distributors, throughwhom this drug is directed into the channels of trade.' TheBritish Government derives a certain portion of its revenue fromthe sale of opium, therefore depends upon these dealers to find amarket for it. ' They are therefore, as distributors, theunofficial agents of the British Government, through whom it issold legitimately, or smuggled around the world. In seeking toeradicate the drug evil, we must face the facts, and recognizeclearly that the source of supply is the British Government,through whose agents, official and unofficial, it is distributed. America, so they tell us, is now menaced by the drug evil. Nowthat prohibition is coming into effect, we are told that we arenow confronted by a vice more terrible, far more deterioratingand dangerous. If that is true, then we must recognize our dangerand guard against it. Some of the opium and morphia which reachesthis country is smuggled in; the rest is imported by the bigwholesale drug houses. There is an unlimited supply of it. As wehave seen, the British Government encourages poppy production,even to the extent of lending money without interest toall those who are willing to raise this most profitable crop. Themonopoly opium is sold once a month to the highest bidders, andsome of these highest bidders are unscrupulous men who must findtheir markets how and where they can. That fact, of course, is ofno moment to the British Government. It is of deepest concern toAmericans, however. To the north of us we have the Dominion ofCanada. To the south, the No-Man's Land of Mexico. At the presentmoment, the whole country is alarmed at the growing menace of thedrug habit, which is assuming threatening proportions. Contents | Feedback | Search DRCNet Library | Schaffer Library | Historical Research WT01-B29-28IA031-000651-B017-392http://206.61.184.43:80/schaffer/history/om/om2.htm 206.61.184.43 19970122121955 text/html 6063HTTP/1.0 200 OKDate: Wednesday, 22-Jan-97 12:19:46 GMTServer: WebSitePro/1.1f (S/N wpo-0deb)Allow-ranges: bytesContent-type: text/htmlLast-modified: Saturday, 28-Dec-96 05:41:11 GMTContent-length: 5846 The Indian Opium Monopoly Contents | Feedback | Search DRCNet Library | Schaffer Library | Historical Research THE OPIUM MONOPOLY BY ELLEN N. LA MOTTE II -- THE INDIAN OPIUM MONOPOLY LET us quote from another dry officialrecord, of unimpeachable veracity-the Statesman's YearBook, for1916. On page 140, under the heading of The BritishEmpire: India and Dependencies, we read: "Opium. In Britishterritory the cultivation of the poppy for the production ofopium is mainly restricted to the United Provinces, and themanufacture of the opium from this region is a State monopoly. Alimited amount is also grown in the Punjab for local consumptionand to produce poppy seeds. In the monopoly districts thecultivator receives advances from Government to enable him toprepare the land for the crop, and he is bound to sell the wholeof the produce at a fixed price to Government agents, by whom itis despatched to the Government factory at Ghazipur to beprepared for the market. The chests of manufactured opium aresold by auction in Calcutta at monthly sales. A reserve is keptin hand to supply the deficiencies of bad seasons, and aconsiderable quantity is distributed by the Indian excisedepartments. Opium is also grown in many of the Native States ofRajaputana and Central India. These Native States have agreed toconform to the British system. No 6 opiummay pass from them into British territory for consumption withoutpayment of duty. "The bulk of the exports of opium from India has been toChina. By arrangements with that country, the first one being inI907, the exports from India have been limited, and provisionmade for the cessation of the export to China when the nativeChinese production of opium shall be suppressed. The trade withChina is now practically suspended." The important things to notice in the above statement arethese: The growing of poppies, the manufacture of opium, and themonthly auction sales continue. Also, the opium trade with Chinais practically at an end. The history of the opium traffic inChina is a story complete in itself and will be dealt with inanother chapter. At present, we must notice that the trade withChina is practically suspended, but that the British Governmentis still auctioning off, once a month at Calcutta, greatquantities of opium. Where does this opium go--who are theconsumers? If not to China, then where? The same reliable authority, the Statesman's Year-Book for1918, has this to say on the subject. On page 130 we read:" Opium: In British territory the cultivation of the poppyfor the production of opium is practically confined to the UnitedProvinces, and the manufacture of opium from this region is aState monopoly. The bulk of the exported opium is at presenteither sent to the United Kingdom, or supplied direct to theGovernments of consuming countries in the Far East; a certainquantity is also sold by auction in Calcutta at monthly sales.Opium is also grown in many of the Native States of Rajputana andCentral India, which have agreed to conform to the Britishsystem." The following tables, taken from most reliableauthority, give some idea of the exports to the "consumingcountries of the Far East." Note that Japan began buyingopium in 1911-122. We shall have somethingto say about the Japanese smuggling later. Also note that it wasin 1907 that Great Britain and China entered intoagreement, the outcome to be the suppression of the opium tradein China. But see the increasing imports into the treaty ports;up till almost the very last moment British opium being pouredinto China. In the second table, observe the increasingimportation into England, (United Kingdom), synchronous with theincreased exports to Japan, which will be discussed later. Contents | Feedback | Search DRCNet Library | Schaffer Library | Historical ResearchWT01-B29-29IA031-000651-B018-15http://206.61.184.43:80/schaffer/history/om/om3.htm 206.61.184.43 19970122122006 text/html 11024HTTP/1.0 200 OKDate: Wednesday, 22-Jan-97 12:19:56 GMTServer: WebSitePro/1.1f (S/N wpo-0deb)Allow-ranges: bytesContent-type: text/htmlLast-modified: Saturday, 28-Dec-96 05:41:06 GMTContent-length: 10806 Japan as an Opium Distributor Contents | Feedback | Search DRCNet Library | Schaffer Library | Historical Research THE OPIUM MONOPOLY BY ELLEN N. LA MOTTE III -- JAPAN AS AN OPIUM DISTRIBUTOR IN an article which appeared in the NewYork Times, under date of February 14, 1919, we read:"A charge that the Japanese Government secretly fosters themorphia traffic in China and other countries in the Far East ismade by a correspondent in the North China Herald in itsissue of December 21st last. The correspondent assertsthat the traffic has the financial support of the Bank of Japan,and that the Japanese postal service in China aids, although'Japan is a signatory to the agreement which forbids the importinto China of morphia or of any appliances used in itsmanufacture or application.' "Morphia no longer can be purchased in Europe, thecorrespondent writes. The seat of industry has been transferredto Japan, and morphia is now manufactured by the Japanesethemselves. Literally, tens of millions of yen are transferredannually from China to Japan for the payment of Japanese morphia.. . . "In South China, morphia is sold by Chinese peddlers,each of whom carries a passport certifying that he is a native ofFormosa, and therefore entitled to Japanese protection. Japanesedrug stores throughout China carry large stocks of morphia.Japanese medicine vendors look to morphia for their largestprofits. Wherever Japanese are predominant, there the tradeflourishes. Through Dairen, morphia circulates throughoutManchuria and the province adjoining; through Tsingtao, morphiais distributed over Shantung province, Anhui, and Kiangsu, whilefrom Formosa morphia is carried with opium and other contrabandby motor-driven fishing boats to some point on the mainland, fromwhich it is distributed throughout the province of Fukien and thenorth of Kuangtung. Everywhere it is sold by Japanese underextra-territorial protection." The article is rather long, and proves beyond doubt theexistence of a well-organized and tremendous smuggling business,by means of which China is being deluged with morphia. In thebody of the article we find this paragraph: "While the morphia traffic is large, there is everyreason to believe that the opium traffic upon which Japan isembarking with enthusiasm, is likely to prove even morelucrative. In the Calcutta opium sales, Japan has become oneof the considerable purchasers of Indian opium. . . . Soldby the Government of India, this opium is exported under permitsapplied for by the Japanese Government, is shipped to Kobe,and from Kobe is transshipped to Tsingtao. Large profits are madein this trade, in which are interested some of the leading firmsof Japan." This article appears to be largely anti-Japanese. In fact,more anti-Japanese than anti-opium. Anti Japanese sentiment inAmerica is played upon by showing up the Japanese as smugglers ofopium. The part the British Government plays in this traffic isnot emphasized. "In the Calcutta opium sales, Japan hasbecome one of the considerable purchasers of Indian opium . . .sold by the Government of India." We are asked to condemnthe Japanese, who purchase their stocks of opium as individuals,and who distribute it in the capacity of smugglers. We are notasked to censure the British Government which produces,manufactures and sells this opium as a State monopoly. We areasked to denounce the Japanese and their nefarious smuggling andshameful traffic, but the source of supply, which depends uponthese smugglers as customers at the monthly auctions, is abovereproach. A delicate ethical distinction. However, there is no doubt that the Japanese are ardentsmugglers. In an article in the March, 1919, number of"Asia" by Putnam Weale, we find the following bit: *"At all ports where Japanese commissioners of MaritimeCustoms (in China) hold office, it is undeniable that centres ofcontraband trade have been established, opium and its derivativesbeing so openly smuggled that the annual net import of Japanesemorphia (although this trade is forbidden by InternationalConvention) is now said to be something like 20 tons ayear-sufficient to poison a whole nation." * " A Fair Chance for Asia," byPutnam Weale, page 227. Mr. Weale is an Englishman, therefore more anti-Japanese thananti-opium. We do not recall any of his writings in which heprotests against the opium trade as conducted by his Government,nor the part his Government plays in fostering and encouragingit. However, there are other Englishmen who see the situation in amore impartial light, and who are equally critical of both GreatBritain and Japan. In his book, Trade Politics and Christianityin Africa and the East," by A. J. Macdonald, M. A., formerlyof Trinity College, Cambridge, we find the facts presented withmore balance. Thus, on page 229: ". . . In the north ofChina another evil is springing up. The eradication of the opiumhabit is being followed by the development of the morphiatraffic. . . . The morphia habit in northern China, especiallyManchuria, is already widespread. The Chinese Government is alertto the evil, but their efforts to repress it are hampered by theaction of traders, mainly Japanese, who elude the restrictionsimposed by the Chinese and Japanese Governments. . . . China isbeing drenched with morphia. It is incredible that anythingapproaching the amount could possibly be devoted to legitimatepurposes. It is said that in certain areas coolies are to be seencovered all over with needle punctures.' An injection of the drugcan be obtained for three or four cents. In Newchang 2,000 Victimsof the morphia habit died in the winter of 1914-15. Morphiacarries off its victims far more rapidly than opium. . . .Morphia is not yet manufactured in any appreciable quantities inthe East, and certainly even Japan cannot yet manufacture thehypodermic injectors by means of which the drug is received. Thebulk of the manufacture takes place in England, Germany andAustria. . . . In this traffic, two firms in Edinburgh and one inLondon are engaged. The trade is carried on through Japaneseagents. The Board of Trade returns show that the export ofmorphia from Great Britain to the East has risen enormouslyduring the last few years. 1911 - 5.5 tons 1912 - 7.5 tons 1913 - 11.25 1914 -- 14 The freedom which allows three British firms to supply Chinawith morphia for illicit purposes is a condemnation of EnglishChristianity. This book of Mr. Macdonald's was published in 1916. Mr.Weale's article was published in 1919, in which he speaksof an importation of about twenty tons of morphia. Apparently thethree British firms which manufacture morphia, two in Edinburghand one in London are still going strong. Japan, however, appearsto be growing impatient with all this opprobrium cast upon her asthe distributor of drugs, especially since much of the outcryagainst this comes from America. Our own country seems to beassisting in this traffic in a most extensive manner. The JapanSociety Bulletin No. 60 calls attention to this: NEW TURN IN MORPHIA TRAFFIC The morphia traffic in China has taken a new turn, accordingto the Japan Advertiser. It quotes Putnam Weale to theeffect that whilst in recent years the main distributors havebeen Japanese, the main manufacturers have been British. Themorphia has been exported in large quantities from Edinburgh toJapan, but as the result of licensing the exports of this drugfrom Great Britain, the shipments to Japan dropped from 6oo,229 ounces in 1917 to one-fourth that amountin 1918. The Japan Chronicle, speaking from"absolutely authentic information," states that 113,000ounces of morphia arrived in Kobe from the United States in thefirst five months of 1919. These figures are not given asthe total shipments received in Kobe, but merely as the quantityof which The Chronicle has actual knowledge. It statesfurther that this morphia is being transhipped in Kobe harbor tovessels bound for China. Dr. Paul S. Reinsch, who has resignedhis post as Minister to China, has stated that he will use everyresource in his power to stop the shipment from America ofmorphia intended for distribution in China, in defiance of theinternational convention which prohibits the sale of the drug inthat country. If sufficient publicity is cast upon the distributors,Japanese, English and American, public sentiment may in time takecognizance of the source of all this mischief, namely, theproducer. Contents | Feedback | Search DRCNet Library | Schaffer Library | Historical ResearchWT01-B29-30IA031-000651-B018-43http://206.61.184.43:80/schaffer/history/om/om4.htm 206.61.184.43 19970122122031 text/html 8241HTTP/1.0 200 OKDate: Wednesday, 22-Jan-97 12:20:22 GMTServer: WebSitePro/1.1f (S/N wpo-0deb)Allow-ranges: bytesContent-type: text/htmlLast-modified: Saturday, 28-Dec-96 05:41:02 GMTContent-length: 8024 The Opium Monopoly - Singapore Contents | Feedback | Search DRCNet Library | Schaffer Library | Historical Research THE OPIUM MONOPOLY BY ELLEN N. LA MOTTE IV -- SINGAPORE In January, 1917, we found ourselves at Singapore, a Britishdependency, situated at the end of the Malay Peninsula, and oneof the greatest seaports of the Orient. We were stopping at theHotel de l' Europe, a large and first class hotel. The firstmorning at breakfast, the waiter stood beside us, waiting for ourorder. He was a handsome young Malay, dressed in white linenclothes, and wearing a green jade bracelet on one wrist. We gavehim our order and he did not move off. He continued to standquietly beside our chairs, as in a trance. We repeated theorder-one tea, one coffee, two papayas. He continued to standstill beside us, stupidly. Finally he went away. We waited for along time and nothing happened. At last, after a long wait, hereturned and set before us a teapot filled with hot water.Nothing else. We repeated again-tea, coffee, papayas. We said ittwo or three times. Then he went away and came back with sometea. We repeated again, coffee and fruit. Eventually he broughtus some coffee. Finally, after many endeavors, we got the fruit.It all took a long time. We then began to realize that somethingwas the matter with him. He could understand English well enoughto know what orders we were giving him, but he seemed to forgetas soon as he left our sight. We then realized that he wasprobably drugged. It was the same thing every day. In the morninghe was stupid and dull, and could not remember what we told him.By evening his brain was clearer, and at dinner he could rememberwell enough. The effects of whatever he had been taking hadapparently worn off during the day. We learned that the opium trade was freely indulged in, atSingapore, fostered by the Government. Singapore is a large cityof about 300,000 inhabitants, a great number of which areChinese. It has wide, beautiful streets, fine governmentbuildings, magnificent quays and docks-a splendid European cityat the outposts of the Orient. We found that a large part of itsrevenue is derived from the opium traffic-from the sale of opium,and from license fees derived from shops where opium may bepurchased, or from divans where it may be smoked. The customersare mainly Chinese. I wanted to visit these Government-licensed opium shops andopium dens. A friend lent me two servants, as guides. We threegot into rickshaws and went down to the Chinese quarter, wherethere are several hundred of these places, all doing aflourishing business. It was early in the afternoon, but eventhen, trade was brisk. The divans were rooms with wide woodenbenches running round the sides, on which benches, in pairs,sharing a lamp between them, lay the smokers. They purchasedtheir opium on entering, and then lay down to smoke it. Thepackages are little, triangular packets, each containing enoughfor about six smokes. Each packet bears a label, red letters on awhite ground, "Monopoly opium." In one den there was an old man-but you can't tell whether adrug addict is old or not, he looked as they all do, gray andemaciated-but as he caught my eye, he laid down the needle onwhich he was about to cook his pill, and glanced away. I stoodbefore him, waiting for him to continue the process, but he didnot move. "Why doesn't he go on?" I asked my guide. "Heis ashamed to have you see him," came the reply. "But why should he be ashamed?" I asked, "TheBritish Government is not ashamed to sell to him, to encouragehim to drug himself, to ruin himself. Why should he beashamed?" "Nevertheless, he is," replied the guide. "Yousee what he looks like-what he has become. He is not quite so fargone as the others-he is a more recent victim. He still feelsthat he has become degraded. Most of them do not feel that wayafter a while." So we went on and on, down the long street. There was adreadful monotony about it all. House after house of feeble, emaciated, ill wrecks, allsmoking Monopoly Opium, all contributing, by their shame anddegradation, to the revenues of the mighty British Empire. That evening after dinner, I sat on the wide verandah of thehotel, looking over a copy of the "Straits Times." Oneparagraph, a dispatch from London, caught my eye. " Chinesein Liverpool. Reuter's Telegram. London, January 17, 1917Thirty-one Chinese were arrested during police raids last nighton opium dens in Liverpool. Much opium was seized. The police inone place were attacked by a big retriever and by a number ofChinese, who threw boots and other articles from thehouse-top." Coming fresh from a tour of the opium-dens of Singapore, Imust say that item caused some mental confusion. It must also beconfusing to the Chinese. It must be very perplexing to a Chinesesailor, who arrives in Liverpool on a ship from Singapore, tofind such a variation in customs. To come from a part of theBritish Empire where opium smoking is freely encouraged, to GreatBritain itself where such practices are not tolerated. He mustask himself, why it is that the white race is so sedulouslyprotected from such vices, while the subject races are so eagerlyencouraged. It may occur to him that the white race is valuableand must be preserved, and that subject races are not worthprotecting. This double standard of international justice he mustfind disturbing. It would seem, at first glance, as if subjectraces were fair game-if there is money in it. Subject races,dependents, who have no vote, no share in the government and whoare powerless to protect themselves-fair game for exploitation. Is this double-dealing what we mean when we speak of "ourresponsibility to backward nations, 1) or of "the sacredtrust of civilization" or still again when we refer to"the White Man's burden " ? Pondering over these things as I sat on the hotel verandah, Ifinally reached the conclusion that to print such a dispatch asthat in the " Straits Times" was, to say the least,most tactless. Contents | Feedback | Search DRCNet Library | Schaffer Library | Historical Research WT01-B29-31IA031-000651-B018-63http://206.61.184.43:80/schaffer/history/om/om5.htm 206.61.184.43 19970122122041 text/html 5031HTTP/1.0 200 OKDate: Wednesday, 22-Jan-97 12:20:32 GMTServer: WebSitePro/1.1f (S/N wpo-0deb)Allow-ranges: bytesContent-type: text/htmlLast-modified: Saturday, 28-Dec-96 05:40:58 GMTContent-length: 4814 The Straits Settlement Opium Commission Contents | Feedback | Search DRCNet Library | Schaffer Library | Historical Research THE OPIUM MONOPOLY BY ELLEN N. LA MOTTE V -- THE STRAITS SETTLEMENTS OPIUM COMMISSION FROM time to time, certain people in England apparently havequalms as to Great Britain's opium traffic, and from time to timequestions are raised as to whether or not such traffic is morallydefensible. In February, 1909, apparently in answer to suchscruples and questionings on the part of a few, a veryinteresting report was published, "Proceedings of theCommission appointed to Enquire into Matters Relating to the Useof Opium in the Straits Settlements and the Federated MalayStates. Presented to both Houses of Parliament by Command of HisMajesty." This document may be found in the New York PublicLibrary and is well worth careful perusal. This Commission consisted of about a dozen men, some English,some natives of the Straits Settlements. They apparently made anintensive and exhaustive study of the subject, carefullyexamining it from every angle. Countless witnesses appearedbefore them, giving testimony as to the effects of opium upon theindividual. This testimony is interesting, in that it is of acontradictory nature, some witnesses saying that moderate opiumindulgence is nothing worse than indulgence in alcoholicbeverages, and like alcohol, only pernicious if taken to excess.Other witnesses seemed to think that it was most harmful. TheCommission made careful reports as to the manner of licensinghouses for smoking, the system of licensing opium farms, etc.,and other technical details connected with this extensiveGovernment traffic. Finally, the question of revenue wasconsidered, and while the harmfulness of opium smoking was amatter of divided opinion, when it came to revenue there was nodivision of opinion at all. As a means of raising revenue, thetraffic was certainly justifiable. It was proven that about fiftyper cent of the revenues of the Straits Settlements and theFederated Malay States came from the opium trade, and, as wasnaively pointed out, to hazard the prosperity of the Colony bylopping off half its revenues, was an unthinkable proceeding. The figures given are as follows. 1898. Revenue derived from 0pium....45.9 percent 1899 44.8 1900 43.3 1901 53.2 1902 48.3 1903 47.1 1904 59.1 1905 46. 1906 53.3 There was one dissenting voice as to the conclusions reachedby this Opium Commission, that of a Bishop who presented aminority report. But what are moral scruples against cold factsthat there's money in the opium trade? This Commission made its report in 1909. But the opiumbusiness is apparently still flourishing in the StraitsSettlements. Thus we read in the official Blue Book for 1917,"Colony of the Straits Settlements " that of the totalrevenue for the year, $18,672,104, that $9,182,000 came fromopium. What per cent is that? Contents | Feedback | Search DRCNet Library | Schaffer Library | Historical ResearchWT01-B29-32IA031-000651-B018-90http://206.61.184.43:80/schaffer/history/om/om6.htm 206.61.184.43 19970122122058 text/html 6267HTTP/1.0 200 OKDate: Wednesday, 22-Jan-97 12:20:43 GMTServer: WebSitePro/1.1f (S/N wpo-0deb)Allow-ranges: bytesContent-type: text/htmlLast-modified: Saturday, 28-Dec-96 05:40:54 GMTContent-length: 6050 Opium in Siam Contents | Feedback | Search DRCNet Library | Schaffer Library | Historical Research THE OPIUM MONOPOLY BY ELLEN N. LA MOTTE VI --OPIUM IN SIAM BANGKOK, Siam, January, 1917- Siam, an independent kingdom. Asa matter of fact, "protected" very sternly andthoroughly by Great Britain and France, so that its"independence" would about cover an oyster cracker.However, it is doubtless protected "benevolently" forwhat protectorate is anything but benevolent? The more rigorousthe protectorate, the more benevolent its character. The PeaceConference seems to have given us a new word in"mandatory." We do not know as yet what adjective willbe found to qualify mandatory, but it will doubtless be fittingand indicative of idealism-of sorts. Therefore, all will be well.Our suspicions will be lulled. It is high time that a substitutewas found for "benevolent protectorate." The particular form of benevolence noted in Siam was the totalinability of the Siamese to exclude British opium. They areallowed, by the benevolent powers, to impose an import duty onall commodities imported except opium. That is free. The treatybetween Siam and Great Britain in 1856 says so. We rather fancythat Great Britain had more to say about this in 1856 than Siambut maybe not. Anyway poor old Siam, an independent kingdom, isbound to receive as much opium as may be imported, and is quitepowerless, by the terms of this treaty, to enact laws to excludeit. In the last year or two, the Government of Siam has beenobliged to put the opium traffic under government control, inorder to minimize the worst evils in connection with it, althoughto restrict and regulate an evil is a poor substitute for theability to abolish it. All this, you will see, is rather tough on the Siamese, butgood business for the British Empire. However, opium is not bad for one. There are plenty of peopleto testify to that. We Americans have a curious notion to thecontrary, but then, we Americans are so hysterical and gullible.An Englishman whom we met in Bangkok told me that opium was notonly harmless, but actually beneficial. He said once that he wastraveling through the jungle, into the interior somewhere. He hadquite a train of coolies with him, carrying himself and hisbaggage through the dense forests. By nightfall, he found hiscoolies terribly exhausted with the long march. But he was in ahurry to press on, so, as he expressed it, he gave each of them a"shot" of morphia, whereupon all traces of fatiguevanished. They forgot the pain of their weary arms and legs andwere thus enabled to walk all night. He said that morphiacertainly knocked a lot of work out of men-you might say, doubledtheir capacity for endurance. The night we left Bangkok, we got aboard the boat at aboutnine in the evening. The hatch was open, and we looked into thehold upon a crowd of coolies who had been loading sacks of riceaboard the ship. There they lay upon the rice sacks, two or threedozen of them, all smoking opium. Two coolies to a lamp. I ratherwondered that a lamp did not upset and set the boat on fire, butthey are made of heavy glass, with wide bottoms, so that thechances of overturning them are slight. So we leaned over theopen hatch, looking down at these little fellows, resting andrecuperating themselves after their work, refreshing themselvesfor the labor of the morrow. Opium is wonderful, come to think of it. But why, since it isso beneficial and so profitable, confine it to the downtroddenraces of the world? Why limit it to the despised races, who havenot sense enough to govern themselves anyway? The following figures are taken from the Statistical YearBooks for the Kingdom of Siam: Foreign trade and navigation of the port of Bangkok, importsof opium: 1911-12 1,270 chests of opium 1912-13 1,775 1913-14 1,186 1 914-15 2,000 Imported from India and Singapore. 1915-16 2,000 1916-17 1,100 1917-18 1,850 Also, from the same source, we find the number of retail opiumshops: 1912-13 2,985 1913-14 3,075 1914-15 3,132 1915-16 3,104 1916-17 3,111 Contents | Feedback | Search DRCNet Library | Schaffer Library | Historical Research WT01-B29-33IA031-000651-B018-116http://206.61.184.43:80/schaffer/history/om/om7.htm 206.61.184.43 19970122122112 text/html 7351HTTP/1.0 200 OKDate: Wednesday, 22-Jan-97 12:21:02 GMTServer: WebSitePro/1.1f (S/N wpo-0deb)Allow-ranges: bytesContent-type: text/htmlLast-modified: Saturday, 28-Dec-96 05:40:50 GMTContent-length: 7134 The Opium Monopoly - Hong Kong Contents | Feedback | Search DRCNet Library | Schaffer Library | Historical Research THE OPIUM MONOPOLY BY ELLEN N. LA MOTTE VII -- HONGKONG The Crown Colony of Hongkong was ceded by China to GreatBritain in January, 1841; the cession was confirmed by the treatyof Nanking in August, 1842; and the charter bears date April 5,1843. Hongkong is the great center for British commerce withChina and Japan, and a military and naval station of first-classimportance." Thus the Statesman's Year Book. This authority, however, omitsto mention just exactly how this important piece of Chineseterritory came to be ceded to Great Britain. It was the rewardthat Great Britain took unto herself as an "indemnity"following the successful prosecution of what is sometimes spokenof as the first opium war-a war of protest on the part of Chinaagainst Great Britain's insistence on her right to deluge Chinawith opium. China's resistance was in vain-her efforts to stemthe tide of opium were fruitless-the might, majesty, dominion andpower of the British Empire triumphed, and China was beaten. Theisland on which Hongkong is situated was at that time a blankpiece of land; but strategically well placed-ninety miles southof the great Chinese city of Canton, the market for Britishopium. The opposite peninsula of Kowloon, on the mainland, was cededto Great Britain by treaty in 1861, and now forms part ofHongkong. By a convention signed at Peking in June, 1898, therewas also leased to Great Britain for 99 years a portion ofChinese territory mainly agricultural, together with the watersof Mirs Bay and Deep Bay, and the island of Lan-tao. Its area is356 square miles, with about 81,000 inhabitants, exclusivelyChinese. Area of Old Kowloon is 3 square miles. Total area ofcolony, 391 square miles. The population of Hongkong, excluding the Military and Navalestablishments, and that portion of the new territory outside NewKowloon, was according to the 1911 census, 366,145 inhabitants.Of this number the Chinese numbered 354,187. This colony is, of course, governed by Great Britain, and isnot subject to Chinese control. Here is situated a Governmentopium factory, and the imports of Indian opium into Hongkong forthe past several years are as follows: 1903-4 3,576,431 pounds sterling 1904-5 4,036,436 1905-6 3,775,82.6 1906-7 3,771,409 1907-8 3,145,403 1908-9 2,230,755 1909-10 3,377,222 1910-11 3,963,264 pounds sterling 1911-12 3,018,858 1912-13 2,406,084 1913-14 1,084,093 1914--15 110,712 These figures are taken from "Statistical AbstractRelating to British India, 1905-6 to 1915," and "Statistical Abstract Relating to British India, 1903-4 to1912-13." The falling off in imports of opium noticed in1914-15 may be due to the war, lack of shipping, etc., or to thefact that the China market was due to close on April 1, 1917. Theclosing of the China market 400,000,000 of people destined nolonger to have opium supplied to them (except illegally, bysmuggling, etc.) is naturally a big blow to the British opiuminterests. That is where the menace to the rest of the worldcomes in. Opium has been proved such a profitable commodity, thatif one market is shut off, others must be found as substitutes.The idea of closing the trade altogether naturally does notappeal to those who profit by it. Therefore, what we should hailat first sight as a welcome indication of a changed moralsentiment, is in reality but the pause which proceeds the castingabout for new markets, for finding new peoples to drug. The Colonial Report No. 972, Hongkong Report for 1917, givesthe imports and exports of opium: Page 7- "The imports and exports of certified opium during theyear as follows: Imports......... 7 chests Export.......... 224 chests Of these, however, the imports all come from Shanghai, and ofthe total export Of 224 chests, 186 went to Shanghai." Opium received from other sources than Shanghai makes a bettershowing. " Seven hundred and forty chests of Persian opiumimported during the year, and seven hundred and forty-fiveexported to Formosa. Nine hundred and ten chests of uncertifiedIndian opium were imported: Four hundred and ten chests by theGovernment Monopoly, and the remaining five hundred for the Macaoopium farmer." Macao is a small island off the coast of China, near Canton-aPortuguese settlement, owned by Portugal for several centuries,where the opium trade is in full blast. But somehow, one does notexpect so much of Portugal. The most significant feature of theabove paragraph, however, lies in the reference to theimportation of Persian opium. " Seven hundred and fortychests of Persian opium imported." Query, who owns Persia? Nevertheless, in spite of this poor showing, in spite of thedecrease in opium importation as compared with the balmy days,all is not lost. The Crown Colony of Hongkong still continues todo an active trade. In the Colonial Office List for 1917, on page218, we read: "Hongkong. Revenue: About one-third of therevenue is derived from the Opium Monopoly." Contents | Feedback | Search DRCNet Library | Schaffer Library | Historical Research WT01-B29-34IA031-000651-B018-148http://206.61.184.43:80/schaffer/history/om/om8.htm 206.61.184.43 19970122122123 text/html 4617HTTP/1.0 200 OKDate: Wednesday, 22-Jan-97 12:21:14 GMTServer: WebSitePro/1.1f (S/N wpo-0deb)Allow-ranges: bytesContent-type: text/htmlLast-modified: Saturday, 28-Dec-96 05:40:47 GMTContent-length: 4400 The Opium Monopoly - Sarawak Contents | Feedback | Search DRCNet Library | Schaffer Library | Historical Research THE OPIUM MONOPOLY BY ELLEN N. LA MOTTE VIII -- SARAWAK NEAR British North Borneo. Area, 42,000 square miles, manyrivers navigable. The government of part of the present territorywas obtained in 1842 by Sir James Brooke from the Sultan ofBrunei. Various accessions were made between 1861, 1885, and188o. The Rajah, H. H. Sir Charles Johnson Brooke, G. C.M.G.,nephew to the late Rajah, born June 3, 1829, succeeded in 1868.Population estimated at 500,000, Malays, Dyaks, Kayans, Kenyahs,and Muruts, with Chinese and other settlers. Thus the Statesman's Year Book, to which we would add aparagraph from an article in the National Geographic Magazine forFebruary, 1919. Under the title: "Sarawak: The Land of theWhite Rajahs" we read: "With the recent death of SirCharles Brooke, G. C. M. G., the second of the white rajahs ofSarawak, there came to an end one of the most useful and unusualcareers among the many that have done credit to British rule inthe Far East. For nearly 49 years he governed, as absolutesovereign, a mixed population of Chinese, Malays, and numerouspagan tribes scattered through the villages and dense jungles ofan extensive territory on the northwest coast of Borneo. " Constant solicitude for the welfare of his people wonthe sympathy and devotion which enabled this white man, supportedby an insignificant army and police, to establish the peacefuloccupations of civilization in place of barbarous tyranny andoppression." How thoroughly this "civilizing" process wasaccomplished may be judged somewhat by turning to the ColonialOffice List for 19I7, where on page 436 we read: "Sarawak:The principal sources of revenue are the opium, gambling, pawnshops, and arrack, producing: 1908 $483,019 1909 460,416 1910 385,070 1911 420,151 1912 426,867 1913 492,455 In the Statesman's Year Book for 1916 we find the totalrevenue for this well-governed little colony as follows, givenhowever in pounds sterling, instead of dollars, as in the abovetable. Thus: Revenue-1910 221,284 pounds sterling 1911I 159,456 1912 175,967 1913 210,342 1914 208,823 It would seem as if forty-nine years of constant solicitudefor the welfare of a people, establishing the peacefuloccupations of civilization, might have resulted in somethingbetter than a revenue derived from opium, gambling, pawn shopsand arrack. Contents | Feedback | Search DRCNet Library | Schaffer Library | Historical Research WT01-B29-35IA031-000651-B018-167http://206.61.184.43:80/schaffer/history/om/om9.htm 206.61.184.43 19970122122139 text/html 10494HTTP/1.0 200 OKDate: Wednesday, 22-Jan-97 12:21:28 GMTServer: WebSitePro/1.1f (S/N wpo-0deb)Allow-ranges: bytesContent-type: text/htmlLast-modified: Saturday, 28-Dec-96 05:40:43 GMTContent-length: 10276 The Opium Monopoly - Shanghai Contents | Feedback | Search DRCNet Library | Schaffer Library | Historical Research THE OPIUM MONOPOLY BY ELLEN N. LA MOTTE IX -- SHANGHAI IN the New York Library there is an interesting little book,about a quarter of an inch thick, and easy reading. It isentitled: "Municipal Ethics: Some Facts and Figures from theMunicipal Gazette, 1907-1914. An Examination of the Opium Licensepolicy of the Shanghai Municipality. In an Open Letter to theChairman of the Council, by Arnold Foster, Wuchang. For 42 yearsMissionary to the Chinese." Shanghai, being a Treaty Port, is of two parts. The native orShanghai city, under the control and administration of theChinese. And the foreign concessions, that part of the city underthe control and administration of foreigners. This is generallyknown as the International Settlement (also called the modelsettlement), and the Shanghai Municipal Council is theadministrative body. Over this part the Chinese have no control.In 1907, when China began her latest fight against the opiumevil, she enacted and enforced drastic laws prohibiting opiumsmoking and opium selling on Chinese soil, but was powerless toenforce these laws on "foreign" soil. In the foreignconcessions, the Chinese were able to buy as much opium as theypleased, merely by stepping over an imaginary line, into aportion of the town where the rigid anti-opium laws of China didnot apply. Says Mr. Arnold, in his Open Letter: "It will be seenthat the title of the pamphlet, Municipal Ethics, describes asituation which is a complex one. It concerns first the actualattitude of the Shanghai Municipal Council towards the Chinesenational movement for the suppression of the use of opium. This,we are assured by successive Chairmen of the Council, has beenone of "sincere sympathy...... the greatest sympathy,"and more to the same effect. Certainly no one would have guessedthis from the facts and figures reproduced in this pamphlet fromthe columns of the " Municipal Gazette." "The second element in the ethical situation is theactual attitude of the Council not only towards the Chinesenational movement, but also towards its own official assurances,protestations and promises. "It is on this second branch of the subject before usthat I specially desire to focus attention, and for the factshere stated that I would bespeak the most searching examination.The protestations of the Council as to its own virtuous attitudein regard to opium reform in China are made the more emphatic,and also the more open to criticism, by being coupled with somevery severe insinuations made at the time, as to the insincerityand unreliability of the Chinese authorities in what they wereprofessing, and in what they were planning to do in the samematter of opium reform. It so happens, as the event proves, thatthese sneers and insinuations were not only quite uncalled for,but were absolutely and utterly unjust. When a comparison isinstituted between (a) 'official pronouncements' made two yearsago by the Chinese authorities as to what they then intended todo for the suppression of the opium habit, and (b) the 'actualadministrative results' that in the meanwhile have beenaccomplished, the Chinese have no cause to be ashamed of theverdict of impartial judges. What they have done may not alwayshave been wise, it may sometimes have been very stern, but theoutcome has been to awaken the astonishment and admiration of thewhole civilized world! When, on the other hand, a comparison isinstituted between (a) the fine professions and assurances of theShanghai Municipal Council made six or seven years ago as to itsown attitude towards the 'eradication of the opium evil' and (b)the 'actual administrative results' of the Council's ownproceedings, the feelings awakened are of very different order.Here, not to mention any other consideration, two hard factsstare one in the face: First, in October, 1907, there wereeighty-seven licensed opium shops in the InternationalSettlement. In May, 1914, there were six hundred and sixty-three.In 1907 the average monthly revenue from opium licenses, dens andshops combined, was Taels 5,450- In May, 1914, the revenue fromlicenses and opium shops alone was Taels 10,995. The Council willnot dispute these figures." At the beginning of the anti-opium campaign in 1907, therewere 700 dens (for smoking) in the Native City, and 1600 in theInternational Settlement. The Chinese closed their dens and shopsat once. In the Settlement, the dens were not all closed untiltwo years later, and the number of shops in the Settlementincreased by leaps and bounds. Table I shows an outline of theMunicipal opium-shop profits concurrent with the closing of theopium houses-and subsequently: Year Month Dens Shops Monthly revenue, shops only 1908 Jan. 1436 87 Taels, 338 Oct. 1005 131 623 1909 Jan. 599 166 1,887 Oct. 297 231 2,276 1910 Oct. Closed 306 5,071 1911 Oct. 348 5,415 1912 Nov. 402 5,881 1913 Dec. 560 8,953 1914 March 628 10,111 April 654 10,772 Mr. Arnold quotes part of a speech made by the Chairman of theMunicipal Council, in March, 1908. The Chairman says in part:"The advice which we have received from the BritishGovernment is, in brief, that we should do more than keep pacewith the native authorities, we should be in advance of them, andwhere possible, encourage them to follow us." It must havebeen most disheartening to the native authorities, suppressingthe opium traffic with the utmost rigor, to see their effortsdefied and nullified by the increased opportunities for obtainingopium in that part of Shanghai over which the Chinese have nocontrol. A letter from a Chinese to a London paper, gives theChinese point of view: "China . . . is obliged to submit tothe ruthless and heartless manner in which British merchants,under the protection of the Shanghai 'Model Settlement' areexploiting her to the fullest extent of their ability." There is lots of money in opium, however. The following tablescompiled by Mr. Arnold show the comparison between the amountderived from opium licenses as compared with the amount derivedfrom other sorts of licenses. 1913. Wheelbarrows Taels, 38,670 Carts 22,944 Motor cars 12,376 Cargo boats.... . . .. 5,471 Chinese boats 4,798 Steam launches.... . 2,221 Total, 86,480 Opium shops 86,386 Opium, 86,3 86 Another table shows the licensed institutions in Shanghairepresenting normal social life (chiefly of the Chinese) ascompared with revenue from opium shops: 1913. Tavern Taels, 16,573 Foreign liquor seller.. 19,483 Chinese wine shop.... 28,583 "" tea shop.... 9,484 "" theater. . . . . 8,74 "" club 3,146 Total.. 85,983 Opium shops 86,386 Treaty Ports are those cities in China, in which the foreignpowers have extra-territorial holdings, not subject to Chinesejurisdiction. Shanghai is one of them, the largest and mostimportant. The Statistical Abstract Relating to British India forI903-4 to I912-I3 shows the exports of British opium into theseTreaty Ports. 1903-4 1,610,296 pounds sterling 1904-5 1,504,604 1905-6 1,130,372 1906-7 1,031,065 1907-8 1,215,142 1908-9 2,703,871 1909-10 1,234,432 1910-11 2,203,670 1911-12 3,64,887 1912-13 3,242,902 It was in 1907 that China began her great fight against theopium evil, and enacted stringent laws for its prohibition onChinese soil. On page 15 of his little book, Mr. Arnold quotesfrom Commissioner Carl, of Canton: "The 1912 figure (for theimportation of foreign opium) is the largest on record since1895. The great influx of Chinese into the foreign concessions,where the antiopium smoking regulations cannot be enforced by theChinese authorities, and where smoking can be indulged in withoutfear of punishment, no doubt accounts for the unusual increaseunder foreign opium." Contents | Feedback | Search DRCNet Library | Schaffer Library | Historical ResearchWT01-B29-36IA031-000651-B018-187http://206.61.184.43:80/schaffer/history/om/om10.htm 206.61.184.43 19970122122153 text/html 11978HTTP/1.0 200 OKDate: Wednesday, 22-Jan-97 12:21:44 GMTServer: WebSitePro/1.1f (S/N wpo-0deb)Allow-ranges: bytesContent-type: text/htmlLast-modified: Saturday, 28-Dec-96 05:41:41 GMTContent-length: 11760 The Opium Monopoly - India Contents | Feedback | Search DRCNet Library | Schaffer Library | Historical Research THE OPIUM MONOPOLY BY ELLEN N. LA MOTTE X -- INDIA INDIA is the source and fount of the British opium trade, andit is from Indian opium that the drug is chiefly supplied to theworld. As we have said before, it is a government monopoly.Cultivators, who wish to plant poppies, may borrow money from theGovernment free of interest, the sole condition being that thecrop be sold back to the Government again. It is manufacturedinto opium at the Government factory at Ghazipur, and once amonth, the Government holds auctions at Calcutta, by means ofwhich the drug finds its way into the trade channels of theworld-illicit and otherwise.* *This description of the Opium Department is to be found inStatistics of British India, Financial Statistics, Vol. 11, 8thIssue, page 159: OPIUM. The region in which the poppy was cultivated in 1916-17for the manufacture of "Bengal opium" comprises 32districts of the United Provinces of Agra and Ouhd. The wholeDepartment has, with effect from the 29th September, 1910, beenunder the control of one Opium Agent, with headquarters atGhazipur. At Ghazipur there is a Government factory where thecrude opium is manufactured into the form in which it passes intoconsumption. The cultivation of the poppy and the manufacture ofopium are regulated by Act XIII of 1857, as amended by Act I of1911, and are under the general control of the LieutenantGovernor and the Board of Revenue of the United Provinces, andthe immediate supervision of the Opium Agent at Ghazipur. Thepossession, transport, import and export of opium are regulatedby rules framed under the Indian Opium Act. Cultivation ispermitted only under licenses granted under the authority of theOpium Agent. The area to be cultivated is fixed by the license,and the cultivator is bound to sell the whole of his productionto the Opium Department at the rate fixed by Government..........Advances, on which no interest is charged, are given to licensedcultivators at the time of executing the agreement and from timeto time (though ordinarily no more than two advances are given)until final delivery. In March, April and May the opium is madeover to the officers of the Department, and weighed and tested,and as soon as possible afterwards each cultivator's accounts areadjusted, and the balance due is paid him. After weighment theopium is forwarded to the Government factory at Ghazipur, whereit is manufactured in 3 forms-(a) opium intended for export toforeign countries, departmentally known as "provisionopium"(b) opium intended for consumption in India and Burma,departmentally known as "excise opium" and (c) medicalopium for export to London. Provision opium is made up in theform of balls or cakes, each weighing 3.5 lbs., and is packed inchests, each chest containing forty cakes, weighing 140 1/7 lbs.It is generally of 71' efficiency. Excise opium is made up incubical packets, each weighing one seer, 60 of which are packedin a case. It is of higher consistency than the "provisionopium." Medical opium is made up into cakes weighing 2 lbs.Provision opium is sold by public auction in Calcutta. Anotification is published annually, generally about the month ofJune, stating the number of chests which will be put up for salein each month of the next calendar year, and the quantities sonotified are not altered without three months notice. Sales areconducted month by month by the Bengal Government; 7,000 chestswere notified for sale in 1917 for shipment to non-China markets.The number of chests actually sold was 4,615. In addition tothis, 4,500 chests were sold to the Government of the StraitsSettlements, 2,200 to the Government of Netherland Indies, and 00to the Government of Hongkong. The duty levied by Government oneach chest may be taken to be the difference between the averageprice realized and the average cost. The following facts are taken from " Statistics ofBritish India. Financial Statistics, Volume II,EighthIssue," to be found at the New York Public Library: AREA UNDER POPPY CULTIVATION Acreage: 1910-11 362,868 1911-12 200,672 1912-13 178,263 1913-14 144,561 1914-15 164,911 1915-16 167,155 1916-17 204,186 In the hey-day of the China trade, 613,996 acres were undercultivation in the years 1905-6, consequently this is a drop inthe extent of acreage. But, as we have said before, the closingof the China market simply means that other outlets must befound, and apparently they are being found, since from I914onwards, the acreage devoted to poppy planting is slowlyincreasing again. The opium manufactured in the Government factory is of threekinds-provision opium for export; excise opium, for consumptionin India, and medical opium, for export to London. It is thislatter form of opium which, according to Mr. MacDonald, in his"Trade Politics and Christianity in Africa and theEast" is being manufactured into morphia by three Britishfirms, two in Edinburgh and one in London, which morphia theJapanese are buying and smuggling into North China. The "Statistics of British India" shows thecountries into which Indian opium has been exported: we will takethe figures for the last five years, which show the number ofchests sent out. In some countries we see a falling off, as in China.Cochin-China, the French colony, shows a considerableincrease--the little Annarnites, Tonquinese, Cambodgians andother inhabitants of this colony of the French Republic beingshown what's what. Mauretius, a British Colony five hundred milesoff the coast of Madagascar, in the Indian ocean, seems to becoming on. The falling off in shipments to the United Kingdom maypossibly have been due to the war and the scarcity of ships."Other countries" seem to be holding their own. Withthe end of the war, the increase in ships, and general traderevival, we may yet see compensation for the loss of China. Withthe increase of drug addicts in the United States, it may be thatin time America will no longer be classed under "othercountries" but will have a column all to itself. In another table we find a comparison as to the number ofchests of provision or export opium and of excise opium, or thatintended for consumption in India. Thus: Each chest contains roughly about one hundred and fortypounds. REVENUE The revenue of India is derived from various sources, and isclassified under eight heads. Thus: for 1916-17- Out of these eight classifications, opium comes fourth on thelist. But in addition to the direct opium revenue, we must addanother item, Excise, which is found under the third heading,taxation. In the "India Office List for i9i8" we find"Excise" explained as follows: Page 383: "Exciseand Customs: Excise duties in India are levied with the two foldobject of raising revenue and restricting the use of intoxicantsand narcotics." In the same book, on page 385, we also read:"Excise and Customs Revenues: The total of the excise andcustoms revenues on liquors and drugs in i 9 i 5-i 6 was in roundfigures ten million pounds. This total gives an average of rathermore than ninepence a head on the whole population of BritishIndia as the revenue charge on drink and drugs during theyear." These excise duties are collected on spirits, beer, opium andintoxicating drugs, such as ganja, charas, and bhang, all formsor preparations of Indian hemp (Cannabis Indica), known in somecountries as hashish. In 1917-18 there were 17,369 drug shopsthroughout India. The excise duties collected from these sourceswas pretty evenly distributed. Excise revenue for a period ofyears is as follows: The "Statistics of British India for 1918" has thisto say on the subject of Excise (page 218): "Revenue: Duringthe ten years ending with 1916-17 the net receipts from Exciseduties increased . . . at the rate of 47 per cent. The receiptsfrom opium (consumed in India, not exported) being at the rate of44 per cent. The net receipts from liquors and from drugs otherthan opium . . . the increase at the rate Of 48 per cent. Thislarge increase is due not merely to the expansion of consumption,but also to the imposition of progressively higher rates of dutyand the increasingly extensive control of the exciseadministration. The revenue from drugs, (excluding opium) hasrisen in ten years . . . the increase being at the rate of 67 percent." A national psychology that can review these figures withcomplacency, satisfaction and pride is not akin to Americanpsychology. A nation that can subjugate 300,000,000 helplesspeople, and then turn them into drug addicts-for the sake ofrevenue is a nation which commits a cold blooded atrocityunparalleled by any atrocities committed in the rage and heat ofwar. The Blue Book shows no horror at these figures. Complacentapproval greets the increase of 44 per cent of opium consumption,and the increase of 67 per cent in the use of other habit-formingdrugs. Approval, and a shrewd appreciation of the possibilitiesfor more revenue from "progressively higher rates ofduty," knowing well that drug addicts will sell soul andbody in order to procure their daily supply. Contents | Feedback | Search DRCNet Library | Schaffer Library | Historical ResearchWT01-B29-37IA031-000651-B018-210http://206.61.184.43:80/schaffer/history/om/om11.htm 206.61.184.43 19970122122247 text/html 3944HTTP/1.0 200 OKDate: Wednesday, 22-Jan-97 12:22:38 GMTServer: WebSitePro/1.1f (S/N wpo-0deb)Allow-ranges: bytesContent-type: text/htmlLast-modified: Saturday, 28-Dec-96 05:41:37 GMTContent-length: 3727 The Opium Monopoly -- Turkey and Persia Contents | Feedback | Search DRCNet Library | Schaffer Library | Historical Research THE OPIUM MONOPOLY BY ELLEN N. LA MOTTE XI -- TURKEY AND PERSIA NEXT to India, the greatest two opium-producing countries inthe world are Turkey and Persia. The Statesman's Year Book for1918 has this to say about it. On page 1334: "The principalexports from Turkey into the United Kingdom..... in two yearswere: These are the only articles mentioned in this list of chiefexports. There are others, doubtless, but the Statesman's YearBook is a condensed and compact little volume, dealing only withthe principal things exported. In i9i5 we therefore notice thatthe opium export was second on the list, being exceeded by butone other, dried fruit. In i9i6, the third year of the war, theopium export is decidedly less, as are all the other articlesexported, except dried fruit and wool-which were articlesprobably more vital to the United Kingdom at that time even thanopium. PERSIA THE same authority, the Statesman's Year Book for 1918, givesa table on page 1162, showing the value of the chief exports fromPersia. The values are given in thousands of kran, sixty kranequaling one pound sterling. Since the war, both Turkey and Persia are more or less undercontrol of the British Empire, which gives Great Britain virtualcontrol of the world's output of opium. With this monopoly of theopium-producing countries, and with a million or so square milesadded to her immense colonial Empire, one wonders what use GreatBritain will make of the mandatory powers she has assumed overthe lives and welfare of all these subject peoples! Will she findthese helpless millions ready for her opium trade? Will sheestablish opium shops, and opium divans, and reap half the costsof upkeep of these newly acquired states by means of thisshameful traffic? Contents | Feedback | Search DRCNet Library | Schaffer Library | Historical Research WT01-B29-38IA031-000651-B018-225http://206.61.184.43:80/schaffer/history/om/om12.htm 206.61.184.43 19970122122255 text/html 3761HTTP/1.0 200 OKDate: Wednesday, 22-Jan-97 12:22:49 GMTServer: WebSitePro/1.1f (S/N wpo-0deb)Allow-ranges: bytesContent-type: text/htmlLast-modified: Saturday, 28-Dec-96 05:41:33 GMTContent-length: 3544 The Opium Monopoly - Mauretius Contents | Feedback | Search DRCNet Library | Schaffer Library | Historical Research THE OPIUM MONOPOLY BY ELLEN N. LA MOTTE XII - MAURETIUS ANOTHER British colony is Mauretius, acquired by conquest in1810, and formally ceded to Great Britain by the Treaty of Parisin 1814. This island is in the Indian Ocean, 500 miles east ofMadagascar, with an area of about 720 square miles. Thepopulation is about 377,000, of which number 258,000 are Indian,and 3,000 Chinese. Opium appears to be sold in the colony, sincethe Blue Book mentions that licenses are required for opiumsellers. As far as we can discover, by perusal of theseGovernment Reports, the sale of opium is not conducted by theGovernment itself, as in India, the Straits Settlements,Hongkong, etc., but is carried on by private dealers who obtainlicenses before they can open opium shops. A part of the revenue,however, is derived from opium; thus, according to the Blue Bookfor the Colony of Mauretius for 1915, page V 73, we read that theimports of opium for the year amounted to 1,353 kilos, with aduty collected of 54,126 rupees. The Blue Book for 1916 shows agratifying increase. Thus, the import of crude opium from Indiaamounted to 5,690 kilos, with a duty collected of 227,628 rupees.(See page V 64-) Statistics for British India, Eighth Issue, gives thesefigures: OPIUM EXPORTED TO MAURETIUS 1912-13 -- 10 chests 1913-14 -- 19 1914-15 -- 23 1915-16 -- 65 1916-17. -- 120 This is a poor little colony, but has its possibilities. Theconsumption of opium appears to be increasing steadily in a mostsatisfactory manner. Congratulations all round. Contents | Feedback | Search DRCNet Library | Schaffer Library | Historical Research WT01-B29-39IA031-000651-B018-255http://206.61.184.43:80/schaffer/history/om/om13.htm 206.61.184.43 19970122122312 text/html 6493HTTP/1.0 200 OKDate: Wednesday, 22-Jan-97 12:23:03 GMTServer: WebSitePro/1.1f (S/N wpo-0deb)Allow-ranges: bytesContent-type: text/htmlLast-modified: Saturday, 28-Dec-96 05:41:30 GMTContent-length: 6276 The Opium Monopoly - British North Borneo Contents | Feedback | Search DRCNet Library | Schaffer Library | Historical Research THE OPIUM MONOPOLY BY ELLEN N. LA MOTTE XIII - BRITISH NORTH BORNEO BRITISH North Borneo occupies the northern part of the islandof Borneo. Area, about 31,000 square miles, with a coast line ofover 800 miles. Population (1911 census), 208,000, consistingmainly of Mohammedan settlers on the coast and aboriginal tribesinland. The Europeans numbered 355; Chinese 26,000; Malays,1,612; East Indians about 5,000 and Filipinos 5,700. The numberof natives cannot be more than approximately estimated, but isplaced at about 170,000. The territory is under the jurisdictionof the British North Borneo Company, being held under grants fromthe Sultans of Brunei and Sulu (Royal Charter in 1881). Like many other British colonies, opium is depended upon forpart of the revenue. The Statesman's Year Book for 1916 observeson page 107: "Sources of revenue: Opium, birds' nests, courtfees, stamp duty, licenses, import and export duties, royalties,land sales, etc. No public debt." In this frank manner, our attention is called to opium, whichappears first on the list of sources o revenue. Going over the files of the Government reports, we will beginwith the "Supplement to the Official Gazette for BritishNorth Borneo. Administration Report for the Year 1910."Published June 1, 1911. On page 3 we read: Customs and Trade: Theimport and export trade of the state shows a healthy expansion. .. . It is interesting to note that imports show an increase atevery station. Out of the 47 headings of Tariff, there are only 7which show decreases. . . . The largest increases appear undercloth, $147,106; opium, $132,692, and iron ware, $218,620. . . .The general all round increases . . . are of course due to thedemand for supplies of all kinds in connection with the openingof rubber estates." The Supplement to the Official Gazette, Report for 1912(published in December, 1913) is also a report of generalprosperity. Page 4: "Trade: The volume of trade for the year1912 was $11,139,122, giving an increase over 1911 of 18 percent. . . . Imports: As in 1911, all stations show an increase ofimports. Out Of 47 headings, 33 show increases, 12 showdecreases, and 2 remain stationary. Increases: There was anincrease under rice, flour and grain . . . the increase underother headings include sundries, opium, machinery, etc." The next Government Report is not so happy. Opium imports showno "healthy expansion." Thus, the Supplement to theOfficial Gazette, Report for 1913 (published 1 February, 1915)says on page 4: "Other decreases in imports were opium,$108,18o. The decrease in opium was due to the abolition of theOpium Farm, which also held the Labuan Farm, and opium wastherefore no longer imported from Labuan for use in the WestCoast and the Interior." Still more bad news as to opium, in the report for 1914,(published 1 February, 1916). All imports drop. Page 4 records"Decrease in imports. . . . Railway and telegraph material,rice, flour, grain and opium." In this year the opiumimports only amount to $58,464. This general falling off in allimports may have been due to the war. But the opium situation wasapparently growing serious. On page 17 of this same report weread that "Thirty-two ordinances were passed by the Counciland became laws during the year. Among them the Opium andChandu." The brevity and meagerness of these official reports oftenleave one puzzled as to their meaning. The Supplement to theOfficial Gazette for 1915 (published October, 1916), shows stillmore discouraging news as to opium. Imports that year amounted toonly $31,299. But, in spite of this discouragement, hope stillremains. The same report shows optimism under the head of Excise."Excise: $627,225, against $467,078, an increase in the netrevenue of $160,147, due to Government taking over the solecontrol of the sale of chandu (smoking opium) and the collectionof other Excise duties, formerly farmed." This explains the Ordinance passed by the Council thepreceding year, regarding Opium and Chandu. Since the Governmenthas taken over 44 sole control of the sale of chandu " andwill collect the excise duties systematically and thoroughly, wemay still hope for some future report which will show once more a"healthy expansion" in the opium revenue. Contents | Feedback | Search DRCNet Library | Schaffer Library | Historical Research WT01-B29-40IA031-000651-B018-295http://206.61.184.43:80/schaffer/history/om/om14.htm 206.61.184.43 19970122122331 text/html 4798HTTP/1.0 200 OKDate: Wednesday, 22-Jan-97 12:23:21 GMTServer: WebSitePro/1.1f (S/N wpo-0deb)Allow-ranges: bytesContent-type: text/htmlLast-modified: Saturday, 28-Dec-96 05:41:26 GMTContent-length: 4581 The Opium Monopoly - British Guiana Contents | Feedback | Search DRCNet Library | Schaffer Library | Historical Research THE OPIUM MONOPOLY BY ELLEN N. LA MOTTE XIV - BRITISH GUIANA SITUATED in South America. Area, 89,480 square miles.Population at census of 1911, excluding aborigines in theunfrequented parts of the colony, 296,000. The Statesman's YearBook, which gives us these brief facts, has very little to sayabout this British colony in our Western Hemisphere, and gives nodates or information as to how and when it was acquired. TheGovernment reports are also meager and unsatisfactory, and thereis no wealth of detail as to exports and imports. The country,however, is rich in gold, mining having commenced in i886.Diamonds have also been discovered. The chief sources of revenue, however, are customs, excise andlicenses. With the word "excise" we have come to haveunpleasant associations. From "The Statistical Abstract forBritish Self-Governing Dominions, Colonies, Possessions andProtectorates" we find a table showing the imports of opiuminto the various countries under British rule. The opium importsinto British Guiana are as follows: 1910 1,251 pounds sterling 1911 1,270 1912 2,474 1913 4,452 1914 5,455 1915 4,481 These figures would seem to indicate that even on the WesternHemisphere the taste for opium may be cultivated. It need notnecessarily be confined to the Oriental peoples. The populationof much of South America is a mixed lot, the result of mixedbreeding between Spanish settlers, Indians, native tribes of allsorts. All this jumble, including the aborigines referred to,might, with a little teaching become profitable customers of theOpium Monopoly. Time and a little effort, given this fertilefield, ought to produce a "healthy expansion" in theopium trade. And that this insidious habit is indeed taking hold, in atleast one more country in South America, one may infer from thefollowing paragraph which appeared in the New York Times, 4October, 1919: DRUG EVIL IN ARGENTINA Buenos Aires Opens Fight on Use of Narcotics The city government of Buenos Aires, Argentina, has begun adetermined fight to wipe out the drug evil by the enactment ofstringent laws governing the sale of narcotics. This step wastaken after an investigation by the authorities had disclosedthat not only was the narcotic habit strong among the poor, butthat it was spreading throughout virtually every class in thecity. Until the passage of the laws druggists were permitted to sellcocaine, morphine and opium to any purchaser. The new laws forbidthe sale of these drugs except in filling prescriptions preparedby registered physicians. The city also has establisheddispensaries for the treatment of drug addicts. Contents | Feedback | Search DRCNet Library | Schaffer Library | Historical Research WT01-B29-41IA031-000651-B018-313http://206.61.184.43:80/schaffer/history/om/om15.htm 206.61.184.43 19970122122341 text/html 13157HTTP/1.0 200 OKDate: Wednesday, 22-Jan-97 12:23:33 GMTServer: WebSitePro/1.1f (S/N wpo-0deb)Allow-ranges: bytesContent-type: text/htmlLast-modified: Saturday, 28-Dec-96 05:41:22 GMTContent-length: 12939 History of the Opium Trade in China Contents | Feedback | Search DRCNet Library | Schaffer Library | Historical Research THE OPIUM MONOPOLY BY ELLEN N. LA MOTTE XV -- HISTORY OF THE OPIUM TRADE IN CHINA IN a vague way, we are familiar with the "opiumevil" in China, and some of us have hazy ideas as to how itcame about. The China Year Book for 1916 has this to say on thesubject: "The poppy has been known in China for 12centuries, and its medicinal use for 9 centuries. . . . It wasnot until the middle of the 17th century that the practice ofmixing opium with tobacco for smoking purposes was introducedinto China. This habit was indulged in by the Dutch in Java, andby them taken to Formosa, whence it spread to Amoy and themainland generally. There is no record to show when opium wasfirst smoked by itself, but it is thought to have originatedabout the end of the 18th century. Foreign opium was firstintroduced by the Portuguese from Goa at the beginning of the18th century. In 1729, when the foreign import was 200 chests,the Emperor Yung Ching issued the first anti-opium edict,enacting severe penalties on the sale of opium and the opening ofopium-smoking divans. The importation, however, continued toincrease, and by 1790 it amounted to over 4,000 chests annually.In 1796 opium smoking was again prohibited, and in 1800 theimportation of foreign opium was again declared illegal. Opiumwas now contraband, but the fact had no effect on the quantityintroduced into the country, which rose to 5,000 chests in 1820;16,000 chests in 1830; 20,000 chests in 1838, and 70,000 chestsin 1858." The China Year Book makes no mention of the traders whocarried these chests of opium into China. The opium came fromIndia, however, and the increase in importation corresponds withthe British occupation of India, and the golden days of the EastIndia Company. "Opium was now contraband, but that fact hadno effect on the quantity introduced into the country,"smuggled in wholesale by the enterprising British traders. China was powerless to protect herself from this menace,either by protests or prohibition. And as more and more of thedrug was smuggled in, and more and more of the people becamevictims of the habit, the Chinese finally had a tea-party, verymuch like our Boston Tea Party, but less successful in outcome.In 1839, in spite of the fact that opium smoking is an easy habitto acquire and had been extensively encouraged, the Britishtraders found themselves with 20,000 chests of unsold opium ontheir store-ships, just below Canton. The Chinese had repeatedlyappealed to the British Government to stop these imports, but theBritish Government had turned a persistently deaf ear. Thereforethe Emperor determined to deal with the matter on his ownaccount. He sent a powerful official named Lin to attend to it,and Lin had a sort of Boston Tea Party, as we have said, anddestroyed some twenty thousand chests of opium in a very drasticway. Mr. H. Wells Williams describes it thus: "The opium wasdestroyed in the most thorough manner, by mixing it in parcels Of200 chests, in trenches, with lime and salt water, and thendrawing off the contents into an adjacent creek at lowtide." After this atrocity, followed the first Opium War, whenBritish ships sailed up the river, seized port after port, andbombarded and took Canton. Her ships sailed up the Yangtsze, andcaptured the tribute junks going up the Grand Canal with revenueto Peking, thus stopping a great part of China's income. Peacewas concluded in 1843, and Great Britain came out well. Sherecompensed herself by taking the island of Hongkong; anindemnity Of 21 million dollars, and Canton, Amoy, Foochow,Ningpo and Shanghai were opened up as "treatyports"-for the importation of opium and the"open-door" in general. Mr. Wells, in his "Middle Kingdom" describes theorigin of this first war with England: "This war wasextraordinary in its origin as growing chiefly out of acommercial misunderstanding; remarkable in its course as beingwaged between strength and weakness, conscious superiority andignorant pride; melancholy in its end as forcing the weaker topay for opium within its borders against all its laws, thusparalyzing the little moral power its feeble government couldexert to protect its subjects. . . . It was a turning point inthe national life of the Chinese race, but the compulsory paymentof six million dollars for the opium destroyed has left a stigmaupon the English name." He also says, "The conflict was now fairly begun; itsissue between the parties so unequally matched --one havingalmost nothing but the right on its side, the other assisted byevery material and physical advantage-could easily beforeseen" and again, after speaking of it as being unjustand immoral, he concludes "Great Britain, the firstChristian power, really waged this war against the pagan monarchwho had only endeavored to put down a vice harmful to his people.The war was looked upon in this light by the Chinese; it willalways be so looked upon by the candid historian, and known asthe Opium War." Within fifteen years after this first war, there was anotherone, and again Great Britain came off victorious. China had topay another indemnity, three million dollars, and five moretreaty ports were opened up. By the terms of the Treaty ofTientsin, the sale of opium in China was legalized in 1858. From a small pamphlet, "Opium: England's Coercive Policyand Its Disastrous Results in China and India" by the Rev.John Liggins, we find the following: "As a specimen of howboth wars were carried on, we quote the following from an Englishwriter on the bombardment of Canton: 'Field pieces loaded withgrape were planted at the end of long, narrow streets crowdedwith innocent men, women and children, to mow them down likegrass till the gutters flowed with their blood.' In one scene ofcarnage, the Times correspondent recorded that half an army of10,ooo men were in ten minutes destroyed by the sword, or forcedinto the broad river. " The Morning Herald " assertedthat "a more horrible or revolting crime than thisbombardment of Canton has never been committed in the worst agesof barbaric darkness." Naturally, therefore, after the termination of these two wars,China gave up the struggle. She had fought valiantly to protecther people from opium, but the resources of a Christian nationwere too much for her. Seeing therefore that the opium trade wasto be forced upon her, and that her people were doomed todegradation, she decided to plant poppies herself. There shouldbe competition at least, and the money should not all be drainedout of the country. Thus it came about that after 1858 extensivetracts of land were given over to poppy production. Wholeprovinces or parts of provinces, ceased to grow grain and othernecessities, and diverted their rich river bottoms to the raisingof opium. Chinese opium, however, never supplanted Indian opium,being inferior to that raised in the rich valley of the Ganges.The country merely had double quantities of the drug, usedstraight or blended, to suit the purse or taste of the consumer. Then, in 1906, the incredible happened. After over a hundredyears of steady demoralization, with half her population opiumaddicts, or worse still, making enormous profits out of thetrade, China determined to give up opium. In all history, nonation has ever set itself such a gigantic task, with such agigantic handicap. China, a country of immense distances, withscant means of communication; with no common language, a landwhere only the scholars can read and write, suddenly decided tofree herself from this vice. The Emperor issued an edict sayingthat in ten years' time all opium traffic must cease, and anarrangement was made with Great Britain whereby this might beaccomplished. To the honor of America be it said that we assistedChina in this resolution. We agreed to see her through. A bargain was then made between China and Great Britain, in1907, China agreeing to diminish poppy cultivation year by yearfor a period of ten years, and Great Britain agreeing to aproportional decrease in the imports of Indian opium. A threeyears' test was first agreed to, a trial of China's sincerity andability, for Great Britain feared that this was but a ruse to cutoff Indian opium, while leaving China's opium alone in the field.At the end of three years, however, China had proved her abilityto cope with the situation. Thus, for a period of ten years, bothcountries have lived up to their bargain, the amount of nativeand foreign opium declining steadily in a decreasing scale. April1, 1917, saw the end of the accomplishment. China's part was most difficult. In the remote, interiorprovinces, poppies were grown surreptitiously, connived at bycorrupt officials who made money from the crops. However, drasticlaws were enacted and severe penalties imposed upon those whobroke them. If poppy cultivation could not be stopped, Englandwould not hold to her end of the bargain. Not only was there anation of addicts to deal with, but these could obtain copioussupplies of opium from the foreign concessions, over which theChinese had no control. We shall show, in another article, towhat extent this was carried on. Yet somehow, in some manner, theimpossible happened. Year by year, little by little, one provinceafter another was freed from poppy cultivation, until in 1917,China was practically free from the native-grown drug, andforeign importation had practically ended. In this manner, first by large smuggling, then by two opiumwars, was China drugged with opium. And in this manner, and tothis extent, has she succeeded in freeing herself from the curse.But in one way, she is not free. She has no control over theextra-territorial holdings of European powers, for in each treatyport are the foreign concessions already mentioned-German,Austrian, British, French, Russian. And in these concessions,opium may be procured. Simply by crossing an imaginary line, insuch cities as Shanghai and Hongkong, can the Chinese buy as muchopium as they choose. China will never be rid of this menace tillshe is rid of these extraterritorial holdings. Opium shops,licensed by foreign governments, are always ready to supply herpeople with the forbidden drug. We say that the China market is closed. So it is, in one way.But the British Opium Monopoly is not ended. The year 1917 saw atremendous blow dealt to the British opium dealers, but othermarkets will be found. There are other countries than China whoseinhabitants can be taught this vice. The object of thisdiscussion is to consider these other countries, and to see towhat extent the world is menaced by this possibility. Contents | Feedback | Search DRCNet Library | Schaffer Library | Historical ResearchWT01-B29-42IA031-000651-B018-336http://206.61.184.43:80/schaffer/history/om/om16.htm 206.61.184.43 19970122122401 text/html 18020HTTP/1.0 200 OKDate: Wednesday, 22-Jan-97 12:23:46 GMTServer: WebSitePro/1.1f (S/N wpo-0deb)Allow-ranges: bytesContent-type: text/htmlLast-modified: Saturday, 28-Dec-96 05:41:17 GMTContent-length: 17802 The Opium Monopoly - Conclusion Contents | Feedback | Search DRCNet Library | Schaffer Library | Historical Research THE OPIUM MONOPOLY BY ELLEN N. LA MOTTE XVI -- CONCLUSION THERE are many people who advocate the use of opium, and whodefend the policy of the Opium Monopoly. They argue that it isnot harmful-if taken in moderation. They even assert that it isno more objectionable than alcohol or tobacco. Leaving out ofaccount, therefore, the consensus of opinion of the medicalprofession as to the evils of habit-forming drugs, and acceptingthe theory that opium is harmless, we should then like to ask whythe use of opium is so carefully restricted to the peoples ofsubject states, who have no voice in their own affairs? Whyshould the benefits of opium be confined to Oriental races, andwhy should not the white race be given the same opportunities forindulgence? Is there any reason for this discrimination? As asource of revenue, it certainly has advantages. Yet curiouslyenough, those European countries which derive much profit throughthe sale of opium to their subject races, seem to have anaversion to introducing it to their people at home. And there isa further coincidence in the fact that none of the self-governingcolonies of European countries-Australia, New Zealand andCanada-permit this traffic. It appears to be only the subjectpeoples, whose well-being has become the White Man's Burden, whoreceive the blessings of this peculiar form of altruism. Is itbecause the white race is worth preserving, worth protecting, andbecause subject nations are fair game for exploitation of anykind? Another argument advanced by advocates of Government opium isthat the Oriental peoples are "different"-that opiumdoes them no harm. Every writer on the subject of opium in China,produces evidence to show the shocking results upon that country,during the hey-dey of the deluge. The complete moral degradation,and economic ruin of thousands of helpless individuals. Nor do wethink the medical profession would agree with this assumptionthat opium is harmless to Orientals, because they are"different." Their only real difference lies in theirhelplessness to protect themselves from foreign aggression. Another argument advanced by the upholders of the Monopoly isthat the Orientals have always been users of opium, that theylike it, it suits them, it would be unfair to deprive them of it.We have seen to what extent the Chinese liked it, and how it wasforced upon them by two wars. Not until they were completelycrushed, and had to accept the terms of the conquerer, did theysubmit. It can hardly, therefore, be called a vice indigenous tothe Chinese. Japan is another Oriental nation that disproves thisargument. As we have said before, there are no opium shops inJapan, and the sale of opium is not conducted by the JapaneseGovernment. On the contrary, the Japanese have the same fear ofthis drug that a European nation has, and exercises the sameprecautions to protect its people. But, as we have said before,Japan is the only Oriental nation that has not been subjugated bya European nation, and therefore has never had opium thrust uponher. She is the only country in the Far East that has managed topreserve her sovereignty, and has never been subject to certainblighting influences of European culture. Another exception to this assumption that the Orientals cannotdo without opium lies in the Philippines. When America acquiredthose islands some twenty years ago, our first act was toeliminate the opium traffic, which had been established there byour predecessors. It had been in existence for decades, but weimmediately set about to abolish it. Root and branch we did awaywith it, and shed no crocodile tears as to the " hardship" this would be to the people who had come under ourprotection. We wished no revenue coming from such a source asthis. Yet we might have cut in half the cost of our Philippinebudget had we followed the example set by other nations. We haveseen that certain British colonies, Hongkong and the StraitsSettlements, for example, derive from one-third to one-half oftheir upkeep expenses from this traffic. But we refrained fromtreating our Filipinos in this manner. We are calledsentimentalists out in the East-at such times as we are notcalled money-getters. To-day, the Philippines are very nearlyready for self government. Would they have been so nearly readyhad we continued to drug them as they had been drugged before wetook possession? Drugged peoples are usually docile andsubmissive-perhaps that is the secret of much of the successfulcolonizing, about which we hear so much. But let us leave aside the question of the Orientals, andwhether or no opium is good for them. We recognize quite clearlythat it is not good for ourselves, for Americans. We recognizethat fact quite as clearly as England realizes that it is notgood for the inhabitants of the British Isles. Quite as clearlyas France, while setting up opium shops in her colony ofIndo-China, refuses to establish them in Paris or Marseilles.America is unique in the fact that although we have colonialpossessions, we do not have a double standard of morality. Weattempt to throw around our colonies the same safeguards that wethrow around ourselves at home. But the question arises, howsuccessful are we in protecting ourselves at home? Notparticularly so, according to the daily press. How great the danger to ourselves was recognized somethirty-seven years ago by an Episcopal missionary to China, theRev. John Liggins. In 1882 he published a small book, alreadyreferred to, entitled: "England's Coercive Opium Policy andIts Disastrous Results in China and India." The preface tothis unheeded warning runs thus. "Our aim in this sketch isto present, as briefly as possible, the most important facts andtestimonies concerning a traffic which is as disgraceful toEngland as it is ruinous to China and hurtful to India. . . . Itis also of the highest importance that the people throughout ourwide domain should be aroused concerning the new, fascinating anddeadly foe which has entered our country through the Golden Gate,and which already numbers its victims by the thousands, and willsoon do so by the tens of thousands." The Rev. Mr. Liggins saw it coming-that danger which is almostready to overwhelm us to-day. He recognized clearly that theOpium Monopoly of that great nation which rules nearly one-thirdof the world-the British Empire would in time reach further andfurther afield for new victims. It is too lucrative a trade to beconfined to only a few countries. Markets must not only becreated and legalized in subject states, but new ones added inoutside countries, through smuggling. All too fatally easy ofaccomplishment, and so profitable, financially, as to be worthany risk and effort. The prediction as to our own danger, made ini882, seems to be abundantly realized. The number of drug addicts in America to-day are fairlystartling. The number is variously estimated in New York Cityalone as from ten thousand to one hundred thousand. It is saidthat there may be a million in the country. Yet these figures arethe merest guesswork, by no means substantiated. Certain it isthat the campaign of the New York Health Department has uncoveredthousands of them, and any other city that chose to do so, couldproduce facts equally startling. The laws on our statute books concerning the prescription ofnarcotic drugs are powerless to deal with the situation. It isshooting into the air to try to "regulate" thiscondition. It is as thoroughly well "regulated" as itcan ever be by the Harrison Anti-Narcotic Act, a Federal Lawwhose enforcement is in the hands of the Internal RevenueDepartment. By the provisions of this Act, every pound of opiumor its derivatives that comes into this country, legitimately, isaccounted for, and its distribution, both wholesale and retail,made a matter of record. Thus, the Board of Trade returns showthe amount imported by the big wholesale drug houses. These mustaccount for their sales to the retail drug stores, and theamounts must tally. The drug stores can only sell narcotic drugson a physician's prescription, and the prescriptions are kept onfile, and the quantity sold must correspond to the quantitycalled for by these prescriptions, as well as to the amountobtained from the wholesale drug house. In prescribing narcotics,the physician is obliged to write his prescription intriplicate--one copy for his own protection, one copy for thelocal druggist, and one copy to be filed with the healthdepartment. Nor is he allowed to prescribe narcotics for anaddict without decreasing the dosage. His prescription cannotcall for thirty grains of morphia day after day, it must show, ina chronic case of this kind, a daily diminution of the amountprescribed, thus indicating a desire to get the patient off thedrug, eventually. All these records are kept on file, open toinspection whenever an accounting is demanded, consequently anyleak can be instantly accounted for. This Harrison Act is ascomprehensive and as nearly perfect as possible, yet it does notcover the situation. By this means, violations can be detected,whether on the part of an unscrupulous physician or druggist, oreven the wholesale house, but these violations are onlyoccasional. The root of the evil remains untouched. At one time, it was believed that carelessness on the part ofthe physician was chiefly responsible for creating drug addicts,but the recent campaign against violators of the Harrison Actseems to have completely exonerated him of this charge. For onepatient who becomes a drug addict while under a doctor's care,through the accidental misuse of morphia, there are a hundred whoform the habit through other ways. It is not the occasional,accidental victim, given morphia for the relief of pain, which iscreating our thousands of drug users. It is not the occasionalunscrupulous physician who is responsible. If this was all, wecould easily cope with these unwitting abuses, or even deliberateinstances of misuse. But the question goes deeper than this. The Opium Monopoly was not established for any humane oraltruistic purpose. It was not established to provide the medicalprofession with a drug for the relief of pain, to ease the agonyof the injured and wounded, or to calm the last days of thosedying with an incurable disease. This, which may be called thelegitimate use of opium, is not the object of the Opium Monopoly.Used only in this manner, there would be no money in it. It isonly when opium is produced in quantities far in excess of thelegitimate needs of the world that it becomes worth while-to theOpium Monopoly. That Monopoly was established not to relieve painand suffering, but with the deliberate intention of creating painand suffering, by creating drug victims by the thousand. It isthese hundreds of thousands of customers that are profitable. Themenace to America lies in the large amounts of opium which aresmuggled into the country for this purpose. Boys and girls osixteen and seventeen first acquire this habit through curiosity,through association with what they call "bad company,"peddlers who first offer it free, as a gift, well knowing thatafter a few doses the fatal habit will be formed. Where do thesevendors obtain their supplies? The daily papers often contain suggestive paragraphs. Thus the" New York Times," under date of February 28, 1919:" Seize Opium in Schenectady. Opium, valued by Federalofficials at $10,000 was seized in Schenectady, and four Chinamenwere arrested in a raid on Chinese places of business on Centrestreet today. The Federal officials expressed the belief thatopium had been smuggled, and that Schenectady is the distributingpoint for this part of the State." An item in the "Seattle Union Record," of June 24,1919, gives us cause for further consideration. BRITISH DRUG SHIP HELD BY UNITED STATES FINE OF $49,265 ASSESSED FOR BRINGING "DOPE" TOAMERICA LINER ALLOWED TO MOVE UNDER BOND NO ARRESTS MADE, THOUGH BOOZE IS FOUND ABOARD No arrests were made up to Tuesday noon in connection with theenormous seizure of opium, cocaine and liquor on the Blue Funnelliner Cyclops, although the investigation is being continued byfederal officials. The ship has been seized and a fine of $49,265 has beenassessed against her for having drugs not listed in the ship'smanifest. United States District Attorney Robert C. Saunders filed alibel Monday night against the Cyclops, the boat being seizedlater by the customs service. Bond was fixed at $100,00, or twicethe fine. The Fidelity Surety Company filed the bond Monday. Theship was released Tuesday morning. A civil libel suit may be filed against Capt. W. Duncan,holding him responsible for the liquor found on the ship. CaptainDuncan, questioned Monday by customs officials, claimed to knownothing about the contraband. The result of Monday's checking of the opium and cocaineshowed that the seizure amounted to 778 tins of opium, 670 ouncesof cocaine and 16 ounces of morphine. A small paragraph in a New York paper, dated June 12, 1919,reads thus: "Two New Yorkers jailed for smuggling opium.Pleas of guilty to charges of opium smuggling were entered in theFederal Court today by Albertus Schneitzer and Maxwell Auerbach,of New York. They were fined $500 each, and sent to Atlantapenitentiary, the former for two years, and the latter for oneyear. The men were arrested in connection with the seizure ofopium on the Canadian border." We cannot grapple with our problem unless we face the facts;if we ignore the source of supply and distribution, and thereasons for this immense overproduction of opium on the part ofthe British Opium Monopoly. The anti-narcotic laws on our statutebooks are powerless to protect us. With Canada, a Britishprovince, to the north, and all Mexico on the south, what chancehave we against such exposure? Of what use to send two smugglersto the penitentiary, when at the Calcutta opium sales, once amonth opium is auctioned off under the auspices of the BritishGovernment, to be disposed of as the buyers may see fit? Much ofit, as we have seen, goes to those helpless states and colonieswhich have no control over their own affairs, where the opiumtraffic is conducted under the administration of the aliengovernment. Much of the rest of it goes out for smugglingpurposes, to be distributed in devious, roundabout, underhandchannels throughout the world. We are coming in for our share inthis distribution. We feel that our country is in grave peril. Our politiciansand our diplomats have been too careful all these years, to speakof this business, through fear of offending a powerful nation.But we feel that the time has now come to speak. England has beenrelying upon our silence to "get away with it." Uponour ignorance, and upon that silence which gives consent. But inthis new, changed world, reborn out of the blood and agony of thegreat war, is it not time to practice some of the decencies whichwe have proclaimed so loudly? As we have said before, no stronger opponents of this policyare to be found than among a section of the people of Englanditself. We look to them to join us, in this great issue, and wefeel that we shall not look in vain. Contents | Feedback | Search DRCNet Library | Schaffer Library | Historical Research WT01-B29-43IA086-000619-B007-407http://206.61.184.43:80/schaffer/debate/debate.htm 206.61.184.43 19970122034549 text/html 9683HTTP/1.0 200 OKDate: Wednesday, 22-Jan-97 03:45:29 GMTServer: WebSitePro/1.1f (S/N wpo-0deb)Allow-ranges: bytesContent-type: text/htmlLast-modified: Saturday, 28-Dec-96 07:20:59 GMTContent-length: 9466 The Drug Legalization Debate Contents | Feedback | Search DRCNet Library | Schaffer Library | The Drug Legalization Debate The Drug Policy Debate Legalization? Decriminalization? Prohibition? This page contains information regarding the debate overdrug policy. Should we legalize? Decriminalize? Build biggerprisons? The viewpoints of the various sides are representedhere. Contents Submissions Invited -- Gotsomething new to add? Read this. Debate Manuals - Manuals for debatingthe issue from various points of view. The Competition - Web sites ofpeople who don't agree with us. The Chicken Page - The"chickens" who are afraid to debate this in public. The Opinion Page - Opinions are like----, everybody's got one. I have made an effort to select someof the best. Submissions Invited We are making a genuine effort to present the best argumentswe can find for every point of view. We have done extensive workand research to locate the best of our opponents' arguments andpresent them here, along with any evidence offered in support ofthose arguments. We have also, in many cases, provided directline-for-line rebuttals of those arguments. We invite all readersto submit any argument we have not properly covered, their arguments in favor of their point of view, and any evidence they have to support their statements. Send submissions to: schaffer@smartlink.netPlease read all of the information on these pages before yousubmit. The Chicken Page -Wherein we list our opponents who, so far, have been too"chicken" to come out for an open and honest debate ondrug policy. What's the problem folks? Why can't we just talkabout this? Debate Manuals In this section, we present the manuals prepared by theopposing sides for debating this issue. Of course, my personalopinion is that we have better manuals and arguments than ouropponents do, but we invite you to read them all and make yourown judgment. The Persuasive Strategies- Answers to Specific Questions- Showstopper Questions -These are the debate strategies which blew the drug warriors outof the debate so badly that the DEA felt compelled to hold aconference in August, 1994, to write the following book. Speaking Out Against DrugLegalization -- This is the DEA debate manual which waswritten in response to the success of the Persuasive Strategies.It was originally titled "How to Hold Your Own in a DrugLegalization Debate," but the title was changed because thefirst title seemed to assume they would get their butts kicked nomatter what and the best they could hope to do is survive. Thiscopy of the DEA debate manual includes my line by line rebuttal.The full text of the DEA manual can also be found on the DEA homepage. Drug Legalization: Myths andMisconceptions by the U.S. Department of Justice DrugEnforcement Administration The Wrong Message Of LegalizingIllicit Drugs This is a pamphlet put out by the Partnershipfor a Drug-Free America which basically states that it is wrongto talk about drug policy reform because even talking about itencourages drug use. Now even ordinary discussion has becomedangerous. The Competition One of the main differences between me and the"competition" (those who support the drug war) is thatI am fully devoted to airing all the facts and arguments on theissue, regardless of whether they favor my point of view. Ifirmly believe that any honest comparison of their evidence (suchas they have presented - not much) and arguments (generally weak,emotional, and illogical) will lead any intelligent, reasonableperson to the truth. Therefore, I am including links to all theother sites on the web which seem to be opposed to mine. Read andcompare yourself. I recommend to all my opponents that they dothe same, in order to make it easier for all interested partiesto get to the truth. However, I expect that none of them will.The truth is that our opponents aren't much interested in thetruth. Please Note: We have invited all of the following listedparties to come out for a live debate at which their evidence andarguments could be presented against ours in an open forum.Though we have made repeated invitations, none of the groups andpeople listed below have had the courage to come out for an opendebate. We stand ready to debate them at any time they are ready. DEA Home Page Dr.Kim Edward Light's Home Page - Dr. Light presents some short,poorly documented, and fundamentally illogical arguments against"legalization" (he seems to have his own definition for"legalization" which doesn't quite match up with what Ihave heard other people suggest). We will soon be postingpoint-by-point rebuttals to his statements, complete with linksto the full text of relevant documents which contradict what hesays. Drug Watch International - This isone of the larger international organizations devoted tosupporting the war on drugs. I have had personal communicationswith Rev. David Noffs, who first started his communications withme by stating that I was the kind of person they are trying toprotect their children against. He said this when the only thinghe knew about me was an e-mail I had sent him asking him to joinus in an open debate on the subject. When I told him that anintelligent debate requires that people not engage in randomcharacter attacks against people they never even met, he quitresponding. The Resolution for a Federal Commission on DrugPolicy Introduction to the Hoover Resolution The Hoover Resolution Short List of Signers of the HooverResolution Long List of Signers of the HooverResolution Excerpt from the 1994 CrimeBill Calling for the establishment of a commission to study thedrug problem. This clause was inserted into the Crime Bill as aresult of the Resolution for a Federal Commission on Drug Policy(Hoover Resolution). The Atlanta Resolution The Atlanta Resolution and the list of signers. TheProhibitionists answer to the Hoover Resolution. Contents | Feedback | Search DRCNet Library | Schaffer Library | The Drug Legalization DebateWT01-B29-44IA087-000632-B022-258http://206.61.184.43:80/schaffer/ACTIVIST/dearep1.htm 206.61.184.43 19970122093718 text/html 8549HTTP/1.0 200 OKDate: Wednesday, 22-Jan-97 09:37:11 GMTServer: WebSitePro/1.1f (S/N wpo-0deb)Allow-ranges: bytesContent-type: text/htmlLast-modified: Saturday, 28-Dec-96 07:27:19 GMTContent-length: 8332 Speaking Out Against Drug Legalization Contents | Feedback | Search DRCNet Library | Schaffer Library | The Drug Legalization Debate Speaking Out Against Drug Legalization or How to Hold Your Own in a Drug Legalization Debate Introduction by Clifford A. Schaffer What follows in these pages is the Drug EnforcementAdministrations's booklet "How to Hold Your Own In a DrugLegalization Debate" which outlines the top ten reasons whythey think "legalization" is such a bad idea. I willexamine their statements, sentence by sentence, and presentcomments. Readers should note that, while the DEA has written abook on how to survive when defending the War on (Some) Drugs,the DEA has no interest in coming forward to actually engage insuch a debate. An open and honest public debate is the last thething the DEA wants. The DEA's Statement ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS Though compiled from many sources, this guide evolved from asingle event: the AntiLegalization Forum held at the FBI/DEATraining Academy in August 1994. Five major city police officialsprovided invaluable assistance to the project: Superintendent Matt L. Rodriguez, Chicago Police Department; Chief Ruben Ortega, Salt Lake City Police Department; Chief William K. Finney, St. Paul Police Department; Chief Joe Samuels, Oakland Police Department; and Chief Dennis E. Nowicki, Charlotte Police Department. Other participants, whose contributions to the discussions areacknowledged with gratitude, were from: Office of National Drug Control Policy National Institute on Drug Abuse National Families in Action California Office of Criminal Justice Planning Office of Drug Control Policy, State of Michigan Office of the District Attorney, Multnomah County, Oregon Kennedy School of Government, Harvard University BOTEC Analysis Corporation, Cambridge, Massachusetts DEA Headquarters DEA Seattle, Miami, and Chicago Field Divisions Facilitators: Kenneth F. Hickey, Esq., Washington, DC Kunz and Company, Arlington, Virginia The Walsh Group, Bethesda, Maryland LETTER OF INTRODUCTION Dear Reader: You and I are frequently faced with the need to address manyof the positions which are advocated by those calling for thelegalization of drugs. More and more, the debate on legalizationis being given public airing in the media. Average citizens, fedup with crime and drugs, are being told that legalization is areasonable alternative to the crime problem that so manycommunities are struggling against. You and I know that legalization is not an alternative, butrather a surrender which will further reduce our quality oflife. Ninety percent of the American people agree thatlegalization of drugs would complicate an already devastatingsituation. Health and social costs associated with the increasedavailability of drugs would break our economy. Crime would notdecrease. The moral fiber of our country would be torn apart. Those who advocate legalization have many motives. But theyfrequently do not have answers to a lot of the questions we areasking. Legalization is an abstract to many of them. But I cantell you firsthand, from my thirtyfour years' experience as alawenforcement officer at the state level, the damage caused bydrugs is real and lasting. It's not drug laws, or the enforcementof the drugs laws of our nation that are causing harm--it's thedrugs themselves. Because we're often called on to speak to the issues, I askeda number of professionals from the law enforcement, health, andacademic communities to come together for two days to discuss howwe can best address the arguments against legalization. I am wellaware that local law enforcement officials are on the front linein the battle against drug abuse. For that reason I asked severalpolice chiefs to participate in the Quantico Conference to givetheir expertise and guidance as we formulated our response tothese issues. This guide represents most of the issues andarguments raised during that time. This booklet is intended as aresource for you as you are faced with the questions and issuesassociated with the debate on the legalization of drugs. Whilemany professionals participated in the session, the viewsrepresented in this document are the position of the DrugEnforcement Administration. They represent the consensus of theassembled group and without necessarily attributing each andevery position to the personal views of each participant. Please feel free to use the guide in whatever way you feel itis appropriate. The debate on the legalization of drugs cannot bewon if we remain silent. Sincerely, Thomas A. Constantine Administrator Drug Enforcement Administration The Reply to the DEA's Statement REPLY TO THE LETTER OF INTRODUCTION The DEA really has no business spending taxpayer dollars topromote their own political agenda. The DEA acts as lobbyist andpublic relations firm for themselves and other special interestgroups which benefit from the drug war and it should be stopped. In the course of this public advocacy the DEA distorts thetruth on many occasions, lies shamefully at times and drawsinvalid conclusions from what is true. The purpose of thisbooklet was to try to stop the damage being done when the drugwarriors were caught in public spouting the old mythology of thedrug war, but we will demonstrate clear examples of the lies anddistortions here in their book. We agree that the debate on the legalization of drugs cannotbe won by anyone who remains silent. That is why we challenge theDEA to bring forth their best against our best in an open publicenvironment where these issues can be discussed at length. Wehave asked for an open debate on this issue since February 23,1993 when the Resolution for a Federal Commission on Drug Policywas first signed. It is only the DEA who is afraid to debate thisissue in public. We challenge the DEA to show the strength and truth of theirarguments by supporting our call for an objective FederalCommission where all of the issues and evidence can be fullyexamined. If they are right, the evidence will show it. Sincerely, Clifford A. Schaffer Contents | Feedback | Search DRCNet Library | Schaffer Library | The Drug Legalization DebateWT01-B29-45IA087-000632-B022-283http://206.61.184.43:80/schaffer/ACTIVIST/dearep2.htm 206.61.184.43 19970122093735 text/html 19871HTTP/1.0 200 OKDate: Wednesday, 22-Jan-97 09:37:20 GMTServer: WebSitePro/1.1f (S/N wpo-0deb)Allow-ranges: bytesContent-type: text/htmlLast-modified: Saturday, 28-Dec-96 07:27:15 GMTContent-length: 19653 Why this drug legalization debate guide is necessary Contents | Feedback | Search DRCNet Library | Schaffer Library | The Drug Legalization Debate WHY the GUIDE IS NECESSARY            DEA Statement                         The Facts               This Guide was developed by the     The reason they developed this       Drug Enforcement Administration in  guide was very simple.  They are     response to requests by law         getting beat -- badly -- every time  enforcement executives, community   they show up for a debate.  The      leaders, substance abuse            evidence is simply  overwhelming     prevention counselors, parent and   that our drug policy needs serious   family advocates, and others for    reform, and it is starting to show.  DEA's help in responding to                                              legalization issues and questions.                                       We well understand that responding                                       to these issues and answering the                                        questions can be a challenge.                                            Questions about legalization often                                       touch on many issues: crime,                                             violence, criminal justice and                                           economic costs; health, behavior                                         and development; the quality of                                          family, community and social life;                                       and employment and productivity.                                         Few are prepared to answer such                                          diverse questions thoroughly, let                                        alone stay current on the research                                       and spot the flaws and distortions                                       in others' arguments. Yet,                                               questions are asked and they must                                        be answered. This Guide offers you                                       a strategy and resource for doing                                        so.                                                                      Discussions about legalization are  This is simply not true.  The drug   usually abstract and theoretical,   warriors are losing the public       which suits proponents of           debate on this issue because of the  legalization fine. A dialogue       most concrete, pragmatic reasons.    without boundaries or benchmarks    The drug war is a failure as an      works to their advantage. For       approach to the drug problem and     those engaged in the daytoday work  there is no way to redeem it.  We    of the real solution to America' s  could not afford to pursue this      drug problem--reducing the supply   policy to a successful conclusion,   and the demand for illegal drugs,   even if it was a good idea -- and    as well as addressing the criminal  it is not a good idea.  It isn't a   activity caused by drug             matter of what we want to do         trafficking and use--taking time    anymore, it is a matter of what we   out to discuss legalization         can do.                              questions can be a frustrating                                           undertaking. This Guide offers you                                       the resource information to                                              discuss this issue in a reasonable                                       and informed manner.                                                     THE DEA POSITION            DEA Statement                         The Facts               DEA is unequivocally opposed to     As the DEA itself points out later   the legalization of illicit drugs.  in their book, there is no clear                                         definition of "legalization" but,                                        whatever it is, they are against                                         it.                                                                                                                                               Actually, "legalization" is not the                                      issue, because we really don't know                                      if we will ever do it.  The issue                                        is really whether we need serious                                        reform of the current policy, no                                         matter what that reform may be                                           called.  It would be more accurate                                       to state that the DEA is                                                 unequivocally opposed to any reform                                      at all.                              Legalization in any form would      Whether a drug is perceived as       likely:                             having risks and costs is not a                                          product of the law, but of public    (1) reduce the perception of the    education.  Even if the law was a    risks and costs of use;             major  factor in those perceptions,                                      this still would not be a good                                           justification to throw individual                                        drug users in prison.                (2) increase availability of and    It should first be pointed out that  access to harmful drugs;            the DEA itself admits that it has    (3) increase demand, use, abuse     never had a major impact on          and addiction; and                  availability of drugs in the United                                      States and there is no hope that it                                      ever will.  In point of fact, this                                       policy often makes the illegal                                           drugs more available to                                                  schoolchildren than alcohol is.                                          The availability of alcohol to                                           children was one of the major                                            reasons that alcohol Prohibition                                         was repealed.                                                                                                                                     Whether availability, demand, use,                                       abuse and addiction would increase                                       depends upon what you mean by                                            "legalization".  If you mean that                                        there would be cocaine vending                                           machines alongside the tobacco                                           vending machines, and convenience                                        store clerks would wink as they                                          sold heroin to children in the same                                      way that they wink when they sell                                        tobacco, then drug use might                                             increase.   If the drug laws are                                         somewhat more sensible, there is                                         good evidence to believe that drug                                       use would drop.                      (4) remove the social sanction      There are many ways to have social   against drug abuse that is          sanctions reinforced in legislation  reinforced in legislation.          and everyone would agree that some                                       laws are necessary to achieve best                                       results with the drug problem.  The                                      question is whether it does any                                          good to enforce those social                                             sanctions with prison.  All the                                          evidence says that prison does more                                      harm than good.                      The present social problems in the  The Drug War benefits only two       United States, including crime,     groups of people -- The drug         health problems and poverty, are    barons, and the drug enforcement     substantial and can only worsen if  barons.  For the drug barons, the    drugs become legal. The arguments   drug war guarantees high profits     for legalization are a sad and      with comparatively low risk.  For    bitter offering to the most         the drug enforcement barons it is    vulnerable segment of our           their very livelihood.  It is the    population. Legalization would      reason they can spend billions of    increase risks and costs to         dollars on fancy drug-detecting      individuals, families and           technology, aircraft, and radar      communities--indeed, to every part  balloons, even while the figures     of the nation--without              clearly show that none of these      compensating benefits.              tactics provides any real benefit                                        to the situation.                    Any proposal with the potential to  The DEA has set up a straw man of    do these things is unacceptable.    what they deem "legalization" to     As public policy, it is             be.  In doing so, they have shown    fundamentally flawed.               that they really don't even                                              understand the arguments.  In the                                        fanatical protection of their own                                        interests, they have missed the                                          points entirely.                     WHO/WHEN/WHERE TO USE            DEA Statement                         The Facts               When DEA asked law enforcement      Basically, what the DEA is trying    executives, community leaders and   to say here is that the drug         prevention advocates exactly what   warriors were getting their butts    they want and need to address       kicked pretty thoroughly every time  legalization questions, the         they came out for a public debate    answers were clear. They said, "It  on this issue.  It was a major       is essential that the facts         embarrassment for them to have drug  regarding the true implications of  warriors being struck speechless     the legalization issue be made      and unable to respond every time     known. Help us to explain this      they got into a discussion in front  complex issue to our families,      of a public group. Whenever the      friends and fellow citizens. Put    drug warriors appeared, they would   it in words everyone can            be confronted by people who knew     understand. And give us the         the facts on the issue and made it   support we need to continue to      apparent that the drug warriors did  make the case until it doesn't      not know the facts.                  have to be made anymore."                                                                                    The drug warriors would also be      This Guide is the first step in     confronted by simple undeniable      helping to deliver the credible,    logic:  Even if you assumed the      consistent message about the risks  facts to be as the drug warriors     and costs of the legalization of    have stated them, our drug policy    drugs to people in terms that make  still does not make sense.           sense to them. The                                                       antilegalization message is                                              effective when communicated by                                           representatives of the Federal                                           Government, but takes on even more                                       credibility when it comes from                                           those in the community who can put                                       the legalization debate in local                                         perspective.                                                                                                                                      DEA will undertake the ongoing                                           work of responding to your                                               inquiries, updating and expanding                                        the guide as necessary and                                               evaluating its usefulness and                                            impact. We invite you to provide                                         your views on this publication.                                                                                                                   We hope the Guide will be used in                                        several ways. For local law                                              enforcement executives, community                                        leaders, prevention advocates and                                        others, the Guide should serve,                                          first, as an open invitation to                                          join in making the affirmative                                           case against legalization. Second,                                       it provides background and                                               practical answers to the most                                            commonly asked questions about the                                       legalization of drugs.                                                   REMEMBER            DEA Statement                         The Facts               There are a few things to remember  This is no surprise.  There has      when discussing the legalization    been a concerted media campaign to   issue.                              instil this belief in the American                                       public over the last several         First, according to reliable        decades by the DEA, its              public opinion polls, the majority  predecessors, and its allies.        of the American people and          Everyone should read the references  lawmakers agree that drugs should   listed at the back of the this       not be legalized.                   section just to see what a                                               long-term concerted and malicious                                        propaganda campaign can achieve.                                                                              Second, when discussing             Strangely enough, information is     legalization, it is important that  the one thing that all drug          all available information and       warriors seem to be short on in      experiences are brought out into    debates.  There are very few who     the open. This can be accomplished  can provide even the most basic      by asking the "tough" questions.    facts about the drug problem, such   Some of these questions are listed  as the number of people killed by    on page 8. Insist that any          drugs, the number of people in       discussion be based on a specific   prison, why drugs were made illegal  definition of how legalization      in the first place, etc.  The        should be implemented, not an       problem, in a nutshell, is the       abstract theory.                    ignorance of the drug warriors.      Third, don't lose faith. This is a  This was copied from my Persuasive   long and difficult effort we are    Strategies.  When I first wrote      undertaking to get our issues on    Persuasive Strategies a few years    the table and be heard. Eventually  ago I realized that, at the time,    the climate will change and         it was often hard to get people to   prolegalization arguments will      listen to rational arguments on      again be out of fashion. While the  drug policy.  I wanted to give       debate appears to be cyclical,      reform activists some encouragement  having more resonance in certain    to stay in the game until the        circumstances, we must continue to  debate turned their way, as I knew   impress upon audiences, and         it would.  As it turns out, I        ultimately the American people,     underestimated the whole situation.  that legalization would be a         Reform activists are beating the    devastating defeat to the           snot out of the drug warriors in     commitment that so many have made   every debate and don't really need   to living free, healthy and         a lot of encouragement and "faith."  unfettered in our nation.            I would agree that the drug                                             warriors probably need it.           Contents | Feedback | Search DRCNet Library | Schaffer Library | The Drug Legalization Debate WT01-B29-46IA087-000632-B022-316http://206.61.184.43:80/schaffer/ACTIVIST/dearep3.htm 206.61.184.43 19970122093820 text/html 29400HTTP/1.0 200 OKDate: Wednesday, 22-Jan-97 09:38:01 GMTServer: WebSitePro/1.1f (S/N wpo-0deb)Allow-ranges: bytesContent-type: text/htmlLast-modified: Saturday, 28-Dec-96 07:27:08 GMTContent-length: 29182 Anti Drug Legalization Forum Contents | Feedback | Search DRCNet Library | Schaffer Library | The Drug Legalization Debate ANTI-LEGALIZATION FORUM            DEA Statement                         The Facts               In August 1994, in an effort to                                          identify compelling arguments                                            against legalization, DEA                                                sponsored a twoday                                                       AntiLegalization Forum at                                                Quantico, Virginia, for experts in                                       the field. Several police chiefs,                                        representatives from Government                                          agencies and private sector                                              authorities gave their time to                                           this important task. The                                                 participants were asked to refine                                        the arguments that can be made                                           against legalization and evaluate                                        ways to address the legalization                                         issue in an effective and                                                meaningful way.                                                          Three groups were formed to                                              discuss various aspects of the                                           legalization debate: Social/                                             Economic issues, Health Effects,                                         and Crime and Violence. All of the                                       arguments espoused by legalization                                       proponents impact on these three                                         areas, and many of the claims                                            outlined in this publication                                             crosscut the topics discussed by                                         the three groups. At the end of                                          the twoday session, group leaders                                        presented the recommendations of                                         each group.                                                              While individual groups arrived at                                       specific conclusions, there were a                                       number of general concerns and                                           ideas raised by all participants:                                         Those speaking against            At one time, drug warriors were      legalization needed to be positive  confident when they spoke about the  and confident about that position.  drug war.  They relied on            Legalization opponents must         inflammatory rhetoric and horror     constantly ask just how many drug   stories to get everyone to believe   addicts will be created under       drugs were bad and, therefore, the   legalization, how the government    best approach to the problem would   will support addicts' habits, and   be to put massive numbers of people  who will pay for the social,        in prison.  Then, about 1989, the    criminal and other costs of         tide began to turn.                  legalization.                                                             Legalization opponents often      This is an extraordinary statement   have a hard time being heard.       considering the fact that they       Although only a small minority of   parade every major drug bust before  academics, social scientists and    the media.  The DEA has always had   other public figures advocate       almost a media monopoly when         legalization, the conference        compared to the voices of reform.    participants felt that the                                               legalization advocates made better                                       use of the media in making their                                         opinions known than the far larger                                       group of legalization opponents. A                                       current climate of frustration                                           with crime, violence and drug                                            abuse is fueling the legalization                                        debate, and accomplishments in                                           controlling drugs do not get much                                        attention. The costs of the fight                                        against drugs are generally not                                          put in perspective, and the costs                                        of inaction are never discussed.                                         Nevertheless, conference                                                 participants agreed that a                                               positive, proactive campaign                                             against legalization can be very                                         effective.                                                                Legalization proponents are       Thank you.                           formidable opponents. The group                                          acknowledged that proponents of     The bit about public relations       legalization are generally          firms is a flat out lie.  Nobody in  wellprepared and credible people    the drug reform movement has the     whose arguments, though             money to afford it.  The movement    compelling, are faulty. Proponents  is made up almost entirely of        effectively use lawyers and public  volunteers.                          relations firms to espouse                                               liberalization of drug policies.                                          Misperceptions drive the debate.  The costs of solving the drug        The legalization debate is being    problem are not too high.  The       driven by the perception that the   costs of solving the drug problem    costs of solving the drug problem   are too high this way.  Everyone     in America are far too high. The    agrees that we should devote         group cited public mistrust of      significant resources to address     government and a perception that    the problem.  We do not believe      federal agencies attacking the      that the single most expensive and   problem are fragmented and have no  least cost-effective approach --     consensus about direction as        prison -- is the best approach.      reasons that the legalization                                            debate rings true with many         The DEA, as it has on many other     people. There are also numerous     occasions, is distorting the truth   misperceptions about the foreign    and outright lying about many        experience relating to drug         aspects of the drug issue in order   legalization and the system of      to advance its own interests.  The   prescription for heroin. Forum      Dutch Government has already filed   participants stressed the need to   an official protest against the      get the real story on the British,  misstatements of the DEA in this     Dutch and Swiss experiments out     booklet.                             into the open.                                                            Americans are frustrated by the   Judge James P. Gray likes to ask     drug problem. While an              audiences how many people believe    overwhelming majority of the        the current drug war is working.     American people are not convinced   On average, he says, about one or    that legalization is a good         two percent will raise their hands.  option, there is a sense of          It is pretty clear to most people   frustration that we have spent so   that this drug war causes more       much money on controlling drug      problems than it solves.             trafficking and use, yet violence                                        and crime continue. The group                                            noted that most Americans                                                erroneously think that                                                   legalization advocates are only                                          suggesting that marijuana be                                             legalized, and are generally                                             unaware of the dramatic impact                                           that legalizing cocaine and heroin                                       will have.                                                                The debate must not take place    This is a curious statement.  The    in the abstract. The debate on      DEA is saying that more than         legalization must be brought down   two-thirds of the people they want   from an abstract concept to a       to prosecute are gainfully           common sense scenario. Audiences    employed, tax-paying adults.  One    need to understand that 70 percent  would have to ask why the            of drug users are employed, and     government would have any interest   that the school bus driver who      in pursuing otherwise law-abiding    drives your children to school      taxpayers.                           could smoke marijuana; that the                                          surgeon who operates on you may     As for people driving your bus, or   have cocaine in his system; and     doing your surgery, there are laws   that the driver in back of you may  and other sanctions in place         be on speed. The debate needs to    against doing anything harmful to    demonstrate graphically how the     others while intoxicated on          common man will be impacted by      anything.  These laws would not      drug legalization.                  change under any scenario.                                                                                                                        Attempting to arrest everyone who                                        ever has a glass of wine is not an                                       effective approach to preventing                                         doctors from performing surgery                                          while drunk.  This is also true of                                       other drugs.                         WHAT MOTIVATES LEGALIZATION PROPONENTS?            DEA Statement                         The Facts               Some of the media, certain          The more interesting study of        quarters in academia and some       motives comes from analyzing the     frustrated Americans see            motives of those who have supported  legalization as an option which     these laws throughout history.  It   should be discussed. The panel      is apparent from the history of      discussed some of the factors       these laws that they were based on   possibly motivating advocates of    racism, ignorance, and the           legalization in order to            promotion of special interests.      appreciate the complexity of the    Everyone should read the history of  debate. The group noted that many   these laws to understand how we      who advocate legalization are       came to be where we are today.       attempting to "normalize" the                                            behavior of drugtaking and that                                          many are people who have tried                                           drugs without significant adverse                                        consequences.                                                            Others see potential profit in      And still others believe that        legalizing drugs and still others   government should abandon policies   simply believe that individual      which were based on ignorance,       rights to take drugs should be      fraud, and racism from the very      protected. The group also           beginning.  It also appeals to       acknowledged that the legalization  people who think that government     concept appeals to people who are   should not undertake to do anything  looking for simple solutions to     that is patently impossible.         the devastating problem of drug                                          abuse.                                                                   QUESTIONS TO ASK            DEA Statement                         The Facts               There was consensus among the                                            participants at the                                                      AntiLegalization Forum, too, on                                          the need to ask a number of                                              questions of those proposing                                             legalization. Too often, the                                             specifics of how to implement a                                          system for distribution and sale                                         of legalized drugs are never                                             discussed. Instead simplistic                                            rhetoric is used to deflect                                              serious consideration of the many                                        questions that must be thought                                           through before one can evaluate                                          the ramifications of their                                               proposals. This is the great                                             weakness of the prolegalization                                          position. Participants in the                                            Forum suggested that the following                                       questions be asked consistently in                                       order to illustrate the                                                  shallowness of the legalization                                          concept.                                                                 Should all drugs be legalized ?     The question is not whether any                                          drugs should be "legalized" because                                      the DEA itself states further down                                       in this book that there is no real                                       definition of "legalization."  Is                                        alcohol legal?  In some senses it                                        is, and in others it is not.  The                                        same is true of many other drugs.                                        If the DEA is right, we will never                                       "legalize" any of these drugs, so                                        they miss the point to focus on                                          "legalization."                                                                                                                                   The real question is prison.  Right                                      now we are embarked on a course                                          which will incarcerate millions of                                       people who, in the view of many of                                       the prison wardens in this country,                                      don't need to be in prison.  We are                                      turning loose violent felons so we                                       can incarcerate more drug users.                                         With these laws, we have the                                             opportunity to imprison literally                                        millions of people.  We must decide                                      how many millions of people we are                                       going to put in prison to make this                                      policy work.                                                                                                                                      As a personal matter, I don't much                                       like cigars.  I think they are                                           addictive, dangerous, smelly, and                                        disgusting. I cannot understand why                                      anyone would want to walk around                                         with one of those things stuck in                                        their face,  and I make my feelings                                      known to anyone who lights one up                                        in my presence.  At the same time,                                       I don't want to put George Burns in                                      prison.                                                                                                                                           No matter what policy we may                                             devise, or what name we may call                                         it, it is an undeniable truth that                                       putting people in prison does no                                         good at all.                         Who will determine which segments   Who determines the access to drugs   of the population will have access  now?                                 to legalized drugs?                 Under "legalization" it would be                                         the same people who do it for                                            alcohol and tobacco.                 Will they be limited only to        Are they limited to people over      people over eighteen ?              eighteen now?                                                                                                                                     Every major proposal for reform                                          assumes that minors should not have                                      access to drugs.  This is one of                                         the major reasons that many people                                       would like to see reform, because a                                      more sensible policy would do a                                          better job of keeping drugs away                                         from children.                       Will cocaine, heroin, LSD and PCP   Are they available now?  As the DEA  be made available if people         itself admits, their efforts have    request them?                       never had any major effect on                                            availability of drugs and it is                                          unlikely that they ever will affect                                      the drug market.                     Who will sell drugs? The            Who sells them now?                  Government? Private companies ?     You can't think of anyone who could                                      do a better job than the current                                         sellers?                             And who is liable for damages       The rules for liability should be    caused by drug use and the          consistent for all drugs.  If you    activities of those taking drugs?   get hit by a drunk or stoned                                             driver, it doesn't matter to you                                         which chemical caused the problem.                                       The damage is done in either case,                                       and should be addressed the same                                         under law.                           Who will collect the revenues       Who collects them now?               generated by the drug sales?        We have funded the richest criminal                                      organizations in the history of the                                      world with this policy. It is time                                       to take the money out of their                                           hands with a more sensible policy.   How will a black market for         The same way it is controlled for    cheaper drugs be controlled ?       alcohol and tobacco.                 Who will bear the costs to society  Under the current system the         of increased drug use?              taxpayers bear the entire cost, and                                      this system uses the single most                                         expensive, least cost-effective                                          approach to the problem -- prison.                                       For the same money it takes to                                           catch, try, and convict one drug                                         offender and to hold them in prison                                      for five years, we can provide                                           treatment or education for more                                          than one hundred people.  Which do                                       you think is the better deal?        How will absenteeism and loss of    It should be addressed the same way  productivity be  addressed by       it is for alcohol, tobacco, or any   business?                           similar problem.                     Will the local drug situation in a  Who dictates where drugs are sold    community dictate which drugs are   now?                                 sold where?                         The community itself should dictate                                      these matters, as they do with                                           liquor and tobacco outlets.          How will society care for and pay   First, there is no real evidence     for the attendant social costs of   that drug use would increase under   increased drug use, including       a more sensible policy.              family disintegration and child     Society is paying these costs        neglect?                            already.  Reform would seek to                                           reduce those costs by using                                              approaches which are more                                                cost-effective than prison.  Prison                                      does not do anything to address                                          these problems.                      Will people still need              This is a separate issue and,        prescriptions for currently         whichever way it goes, will not      controlled medications, such as     make much difference to the          antibiotics, if drugs are           fundamental problems of our current  legalized ?                         drug policy.  Antibiotics are an                                         entirely different class of drug                                         with an entirely different set of                                        uses and associated problems.                                            Therefore, it would be appropriate                                       to have a different policy for                                           them.                                Will legal drugs require            That depends on what you mean by     prescriptions?                      "legal".  For example, both alcohol                                      and penicillin are "legal" but have                                      different requirements for                                               purchasing them.                     Can anyone, regardless of physical  Who can purchase them now?           or medical conditions purchase                                           drugs?                              Can anyone, regardless of physical                                       or medical conditions purchase                                           alcohol or tobacco?  Alcohol and                                         tobacco are the big killers by a                                         wide margin. If we can manage to                                         find a workable policy for alcohol                                       and tobacco, then the other drugs                                        will be easy.                        How can we deal with the influx of  We won't have to.  The rest of the   people to the United States who     western world is going toward        are seeking legal drugs?            "legalization" faster than we are.   Can we begin a legalization pilot   Yes.  As the New York City Bar       program in your neighborhood for    Association recommended, we should   one year?                           allow states and communities to                                          determine their own approach to the                                      problem, as they do for alcohol, so                                      that we might have a number of                                           different programs from which to                                         draw ideas and information.  The                                         one thing we should not do is to                                         stay locked in to a single national                                      policy which -- by definition --                                         cannot work.                         Should the distribution outlets be  Where are the distribution outlets   located in the already              located now?                         overburdened inner city?                                                                                     Matters affecting the inner city                                         should be decided by the people in                                       the inner city.                      Contents | Feedback | Search DRCNet Library | Schaffer Library | The Drug Legalization Debate WT01-B29-47IA087-000632-B022-343http://206.61.184.43:80/schaffer/ACTIVIST/claim1.htm 206.61.184.43 19970122093832 text/html 34107HTTP/1.0 200 OKDate: Wednesday, 22-Jan-97 09:38:23 GMTServer: WebSitePro/1.1f (S/N wpo-0deb)Allow-ranges: bytesContent-type: text/htmlLast-modified: Saturday, 28-Dec-96 07:28:34 GMTContent-length: 33889 Claim I - Crime, Violence and Drug Use Go Hand in Hand Contents | Feedback | Search DRCNet Library | Schaffer Library | The Drug Legalization Debate How to Hold Your Own In a Drug Legalization Debate THE TEN CLAIMS DEA Statement The three groups discussing legalization at Quantico touchedon a number of significant issues. It was evident to theparticipants that the prolegalization arguments have remainedfairly consistent over the years and that there are ten majorclaims that can be made in opposition of legalization. The Facts The participants have missed the point again. The argumentshave changed over the last few years in particular, which is whatbrought them to Quantico in the first place. DEA Statement We have attempted to provide the ten simple, compelling claimsto help you frame your arguments against legalization. The claimsare backed up by facts, quotes and statistics. Periodically,these will need to be updated to ensure that the most currentinformation is being used to craft arguments againstlegalization. The Facts In this booklet, the DEA puts its arguments on the line. Whenthese ten claims are gone, it will have no more argument forcontinuing this drug war. DEA Statement CLAIM I: CRIME, VIOLENCE AND DRUG USE GO HAND IN HAND The Facts In this claim, the DEA does the first of its major distortions- the lumping together of all drugs into the same group.Different drugs have different effects and, for some drugs, thereis clearly very little association with violence. Marijuana andtobacco are two examples of drugs with little reason to believethat they are connected to violence. The DEA does not mentionhemp (marijuana) in this Claim so we must assume that they agreethat this argument would not apply to hemp (marijuana) in anycase. Even if we accepted the DEA's arguments that drugs, and notprohibition, causes violence, the best way to reduce the crimeand violence would be to reduce the drug use. There is noevidence that throwing people in prison is the most effective wayto reduce drug use. All the evidence shows that treatment andeducation are more cost-effective. DEA Statement Proponents of legalization contend that if drugs werelegalized, crime and violence would decrease. They believe thatit is the illegal nature of drug production, trafficking and usethat fuels crime and violence. They state that turf wars, gangactivity and drugrelated crimes are the result of the illegalnature of the drug trade. Proponents state that users commitcrimes to pay for drugs now because they cannot easily obtainthem. If drugs were legal, they say, the enormous profitsassociated with drugs because of their illegal status wouldevaporate and, once gone, the black market and criminal activityassociated with drugs would also be eliminated. The Facts If this was really the number one concern of the DEA then theyshould be advocating tough prison sentences against alcohol. Of all psychoactive substances, alcohol is the only one whose consumption has been shown to commonly increase aggression. . . . Alcohol drinking and violence are linked through pharmacological effects on behavior, through expectations that heavy drinking and violence go together in certain settings, and through patterns of binge drinking and fighting that sometimes develop in adolescence. . . . Illegal drugs and violence are linked primarily through drug marketing: disputes among rival distributors, arguments and robberies involving buyers and sellers, property crimes committed to raise drug money and, more speculatively, social and economic interactions between the illegal markets and the surrounding communities. . . . Psychoactive Substances andViolence, published by the Department of Justice, Series:Research in Brief, February 1994 The image of the insanely violent drug user has been a commonargument for drug prohibition since the earliest days of the lawswhen the New York Times published front page articles about"Negro Cocaine Fiends, New Southern Menace", and quoteda sheriff saying, "Those cocaine niggers sure are hard tokill." (NY Times, February 17, 1914) It is an image whichhas been used to justify the cruelest kinds of responses tosocial problems, as shown by the sheriff's own words. It neverdid have any basis in fact. The Department of Justice's own research clearly shows thatthe only real connection between illegal drugs and violence isthe violence created by the fact that it is illegal. This is thesame kind of violence that we saw with respect to alcoholProhibition with the wars between rival alcohol distributors. Itwas during this period that the Thompson submachine gun became asymbol of gangs and Prohibition. All of that ended whenProhibition ended. Violent crime dropped 65 percent in the yearProhibition was repealed and it continued to drop every yearthereafter until World War II. (Need citation from Ethan N. onthis one.) We could expect similar results from the repeal ofdrug Prohibition. DEA Statement Participants in the AntiLegalization Forum, who are experts incrime and violence, disagreed strongly with the notion that crimeand violence would be reduced if drugs were legalized. It iswidely claimed by those advancing the case for legalization thatcrime is largely committed by drug traffickers protecting theirturf. Sadly, it is the experience of many local police officersthat crime is committed not only because people want to buydrugs, but more often because people use drugs. There is nodenying the fact that drug use changes behavior and exacerbatescriminal activity. The Facts The Department of Justice's own studies of the issue disagree.See the information presented above. DEA Statement The experts also believe that legalization will lead toincreased availability of drugs, which will, in turn, lead toincreased use. The use of drugs, especially cocaine, crack,methamphetamine, and PCP is often associated with violentcriminal behavior. There is ample evidence which demonstrates thelinks between drugs, violence and crime, and the links between acurrently legal substance--alcohol--and crime is well documented.Police can attest to the fact that alcohol plays a significantrole in domestic violence cases. Drug use would only swell thestatistics regarding crime, even if the drugs were legallypurchased. The Facts The Department of Justice's own studies of the issue disagree. DEA Statement Legalization proponents ignore the fact that the peoplecommitting violent crimes are career criminals who will not stoptheir illegal activities once drugs are legalized; they willinstead seek new sources of illicit revenue. Criminal activitywould not be reduced as a result of drug legalization any morethan gangster activity disappeared after the Repeal ofProhibition. The Facts This is the argument that if we "legalized" drugsthen the criminals would just find another line of work. There isnothing else which offers the opportunity to get rich so easily.By comparison, all the other crimes are hard work. The DEA says that criminal activity would not be"reduced" because gangster activity did not"disappear" after the repeal of Prohibition. Of course,anyone who has seen "The Untouchables" should know thatgangster activity was significantly "reduced" after therepeal of Prohibition, even if it did not "disappear".Therefore, we could expect similar results again. This is an interesting argument. We must keep drugs illegalbecause it gives work to criminals who might be doing somethingmore dangerous if we did not. That is, having these people selldrugs is a good thing because it keeps them out of biggertrouble. Relatively speaking then, selling drugs is not so bad asother potential crimes so we should make sure they keep doing it. Of course, then the question becomes: What would happen if weactually did stop the flow of drugs? Would we have to startmanufacturing drugs and distributing them through these samecriminals just to keep them from doing something worse insociety? According to this argument, we are better off if the drug warnever does succeed. DEA Statement The group discussed the fallacy that legalizing drugs wouldeliminate the black market environment which seems to fuel thedrug trade and its attendant violence. The existence of a blackmarket is heavily dependent on the parameters set by thelegalizers: which drugs would be legal, the potency level ofdrugs and the age at which legal drugs could be purchased. Ifdrugs were legal for persons over 18, for example, drugtraffickers would still target those 17 and younger; if onlymarijuana were legalized, drug traffickers would continue totraffic in heroin and cocaine. The Facts Who do the drug traffickers target now? What drugs do theytraffic in now? No sensible person pretends that any drug policy is going tosolve all the problems related to drugs. That is clearlyunrealistic. At the same time, there is no reason to undertakepolicies, such as we have now, which only make the situationworse. Let's face it. The DEA never has had any effective controlover the drug markets and they never will. By taking thisapproach the DEA has insured that only the outlaws will havecontrol of drug sales and distribution. DEA Statement Some facts which help to confirm the observations of the forumparticipants may be used in debates:  A report in the Journal of the American Medical Association(7/6/94) reports that cocaine use is linked to high rates ofhomicide in New York City and that "homicide victims mayhave provoked violence through irritability, paranoid thinking orverbal and physical aggression which are known to bepharmacologic effects of cocaine." The Facts The DOJ's own studies, mentioned above, tell a differentstory. What the DEA is alluding to here in the last part of thisparagraph is the fact that people are more likely to be victimsor homicide than to be perpetrators of homicide while under theinfluence of cocaine. The same statistic is true of alcohol. Whatit means is that people who get stoned on anything sometimes dostupid things, such as getting themselves killed. This is evenmore true of alcohol, but does not make a good reason to throwpeople in prison for drinking wine or beer. DEA Statement  An April, 1994 report titled "Violent Drug RelatedCrime" compiled by Drug and Crime Data Center andClearinghouse indicates that drugs are used by many offenderscommitting crimes. In 1991, the following percentages of Stateprison inmates involved in violent offenses reported that theyhad used drugs at the time the offense was committed. Violent Offenses: 28% Homicide: 28% Sexual Assault: 20% Robbery: 38% Assault 23% The Facts The Drug and Crime Data Center and Clearinghouse reports thatthey have no publication with this title. The Sourcebook ofCriminal Justice Statistics of 1992 lists the breakdown of druguse during commission of violent offenses. The figures showsthat, with the exception of robbery, about 75 to 90 percent ofall the reported drug use was use of alcohol, not illegal drugs.For robbery, the figures are roughly equal. People who commit violent crimes are likely to have a lot ofproblems in their lives, including use of illegal drugs as wellas higher rates of use of alcohol and tobacco. That doesn'tnecessarily mean that one problem is causally related to another. Even if we assumed, as the DEA implies, that all of this wasdue to illegal drugs, they don't mention comparison data for thenumber of people who took whatever drug and did not commit aviolent crime. Even if we assumed the DEA is right, there is no evidence thatthe best way to control the problem is to put people in prison. DEA Statement  Data from the National Institute of Justice (US Departmentof Justice) Drug Use Forecasting (DUF) program underscore thecrimedrugs link. Of a sample of males arrested in 24 US cities in1991, the percent testing positive for at least one drug in theDUF survey ranged from 36% in Omaha to 75% in San Diego. Amongfemale arrestees, the percent testing positive for any drugranged from 45% in San Antonio to 79% in Cleveland The Facts The data of the Drug Use Forecasting program is interestingbut it does not underscore the crime-drugs link. The data aresimply measures of the number of people arrested who had drugs intheir system. There is no similar comparative data on people whowere not arrested, or did not commit crimes. It is also a long way from showing any causal relationshipbetween drugs and crime except, perhaps, for the fact that peoplewho are stupid enough to get severely drunk or stoned are proneto do stupid things. That would not make it a good idea to havedrug prohibition any more than the fact that we arrest people whoare drunk and disorderly makes it a good idea to have alcoholprohibition. DEA Statement  A May 1993 Bureau of Justice Statistics report states that"Drug use was common among inmates serving time forburglary, robbery or drug offenses. Among inmates serving asentence for burglary or robbery, about 6 in 10 inmates had useddrugs in the month before the arrest for the current offense, andabout 4 in 10 were under the influence at the time of theoffense." The Facts The number of inmates who used drugs in the month before thearrest is as irrelevant as the number who drank a beer during themonth before the arrest. It should be noted that being under the influence of drugs isa convenient excuse which seems to suit everybody involved in acriminal prosecution. The defendant can plead that he wasn'thimself because he was out of his mind on drugs and thereby playon the court's sympathies for leniency. The prosecutors can pointto another horrendous drug problem, which suits their interestsas well. DEA Statement The same study indicates that female inmates were more likelythan male inmates to have used drugs in the month before theoffense (54% versus 50%) and to have been under the influence atthe time of the offense (36% versus 31 %). The Facts How does this show that we ought to have a general program toimprison women who use drugs? DEA Statement Another finding of the study indicated that among 18-49 yearold males, those who had used alcohol, cannabis and cocaine atsome point during the past year were ten times more likely tocommit a violent act (26.1 percent versus 2.7 percent) than thosewho used none of the above. The Facts The DEA conveniently ignores the fact that alcohol has thehighest association with violence and that cannabis (hemp) hasnone. The DEA contends that, because someone had a beer up to a yearago, they are potentially violent today. There is no evidence of a causal relationship here at all.Even if there was, there is no evidence that prison would be thebest way to control drug use. DEA Statement  Mitchell S. Rosenthal, M.D., president of a major New YorkCity drug treatment center, Phoenix House, and chairman of theNew York State Advisory Council on Substance Abuse, notes thatone of the basic contentions of advocates of legalization is thatdrug users are essentially normal people. Actually, Dr. Rosenthalsaid in a speech in 1993, drugs undo the bounds that keep manyseemingly normal people on an even keel. "The treatmentcommunity does not contend that society is at risk from thebehavior of all drug abusers or even the great majority ofthem," he said. "The case for prohibition rests on thesubstantial number of abusers who cross the line from permissibleself-destruction to become 'driven' people, who are 'out ofcontrol' and put others in danger of their risk taking, violence,abuse or HIV infection." The Facts The DEA argues that drug users are not "essentiallynormal people", even while they state that at leasttwo-thirds of them are gainfully employed taxpayers. As for undoing "the bounds that keep many seeminglynormal people on an even keel" and all the other problemsmentioned, these problems are equally true of alcohol. Yet theydo not recommend that we bring back Prohibition of alcohol. Again, the DEA attempts to lump all drugs together, as if theyall had the same effects. General statements about"all" drugs are intentionally misleading. DEA Statement  The International Association of Chiefs of Police publisheda report in 1993 titled "Violent Crime in America." Itstates "Drug abuse and crime, both violent and nonviolent,are linked. National Crime Victimization surveys in 1989 and 1990revealed over 2,000,000 crimes committed by offenders under theinfluence of drugs or alcohol...this represented 36% and 34% oftotal violent crime recorded by the surveys." The Facts The important phrase here is "drugs or alcohol". Thetable below shows that alcohol's association with violent crimeis far greater than the association of all illegal drugscombined. The biggest problem is alcohol, and yet no one issuggesting that we have a war on booze. Again, the DEA attempts to lump all drugs together as if theywere all equally responsible for the problems. It isirresponsible and misleading to lump all drugs together,particularly in view of the large role that alcohol plays in thefigures. DEA Statement  Bureau of Justice Statistics surveys indicate that"25% of convicted inmates in jails, 33% of state prisoners,and 40% of youths in stateoperated facilities admit being underthe influence of an illegal drug at the time of theiroffense." (BJS, Drug and Crime Facts, 1992) The Facts One reason is that a large number of them are in jail forselling illegal drugs. Again, it is misleading to lump all drugs together as if theywere all equally responsible and to imply a causal relationship. The more complete figures, in the table below, show a somewhatdifferent picture. DEA Statement  Data from Bureau of Justice Statistics Surveys show that77.7 percent of jail inmates, 79.6 percent of State prisoners,and 82.7 percent of youth in longterm public juvenile facilitieshad used drugs the The Facts One reason is that a large number of them are in jail forillegal drug offenses. This what the DEA did not tell you. Convicted jail inmates under the influence of drugs or alcoholat the time of the current offense.                        Percent of convicted jail inmates under the    influence of:                   Most Serious             (All        Alcohol        Both        Total    Offense                Illegal)        Only                              Drugs Only                                         Violent Offenses          8.8          30.7         16.1         56.6        Homicide              5.5          49.5         13.7         68.7        Sexual Assault        3.5          21.1         21.1         45.7        Robbery              17.7          18.1         17.3         53.1        Assault               4.5          44.3          9.8         58.7        Other violent        10.0          21.8         27.3         59.2    Property Offenses        18.2          17.9         12.8         48.9    Drug Offenses            28.6          7.3          12.3         48.2    Public-Order              6.4          54.1          9.6         70.1    Offenses                                                                 From: Sourcebook on Criminal Justice Statistics, 1992, Table6.54, page 603. DEA Statement Some Effects of Illegal Drugs The Facts The DEA's table of the effects of illegal drugs is a notableexample of their failure to consider the whole picture. The tabledoes not include any information on the effects of either alcoholor tobacco for comparison, even though these drugs are clearlythe bigger problems in our society. Some of the information in the table the DEA presented is, ofcourse, patently wrong but, in the interest of brevity, we willforgo the detailed rebuttal of the information in this table. DEA Statement                     Short-Term Effects      Duration of  DEA View of Risk   Acute        of                 Drug Type      Desired        Other          Effects      Dependence         Heroin         euphoria       respiratory    3 to 6       physical - high                   pain           depression     hours        psychological -                   reduction      nausea                      high                                             drowsiness                                     Cocaine       excitement     increased      1 to 2       physical                          euphoria       blood          hours        possible                          increased      pressure                    psychological                     alertness,     increased                   high                              wakefulness    respiratory                                                                  rate                                                                         nausea                                                                       cold sweats                                                                  twitching                                                                    headache                                       Crack cocaine  same as        same as        about 5      same as cocaine                   cocaine        cocaine        minutes                                        more rapid                                                                   high than                                                                    cocaine                                                       Marijuana      euphoria       accelerated    2 to 4       physical  unknown                 relaxation     heartbeat      hours        psychological                                    impairment of               high                                             perception,                                                                  judgement,                                                                   fine motor                                                                   skills, and                                                                  memory                                         Amphetamines   euphoria       increased      2 to 4       physical                          excitement     blood          hours        possible                          increased      pressure                    psychological                     alertness,     increased                   high                              wakefulness    pulse rate                                                                   insomnia                                                                     loss of                                                                      appetite                                       LSD            illusions and  poor           8 to 12      physical  none                    hallucinations perception of  hours        psychological                                    time and                    unknown                           excitement     distance                                                      euphoria       acute                                                                        anxiety,                                                                     restlessness,                                                                sleeplessness                                                                sometimes                                                                    depression                                     The Drugs the DEA Did Not Include                                        Alcohol        euphoria       poor           2 to 4       physical - high                   excitement     perception of  hours        psychological -                   relaxation     time and                    high                                             distance                                                                     impairment of                                                                perception,                                                                  judgement,                                                                   fine motor                                                                   skills, and                                                                  memory                                                                       respiratory                                                                  depression                                                                   nausea                                                                       drowsiness                                                                   headache                                                                     death from                                                                   overdose                                       Tobacco        relaxation     nausea         1 to 2       physical - high                                  headache       hours        psychological -                                  lung cancer                 high                                             throat cancer                                                                Central                                                                      Nervous                                                                      System damage                                                                death from                                                                   overdose                                       AN1142 Sources NIDA, Heroin, NIDA capsules, August1986; DEA, Drugs of abuse, 1989, G R Gay, 'Clinicalmanagement and chronic cocaine poisoning Concepts, components andconfiguration, Annals of emergency medicine, 11(10); 562572 as cited in NIDA, Dale D Chitwood, Patterns andconsequences of cocaine use, in Coca, America: Epidemiologic and clinical perspectives, NicholasJ Kozel and Edgar H Adams, eds, NIDA research monograph 61, 1985; NIDA, James A Inciardi, Crackcocaine inMiami, in The epidemiology of cocaine u abuse, Susan Schober and Charles Schade, eds, NIDAresearch monograph 110, 1991; and NIDA; ManjL NIDA Capsules August 1986 Contents | Feedback | Search DRCNet Library | Schaffer Library | The Drug Legalization Debate WT01-B29-48IA087-000632-B023-10http://206.61.184.43:80/schaffer/ACTIVIST/claim2.htm 206.61.184.43 19970122093848 text/html 13352HTTP/1.0 200 OKDate: Wednesday, 22-Jan-97 09:38:39 GMTServer: WebSitePro/1.1f (S/N wpo-0deb)Allow-ranges: bytesContent-type: text/htmlLast-modified: Saturday, 28-Dec-96 07:27:57 GMTContent-length: 13134 Claim II: We have made significant progess in reducingdrug use. Contents | Feedback | Search DRCNet Library | Schaffer Library | The Drug Legalization Debate DEA Statement CLAIM II: WE HAVE MADE SIGNIFICANT PROGRESS IN REDUCING DRUGUSE IN THIS COUNTRY. NOW IS NOT THE TIME TO ABANDON OUR EFFORTS. The Facts No one has suggested that we should "abandon" ourefforts to reduce the problems associated with drugs. What wehave suggested is that we should make those efforts morecost-effective. Prison is not cost effective. Even if we accepted this claim as true, there is no evidencethat the progress in reducing drug use was at all due to thenumber of people put in prison. In fact, the evidence clearlyshows that the number of people put in prison could not have hadenough of an impact on the average white, middle-class drug userto make any difference at all in drug use. If there was anyactual reduction in drug use (and not just in"reported" drug use) then it seems clear that it musthave been due to other factors. DEA Statement Legalization advocates claim that the fight against drugs hasnot been won, and is, in fact, unwinnable. They frequently statethat people still take drugs, drugs are widely available, andthat the changing that fact is a lost cause. Legalization is thealternative. The Facts It should be clear to anyone that the war on drugs has notbeen won. There is no credible evidence anywhere which wouldsuggest that the war could be won by the current methods, and theDEA has presented no such evidence here. The alternative is tolook for a better approach, whatever we might choose to call it. DEA Statement The conference participants disagreed with the notion that weshould wave the white flag of surrender because people still takedrugs. The experts contended that there have been many positivedevelopments over the past fifteen years in reducing drug use,and stated that the good news is often given short shrift. Ourdrug problem did not happen overnight, and it will take a numberof years to eliminate the problem. Legalization is not analternative to combating the drug problem. The Facts As happened with Vietnam, there comes a point when mustrecognize that we never should have taken this course in thefirst place. It is not surrender to end the war on drugs, it is arecognition of what we should have recognized years ago. DEA Statement The United States faces a number of problems today which, likeour drug problem, are not susceptible to easy solutions,including illegal immigration, declining education quality andpublic health problems. Should we just post signs on our bordersthat we've given up and invite a tide of immigrants in? Should wedeclare that our education system has been a failure and givechildren a permanent vacation from school? Should we throw up ourhands in frustration about AIDS and stop searching for a cure? Ofcourse not. Americans are a people committed to solving problems,not running from them. Why should our commitment to stoppingdrugs be any different from our approach to other nationalinterests? The Facts There is no doubt that there are many difficult problems. Ofall the problems mentioned, the DEA does not propose to solve anyof them by throwing people in prison. The final question here asks for a commitment to"stopping drugs" which, the DEA itself admits, isclearly impossible. DEA Statement Furthermore, ask proponents of legalization just what they areproposing be legalized. Just marijuana? Marijuana and heroin? Alldrugs? And for what age group? Will children be able to buy drugs? Will prescriptions be necessary? And what will they tolerate as the price of legalization? Apermanent underclass of drug users? Will a 10% increase in the number of traffic fatalities beaccepted? What about 50%? Would they be relieved to know that their child care providerhad been smoking legally-purchased marijuana? How manyborderbabies is too many? The Facts The question really is: for what drugs are we willing to throwpeople in prison? Can children buy drugs now? Obviously, they can because onlythe outlaws control distribution of drugs. The questions try toinsinuate that people in favor of reform want to distribute drugsto children. Nothing could be further from the truth. Thequestion also conveniently ignores the fact that the number onedrug killer, tobacco, is still freely available to childrenthrough vending machines. There are any number of possible policies, besides the currentone. The question of whether prescriptions would be necessaryshould not stop us from recognizing that prison is unnecessary. We already have a permanent underclass of drug users. There is no evidence that the number of traffic fatalitieswould change. About half of all traffic fatalities are now causedby alcohol, but the DEA does not propose that arresting all thepeople who drink beer or wine is a sensible solution. The laws and social rules for things such as caring forchildren would not change regardless of the legal status of anydrug. DEA Statement Some facts which help to confirm the observations of the forumparticipants may be used in debates:  The 1993 National Household Survey on Drug Abuse, releasedin July, 1994, demonstrates unequivocally that drug use declinedsignificantly between 1979 and 1993. The Facts The same figures show it is going back up again, particularlyamong children. Those figures show large increases in the lastyear alone -- and the laws have not changed. It must also be recognized that the data gathering methods ofthis survey are open to question. The survey is conducted bycalling people at random on the telephone and asking if anyone inthe household has committed a felony (used drugs) in the past fewweeks or months. Instead of an accurate measure of the amount ofdrug use, it may just be a measure of the number of people whoare stupid enough to answer such a question from a stranger onthe phone. DEA Statement  In 1993, an estimated 11.7 million Americans were currentillicit drug users, meaning they had used an illicit drug in themonth prior to the interview. This represents no change from 1992when the estimate was 11.4 million. The number of illicit drugusers had been declining since its peak in 1979 at 24 million. The Facts The DEA needs to take elementary math again. The figures shownrepresent a rise of 300,000 drug users. The figures show one thing above all else-- there is no way wecan throw that many people in prison, and our jails are fullalready. How many of these millions does the DEA propose that wethrow in prison? The DEA's own figures also clearly show that all of thesupposed decline in drug use has been among casual drug users.Their own figures show that this policy has had no effect on thenumber of hard core drug users, where the problem really lies. DEA Statement  The number of current cocaine users remained at 1.3 millionusers in 1993, the same as 1992. This is down from a peak of 5.3million in 1985. The Facts Does the DEA suggest that we throw all 1.3 million cocaineusers in prison? Since 1979, rates of current illicit drug use have dropped for12 17 year olds, 1825 year olds, and 2634 year olds, but not forthe age group 35 and older. The latest figures show that drug use among these groups hasrisen dramatically again, and yet the laws are just as harsh asthey always were. DEA Statement  Teenage drug consumption, despite recent upturns, is downin the long term. There is an obvious concern in the UnitedStates about the consumption of drugs by teenagers--the adults oftomorrow. Recent upturns demonstrate to us the clear need tocontinue doing what we've done for more than the past decade:combine law enforcement, education, and international efforts toaddress all aspects of the drug situation. The Monitoring theFuture Study, conducted annually by University of Michiganresearch scientists for the US Department of Health and HumanServices, has been tracking the drug consumption of American highschool seniors since the 1970s. In the past few years, the studyhas been broadened to embrace drug use by 10th grade and 8thgrade students as well. The Facts This is obviously wrong. See the latest figures cited above. DEA Statement When the first Monitoring the Future Study was published, 27.1% of the members of the Class of 1975 (eighth and 10th graderswere not surveyed then) reported having used marijuana or hashishin the previous month. The figure for the Class of 1980 was33.7%--which puts that 2.4% figure 13 years later intoperspective. The Facts If the study is looking at the drug use of eighth to tenthgraders then it would seem obvious enough that the campaign toput people in prison would not have had much real effect on thisgroup. This is evidence that any drop in use was not due totougher criminal enforcement. Source 1993 National Household Survey Contents | Feedback | Search DRCNet Library | Schaffer Library | The Drug Legalization Debate WT01-B29-49IA087-000632-B023-41http://206.61.184.43:80/schaffer/ACTIVIST/claim3.htm 206.61.184.43 19970122093856 text/html 23062HTTP/1.0 200 OKDate: Wednesday, 22-Jan-97 09:38:48 GMTServer: WebSitePro/1.1f (S/N wpo-0deb)Allow-ranges: bytesContent-type: text/htmlLast-modified: Saturday, 28-Dec-96 07:27:51 GMTContent-length: 22844 Claim III: Legalization of drugs will lead to increaseduse and addiction Contents | Feedback | Search DRCNet Library | Schaffer Library | The Drug Legalization Debate CLAIM III: LEGALIZATION OF DRUGS WILL LEAD TO INCREASED USEAND INCREASED ADDICTION LEVELS DEA Statement A cornerstone of the legalization proponents' position is theclaim that making illegal drugs legal would not cause more ofthese substances to be consumed, nor would addiction increase.They claim that many people can use drugs in moderation and thatmany would choose not to use drugs, just as many forego alcoholand tobacco now. The Facts Every major study of drug policy agreed that there is noevidence that drug use would increase with more sensiblepolicies. In fact, they found that drug use would probablydecrease with more sensible policies. They also found that, even if drug use did increase,decriminalization would still be a better approach simply becauseof all the harm caused by the current policy. See the list of theBiggest Studies of Drug Policy, also on these web pages. DEA Statement Participants in the AntiLegalization Forum felt strongly thatwhen drugs are more widely available--as they certainly would beif they were legalized--rates of use and addiction wouldincrease. Legalizing drugs sends a message that drug use (like tobaccoand alcohol) is acceptable, and encourages drug use among peoplewho currently do not use drugs. When the social taboos about premarital sex were removed, thenation's illegitimate birthrate soared. And we are paying dearlyfor it. The Facts All of the arguments here depend upon what you mean by"legalized". No, it does not send any such message, and our society'scampaigns against tobacco are perhaps the best example. And ofcourse, the real question is: How many millions of people do wehave to put in prison to show the right amount of disapproval? This is a "TV-talk-show" argument, which blithelyignores the fact that the illegitimate birth rate is due toproblems much more complex than the taboo on premarital sex. Does this mean that, as a solution, the DEA is proposing thatwe throw people in prison for premarital sex? There are lots ofways to discourage something without throwing people in prison. DEA Statement Look to our history. For years, the United States legallyrefined morphine from opium, and hailed it as a miracle drug.Many soldiers on both sides of the Civil War who were givenmorphine for their wounds became addicted to it. Are we ready formore morphine addicts? Crack addicts? Heroin addicts? The Facts Morphine was first refined when many battle wounds weretreated with simple amputation without anesthesia and a doctorwas considered a good surgeon if he could do the amputationquickly to minimize the pain. In the medical context of that typeof "surgery" and the fact that there were noantibiotics to control infections, morphine was a real miracledrug because it relieved a great deal of suffering. The figures differ on the number of Civil War veterans whobecame addicts, partly because of the difficulty in defining whatan addict is. There was widespread use of these drugs simplybecause there were no regulations at all during this period andthey were included in many common patent medicines, includingremedies for baby colic. There is no evidence that the Civil Warveterans who became addicts were any more of a problem to societythan a modern tobacco addict. The 1905 Pure Food and Drug Act wasthe first law to require manufacturers to state the contents oftheir mixtures on the label. This was clearly a good law becauseit helped consumers make an informed decision. Drug use declinedsteadily between the time the law was passed and 1914, when theHarrison Narcotics Act was passed. See any of the major studieslisted elsewhere in this book for a more complete history of thesubject. DEA Statement Early in the 20th Century, drugs were plentiful, cheap, andlegal in the United States. Some could even be bought from theSears Catalogue. The Facts This is true. DEA Statement But Americans realized that these legalized drugs were harmfulto individuals and society, and drug laws were written. The Facts This is not true. The reasons were more complex than this andwere largely based on racism and ignorance. No evidence waspresented to Congress to show that prohibition was eithernecessary or desirable. No evidence was even presented to showthat these drugs were even medically harmful. In the case ofcocaine and the opiates, it is doubtful if Congress realized itwas passing what would be regarded as a general prohibition onthese drugs because it was phrased as a tax act. In the case ofmarijuana (hemp) it is clear that most members of Congress didnot realize that they were passing a law to prohibit the mostcommon crop in America. These laws were a hoax from the verybegining. DEA Statement CocaCola took the coca out of its popular soft drink andsubstituted caffeine. The Facts This is true. The original name of Coca-Cola was "FrenchWine of Coca -- Invigorating Tonic". It is also true thatthere was a campaign to outlaw caffeine for the same reasons thatcocaine was outlawed. That campaign died when it was realizedthat caffeine was contained in too many common foods, such ascoffee, tea, and chocolate. DEA Statement Legalization proponents would have them put it back, and makeopium as available as chewing gum. The Facts This is a flat-out lie and a cheap, deliberate attempt todistort the arguments. It shows that the DEA has set up"legalization" as a straw man, defined in their ownextreme terms. We do not agree with this extreme policy, or theDEA's extreme definition of "legalization". DEA Statement More recently Alaska decriminalized the personal use of smallamounts of marijuana in the home. The experiment did not turn outthe way legalization proponents had predicted. Although the legalage for using marijuana was 19, adolescents as young as 12 yearsold were using the drug. Alaskans eventually came to therealization that decriminalization did not work, and voted tooverturn the law. The Facts Twelve-year-olds using marijuana (hemp) is nothing new. Iobserved pre-teens using marijuana (hemp) more than twenty-fiveyears ago, and it appeared to me that it was fairly common amongchildren of that age. Decriminalization in any area has neverbeen shown to have any real effect on the use patterns ofmarijuana. The law was overturned because of a massive campaign headed bythen-Drug-Czar William Bennett as one of the cornerstones of hiscampaigns against the evils of drugs. Bennett, at the time, was atobacco addict. DEA Statement The experts believe that legalization of drugs would decreasethe perception of risk currently associated with drug use. The Facts Let's assume that the DEA experts are right. How many millionsof people do we have to put in prison to create the properperception of risk? DEA Statement The group strongly endorsed the notion that the Governmentshould help protect people from substances and activities thatare harmful to themselves the community and society at large. The Facts So why aren't we throwing people in prison for alcohol ortobacco? DEA Statement Some facts which help to confirm the observations of the forumparticipants may be used in debates:  Dr. Herbert Kleber, prominent psychiatrist from YaleUniversity, former Demand Reduction Deputy Director at the Officeof National Drug Control Policy and currently with the Center onAddiction and Substance Abuse at Columbia University, states in a1994 article in the New England Journal of Medicine that clinicaldata support the premise that drug use would increase withlegalization. The Facts Dr. Kleber does not define what he means by"legalization." There are any number of differentpolicies which could be defined as "legalization," eachof which could have widely varying effects. Therefore, all therest of his statements on the subject are essentiallymeaningless. Even if he did define what he means by"legalization", it is not the only option we have fordrug policy. DEA Statement He says: "There are over 50 million nicotine addicts, 18million alcoholics or problem drinkers, and fewer than 2 millioncocaine addicts in the United States. Cocaine is a much moreaddictive drug than alcohol. If cocaine were legally available,as alcohol and nicotine are now, the number of cocaine abuserswould probably rise to a point somewhere between the number ofusers of the other two agents, perhaps 20 to 25 million...thenumber of compulsive users might be nine times higher...than thecurrent number. When drugs have been widely available--as...cocaine was at the turn of the century--both use and addictionhave risen " The Facts See the table below for the latest ratings on the relativeaddictive qualities of drugs. Dr. Kleber does not suggest that the most productive approachto the 50 million nicotine addicts, or the 18 million alcoholics,is to put alcohol or tobacco users in prison. Why not? Drug use was widespread at the turn of the century. Thisstatement ignores the fact that drug use and addiction fellsteadily after manufacturers were required to list theingredients in their products. DEA Statement  England's experience with widely available heroin showsthat use and addiction increase. Great Britain allowed doctors toprescribe heroin to addicts. There was an explosion of heroin useand by the mid-1980s known addiction rates were increasing byabout 30% a year. According to the Lancet, the wellrespectedmedical journal (Lancet, January 9, 1982), 2,657 heroin addictswere registered in 1970 compared with 5,107 in 1980. The Facts By the mid-1980's Great Britain was fully into the Americanstyle drug war so it is apparent that, if there is any connectionbetween the drug war and addiction, the drug war must have madethe problem worse. It is also worthwhile to note that the figures show that thenumber of heroin addicts doubled in ten years, but the numberswere still trivial in comparison to the number of addicts in anycomparable segment of the United States. DEA Statement This was a program in which heroin users needed a doctor'sauthorization to get their drug. What would happen if anyonewanting to try heroin could simply buy it at the governmentstore? The Facts The vast majority of them would throw up after using it andfind they really didn't like the effects. DEA Statement  Alaska tried the legalization experiment and abandoned it.Legalization was given a lengthy try closer to home when theAlaska Supreme Court ruled in 1975 that the state could notinterfere with a person's possession of marijuana in his home forpersonal use. Enforcement was permitted only when the quantitypossessed exceeded four ounces--this in a state that, because ofthe long, sunny days of its brief growing season, produces extrapotent marijuana. The Facts Alaska's ruling applied to personal possession of hemp(marijuana) and use within the confines of one's own home. Thisis a far cry from the "legalization" the DEA talksabout elsewhere. The court decided that the right of privacyprotected the citizen's rights within their own home. All states are capable of producing extra potent marijuana.Alaska is nothing special in this regard. DEA Statement The court's ruling was interpreted by many Alaskans as asignal to light up, and so they did, especially the young ones,even though the ruling was limited to persons 19 and over.According to a 1988 University of Alaska study, the state's 12 to17yearolds used marijuana at more than twice the national averagefor their age group. The Facts It is ludicrous to state that an Alaskan Supreme Courtdecision would be interpreted by anyone as a "signal tolight up." It is highly doubtful if teenagers govern theirbehavior based on Supreme Court decisions. Anyone who wants touse a drug is going to do so regardless of what the Supreme Courtmay have said about it. DEA Statement "The frequency with which marijuana was used within thecurrent sample," the report on the study said,"suggests that it is not an experimental event for manystudents, but that it seems to have become well incorporated intothe lifestyle of many adolescents." The Facts And the DEA suggests that the best way to improve thesestudents lives is to hunt them down and put them in jail to curethem of their lifestyle. DEA Statement Although they historically cling to their personal liberties,Alaska residents voted in 1990 to recriminalize possession ofmarijuana, demonstrating their belief that increased use was toohigh a price to pay for increased personal liberties. The Facts A referendum was passed in 1990 by Alaska voters whichattempted to overturn the Alaska Supreme Court decision. Thereferendum was the result of an intensive, well-funded campaignby then-Drug Czar William Bennett and other drug wars to remove amajor embarrassment to their cause -- the fact that Alaska hadprotected private use of marijuana and Alaskan society had notfallen apart as a result. The courts later threw out the votebecause the issue had been decided on a matter of basicconstitutional protections of privacy, which cannot be voted awayunder Alaskan law. DEA Statement  Will the public support an aggressive marketing approach?While "government drugs" could conceivably be pricedlow enough, perhaps by having taxpayers subsidize them todiscourage a black market, the combination of low price and readyavailability would bring more consumption, more addiction. Wewould have won the battle and lost the war. If they see this asthe probable outcome, the American people can hardly be expectedto endorse a "sell at all costs" policy. The Facts Why should there be an aggressive marketing approach? DEA Statement  Robert L. DuPont, M.D., former director of the NationalInstitute on Drug Abuse, considered the impact legalization wouldhave on use and addiction rates in a paper published in 1994. "Would legalization increase the number of drug users andthe social harm produced by the use of drugs?" Dr. DuPontasked. "The answer to those two questions is simply, 'Yes,it would."' The Facts The answer to this question is simply: What"legalization" are you talking about? Until you definewhat you mean by "legalization" you can't define whatthe likely effect on the number of drug users and social harm. DEA Statement The current global experience with alcohol and tobacco revealsthe downside of legalization clearly, Dr. DuPont said. The Facts This is certainly true, keeping in mind the fact these drugsare only legal under certain conditions. Despite this, Dr. DuPontis not suggesting that we outlaw alcohol and tobacco as the mostappropriate response. Why not? DEA Statement "Legalization of any drugs leads to large increases inthe use of the legalized drugs," he said. "Because mostof the social costs of drugs are not the costs of prohibition butthe costs created by the drug use itself (a point proved beyonddispute by the dismal global experience with alcohol andtobacco), legalization raises the net social costs of drug use. The Facts Even if we assumed this to be true, every major study of drugpolicy has said that the cost of the current policy far outweighsthe other potential costs. DEA Statement "Legalization is an old, siren call which promises toreduce the high costs of drug use, but which abundant evidenceshows would inevitably raise the costs society pays for drug use,not reduce them. We do not need new experiments to make Contents | Feedback | Search DRCNet Library | Schaffer Library | The Drug Legalization Debate WT01-B29-50IA087-000632-B023-70http://206.61.184.43:80/schaffer/ACTIVIST/claim4.htm 206.61.184.43 19970122093911 text/html 15827HTTP/1.0 200 OKDate: Wednesday, 22-Jan-97 09:38:57 GMTServer: WebSitePro/1.1f (S/N wpo-0deb)Allow-ranges: bytesContent-type: text/htmlLast-modified: Saturday, 28-Dec-96 07:27:44 GMTContent-length: 15609 Claim IV: Any revenues generated by taxing legalized drugswould quickly evaporate Contents | Feedback | Search DRCNet Library | Schaffer Library | The Drug Legalization Debate DEA Statement CLAIM IV: ANY REVENUES GENERATED BY TAXING LEGALIZED DRUGSWOULD QUICKLY EVAPORATE IN LIGHT OF THE INCREASED SOCIAL COSTSASSOCIATED WITH LEGALIZING DRUGS. DEA Statement A favorite argument in support of legalization is thateducation, health care, road building and a wide array of otherworthwhile causes would benefit from the taxes that could beraised by legalizing drugs and then taxing them. The Facts On the whole, it certainly seems better than sending all thatmoney to Colombia. DEA Statement The conference participants were extremely skeptical about theclaim of a large tax windfall, and challenged advocates to provethat the amounts of revenue potentially generated by legalizationwould counterbalance the increased social costs that would resultfrom making drugs legal. When asked for specifics, they have noanswers. Are they taking into account the erosion of the tax base asmore and more citizens are unable to work because of drugaddiction? Add to this loss the cost of health and welfarebenefits for the unemployed. The Facts There is no tax windfall, large or small, right now. The onlyrevenue generated is the revenue generated from money andproperty seizures, which is fraught with its own problems. The DEA has asked the American taxpayers to support anopen-ended program of building more prisons. When they are askedfor specifics, such as how many prisons they propose to build,they have no answers. Does the DEA take into account the erosion of the tax bases bythe fact that -- by their own estimates -- two-thirds of thepeople they propose to throw in prison are gainfully employedtaxpayers? Does the DEA take into account the fact that, oncethese people have a prison record, they may be permanentlyunemployed because no one wants to hire an ex-convict? Puttingpeople in prison doesn't do anything to reduce unemploymentproblems, except for prison guards. DEA Statement Health and societal costs of drug legalization would increase.The panel predicted that drug treatment costs, hospitalizationfor longterm drug related disease, and treatment of theconsequences of family violence would further burden our alreadystrapped health care system. The Facts Every major study of drug policy disagreed with this point.See the list elsewhere on these pages. DEA Statement There is also real reason to believe that liability suitswould be brought against manufacturers and distributors of drugsas damages to individuals increased, thereby increasing the costof products. The Facts As opposed to the current situation, where there is no one tobring a liability suit against. Liability suits have not yet put the alcohol and tobaccoindustries out of business, or made their products too expensive.If this was a real concern, alcohol and tobacco would still bethe major concerns. DEA Statement Ask legalization proponents if the alleged profits from druglegalization would be enough to pay for the increased fetaldefects, loss of workforce productivity, increased trafficfatalities and industrial accidents, increased domestic violenceand the myriad other problems that would not only be high incomeitems, but extremely expensive in terms of social decay. How muchare they willing to pay? The Facts The number of fetal defects caused by alcohol are far greaterthan the number for illegal drugs so this argument is a redherring. If the DEA was really concerned about fetal defects,they would concentrate on alcohol first. The DEA acts like these problems are not here already, andthat the best method of preventing them is to throw people inprison. In every case, these problems are already here, andthrowing people in prison is not the best approach to theproblem. DEA Statement Some facts which help to confirm the observations of the forumparticipants may be used in debates: Dr. William Olson, former Deputy Assistant Secretary of Statefor International Narcotics Matters, outlines the magnitude ofthe social costs borne now by U.S. taxpayers because of drugs. Inhis 1994 essay, "Drug Legalization: Getting to No," heprovides the following:  2560 percent of the homeless are addicts, whosehomelessness is in large part the result of addiction and theirinability to manage money or make rational, reasonable decisions.They are increasingly supported at public expense. The Facts This is the result of the current policy which is, in itself,a good argument against what we are doing. DEA Statement  7580 percent of the 1.2 1.5 million teenage runaways aresubstance abusers, and not because prohibition made them usedrugs or run away. The Facts No, and prohibition didn't keep them from using drugs either.Runaways are usually children who have severe problems at homewhich cause them to engage in all sorts of deviant behavior. Thedrug laws do not do anything to address the underlying problem.The law only makes the runaways' problems worse if they arecaught using drugs. DEA Statement  3050 percent of mental patients are chemical abusers, 5060percent of these crack and cocaine. They are largely on publicsupport. The Facts The only thing this would show is that people with severemental problems are likely to try to self-medicate themselves. Itdoes not show any causal connection between drug use andinsanity, except perhaps that insanity causes greater drug use.It says even less about what would a sensible public policy foraddressing the problem. DEA Statement  As many as 11 percent of young mothers use drugs duringpregnancy. The Facts This is what is happening under the current system. A moresensible approach might reduce the number. DEA Statement  2.5 percent of all live births, some 100,000 babies areborn addicted to cocaine. They have lifelong learningdisabilities and emotional problems. The Facts There is no support for this claim at all and the DEA knowsit. The DEA is lying. DEA Statement  $50 billion is devoted annually to dealing with the healthcare costs of drug addiction and its collateral costs. These willnot disappear with legalization. The Facts Those costs haven't disappeared with prohibition either. Infact, every major study of the subject says that prohibition onlymakes those costs greater. DEA Statement  There are approximately 500,000 heroin and 2 million othersubstance abusers. Their care is increasingly a demand onsociety. The Facts According to the DEA's own figures, shown above, the currentpolicies have had no effect on this problem at all. DEA Statement  There is no way to predict how much revenue would begenerated by the United States Government taxing legalized drugs.Such a scenario depends entirely upon the parameters oflegalization, and what the policy means vis a vis sources ofdrugs. If U.S. farmers were given subsidies to produce drugs (asthey are given subsidies for tobacco) the U.S. taxpayers would beresponsible for paying for these subsidies. If foreign sources ofdrugs (opium or coca) were allowed to supply the raw material forthese products, an elaborate system of tariffs and tradepreferences would need to be established. The Facts It is true that there is no way to predict tax revenues untilone makes some assumptions about "legalization". One ofthe reasons is that the DEA doesn't have a clue how big themarket for drugs really is. This should not stop us fromrecognizing that prison is a net revenue loser. These are curious arguments. They bring up the question ofwhether we should have subsidies for tobacco in the first place,especially in view of the fact that it kills 100 times as manypeople as all the illegal drugs combined. Why does our governmentgive subsidies to tobacco farmers while it throws marijuana(hemp) farmers in prison? Our drug laws plainly make no sense atall. Trade and tariffs would be handled as they would for any othercommodity and the fact that tariffs might be complicated is not agood argument for throwing American citizens in prison. We also have to ask, who controls the trade and tariffs now?And what are the trade and tariff rules now? DEA Statement  Taxes would likely push the cost of the product up. Taxingthe drugs would make them more expensive at the checkout counter.The drug cartels do not provide a share of their receipts totheir respective governments. They are all business. Anyone goinginto competition with them, including the U.S. Government, wouldhave to be all business too, prepared to cut prices, ifnecessary, to stay in the game. The Facts Prohibition pushes the cost of the product up. The maindifference would be that the revenues would not be used to fundother crime. The same arguments were equally true of alcohol during alcoholProhibition. DEA Statement  Legalized gambling has not put illegal gambling out ofbusiness. In fact, legalized gambling has produced a whole newgroup of people who cannot control their need to gamble. Manystates have gone into the gambling business to raise funds forpublic purposes, with some success, although as morejurisdictions get into it the profits decline. Meanwhile, bookiesply their trade as they always have. The reason is the payoffthey offer is better than the legal gambling schemes. For everymillion dollars wagered, that is, they return a higher percentageto the winners. Again, it' s a matter of overhead. The bookiesare not trying to build schools, so they don't have to earmark apercentage of the profits for such endeavors. So long as that isso, they will always have a market that is loyal to them. Thesame situation could logically occur if drugs were legal. The Facts And prohibition has not put the drug dealers out of business,it has only made them richer. In places where gambling is legal, illegal bookies do not havehigher payoffs than the legal gambling schemes, except in thecase of state lotteries which have notoriously poor payoffpercentages. No one contends that any scheme will entirely eliminate theblack market in drugs, and the current policy is the bestexample. However, a better policy could greatly reduce many ofthe problems associated with the black market, as happened withthe repeal of alcohol Prohibition. Contents | Feedback | Search DRCNet Library | Schaffer Library | The Drug Legalization Debate WT01-B29-51IA087-000632-B023-101http://206.61.184.43:80/schaffer/ACTIVIST/claim5.htm 206.61.184.43 19970122093920 text/html 12457HTTP/1.0 200 OKDate: Wednesday, 22-Jan-97 09:39:12 GMTServer: WebSitePro/1.1f (S/N wpo-0deb)Allow-ranges: bytesContent-type: text/htmlLast-modified: Saturday, 28-Dec-96 07:27:39 GMTContent-length: 12239 Claim V: There are no compelling reasons to prescribemarijuana or heroin Contents | Feedback | Search DRCNet Library | Schaffer Library | The Drug Legalization Debate DEA Statement CLAIM V: THERE ARE NO COMPELLING MEDICAL REASONS TO PRESCRIBEMARIJUANA OR HEROIN TO SICK PEOPLE. The Facts It is quite easy to refute this argument for both drugs. Medically speaking, heroin is simply a stronger form ofmorphine. Therefore, if there is a legitimate medical use formorphine, then there is a legitimate medical use for heroin.Heroin was once used medically in a manner similar to morphineand was even used for pain relief during childbirth. Doctorsstate that heroin is a good drug for medical use because it issafe, powerful, and short acting. Recent research indicates thatpain-killers can be important healing agents after patientsundergo major surgery, because these drugs reduce the stress onthe central nervous system. In some cases, the amount of timerequired to heal can be cut in half. Some research shows that thebest doses of morphine are perhaps ten times what they wereconsidered to be just a decade ago. In the case of marijuana (hemp), there is already an approvedprescription drug, Marinol, which is derived from the primaryactive ingredient in marijuana and used for the conditions forwhich marijuana (hemp) is recommended. Marijuana (hemp) itselfwould not be approved as a prescription drug because of FDA ruleswhich state that a medicine must consist of only the activeingredients and a filler. Therefore, the rules themselvesprohibit the approval of any natural substances such as a plant,even though the active ingredients in the plant and theprescription drug are precisely the same. The question then becomes, why should a sick person pay sixtydollars a pill when they can grow the same medicine in their ownbackyard for free? Some patients report that the homegrown version of themedicine is far superior to the prescription version for a coupleof reasons. One reason is that marijuana (hemp) is often used totreat nausea and it is often hard to keep pills in their stomachwhen they have nausea. Some of them have complained that it isawfully depressing to vomit up a sixty dollar pill. Therefore, itis better if the medicine is smoked because it bypasses thestomach and gets the medicine into the body much more quickly.Another reason that some sick people prefer marijuana (hemp) overMarinol is that Marinol makes them "higher than akite", and they don't want to be high, they just want theirmedical symptoms relieved. By smoking marijuana (hemp), they canlimit the amount of "high" they get. Marijuana (hemp) has traditionally been used in medicines forthousands of years. Prior to 1937, it was the most commonagricultural crop in America and was used for literally thousandsof purposes, including rope, cloth, paper, fuel, and medicine. Itwas prescribed for a wide variety of ailments and was included inup to two-thirds of all over the counter preparations. Prior to1937, cannabis (hemp) was completely unregulated and it wouldhave been impossible to regulate cannabis (hemp) because it was amajor agricultural crop grown nearly everywhere. Cannabis (hemp)derivatives were included in a wide variety of items consumed bythe general public. Despite this widespread, unregulatedconsumption, there were no reported problems. The AmericanMedical Association was opposed to the marijuana (hemp) laws in1937 for these reasons. The promoters of these laws openly liedabout the AMA's attitude toward the law in order to get itpassed. DEA Statement It is often suggested that, even if currently controlledsubstances are not made available to the general public, some ofthem, particularly marijuana and heroin, could be used to relievesuffering. Participants in the AntiLegalization Forum acknowledged thatarguments urging the medical use of marijuana are often used asan entree into the legalization debate. Medical use arguments cangarner public support because they seem harmless enough to theuninformed audience. The experts agreed that these issues areperipheral to the real issue. The Facts The DEA has no business making decisions or statements aboutthe proper medical use of anything. The fact that they do is onlyone more example of what is wrong with our current drug policy. There should be no argument at all that it is up to themedical profession and its patients to define what is, or is not,a proper medical treatment. The police do not have the requiredprofessional knowledge to determine proper medical uses, they donot know what difficulties individual patients may face in theirtreatment or what benefits patients might receive, and they careeven less. It is absurd to pretend that complex medical decisionscan be made for every patient in the United States by anorganization such as the DEA. The problem goes beyond the illegal drugs such as marijuanaand heroin. The problem extends to pain killers of all types ingeneral. The severity of this problem was seen in the recent caseof Florida versus Martinez. Mr. Martinez was a lay AIDS counselor who ran a drug buyersclub for AIDS patients. A drug buyers club purchases medicaldrugs which are available in other countries but not in theUnited States and distributes them to sick people here. Mr.Martinez was charged with distributing morphine without medicaltraining or a license. Mr. Martinez did not deny the fact that he distributedmorphine to people and that he was in violation of the drug laws.His only defense was that his actions were a medical necessity,because of the barbaric policies of the DEA against people whowere in pain. The defense brought forth experts who testified howthe DEA had prosecuted and imprisoned doctors for prescribingTylenol 3 -- Tylenol with codeine -- a drug which is not even aprescription drug except in the United States and South Africa,and the US is the only control in the world which has ever sent adoctor to prison for prescribing it. They testified about AIDSpatients who suffer from a nerve degeneration all over their bodywhich makes them scream in pain every time they are even touched.For many of them, a simple bath can be painful beyond belief, andyet they cannot get pain medication because their doctors areoften afraid to prescribe it because they fear what the DEA coulddo to them. After the jury heard the evidence on the government's drugpolicy, they voted unanimously for acquittal. This trial wasshown on Court TV and has been repeated many times because it isone of the most interesting trials they have ever shown. DEA Statement The medical pros and cons of prescribing marijuana and herointo sick people are best debated by medical professionals. Itshould be kept in mind, however, that marijuana has been rejectedas medicine by the American Medical Society, the AmericanGlaucoma Society, the American Academy of Ophthalmology, theInternational Federation of Multiple Sclerosis Societies, and theAmerican Cancer Society. HHS report Not one American health association accepts marijuana asmedicine. Statements issued by these organizations expressconcern over the harmful effects of the drugs and over the lackof solid research demonstrating that they might do more good thanharm. The International Federation of Multiple Sclerosis Societies,for instance, said in a statement issued by its TherapeuticClaims Committee in 1992: "Further studies are required todetermine whether marijuana has a clinically useful effect onmultiple sclerosis. In view of the possible toxic effects oflongterm use, its use cannot be recommended. In the opinion ofthe committee, there appears to be no generally acceptedscientific basis for use of this therapy. It has never beentested in a properly controlled trial. Longterm use may beassociated with significant serious side effects." Some facts which help to confirm the observations of the forumparticipants may be used in debates:  Under the federal statute known as the ControlledSubstances Act, regulated drugs are divided into categories knownas schedules. In Schedule I, for instance, are drugs with a highpotential for abuse and no currently accepted medical use intreatment in the United States. At the other end of the spectrumis Schedule V, which is for drugs that have a low potential forabuse and have a currently accepted medical use in treatment inthe United States. The Act provides a mechanism for substances tobe controlled (added to a schedule), decontrolled (removed fromcontrol), or rescheduled (transferred from one schedule toanother). Heroin and marijuana are in Schedule I; cocaine, which issometimes used as a local anesthetic, is in Schedule II. Much ofthe debate about medical uses for currently illegal drugsconcerns substituting heroin for morphine and supplying marijuanato AIDS and glaucoma patients or using it to treat side effectsof chemotherapy.  A petition to put marijuana in a less restrictive scheduleof the CSA was rejected by then DEA Administrator John C. Lawn,after public hearings, on December 29, 1989. The United StatesCourt of Appeals ordered further proceedings, however, to clearup what it felt were some ambiguities in the record.Administrator Robert C. Bonner, who succeeded Lawn, complied andissued a new ruling on March 26, 1992. "By any modernscientific standard, marijuana is no medicine, " Bonnersaid. The three judge appeals court upheld the ruling unanimouslyon February 18, 1994. "Our review of the record convinces usthat the Administrator's findings are supported by substantialevidence," the court said, noting the "testimony ofnumerous experts that marijuana' s medicinal value has never beenproven in sound scientific studies." Contents | Feedback | Search DRCNet Library | Schaffer Library | The Drug Legalization Debate WT01-B29-52IA087-000632-B023-124http://206.61.184.43:80/schaffer/ACTIVIST/claim6.htm 206.61.184.43 19970122093928 text/html 11738HTTP/1.0 200 OKDate: Wednesday, 22-Jan-97 09:39:20 GMTServer: WebSitePro/1.1f (S/N wpo-0deb)Allow-ranges: bytesContent-type: text/htmlLast-modified: Saturday, 28-Dec-96 07:27:34 GMTContent-length: 11520 Claim VI: Legalization and decriminalization of drugs havebeen a dismal failure Contents | Feedback | Search DRCNet Library | Schaffer Library | The Drug Legalization Debate CLAIM VI: LEGALIZATION AND DECRIMINALIZATION OF DRUGS HAVEBEEN A DISMAL FAILURE IN OTHER NATIONS. DEA Statement The Facts The experiences of a number of foreign countries includingGreat Britain, the Netherlands and Switzerland are often cited todemonstrate that other nations have successfully controlled druguse by offering access and areas where drug takers can obtain anduse drugs. Recently, an MTV documentary on the drug issuehighlighted coffeehouses in Amsterdam as a model for controlled,successful environment in which young Europeans can enjoymarijuana. There was also a 60 Minutes segment on the drug clinics inLiverpool, England, a special on the Arts & EntertainmentChannel, and a special on ABC which explored the situation inEurope. Legalization proponents cannot find encouragement in the factthat when drugs were once legal, cheap and available in theUnited States, the impact on society was such that laws wereenacted to make drugs illegal. They ignore our own history andpoint to Great Britain, the Netherlands and Switzerland as freeand open societies where drug use is allowed with no adverseeffects. The Quantico experts believed it is important to shedlight on the foreign experience with increased drug access andliberalized use policies, and explain that this experience hasbeen negative The statement of our own history is plainly false. Interestedreaders should any of the major studies of drug policy listed inthis book. England tried prescribing heroin but gave it up. Until themid1960s, British physicians were allowed to prescribe heroin tocertain classes of addicts. After this experiment, according toJames Q. Wilson in his 1990 article "Against theLegalization of Drugs", "a youthful drug cultureemerged with a demand for drugs far different from that of theolder addicts." The British system didn't work. Addiction levels rose,especially among teenagers, and many addicts chose to boycott theprogram and continued to get their heroin from pushers. In 1983, England began switching over to methadone and stoppeddispensing heroin from the clinics, and that caused even moreaddicts to depart in favor of the real thing. According to thelate John Kaplan of Stanford University, the number of addictsincreased fivefold. James Q. Wilson states that the BritishGovernment's experiment with controlled heroin distributionresulted in, at a minimum, a 30fold increase in the number ofaddicts in ten years. The Netherlands, despite its controlled program, is havingtroubles. Under the socalled "expediency principle"Dutch law protects individuals from prosecution for acts that aretechnically illegal, including the retaillevel sales and purchaseof marijuana and hashish. Dutch police are also instructed toignore streetlevel sales of all types of drugs. The Amsterdam Municipal Health Service showed a rise inhardcore addicts in 1992, attributable to a significant rise inthe local heroin supply which led to a price drop of as much as75%. Switzerland has become a magnet for drug users the world over.One thing small European nations have learned is a littletolerance about drugs brings a lot of unwelcome visitors. In1987, Zurich permitted drug use and sales in a part of the citycalled the "Platzspitz", dubbed "NeedlePark." Five years later the experiment was curtailed afteran influx of addicts and increased violence and deaths. In 1992,Zurich Municipal spokesman Andres Ohler told the New York Timesthat the number of regular drug users at the park had swelledfrom a few hundred in 1987 to 20,000 by 1992. After thePlatzspitz closed, the price of heroin reportedly doubled. RESOLUTION EUROPEAN CITIES AGAINST DRUGS DEA Statement The Facts A number of European cities have taken the initiative oforganizing a Conference for Cities Against the Legalization of Drugs. One of the aimsof the conference is to adopt a resolution to enable towns that have notparticipated in the conference to support its work. Imitation is the sincerest form of flattery. The tide of thedrug policy debate began to turn against the DEA with the adventof the Resolution for a Federal Commission on Drug Policy(sometimes referred to as the Hoover Resolution). A copy of thisResolution and a list of some of the major signers is included inthis book. The purpose of the conference is to increase cooperationbetween cities, to provide inspiration and hope for areas with particularly difficultdrug problems. The signatories to the resolution will affirmtheir decision to fight against the spread of drugs. The DEA apparently thought the Resolution for a FederalCommission on Drug Policy was so important that they figured theyhad to trump up something to counter it. The result is thisreally phony and poorly worded resolution against drugs. It isnotable that the DEA did not name any of the people who signedthis resolution on behalf of their entire city. STOCKHOLM  28TH APRIL 1994 Some facts which help to confirm the observations of the forumparticipants may be used in debates:  In April, 1994, a number of European cities signed aresolution titled "European Cities Against Drugs,"commonly known as the Stockholm resolution. It states: "Thedemands to legalize illicit drugs should be seen against thebackground of current problems, which have led to a feeling ofhelplessness. For many, the only way to cope is to try toadminister the current situation. But the answer does not lie inmaking harmful drugs more accessible, cheaper and sociallyacceptable. Attempts to do this have not proved successful. Webelieve that legalizing drugs will, in the long term, increaseour problems. By making them legal, society will signal that ithas resigned to the acceptance of drug abuse. The signatories tothis resolution therefore want to make their position clear byrejecting the proposals to legalize illicit drugs." It is interesting to note the differences between theResolution for a Federal Commission on Drug Policy and thisresolution. The biggest difference is that the Resolution for aFederal Commission on Drug Policy does not say anything about"legalization" but simply asks for an objective reviewof the evidence. The DEA's resolution does not call for anyobjective review of the evidence and, in fact, rejecting even theidea of a discussion of alternatives. Pointing to the appropriate international treaties whichrequire nations to "protect children from the illicit use ofnarcotic drugs," the signatories state that they"reject all demands for legalizing illicit drugs... Werequest that our Governments respect and with determination applythose conventions and agreements regarding drugs which they havesigned." Again, the DEA's resolution calls for a blind rejection of anyideas but there own, without consideration of any evidence. The cities signing this resolution include: Berlin, Stockholm,Budapest, Dublin, Gdansk (Poland), Gothenburg (Sweden), Helsinki,Paris, Lugano (Switzerland), Madrid, Malmo (Sweden), Moscow,Oslo, Prague, London, Reykjavik (Iceland), Riga (Latvia), St.Petersburg (Russia), Tallinn (Estonia), Valletta (Malta) andWarsaw. It is notable that the DEA does not mention who in thesecities signed on behalf of the entire city. It is also notablethat many of the cities are former Soviet Union cities withlittle experience in these areas.  A study by the Rotterdam Municipal Council shows that thenumber of cocaine users there has risen substantially. About 3.3%of all Rotterdam residents over 15 years of age or approximately12,000 people now use cocaine. Violent crime is also a major problem in the Netherlands. A1992 study of crime victims in twenty (mostly European) countriesranks the Netherlands as the number one country in Europe forassaults and threats. The Dutch Criminal Intelligence Service reported 104gunrelated deaths in the Netherlands in 1992, compared to 73 in1991. Almost all involved drug disputes. Robberies have alsoincreased in each of the four years since 1988. The Netherlands, smaller than West Virginia, has more than 50clinics supplying methadone to heroin addicts, and drug violatorsmake up a large percentage of prisoners in the Dutch prisonsystem.  Zurich authorities moved many addicts to a new site, anearby abandoned railway station, a few blocks north of NeedlePark. Here, addicts receive clean needles and are allowed toinject heroin and consume other drugs. Writing in Drug AbuseUpdate in 1994, Sue Rusche, executive director of NationalFamilies in Action, gave this description of what passersby cansee if they look down from the Kornhaus Bridge: "Most people think shots are bloodless events. A nurseinserts a needle, injects a medicine and you're on your way. Buthere, bright red blood streams down arms, necks, legs, feet andgroins as addicts inject themselves. Festering red and purplesores filled with pus, old blood and filthy scabs stretch fromwrist to elbow, ankle to knee." Contents | Feedback | Search DRCNet Library | Schaffer Library | The Drug Legalization Debate WT01-B29-53IA087-000632-B023-156http://206.61.184.43:80/schaffer/ACTIVIST/claim7.htm 206.61.184.43 19970122093940 text/html 13680HTTP/1.0 200 OKDate: Wednesday, 22-Jan-97 09:39:27 GMTServer: WebSitePro/1.1f (S/N wpo-0deb)Allow-ranges: bytesContent-type: text/htmlLast-modified: Saturday, 28-Dec-96 07:28:25 GMTContent-length: 13462 Claim VII: Alcohol has caused significant health, social,and criminal problems Contents | Feedback | Search DRCNet Library | Schaffer Library | The Drug Legalization Debate CLAIM VII: ALCOHOL HAS CAUSED SIGNIFICANT HEALTH, SOCIAL ANDCRIME PROBLEMS IN THIS COUNTRY, AND LEGALIZED DRUGS WOULD ONLYMAKE THE SITUATION WORSE DEA Statement Many legalization advocates are fond of comparing the use ofalcohol with the use of drugs, yet draw faulty conclusions fromthe comparison. People often consume small amounts of wine orbeer as a beverage and do not necessarily drink to the point ofmental impairment. This is not true of drug use, where the wholepoint of use is intoxication. A more accurate analogy would be tocompare drug use to drunkenness. Yet even that analogy is weak,because drugs are far more addictive than alcohol, and have nocultural or social value. Dr. Mitchell Rosenthal points out, forexample, that only 10 percent of drinkers become alcoholics,while up to 75 percent of regular illicit drug users becomeaddicted. The Facts The point of use of alcohol is intoxication, just as it is forthe illegal drugs. Even small amounts of alcohol will relax aperson or change their mood. This is intoxication, it is just amild intoxication. If you don't want the intoxication, there isvery little reason to drink alcoholic wine or beer instead oftheir non-alcoholic versions. The alcoholic versions are themajor sellers so it is a fair assumption that most alcoholdrinkers want the mild intoxication which comes from a couple ofbeers. Most users of most drugs want a relatively mild intoxicationfrom their drug of choice. That is one of the main reasons thatwine and beer outsell the harder beverages, and why most illegaldrug use is the use of marijuana. This argument is a distortion in itself because it lumps allillicit drugs together, as if they had the same capacity toaddict. Clearly, there are major differences between drugs suchas heroin, cocaine, and marijuana, and Dr. Rosenthal isirresponsible not to point them out. Dr. Rosenthal's figures could not possibly be true, based onthe DEA's own evidence shown above in their chart showing thesupposed drop in drug use. The DEA's own figures shows the numberof regular drug users is far higher than the number of addictsand always has been. By the DEA's own figures at least 85 percentare not addicted, and at least 70 percent are gainfully employed. DEA Statement Proponents of legalization note--correctly--that alcohol killsmany more Americans than do illegal drugs and currently exactsocial and financial costs that are higher as well. Advocatesclaim that many people do not use alcohol, and that manyAmericans may also choose to forego drugs. Like treatmentprograms available for alcohol addicted people, treatment fordrug addicts should be more widely available. The Facts The DEA admits that alcohol causes far more damage than theillegal drugs but they don't seem to propose that we bring backalcohol Prohibition. What the DEA does not say is the degree to which alcohol andtobacco cause more damage than illegal drugs. DEA Statement The experts assembled at the AntiLegalization Forum pointed toalready overburdened health care and social systems that areunable to address all the problems associated with alcohol use.Instead of compounding these problems, and acknowledging thecrime problems made worse by alcohol use, the group stated thatlegalizing drugs would create undue burdens on the criminal,health and social service systems. The Facts The group points out that the "already overburdenedhealth care and social systems . . . are unable to address allthe problems associated with alcohol use", yet no oneproposes that we bring back alcohol Prohibition as the bestapproach to the problem. DEA Statement Alcohol use in this country has taken a tremendous physicaltoll on Americans, not to mention the social problems that haveresulted from its use. Legalization proponents would have uscompound our problems by creating a new class of drug addictedAmericans. Again, how much are we willing to tolerate? To payfor? The Facts Should we bring back alcohol Prohibition as a means of dealingwith alcohol problems? Clearly not. The message of Prohibition isclear: Alcohol is bad, but Prohibition is worse. DEA Statement Look at the problems that alcohol abuse has wrought. In the1920s those advocating the repeal of Prohibition argued thatcrime and other social ills would be alleviated if alcohol werelegal. Has that happened? We now have approximately 11 millionalcoholics or problem drinkers in this country whose behavior hascontributed to lost productivity in the workplace, fetal defects,traffic fatalities, domestic violence and other crime. If drugswere made legal, the numbers and the problems would swell. The Facts Is the DEA arguing that the best approach to the alcoholproblems is to bring back Prohibition? Why not? DEA Statement The simple fact is that if drugs are made legal, more peoplewill use drugs. There will be higher health and social costs;there will be more crime. Some facts which help to confirm theobservations of the forum participants may be used in debates: The Facts The Wickersham Commission, which was originally formed toimprove alcohol Prohibition, found that alcohol use fell in thefirst year of Prohibition but rose every year thereafter. DEA Statement  In a May, 1993 report titled "Survey of State PrisonInmates," the Bureau of Justice Statistics states that 32%of inmates committed their offense under the influence ofalcohol. Slightly more than twofifths of inmates convicted ofhomicide or assault committed their current offense under theinfluence of alcohol or of alcohol with drugs. The Facts This is another curious argument. It is clear that the biggestproblem here is alcohol, as the DEA itself states. If the DEA wasreally consistent in their position, they would advocate thereturn of alcohol prohibition. DEA Statement  According to the 1993 National Household Survey on DrugAbuse, about 11 million Americans were heavy drinkers in 1993(drinking five or more drinks per occasion on five or more daysin the past 30 days). Heavy alcohol use has changed little since1985, when there were 12 million heavy drinkers. The Facts Assuming the figures are accurate, it would obviously not be asensible approach to the problem to attempt throw all thesepeople in prison. DEA Statement The same report indicates that "of the 11 million heavydrinkers in 1993, 26 percent (3 million) were also currentillicit drug users." The report goes on to say that"Current smokers are more likely to be heavy drinkers andillicit drug users. Among smokers in 1993, 11 percent were heavydrinkers and 12 percent were illicit drug users." The Facts The DEA seems to be trying to make the discredited argumentabout "gateway drugs". That is, they used to contendthat some drugs, by some as-yet-unexplained process, naturallycreated a craving for totally unrelated drugs in people who hadnever used drugs before. This was a holdover from their earlier,plainer and even more easily discredited argument that marijuanaleads to heroin. (Which, by the way, was in direct contradictionto Harry Anslinger's testimony before Congress when marijuana wasoutlawed.) People who engage in one form of risky behavior often engagein other risky behaviors. That is the only thing that these kindsof statistics could show. DEA Statement  In a 1993 report by Brandeis University, it was estimatedthat the United States spent $10.5 billion on health care relatedto alcohol use. The Facts Then why shouldn't we bring back Prohibition as the best wayto deal with the problem? DEA Statement  Alcohol is blamed for between $140 and $210 billion peryear in lost productivity. The Facts Then why shouldn't we bring back Prohibition as the best wayto deal with the problem? DEA Statement  17,461 people were killed in alcohol related trafficincidents in 1993. The Facts That is almost as many people as the American MedicalAssociation estimates were killed by all illegal drugs from allcauses combined. Clearly, if the DEA wanted to do something aboutthe real drug problem, it would be of more benefit to concentratetheir enforcement efforts on alcohol. DEA Statement  Michigan's Director of the Office of Drug Control Policy,Robert Peterson, states that "It is estimated that alcoholabuse costs the nation $100 billion per year and over 300 livesper day, an amount that the $18 billion in state and federalexcise tax revenue does not begin to cover." The Facts And yet no one contends that throwing wine and beer drinkersin prison is a sensible approach to this problem. Contents | Feedback | Search DRCNet Library | Schaffer Library | The Drug Legalization Debate WT01-B29-54IA087-000632-B023-188http://206.61.184.43:80/schaffer/ACTIVIST/claim8.htm 206.61.184.43 19970122093957 text/html 12517HTTP/1.0 200 OKDate: Wednesday, 22-Jan-97 09:39:46 GMTServer: WebSitePro/1.1f (S/N wpo-0deb)Allow-ranges: bytesContent-type: text/htmlLast-modified: Saturday, 28-Dec-96 07:27:29 GMTContent-length: 12299 Claim VIII: Drug control spending is a minor part of theUS budget Contents | Feedback | Search DRCNet Library | Schaffer Library | The Drug Legalization Debate CLAIM VIII: DRUG CONTROL SPENDING IS A MINOR PORTION OF THEU.S. BUDGET, AND COMPARED TO THE COSTS OF DRUG ABUSE, SPENDING ISMINUSCULE. DEA Statement Legalization advocates claim that this nation has spentbillions of dollars to control drug production, trafficking anduse with few, if any, positive results. They contend that themoney spent on drug control should be shifted to other, moreproductive endeavors. The Facts This whole claim is another curious argument. It seems thatthe DEA is saying, "We don't take very much money in thebigger scheme of things, so leave us alone." From my ownperspective, I still regard several billion dollars as a lot ofmoney. There is no doubt that a lot of money is spent on drugenforcement and there is no doubt that even the DEA has neverclaimed that it ever had any significant effect on reducing thesupply of drugs. If a program to spend several billion dollars isas useless as this one, it behooves us to look for a betterapproach. DEA Statement The truth is, we have made great progress in reducing drug useduring the past 15 years. If the relatively modest outlays ofFederal dollars had not been made, drug abuse and attendantsocial costs would have been far greater. The good news is thatdrug use has declined significantly between 1979 and 1993. The Facts Whether drug use has been significantly reduced is open toquestion, particularly in view of the survey methods used toarrive at such conclusions. Even if we assumed that this statement is true, it would stillleave open the question of whether any other approach might haveproduced better results. That is a question the DEA does not evenwant to consider. DEA Statement The experts participating in the Anti-Legalization forumdisputed the claim that money allegedly saved from giving up onthe drug problem could be better spent on education and socialproblems. When compared to the amount of funding that is spent onother national priorities, drug control spending is minimal.There has been progress in reducing drug use, and the money spenthas been effective and worthwhile. The Facts This argument is illogical. The participants state that themoney could not be better spent on education and social problemsbecause "drug control spending is minimal." Whether thespending is minimal (by their terms) has no bearing on whetherthe spending is wise. DEA Statement On the surface, legalization proponents present an appealing,simple argument that by legalizing drugs we can move vast sums ofmoney from drug law enforcement into solving society's ills. Theyleave unanswered questions about the cost of collecting revenuesassociated with drug sales, or the cost of regulating drugs. They ignore questions concerning the purity, potency andquality of legal drugs, the costs of insuring a safe product, andcosts associated with increased liability litigation. The Facts No revenue is collected from drug sales now, except by outlawdrug dealers. Any collection of tax revenues would be animprovement. There are no standards for purity, potency, or quality nowexcept those established by outlaw drug dealers, and there is noone to sue for an unsafe product. Any legal standards would be animprovement in this area. DEA Statement Ask proponents of legalization for specifics. Would the rawmaterial for these drugs be purchased from traditional sources,or would the United States produce its own marijuana, coca andopium? Would the government pay farmers subsidies to produce ornot produce these crops? Although all of these questions could beresolved, none comes without a price tag. The Facts The United States could easily produce all of its ownmarijuana, as the DEA should know from the fact that it wasAmerica's largest commercial crop before it was outlawed. The Federal Government should not be in the position of payingfarmers subsidies to produce any dangerous, addictive drug,including tobacco. The rules for subsidies should be consistentacross the board. However difficult these questions may be to agree on, it stilldoes not present any evidence that throwing people in prison fordrugs is a good idea. DEA Statement Proponents also conveniently fail to mention that unless drugsare made available to little children, law enforcement will stillbe needed to deal with the sale of drugs to minors. The Facts This is one of the phoniest arguments to come down the pike.No one except the DEA has suggested that drugs should be"made available to little children". We have laws now to prevent the sale of alcohol to minors andthe rules for other drugs should be no different. Law enforcementis needed to deal with the sale of alcohol to minors but it is byno means an overwhelming problem. If the DEA was really concerned about little children, theywould recommend stronger action against convenience store clerkswho sell tobacco to children. An American is about 100 times aslikely to die from tobacco as from any illegal drug, andchildhood is when most of them become addicted. DEA Statement But more importantly, in their simplistic arguments, they omitmention of the atrocious social costs that would be incurred witha larger class of drug users. The Facts No, we freely admit that drugs are going to impose atremendous social cost whatever we do. That is still not a goodreason to undertake actions which are counterproductive, such asprison. DEA Statement Legalization would also result in lost workforce productivityand a resultant increase in the cost of goods. A new class ofunemployables would be created who were unfit to hire because oftheir drug dependence. The Facts There is no evidence for this at all. The DEA proposes thatprison is the best way to keep drug users productive. DEA Statement Health and societal costs of drug legalization would alsoincrease, the panel predicted. Drug treatment costs,hospitalization for longterm drugrelated disease, and treatmentof family violence consequences would further burden our alreadystrapped healthcare system. The Facts The panel came together for the purpose of fighting"legalization" so it is no surprise that they wouldpredict it would be a disaster. It is important to note that theydid no research to back up their prediction and every major studyof drug policy in the last fifty years disagreed with them. DEA Statement There was also no guarantee, according to the group, thatcriminal justice costs would decline if drugs were legalized. Itis possible that law enforcement would be additionally burdenedwith addressing violations of traffic and family violence laws ifmore people had access to drugs. Law enforcement is alreadychallenged by significant alcoholrelated crimes. More users meanmore crimes committed, and incarceration costs would increase. Some facts which help to confirm the observations of the forumparticipants may be used in debates:  In 1995, over $13 billion is being spent by the federalgovernment on drug control, including treatment, education, lawenforcement and international activities.  Drug abuse costs the United States between $60 and $100billion in lost productivity each year. The Facts Most of this cost is caused by alcohol, which the DEA does notaddress at all. Even if all this cost was the result of illegaldrugs, there is still no evidence that throwing people in prisonis the best way to reduce those costs. Does the DEA honestlypropose that the best way to make sure that people are productiveis to throw them in prison? DEA Statement  The Federal Government spends billions of dollars each yearon other national priorities. In Fiscal Year 1995, the FederalGovernment is spending $ 243.4 billion on Defense $ 350 billion on Social Security $ 61.6 billion on Agriculture $ 22 billion on Welfare $ 13.5 billion on Foreign Assistance The Facts And? Not one word here is any kind of an argument in favor ofthrowing people in prison for drugs. Contents | Feedback | Search DRCNet Library | Schaffer Library | The Drug Legalization Debate WT01-B29-55IA087-000632-B023-213http://206.61.184.43:80/schaffer/ACTIVIST/claim9.htm 206.61.184.43 19970122094020 text/html 7692HTTP/1.0 200 OKDate: Wednesday, 22-Jan-97 09:39:59 GMTServer: WebSitePro/1.1f (S/N wpo-0deb)Allow-ranges: bytesContent-type: text/htmlLast-modified: Saturday, 28-Dec-96 07:27:24 GMTContent-length: 7475 Claim IX: Drug prohibition is working Contents | Feedback | Search DRCNet Library | Schaffer Library | The Drug Legalization Debate CLAIM IX: DRUG PROHIBITION IS WORKING DEA Statement Legalization advocates claim that drug prohibition is akin toalcohol prohibition earlier this century. Their main premise isthat it is impossible to prohibit people from using substancesthat they want to use. The Facts It seems obvious that it is impossible, by the DEA's ownevidence. But there are other reasons as well. Even if it waspossible, we should not undertake actions which do more harm thangood. DEA Statement Participants in the AntiLegalization forum felt thatlegalization opponents should point to the successes ofProhibition and to continuously stress the positive progress thathas been made between 1979 and 1994 in reducing levels of drugabuse. The Facts Does the DEA feel that the "successes ofProhibition" were so great that we should bring backProhibition? Why not? DEA Statement When the Volstead Act was repealed, arrests for alcoholtraffickers disappeared, but arrests of alcohol related incidentsrose, indicating that the prohibition against alcohol had keptpeople from using it. The same will happen if drugs arelegalized. Once drug use is sanctioned by the government, morepeople will use drugs. It is also important to remember that after Prohibition wasrepealed, organized crime branched out into other areas, andthere is every expectation that current drug organizations wouldalso continue and diversify. The Facts After Prohibition was repealed, organized crime lost itssingle biggest source of funding. This is the same argument theDEA made before, that we must keep drug prohibition to keep thedrug dealers employed so they will not do something else. Again,we have to asked what would happen if the DEA really did succeedin stamping out drugs. Would we have to start selling them againto keep the criminals from doing something else? DEA Statement Some facts which help to confirm the observations of the forumparticipants may be used in debates:  Dr. Mark Moore, in a 1992 article titled "Actually,Prohibition Was a Success" points out that alcoholconsumption declined during the Prohibition years by as much as3050%. Mental hospital admissions from alcoholinduced psychosisdeclined 50%. The Facts The Wickersham Commission, which was formed to study andimprove Prohibition, found that alcohol use fell in the firstyear of Prohibition and rose every year thereafter. Assuming this was true, does that mean that the DEA isadvocating the return of alcohol Prohibition? Why not? DEA Statement  Robert Peterson, Director of the Michigan Office of DrugControl Policy, states that "Since the repeal ofProhibition, alcohol consumption has tripled." The Facts Does this mean that the DEA is advocating the return ofalcohol Prohibition? Why not? DEA Statement  Alcohol, unlike currently illegal drugs, has a long historyof social acceptance and has an important role in many cultures.Alcohol can also be selfadministered in small doses with littledamaging effects. The Facts The DEA is saying that some drugs can be sold in the localstore, while others merit a term in prison if you possess them.The difference, it seems, is based on their popularity. By thisargument, when these drugs reach a certain level of popularitythen it will be appropriate to sell them as we do alcohol andtobacco. Other drugs also have a long history of social acceptancewhich the DEA would like to deny. Marijuana (hemp), for example,was once this nation's largest crop and was even grown by ourfounding fathers such as George Washington and Thomas Jefferson. Most drugs can be self-administered in small doses with littledamaging effects and, in most examples of their use, they are. DEA Statement We are making progress in reducing the number of illicit drugusers. The Facts Even if one believes the DEA's figures on this score (andthere is good reason to doubt them), the DEA's own figures showthat there has been no effect on hard core drug use. Further,there is no evidence that the current policy is the best way toreduce the number of drug users of any type. Contents | Feedback | Search DRCNet Library | Schaffer Library | The Drug Legalization Debate WT01-B29-56IA087-000632-B023-241http://206.61.184.43:80/schaffer/ACTIVIST/claim10.htm 206.61.184.43 19970122094049 text/html 6878HTTP/1.0 200 OKDate: Wednesday, 22-Jan-97 09:40:38 GMTServer: WebSitePro/1.1f (S/N wpo-0deb)Allow-ranges: bytesContent-type: text/htmlLast-modified: Saturday, 28-Dec-96 07:28:01 GMTContent-length: 6661 Claim X: Drug legalization would have an adverse effect onlow income communities Contents | Feedback | Search DRCNet Library | Schaffer Library | The Drug Legalization Debate CLAIM X: DRUG LEGALIZATION WOULD HAVE AN ADVERSE EFFECT ONLOWINCOME COMMUNITIES DEA Statement Some proponents of legalization claim that current strict drugcontrol policies have a disproportionately adverse effect on poorcommunities. The Facts This much is obvious from even the most cursory examination ofthe statistics. DEA Statement The drug laws of the United States, and efforts to stop drugtrafficking and abuse, are designed to protect all people fromthe harm and denigration that illegal drugs cause. If oneeconomic group or another is disproportionately affected by theimplementation of current laws, that problem should be dealt within its proper context--not by legalizing drugs. The Facts As a matter of fact, the laws were based largely on racism andthe fears of such things as Chinese men luring white women totheir ruin in opium dens, and the mythical "Negro CocaineFiend." Harry Anslinger specifically stated that the primaryreason to outlaw marijuana (hemp) was "its effect on thedegenerate races." DEA Statement The participants at the Forum, many of them city policechiefs, disagreed with the notion that legalization would improvethe lot of the poor. Legalization proponents argue that fewer people would bearrested for drug trafficking crime and the violence associatedwith turf protection would be reduced if drugs were legalized.That argument assumes that drugrelated violence is limited torival drug gangs disputing turf, when in fact, most drug violenceis committed by people under the influence of drugs. The incidence of dysfunctional families, unemployability,family violence, and ruined lives would increase in lowincomecommunities, just as they would in every other community. Allcommunities would see increased aberrant behavior because ofincreased drug use; increased occurrences of child neglect;increased family disintegration; increased fetal damage caused bymothers' drug use; increased social welfare costs; loss ofworkforce productivity; increased auto accidents because driversare driving under the influence of drugs; increased industrialaccidents caused by impaired workers; increased absenteeism; andincreases in emergency room visits and overdose deaths. In short,all Americans would see a moral decline of society. Drug use in the inner city is a manifestation of otherproblems in the inner city; these problems would not go away ifmore drugs were available. If proponents truly believe thatlegalization would have a positive affect on communities, wechallenge them to set up a trial program in their own community. The Facts This is an empty challenge. If anyone tried it, the DEA wouldhave them in jail before the first results could be evaluated.This kind of trial program is the last thing the DEA wants tosee, as they have already stated by their opposition to anobjective Federal Commission to examine the evidence. DEA Statement Some facts which help to confirm the observations of the forumparticipants may be used in debates:  In his 1994 article in the New England Journal of Medicine,Dr. Herbert Kleber addresses the drug situation: "Ourcurrent drug situation follows a pattern of earlier drugepidemics. As the use of drugs drops from epidemic to endemiclevels, disadvantaged groups are more likely than others tocontinue using drugs because of their greater availability andfewer alternative opportunities. That is why minority communitieswant not only treatment facilities but also fair laws, justlyapplied to reduce the horrendous toll of drug related crime intheir neighborhoods. The illegal, open air drug bazaars thatflourish in southeastern Washington DC and the South Bronx wouldnot be tolerated in Georgetown or Scarsdale." The Facts Try as I might, I can't find anything in that statement whichsays that throwing massive numbers of people in prison for drugoffenses is a good idea. Contents | Feedback | Search DRCNet Library | Schaffer Library | The Drug Legalization Debate WT01-B29-57IA031-000655-B047-59http://206.61.184.43:80/schaffer/ACTIVIST/flier2.htm 206.61.184.43 19970122115304 text/html 3882HTTP/1.0 200 OKDate: Wednesday, 22-Jan-97 11:52:57 GMTServer: WebSitePro/1.1f (S/N wpo-0deb)Allow-ranges: bytesContent-type: text/htmlLast-modified: Monday, 16-Dec-96 08:40:53 GMTContent-length: 3667 Worlds Largest Online Library of Drug Policy World's Largest OnlineLibrary of Drug Policy The Drug War obviously isn't working. It is time we took anotherlook at the evidence on drugs. Now you can do it through the Internet.The DRCNet Online Library contains thousands of documents coveringall aspects of drugs and drug policy, from ancient history tothe latest developments from Europe. You can find this libraryon the World Wide Web at the following location: http://www.druglibrary.org What These Libraries Contain: Major Studies of Drugs and Drug Policy overthe last 100 years, including summariesand full text of many studies. These studies include the NewYork City Bar Association Report (1994), the National Commissionon Marihuana and Drug Abuse (1972), the La Guardia CommitteeReport (1944), and many more. Historical Information,including the shocking origins of the drug laws. Included in thecollection are the actual transcripts of the hearings for theMarihuana Tax Act and many other historical works, includingtexts dating back to 550 BC. Why were these laws passed in thefirst place? You will find it hard to believe - it had nothingto do with what you have assumed. Latest News from Europe- including up-to-date information on drug policies in the Netherlandsas well as other developments, such as the heroin maintenanceclinics currently being run in Switzerland. DEA Judge Young's ruling on medical marijuana.In 1989, the DEA's Chief Administrative Law Judge finished hearingtwo years of evidence on medical marijuana and ruled that theDEA's actions in restricting the medical use of marijuana were"unconscionable." Our online library has the full textof Judge Young's decision. The Drug Legalization Debate -Extensive materials covering all of the arguments in the "druglegalization" debate from all perspectives, including thefull text of documents from all points of view. See all thearguments and all the evidence from both sides. Government Documents -We maintain an extensive collection of Federal and State Governmentdocuments related to drug policy including many reports whichhave never been formally published or are so rare that they arenot available in most libraries. Much, much more -literally thousands of documents on a huge range of topics! Our Guarantee We absolutely guarantee: That you will find the information in these libraries surprisingand fascinating - no matter what your current point of view. You have never seen or heard much of this information anywherebefore. We have some of the best information resources youwill find anywhere in the world on this topic. Brought to you by the Drug ReformCoordination Network (DRCNet) as a free public service.WT01-B29-58IA031-000655-B047-87http://206.61.184.43:80/schaffer/ACTIVIST/whatnext.htm 206.61.184.43 19970122115315 text/html 19461HTTP/1.0 200 OKDate: Wednesday, 22-Jan-97 11:53:06 GMTServer: WebSitePro/1.1f (S/N wpo-0deb)Allow-ranges: bytesContent-type: text/htmlLast-modified: Saturday, 28-Dec-96 07:24:45 GMTContent-length: 19243 What's Next? for Drug Legalization What's Next? by Clifford A. Schaffer This is my view of what is the current most important step inpromoting drug policy reform. This includes some suggestions onhow you can help. WHAT IS THE MAIN PRIORITY AT THIS POINT? A few people have asked the basic question, What's next? Whatis the main priority at this point? A good question. In order to answer it correctly we have toback up and review the current state of affairs. WHERE AREWE WITH RESPECT TO THE GOALS? First, it is necessary to establish where we are with respectto our goals. Atlanta has come and gone. I don't think the drugwarriors got as much publicity as perhaps they wanted, and itlooks like a flash in the pan. No doubt they will try to usetheir resolution as proof of something when they are pressed in the debate. In their rathersimplistic view of the issue they have confused the main pointand will continue to lose debates as time goes on. As Drug CzarLee Brown has recently stated, their strategy will be to pretendthat the issue doesn't exist. They just don't want to hear aboutit. The bottom line is that Atlanta won't do much to change thelong term trend in public thinking, particularly if we areintelligent about what we do. The trend is going our way and willcontinue to go our way. Little by little, we are working our wayto a majority. THE HOOVERRESOLUTION? Alan asks if the main priority at this point should be topush the Hoover Resolution. In a sense, that should be the mainpriority, but we have to recognize the underlying issuesinvolved. The Hoover Resolution was built upon the recognition of thesingle biggest flaw behind the drug war -- ignorance. No onecould support these kinds of policies if they had even read theevidence, so I knew that every drug warrior could be defeated ifyou could just get to the evidence. A good knowledge of theevidence is enough to publicly destroy any of them. The Hoover Resolution has already been successful to acertain extent. The last Crime Bill provided for a commissionwhich is due to start work in 1996. They are now selecting peopleto sit on the commission, but I have no idea of their progress onselecting any members. There is still some question about whetherit will come off or, if it does, who will be on it or how deeplyit will delve into the issues. Regardless of the commission, we should be prepared with theinformation the commission should read, or that anyone shouldread on this issue. We should have such complete evidence andresearch on the issue that anyone who wants information on theissue will have to come to us. IS IT PROPER TO REFER TO IT AS THE HOOVER RESOLUTION? No, but I often do it anyway. SHOULD WE POST THE HOOVER RESOLUTION ON A FORM? Sure. As long as we follow all of the original rules of theHoover Resolution -- that is, it must be very clear what thepeople are agreeing to -- only what the Resolution states.Signatures must include name, title, mailing address, and theform should ask them if they would like to join any of thevarious national organizations. MEMBERSHIPSUBSCRIPTION PAGES We should have an independent membership page for each of theorganizations covered under our group. People should be allowedto subscribe on-line. We don't have to hassle the problems withcredit cards or anything yet, just let them enter their name andaddress and the organization can send them an envelope. WHY WILLTHE DRUG WAR FALL? The drug war will eventually fall for the same reason thatcommunism fell. That is, they are both repressive systems whichdepend upon hiding or ignoring knowledge iin pursuit of anideological goal. As such they are wildly impractical, and thatimpracticality becomes more apparent as more knowledge becomesavailable. The Soviet Union fell because, in order to enforcetheir restrictions on knowledge, they had to put photocopymachines under lock and key and require forms to be filled outevery time someone wanted to make a copy. You can imagine theeffect that would have on a modern competitive business. Theinvention of the personal computer was their complete downfall.It became apparent that they could not have a modern economy ifthey did not have person computers, fax machines, and the like.But, of course, that meant that everyone was a publisher. Ifeveryone is a publisher, sooner or later the truth is going toget out. Computers and the Internet will be the key elements whichbring down the drug war. Political systems based on ignorancewill come down because of the information which can be madeavailable to anyone through computers. That is also thefundamental idea behind the CD ROM -- widespread public educationof the facts. We will win our struggle as soon as the publicknows the facts. We have taken the first steps with the formalestablishment of our org. #1PRIORITY -- GET THE KNOWLEDGE ASSEMBLED Our Number One Priority at this point should be to locate allof the information on drug policy that we can find, convert it tocomputer format, and post it in a commonly accessed place on theweb. We should set up an interlinked network of web pagesaccessible from a single web page which serves as a directory.Behind these web pages should be all of the information we canget. Remember all the times that people on the net have askedquestions or argued about some aspect of the drug issue? No more.Any time anyone has a question, we should be able to pointdirectly to documents on-line which provide an immediate answer. WHAT KIND OF INFORMATION? Anything relevant to the subject. We have nothing at all tofear from the truth and you will notice that, on my web pages, Iwill include materials which are propaganda of the opposition.Ultimately, we gain the most from the broadest range ofinformation. We should scan, retrieve, enter by hand, or dowhatever we can to build the best library anyone has ever seen onthe subject. We have to make our web sites an absolute must-seefor any member of the media who wants to do anything on thesubject. (Please note that, even while the public as a whole maynot be on the net yet, the media is far more likely to beconnected to the net. This is an issue on which we can, ineffect, force their behavior. If our web pages have enoughinformation, they will be forced to come to us.) Think of it this way. In the course of these conversations wehave passed back and forth a lot of good solid information toeach other, such as the information put forth on hemp, or thebackgrounds of Voth and Nahas. That kind of information should beposted so it is available to anyone who wants it, any time theyneed it. The only real difference is that we should use a lessconversational style. That is, when we post the information tothe library, it should be in "encyclopedia style" A CENTRAL ENTRY POINT - The World's Best Library on DrugPolicy. Right now, if we want to tell the media about our growinglibrary of on-line information, we would have to give them thenames of a multitude of web sites and tell them to go poke aroundon their own. We need one main menu page to give them for thelibrary. We should establish a central entry point to all the websites of interest. This one home page would list all of the otherweb pages which have factual information of interest on thesubject. This will make it easy for us to give the media a singleaccess point where they can find all of the information. That isimportant in uniformly advertising it to the media around theworld. That central point should have an index (updated once a monthperhaps) which will point to each of the web sites and providesome sort of explanation as to what kind of materials are behindit. MAKE SURE THE MEDIA KNOWS WHERE TO GO FOR INFO Then we will have to make sure that ALL the media knows thatthey have to go to our page if they are going to discuss the drugissue. That will require a dedicated campaign to publish thelocation of our unified home page to all media sources. Our nextpriority will be to make sure that everyone in the media knowswhere to look. We will each have to contact our local newssources and make sure they know. It should be mentioned as astandard reference in every letter to the editor, for example. Weshould mention our unified home page everywhere we go. Print iton your letterhead and business cards. TASKS TO BE DONE Top Itemsto be Put on the Web This is a list, somewhat incomplete as yet, of the top itemswe intend to put on the web pages as soon as we can. We askeveryone to help us by contributing this information inelectronic form. If you have it, you can e-mail it toschaffer@smartlink.net. And thanks! If all you have is a paper copy, we would appreciate thattoo. You can send stuff to Dave Borden at Drug Policy Foundation,4455 Connecticut Ave., N.W., Suite B-500, Washington, DC20008-2302. You can snail-mail stuff to me at: Cliff Schaffer, P.O.Box 1430, Canyon Country, CA 91386-1430 1. Information for Dave Bordens "Tour of the War onDrugs". Use your imagination here, but if you were going togive someone a tour of the War on Drugs, what would you include?It should have lots of interesting facts, graphics, documents,etc. 2. A video file which contains a good quality copy of"Hemp for Victory". We would like to put in onlinewhere it can be distributed to the world. If you already have acomputer and a VCR, the cost of the video capture board iscurrently running around $500 to $700. Or maybe you know someonewho has one . . . 3. The full text of any of the reference sources listed inthe Biggest Studies of DrugPolicy. We much prefer the electronic format but if all youhave is a good paper copy, we will try to work with it. 4. The full text of the Congressional Record for the portionsrelevant to both the Harrison Narcotics Act of 1914 and theMarijuana Tax Act of 1937. 5. Charts, pictures, etc., which show the current statisticsfor all of the issues related to drug policy. SCANNING We have a huge task ahead of us. We must convert tens ofthousands of pages of information to computer format. Most of theinformation, such as the major studies of drug policy, never wasin computer format and some of the documents are quite large. Thetask will probably take man years of scanning effort to beproperly accomplished. The only way we will get it done (with ourlimited financial resources) is if everyone does a little bit. Istrongly recommend that you get a scanner as soon as possible.You don't need much, a simple gray scale scanner with OCR will dothe trick. Shop around and you can install a minimum page-feedscanner in an existing computer system, with OCR for about $250.A good quality flat-bed color scanner with a page feed optioncurrently runs about $1,000. I have found from my own experiencethat the handheld scanners are not adequate to the task. Does anyone know where we can get scanners cheaply (free) todistribute to volunteers who will commit to using them? GETTINGTHE WORD OUT TO THE MEDIA We will need volunteers who will help us get the word out tothe lawmakers and the media when we are ready to launch. Anyonecan help here, if they have a telephone, a stamp, or an e-mailaddress. FORMATTINGAND ORGANIZING We will also need people to specialize in the librarianfunction. That is, we must have people who are willing to spendthe time to: Organize the data so it has a logical structure and is easyto find. Establish links from references in one document to the actualtext of the cited documents. Format good looking web pages according to a standard format We will need standards for how the web pages will beconstructed and their overall look. (Please understand, it is notthat I want to limit your creativity with web pages, it is justthat we want to present to the public the look of a uniform,organized library.) I recommend that anyone who is interested inworking on this end of the task should buy a copy of TeachYourself Web Publishing With HTML In A Week, by Laura Lemay fromSams Publishing. I just got a copy and found it quite helpful. READINGAND SUMMARIZING There will be a lot of information on line. We will needpeople to read through volumes of information and prepareaccurate summaries on a chapter by chapter basis. PROGRAMMING Someone will have to program the membership forms and otherstuff required by this little venture. WHERE TOGO TO GET THE DATA 1. Information from other on-line services. We mustaccumulate all of the information in a place we control andorganize. 2. Government sources. A lot of the government agencies arenow publishing information in computer format, including CD-ROM.We should make it a point to get all of this information we canand bring it together in a logical organization which makes iteasy for people to find. 3. Historical records. A good project for anyone would be togo to the library and browse through the newspapers of anywherefrom 1860 to the present and get copies of all the articles theycan find relating to drugs. 4. Private collections of documents. I have already contacteda number of prominent people to ask them if we can get theirpersonal records which relate to drug policy. We want to developa depth of information which cannot be challenged and the privaterecords of individuals involved in the drug war is a good way todo it. 5. NIDA research. The National Instiute on Drug Abuse haspublished volumes of data on all sorts of issues. We should startwith the most interesting stuff. 6. The Congressional Record. We need to get on-line theentire text of the Congressional Record relating to all of ourcurrent drug laws. Most important-- we must get the text of theoriginal proceedings behind these laws. Harry Anslinger's wordsshould be posted in a place where all the world can read them. 7. Current Media. Scan and/or summarize articles from yourlocal newspaper. Include the full citations of the name of thenewspaper, the headline of the article and the date it waspublished. Also include a summary, length as appropriate, of themajor points made in the article. If we can get permission toreprint, we should do so. If not, we will publish a summary ofthe points made in the article, but retain the scanned text in aprivate library for backup. 8. Videos and movies. We should convert things such as Hempfor Victory to computer format. This can be done with a computer,a VCR, and a video capture board (now down to as low as $179.00) WEB PAGESTANDARDS I suggest the following as a preliminary suggestion for webpage standards. More complete standards, including a template,should be developed by a committee working on the formatting andorganizing team. 1. All web pages should include both the name of the currentpage plus the name of the central home page. This will make surethat anyone who prints out the information will know where itcame from. The name of the central home page should also beincluded as a header in all text files on the net. 2. All menus should contain links back to your own home pageas well as the central home page. 3. All menu pages should include the title of the document,and a description of the author and the contents of the work. 4. All web pages under your own home page should have aconsistent layout. The layout should be simple and withoutexcessive graphics, so it doesn't take a month to download them. COPYRIGHTS Under current copyright law we cannot post anything which iscopyrighted without the permission of the copyright owner. Hereis how to get around this restriction and still have a completeon-line library. 1) Any material produced by any government agency, or thetexts of official statements by public officials is in the publicdomain and may be posted without any problems. 2) The current copyright law is that copyrights are effectivefor the life of the creator plus fifty years. The old law wasthat copyrights were valid for 28 years with a renewal of 28years. What this means is (with some exceptions) materialspublished before about 1940 have probably fallen into the publicdomain. I have a feeling that, if some people or organizations were asked, they would grant us permission to post their materials, or at least excerpts from the materials. If we cannot get permission, we will post our own written summaries of the materials -- reviews of the essential points made by the document. CliffSchaffer's Home Page WT01-B29-59IA031-000655-B047-110http://206.61.184.43:80/schaffer/ACTIVIST/wherego.htm 206.61.184.43 19970122115329 text/html 6355HTTP/1.0 200 OKDate: Wednesday, 22-Jan-97 11:53:20 GMTServer: WebSitePro/1.1f (S/N wpo-0deb)Allow-ranges: bytesContent-type: text/htmlLast-modified: Saturday, 28-Dec-96 07:24:35 GMTContent-length: 6138 Where do we go from here? Where do wego from here? by Clifford A. Schaffer The tide has turned in the war against the War on Drugs. Itis a tough fight, but those who support drug policy reform havebegun to carry the day. There have been three major televisionspecials on the issue in less than a year and the DEA openlyadmitted their arguments were in trouble when they called aspecial conference last August to try to find ways to argueagainst reform. They have been getting pretty well shellacked inevery single debate over the last few years and the media hasbegun to seriously question the wisdom of the drug war. The drugwarriors are in retreat and they know it. The big question for those who support reform is: Where do wego from here? Activists from around the world have beendiscussing this on the Internet, and here are some of theanswers. The Internet Rapid communication is critical to this movement. Activistsfrom around the world have joined together on the Internet todiscuss ideas and provide support for each other in a widevariety of ways. There are plans for a bigger and better presenceon the Internet where news, research, and ideas will be availableto anyone with a computer, and where people from around the worldcan work together. We need more people on the Internet. We alsoneed someone in every city who is plugged in to the network andcan distribute the news on a timely basis to those who are notyet on the Internet. Unity The Internet has also brought unity. The biggest singlethrust of the DEA in their public relations campaign is that welack unity. The DEA tells the public that those who supportreform don't even agree among themselves on what they want and,therefore, they could never build a credible public policy. Formany years it was true. We have a number of organizations andgroups around the country who have always agreed on theiropposition to the drug war but have usually worked alone topursue their goals. As a result, we looked like a mob, ratherthan a team. Through the internet, we have held lengthy on-line"meetings" where many of the leading activists andorganizations have discussed where we agreed and disagreed, andhow we could work together toward the goals we all shared. As theresult of those meetings, we have formulated a basic statement ofour objective and the principles which should be the basis for abetter drug policy. They are: Our Objective Our objective is to bring drugs within the law. Principles for a Solution. We believe that a better drug policy should be based on threebasic principles: 1) Decisions on the medical use of drugs should be the soleprovince of the medical profession in consultation with itspatients. 2) Punishment should not be used to control private drug use. 3) We must have a consistent policy for all drugs ofpotential abuse. We ask all interested people and groups around the nation tojoin us in a recognition of our common goals and present a unitedfront to the world. We all agree that we need reform now. Thefirst step toward reform is to press for open and honestdiscussion of the issue. Better Public Relations When it comes to funding for media, we are clearly outgunnedby the drug warriors. But, over the last few years we have justas clearly beaten them with a better, more sensible message. Weneed a grass roots effort to educate the media at all levels.Keep track of your local newspaper, television, and radiostations and make sure that the old hysterical lies andhalf-truths of the drug war do not go unchallenged. We haveproven that the media will come our way if they know the facts. Recruitment We all know people who are not members of the DPF but shouldbe. Many of them are not members simply because no one has askedthem to join, or they don't know the DPF is there. No one hastold them that their support is important. We should all make acommitment to recruit at least one new member in the comingmonth. It's easy. All you need to do is ask them. When you leavethe house tomorrow morning, carry a membership application and astamped envelope addressed to the DPF. I will bet you find a newally before noon. The Next Step We have already demonstrated that when the evidence isexamined the drug warriors don't have a leg to stand on. Theyhave lost every debate in the last few years because of theevidence, so the last thing they want now is a public discussionof the evidence. Their "anti-legalization" resolutioneven says so, in so many words. Even the mere discussion ofpossible alternatives, they say, will cause a massive increase indrug addiction. We want to talk about alternatives. We want to review theevidence. We want openness, honesty, and objectivity in a publicreview of all we know about drug policy. We want to lay the cardson the table and let the chips fall where they may. The drugwarriors do not. Therein lies the difference between us. Our mission is to draw the drug warriors into a publicdebate. We must ask the media to ask them: "What's wrongwith the truth? Why don't you want to read the evidence? Whywon't you discuss it? If you are right, the evidence will surelyshow it." We have nothing to fear from the truth. CliffSchaffer's Home Page WT01-B29-60IA031-000655-B047-133http://206.61.184.43:80/schaffer/ACTIVIST/politic.htm 206.61.184.43 19970122115343 text/html 5158HTTP/1.0 200 OKDate: Wednesday, 22-Jan-97 11:53:32 GMTServer: WebSitePro/1.1f (S/N wpo-0deb)Allow-ranges: bytesContent-type: text/htmlLast-modified: Saturday, 28-Dec-96 07:25:05 GMTContent-length: 4941 Political Strategies for Drug Policy Reform PoliticalStrategies by Clifford A. Schaffer This is a first crack at the kinds of political strategies wemust use to end the drug war. We mustwin by knockout. I believe that we must pick issues where we can by knockout.The odds are so stacked against us that, unless we win byknockout, we will not win at all. While I agree with the economics and civil libertiesarguments for decriminalization, I do not favor the use of theseissues as a primary focus. The primary reason that I do not likethe arguments on economics or civil liberties is because they arehighly intellectual arguments which could be debated all day withno clear resolution. They make people think too much, and thatslows down decision-making. We want issues which will changepeople's minds forever -- and do it today. I believe that thesearguments may be useful to convince other people like us, but itwill not convince large masses of Americans. There are two primary issues where I believe we can win byknockout right now. They are the treatment of medical patients,and the issue of African-American men. In both cases we haveclear, overwhelming arguments which would get the immediateagreement of large masses of Americans. We mustbuild a coalition of constituencies. We must bring people of different persuasions together tosupport our cause. In our Resolution, we have already chosen abroadly based statement which does not use the "D" wordand which could be supported by people of all persuasions. Thatis step one. Next we, need to formally identify our constituencies and thespecific arguments which will be most relevant to those groups. Some constituencies are: Doctors - The relevant issues here are the persecution ofdoctors and the treatment of medical patients. Medical Patient Groups - The relevant issue is the treatmentof medical patients. African-Americans - The relevant issue is the incarcerationand economic destruction of African-American men. I believe that doctors and African-Americans are absolutelyvital to our success and that every one of us should takeimmediate steps to recruit them to our cause. We mustform "intervention groups" and target specificindividuals that we need on our side. We have used an approach which someone likened to an AlcoholsAnonymous intervention group. We assembled a group of people thatwe knew an important person would find persuasive. Then we allwent together to that person and explained our concerns in termsthat were important to that person. Then we asked for support,not for the "D" word, but for general drug policyreform. This technique is highly effective and will enable us tochange the thinking of many important people, or at least startthem down the slippery slope to the "D" word. I believethat we should all commit to participating in at least one ofthese intervention groups to change the mind of at least oneimportant person. We mustseek action. We have already asked for public hearings. As many of youhave already stated, public hearings may not come about and, evenif they do, they may not change anything. Therefore, we must seekother means which will also bring about clear publicconfrontations on the issue. When those confrontations occur, wemust all respond unanimously. We mustprovide support for people who speak out for drug policy reform. We all know that many people are reluctant to speak out forreform because of the McCarthy-like tactics of our opposition. Wemust come to the defense of anyone who is criticized or vilifiedbecause of their support for a change in drug policy. Point outthat people are not vilified because they are Republican,Democrat, or Libertarian, but people are vilified if they evenwant to discuss a different drug policy. This is McCarthyism. CliffSchaffer's Home Page WT01-B29-61IA031-000655-B047-162http://206.61.184.43:80/schaffer/ACTIVIST/localact.htm 206.61.184.43 19970122115418 text/html 7701HTTP/1.0 200 OKDate: Wednesday, 22-Jan-97 11:53:54 GMTServer: WebSitePro/1.1f (S/N wpo-0deb)Allow-ranges: bytesContent-type: text/htmlLast-modified: Saturday, 28-Dec-96 07:25:16 GMTContent-length: 7484 Local Action strategies for drug policy reform LocalAction strategies by Clifford A. Schaffer 1. Contactyour local media. Tell them about these web pages and theinformation on them. 2. Readthe newspapers and respond. Make it a point to read the largest newspapers in your areaand be alert for drug-policy related news stories. Write short,punchy letters to the editor to make your views heard. 3. Contactthe talk shows in your area. Most TV and radio talk shows need a steady stream ofcontroversial subjects to make the shows interesting. Sooner orlater, they will all do a show on drug policy. Go through your TVlistings and locate all talk and news shows. Call the stationsand ask for the producers of the show. In most cases, it willsurprise you how easy it is to get through. Tell them about theresolution and the people supporting it. Let them know that thereare prominent people now willing to come forward and debate thisidea publicly. Producers are probably extremely busy, so keep itshort, punchy, and sweet. Have some juicy "sound bites"planned to stimulate interest. Follow up with a letter andprinted material such as the things I have enclosed. Keep intouch with them every ninety days or so, just to make sure thatthey don't forget you. If you get a spot on a good TV show and then don't know whatto do -- call me. We'll work something out. 4. Developa constituency. Contact groups and members of groups to put on a presentationand persuade them to support the resolution. There are all kindsof groups which may support this resolution, each for their ownindividual reasons. They include African-Americans, ministers,doctors, medical patients, law enforcement officials, AIDSgroups, and many others. Pick groups that you think you canpersuade and then develop the issues which are most important tothem. 5. Pickone influential person at a time and persuade them. When you have persuaded them that it is time for a change,and that we should at least look at other drug policy options,get them to commit to going with you to persuade at least twomore influential people. Use this technique to "move up theladder" to more and more influential people. Use the "intervention group" approach. Assemble asmall group of people whom your target will view as influentialand persuasive. Arrange a meeting where all can attend and haveall those people ask the person to reconsider their point ofview. Don't ask them to support legalization ordecriminalization, because it is unlikely that you could persuadethem in one meeting anyway. Just get them to admit that there isenough of a question about the issue that it is time tore-examine the evidence and commit to the investigation of thepossibility of change. 6. Enlistyour friends to create a steady "rain" of resolutionson the White House. Get everyone to commit to sending a resolution a week. Keepit up until we get the commission. Let Clinton know that thisresolution is not going to go away. 7. Developphone networks to get people to respond when we need them torespond. The National Rifle Association is powerful because, at anygiven time, it can bombard the President and Congress withmillions of letters and phone calls. We need the same type ofresponse. 8. Put ondebates and seminars at colleges. Colleges and universities often have philosophy, publicadministration, law enforcement, or political science professorswho might like to put on a public forum or debate on drug policy.Call the local colleges and ask for the heads of thesedepartments, or anyone else you think might be interested.Suggest the idea to them. I have enclosed a sample speech from one of the debates I wasin. You can edit it as appropriate to your needs. I have neverhad anyone make an intelligent comeback to that speech. The enclosed charts can be blown up to 18 inch by 24 inchsize by places such as Kinko's Copies for about $2.50 to $5.00each, depending upon whether you get them on ordinary paper or oncard stock. For large audiences, consider taking 35mm slidepictures of the graphs. If you are out in the middle of the woodsand can't do either of those things, write to me and, if you payfor it, I will have it done for you. The biggest problem you may have with this tactic is that thelocal gendarmes and prosecutors are becoming increasinglyreluctant to come out in public and defend the drug war. Theyhave been getting their butts kicked far too much lately and eventhe most fervent drug warriors are now having a hard time withtheir beliefs. 9. Contactlocal civic organizations. In most towns, there are various local civic organizationsthat might want to have presentations on the drug war for any ofa variety of reasons. Some of them will do it just for theentertainment value. Go through the phone book and locate theRotarians, the Elks, etc. and ask them if they would beinterested. 10. Writeto and call your local Congressman. Most members of Congress are chowder-heads, but there aresome out there who are intelligent enough to read the facts andstand up for the truth. We won't know who they are until peoplelike you can find them. 11.Produce Local Access Cable Shows. You can become a producer for local access cable channelswith as little as five hours of mostly free classes. Call yourlocal cable company for information. Once you become a produceryou can use their facilities to tape shows, or you can broadcasttapes which were prepared by others. We have already done this afew times and have a number of shows which can be made availableto anyone who is hooked in to their local access cable channels. 12. Don'tget discouraged. It may take time to build your persuasive skills and even thebest of us don't persuade everybody the first time around. Keepit up, despite the setbacks, and you will eventually prevail. CliffSchaffer's Home Page WT01-B29-62IA086-000619-B008-81http://206.61.184.43:80/schaffer/ACTIVIST/persuas.htm 206.61.184.43 19970122034635 text/html 22196HTTP/1.0 200 OKDate: Wednesday, 22-Jan-97 03:46:27 GMTServer: WebSitePro/1.1f (S/N wpo-0deb)Allow-ranges: bytesContent-type: text/htmlLast-modified: Saturday, 28-Dec-96 07:25:11 GMTContent-length: 21978 Persuasive Strategies for the Drug Legalization Debate Persuasive Strategies by Clifford A. Schaffer Dos The issue is prison. The issue is not legalization or decriminalization because wereally do not know if we will ever do those things, or anythinglike them. The issue is prison. The issue is how many millions ofpeople will have to go to prison before this policy issuccessful. You cannot successfully defend decriminalization orlegalization to most people at this point, because it is not hereand they cannot see it. Turn the issue around on them, and makethem defend what we are doing now. The drug war has not workedand there is not a drug law enforcement official in the UnitedStates who pretends that it can work. Once they are on thedefensive, it is easy to get them to admit that it is time tolook for another approach -- whatever that approach might be. Do your homework. There is enough information in the references I have listedto sink anyone who supports the use of jails for drugs. That'swhy the reports were written. Be reasonable. If you can present a sound and reasonable approach to solvingthe drug problem, and maintain that stance, you willshort-circuit most of the negative emotions and hostility whichmay be raised against you. Notice that I have said a reasonable"approach" to solving the drug problem, not areasonable "solution" to the drug problem. By approach,I mean a method of finding a solution. Do not try to present asolution because, as discussed later, that only gets you intotrouble. Instead, promote a fair and reasonable method of findinga solution -- such as the objective commission called for by theHoover Resolution. At the same time, this reasonable stance forces our opponentsto either be reasonable and follow us toward reform, or adoptever more extreme positions on drugs. One of my favoritequestions for them is: "What do you have against an open andhonest review of the evidence?" If they do not agree to an open and honest review of theevidence then they clearly demonstrate that they are too extremeto even consider the facts. If they do agree to the review, thenI have them every time because I have already read the evidenceand I know what it says. Judo is better than boxing. You can beat someone with boxing, in which case you knockthem down with your weight. Or, you can beat someone with judo,in which case you knock them down with their own weight. Judo isalways better than boxing when you have to persuade someone. Usethe arguments your audience finds persuasive, not the argumentsyou find persuasive. For example, if you encounter a fundamentalist Christian,nothing you will say to them will have any meaning to them at allunless they believe that Jesus Christ would support what you aresaying. So far most of them have believe that drug users shouldbe thrown in prison because drug use is immoral -- that is, Jesuswould not approve of drug use. I have found that the bestapproach to these people is to help them to understand it intheir own terms. What I say is: "You are certainly a better Christian than I am so youtell me. If Jesus came down here today and we gave the drugproblem to him, what do you think he would do? Would he buildbigger prisons? Or would he build hospitals and schools?" When the issue is stated in these simple terms, most of themwill come around right away. They will immediately see the goodsense in an approach that heals, rather than punishes. Avoid complex arguments The supporters of the drug war have, in keeping with theirgeneral intellectual level, made the simplest propagandapossible. The eggs in the frying pan commercial is a goodexample. In order to compete with them, it is necessary to makearguments which are as simple and as easily understood aspossible. There are a lot of ways to get really complicated in adrug argument but two of the favorites are arguments based oncivil liberties and economics. Please keep in mind that I agreewith the arguments based on civil liberties and economics, I justdon't find them persuasive to others. Arguments based on such topics as civil liberties oreconomics are not likely to be persuasive for three reasons: 1) They are complicated issues which take a lot of thought.Even if you come up with a reasonable sounding argument today,someone will just confuse them tomorrow with an equally goodsounding argument. 2) Surveys consistently show that a large portion of theAmerican public would readily sacrifice their civil liberties totry to solve some mythical problem. 3) The people who are likely to be persuaded are alreadypersuaded. There are exceptions to every rule, of course, but, ingeneral, most people will not be persuaded by philosophicalarguments about civil liberties, or arcane arguments abouteconomics. It may be sad, but it is true. One of the major exceptions to this is property owners.Property owners in California have become very sensitive to thefact that their property can be seized even though they knewnothing at all about criminal activity on the property. Propertyowners can be a pretty vocal group so they should not beoverlooked as allies. Economic arguments, when used, should be simplified to avoidlong-winded discussions which do not resolve anything. Forexample: With $500,000 of tax money we can put one drug user inprison, or we can provide treatment or education for more than100 people. Which do you think is the better deal? Build agreement. Sales people know that a person is more likely to agree withyou if they have already agreed with you. That is, if you can getthem to agree that it is a nice day, for example, they will bemore likely to agree with whatever else you may say. You get themin the habit of saying "Yes" and they will keep saying"Yes." There are certain issues on which nearly everyone willreadily agree. The first is that people who are sick should getwhatever medicine they need. If they understand that marijuanacan help save the lives of people with AIDS and cancer, and thatheroin can help relieve extreme chronic pain, and may even speedhealing after surgery or injury, they will usually agree that --for medical purposes at least -- we should allow the use of thesedrugs. Then point out: Sick people are suffering and dying because they need thesemedicines to live. If that was the only reason to re-examine ourdrug policy it would be reason enough. But, as you know, it isnot the only reason to re-examine what we are doing. Isn't ittime to examine all these problems and see what really is theright thing to do? Attack the very foundations of the drug laws. The drug laws were the product of racism and ignorance. Theynever did have anything to do with public health and safety. Itis important that people understand this point. Most peoplewrongly assume that the drug laws were passed because it wasnecessary to protect people against dangerous drugs. Most peopledo not know that, at the time the laws were passed, there was nomedical evidence to show that these drugs were dangerous, andthat major newspapers like the New York Times published articleswith titles like "Negro Cocaine Fiends, New SouthernMenace." Once people begin to understand that there neverwas a good reason for the laws in the first place, then it isperfectly legitimate to ask what is the reason for these lawsnow. This can lead to a discussion of how the drug laws came to be(your opponent loses by default); or the fact that half of allour prison inmates are black, most of them there on drug charges;or the fact that in places like Washington, DC, ninety percent ofall the black men have already been to jail, most of them on drugcharges (your opponent loses by embarrassment). One standard response The following sentence works for nearly anything youropponent may say: "There is no evidence to support that assertion.Every major study of drug policy agreed that, even if it wastrue, decriminalization would still be a better solution." For example, they may say that, if drugs are legalized thateveryone will become drug addicts. You say: "There is no evidence to support that assertion. Everymajor study of drug policy agreed that, even if drug use didincrease, decriminalization would still be a bettersolution." Preface your sentences Put a prefix in front of your sentences. The prefix is "Everymajor study agreed . . ." Without this phrase, thethings you say will be interpreted as your own opinion. If youuse this phrase, your opinions are seen more clearly as theoverwhelming weight of the evidence. Also, this phrase will forceyour opponent to debate on the basis of fact, where they are theweakest, and will quickly flatten their best arguments. Attack, Attack, Attack. It is the only way you will win. Even if people believed thatlegalization was right, they would still support the current setof laws because they aren't certain about legalization andbelieve the criminal laws do no harm. They must be made to seethat the current laws are worse than no laws at all. You must putyour opponents on the extreme defensive and keep them there. Makethem justify all of the awful facts. The subject is notlegalization or decriminalization. The subject is prison. Keep it short and punchy. Know what you are going to say and trim every excess word. Ifyou are really lucky you will get a full fifteen minutes of mediaair time to explain everything there is to know about drugs. Hitthe major facts as rapidly as you can. Memorize what you want to say Salesmen memorize their sales pitch because, once they haveit down by rote, they can say it without even thinking, thusfreeing their tactical brain to get an edge on their prospect.With tricky subjects like drug policy reform it is very easy tomake verbal missteps which will weaken your case, or send youraudience into extreme cognitive dissonance (a mental shutdown)where they will not hear another thing you say. Be extremelycareful about the phrasing you use and stick with the phrasingwhich will keep you out of trouble. Memorize the names of thestudies so you can spit them out without thinking. Stick to the issue. Don't let the discussion stray into related social issues.Drug policy is one of those issues which is closely intertwinedwith other issues such as morality, education, health care,welfare, and many others. Don't get sidetracked into argumentsover welfare reform or some other complicated issue You don'thave time for it and most Americans don't have the brain capacityto understand the complexities anyway. The issue is whetherbuilding massive prisons will solve the drug problem. Get the facts out. Most people do not know the actual statistics on things likedrug deaths, the number of people in prison, the percentage ofblack men who will go to prison and the plight of medicalpatients who cannot get these medicines. When they hear thefacts, they really begin to wonder about the current policy. Win by inches. Don't try to bring people too far in their thinking. Theconcept of legalization or decriminalization is a bigintellectual and emotional stretch for a lot of people and youcould easily spend years getting them to fully believe it. It issimply not practical, or necessary, to try to bring people overto the legalization side all at once. People will naturally cometo the legalization point of view if you can simply convince themthat our current policy is a disaster which could never work (andthat is really easy!). Once they agree that the current policy isnot working, and cannot work, then they will ask themselves -- ifprisons don't work, what should we do? When they confront thisquestion, they have started down the slippery slope todecriminalization. Federal Judge Jack B. Weinstein said, "Unthinkingacceptance of the current drug policy is unreasonable." Ifwe can just get people to admit that there is a real problem withwhat we are doing now, and that we must look for a bettersolution, they will eventually agree with you. An interesting thing happened to Judge James P. Gray. A manwrote Judge Gray a letter in which he started out by tellingJudge Gray how wrong Judge Gray was about legalization. The guytried to tell Judge Gray why he was so wrong and, in the space ofthree written pages, wound up realizing that Judge Gray wasright. He convinced himself once he just sat down and thoughtabout it. Take the moral high ground Our opponents like to take the stance that anyone who doesnot believe in huge prisons full of drug dealers is less thanmoral, beneath contempt, and is probably selling drugs tograde-school children in their spare time. It is time to teardown this moral charade. There is nothing moral about incarcerating most of the blackmen in America. There is nothing moral about denying legitimatemedicines to people who are suffering and dying. There is nothingmoral about a drug policy which seeks to destroy people, not healthem. The damage being done by this policy is too great to allowanyone to maintain the pretense that this drug war is somethingholy and moral. Don'ts Don't use the "L" word, the "D" word, orthe "M" word. Don't use "legalization,""decriminalization," or "medicalization".These words tend to set some people's heads on fire. In the firstplace, these words will cause many people to go into an immediatecomplete mental shut-down and they will not hear another thingyou say. In the second place, it is wrong to reduce what mustnecessarily be a complex policy under any circumstances, to asingle word. It only serves to further distort the issue.Besides, you don't have to use the words to win. Some people have mentioned that the word"legalization" must be used sooner or later in thepublic debate simply because a recognition that prison is wrongwill lead people to consider the alternatives, which willultimately lead to prison. This is certainly true. However, Iwould recommend that you let your opponent use it first, and thatyou do not promote it as a cause. Don't defend the use of drugs. Don't tell people that everyone has a God-given right to putwhatever they want to in to their body. You may be right, and Ihappen to agree, but it won't play in Peoria. Many people justview this as an excuse to get loaded (and, in many cases, theyare right). Don't advance your own plan for selling drugs. Do not discuss your personal plan for how legalization wouldwork The reasons are: a) You can only sell one product at a time. First convincethem whether we should change the laws. We will haveplenty of time for how later. b) When you suggest how it should be done then yourindividual ideas become the focus. If your plan fails for anyreason, then your whole argument will fail, and; c) The real secret is that there is no right answer to drugpolicy. Every idea you will suggest is only the lesser ofmultiple evils and leaves you open to violent emotional attack. Don't get tied up in debates over the health risks. First let me state that the evidence is quite clear that, byany standard of comparison, alcohol and tobacco are far moredangerous than almost any of the illegal drugs. However, therelative health risks are not really the issue. Just because something is dangerous does not automaticallymean that the best approach to those dangers is to throw millionsof people in prison. We all know that tobacco, and alcohol, andAIDS are hazardous to your health. But we all would agree thatprison is not the best public policy for those hazards. Prison,in fact, would be a terrible mistake. It is the same principle with illegal drugs. We can assumethat drugs are dangerous. That is not the question. The questionis: What is the best public policy for those dangers? On thisquestion, every major study of drug policy has agreed that,whatever the dangers may be, prison is the wrong approach. Everymajor study recommended decriminalization because of thosedangers, and because prison is the worst approach. Bigger prisonsdo not equal better public health policy. Don't get stuck on questions which cannot be answered. Congressman Charles Rangel likes to ask the question,"How do you propose that we go about legalizing drugs?Should we have crack stores next to liquor stores?" Thetrick is that there really is no perfect answer, and any answeryou give leaves you open to attack. It turns the issue into oneof your personal social ideas rather than the objective truththat all studies agree that decriminalization, under almost anyscenario, is a better approach. Don't Overdose I generally avoid mention of overdoses because the worditself distorts the issue in a very emotional sense. The drugwhich produces the most overdoses is alcohol. No one thinks of adrunk high school kid puking into a toilet as a drug overdose,even when you point it out to them. Consumers Union found thatthere are very few real drug overdoses and none at all formarijuana. Most of the so-called "overdoses" wereclearly attributable to other causes, such as impurities in thedrugs. Don't get the issues stuck between you People are more likely to believe you and be persuaded bywhat you say if they feel that you share their same basicconcerns, that is, if they feel you are "on theirside." Always explain you answers in terms of their thoughtsand goals. Your goals are probably the same as theirs anyway --reducing the harm done by drugs, keeping drugs away from kids,controlling the social costs of drugs, etc. Don't let them have anything. There are many, many myths about drugs and drug use. Like forinstance, the old myth that pushers spike marijuana with heroinand cocaine to get unsuspecting kids hooked. It doesn't happen. Licitand Illicit Drugs effectively explodes most of these myths.If your opponent mentions such a myth, jump down his throat andpoint out that there is no evidence at all to support what he issaying. Make them prove it. You can prove what you say, theycan't. Don't get stuck on Constitutional issues. Issues based on the US Constitution will generally not bepersuasive for a number of reasons: They are complicated. They require a lot of knowledge of history, law, and other subjects which most people, including you, are not likely to have. Like any other complicated issue, anyone can make long-winded discussions go on forever with no clear resolution. Complicated arguments are best avoided because they just don't win. The people who are likely to agree with you probably already agree with you. Many Americans, including some intelligent ones, do not understand the protections afforded by the Constitution and why they are so important. Many people tend to feel that the protections of the Constitution were only meant to be given to the law-abiding citizens like them and, besides, if innocent people are hurt because the police have violated their rights, then that is just the price we have to pay for law and order. It is pointless to argue with these people on this point because, for the most part, you are not going to change their basic attitude about it. Even if you win, you don't win anything. Even if you get your opponent to agree that Fourth Amendment rights (or some other rights) are being violated by the police, it can be dismissed as simple bad management. That is, they will argue that we should manage it a little better, but we still ought to continue the war on drugs. Constitutional arguments in general do not effectively address the point that the drug war is morally and practically wrong at its very foundations. CliffSchaffer's Home Page WT01-B29-63IA031-000655-B031-86http://206.61.184.43:80/schaffer/LIBRARY/basicfax.htm 206.61.184.43 19970122110217 text/html 46075HTTP/1.0 200 OKDate: Wednesday, 22-Jan-97 11:02:03 GMTServer: WebSitePro/1.1f (S/N wpo-0deb)Allow-ranges: bytesContent-type: text/htmlLast-modified: Saturday, 28-Dec-96 06:43:13 GMTContent-length: 45857 Basic Facts About the War on Drugs Contents | Feedback | Search DRCNet Library | Schaffer Library | Major Studies Basic Facts About the War on Drugs by Clifford A. Schaffer A summary of the basic facts about drugs and the drugwar. 1. Why were the laws against drugs passed in thefirst place? 2. How many people use drugs in the UnitedStates? 3. How many people are actually killed by drugs? 4. Which drug causes the greatest burden on ourmedical facilities? 5. Which drugs are the most addictive? 6. Do illegal drugs cause violent crime? 7. Can we win the war on drugs this way? 8. How many millions of people will have to goto prison? 9. What does it cost to put a single drug dealerin jail? 10. What does this drug policy do to the blackcommunity? 11. How does our policy compare with thepolicies of other countries? 12. Do the illegal drugs have any legitimateuses? 13. Does marijuana lead to harder drugs? 14. What should we do about drugs? Charts and Graphs on Drug War Statistics 15. How dangerous is marijuana, really? 16. Would "legalization" cost morethan it saves? 17. How Many People are currently in prison,and what are they in for? 1. Why were the laws against drugs passed in thefirst place? The first American anti-drug law was an 1875 San Franciscoordinance which outlawed the smoking of opium in opium dens. Itwas passed because of the fear that Chinese men were luring whitewomen to their "ruin" in opium dens. "Ruin"was defined as associating with Chinese men. It was followed byother similar laws, including Federal laws in which traffickingin opium was forbidden to anyone of Chinese origin, andrestrictions on the importation of smoking opium. The laws didnot have anything really to do with the importation of opium as adrug, because the importation and use of opium in other forms --such as in the common medication laudunum -- were not affected.The laws were directed at smoking opium because it was perceivedthat the smoking of opium was a peculiarly Chinese custom. Inshort, it was a way of legally targeting the Chinese. Cocaine was outlawed because of fears that superhuman"Negro Cocaine Fiends" or "CocainizedNiggers" (actual terms used by newspapers in the early1900's) take large amounts of cocaine which would make them go ona violent sexual rampage and rape white women. There is littleevidence that any black men actually did this, if only because itwould have been certain death. The United States set a record in1905 with 105 recorded lynchings of black men. At the same time,police nationwide switched from .32 caliber pistols to .38caliber pistols because it was believed that the superhuman"Negro Cocaine Fiend" could not be killed with thesmaller gun. Dr. Hamilton Wright is sometimes referred to as the"Father of American Drug Laws". Dr. Wright was theOpium Commissioner at the time and had previously become famousbecause he had "scientifically proved" that beri-beriwas a communicable disease. Beri-beri is a vitamin deficiency. The Harrison Act which "outlawed" these drugs was,on its face, a simple licensing law which simply required sellersto get a license if they were going to handle the opiates andcocaine. As the Consumers Union Report on Licit and Illicit Drugshas said, it is doubtful that very many members of Congress wouldhave thought that they were passing what would later be regardedas a general drug prohibition. The law even contained a provisionthat nothing in the law would prohibit doctors from prescribingthese drugs in the legitimate practice of medicine. In fact, even the people who wrote the Harrison Act and theMarijuana Tax Act in 1937 agreed that a general prohibition onwhat people could put into their own bodies was plainly anunconstitutional infringement on personal liberties. Forcomparison, see the history of the constitutional amendment whichwas required to prohibit alcohol. There is no fundamental reasonwhy a constitutional amendment should be required to prohibit onechemical and not another. The trick was that the bureaucrats who were authorized toissue licenses never did so, and there was a heavy penalty fornot having the license. This heavy penalty required that theenforcing bureaucrats needed more staff and, therefore, morepower, which, in turn required tougher laws. Over the years,through a series of court rulings, they gradually got the courtsto change what had been well-established constitutional law.Specifically, they got the courts to accept the notion that itreally was a tax violation when people got arrested for drugs,and that the fact that the government would not issue anylicenses was not a defense. They also got the courts to bypassthe old issue of whether the Federal Government had the right tocontrol what an individual puts into their own bodies by creatingthe fiction that whatever the person puts into their bodies musthave come as a result of some form of interstate commerce, whichis regulated by the Federal Government in the form of taxes andlicenses and, therefore, since the Federal Government is allowedto levy a tax it is -- by rather indirect logic -- allowed toregulate what anyone may put into their own bodies. Marijuana was outlawed in 1937 as a repressive measure againstMexican workers who crossed the border seeking jobs during theDepression. The specific reason given for the outlawing of thehemp plant was its supposed violent "effect on thedegenerate races." (Testimony of Bureau of NarcoticsCommissioner Harry J. Anslinger, in testimony before Congress inhearings on the Marijuana Tax Act of 1937). The American MedicalAssociation specifically testified that they were opposed to thelaw. When the supporters of the law were asked about the AMA'sview on the law on the floor of Congress, they lied and said thatthe AMA was in favor of the law because they knew the law wouldnever pass without the AMA's endorsement. The law passed, and theAMA later protested, but the law was never repealed. In both cases, newspapers across the country carried luridstories of the awful things that these drugs did to racialminorities, and of the horrors that people of racial minoritiesinflicted on innocent white people while they were under theinfluence of these drugs. Later research has shown that not asingle one of the stories used to promote these laws could besubstantiated. There never was any scholarly evidence that the laws werenecessary, or even beneficial, to public health and safety andnone was presented when the laws were passed. Consumers Union Report on Licit andIllicit Drugs, by Edward M. Brecher and the Editors ofConsumer Reports, 1972 The American Disease, The Origins of Narcotics Control,by Dr. David F. Musto, 1973 The Report of the NationalCommission on Marihuana and Drug Abuse, 1973 The History of the Drug Laws,a short speech by Professor Charles Whitebread, of USC LawSchool. Guinness Book of World Records (information onlynching) "Cocaine Fiends: New Southern Menace," New YorkTimes, February 18, 1914 2. How many people use drugs in the UnitedStates? This is a difficult question to answer with any certainty. The Federal Government's Household Survey on Drug Abuse,conducted annually, is the most commonly cited set of statisticson the prevalence of drug use. According to the latest surveys,cited by the DEA themselves, there are about 12.7 million peoplewho have used some illegal drug in the last month and perhaps 30to 40 million who have used some illegal drug within the lastyear. Of the 12.7 million who used illegal drugs in the lastmonth, about 10 million are presumed to be casual drug users, andabout 2.7 million are addicts. But there are a number of problems with these figures. Thesurvey is conducted by calling people on the telephone at randomand asking them about their use of illegal drugs. Some of theproblems with this technique are: It only reaches people who have a telephone. If the effects of drugs are as bad as some people claim, it seems only reasonable that a lot of addicts would no longer have a telephone. It only reaches people who answered the telephone. There are many groups of people who would not necessarily answer the phone, including addicts who are out looking for drugs, as well as business people out for a two-martini lunch. The survey crew calls people they don't know and asks them if anyone in their household has committed a felony (used drugs) recently. In a time of increasing penalties for drug use, and increasing publicity about those penalties, it seems only logical that most people would not answer this question entirely honestly, particularly if they were currently using drugs and, therefore, were acutely aware of the penalties. Rather than a measure of the number of people who use drugs, the Household Survey may be a better measure of the number of people stupid enough to answer the question. Other surveys put the number of drug users at levels that areperhaps twice as high as the figures produced by the HouseholdSurvey on Drug Abuse. The very disparity of the estimates ofvarious surveys points to one of the problems caused by a generaldrug prohibition. Because these drugs are illegal, it isdifficult to get accurate information about their use. The source for the number of drug users comes from, amongother sources, the Household Survey on Drug Abuse, a Federalsurvey, available through any of the sources listed here. Thecosts to imprison them are based upon figures published by theDepartment of Justice, available through the sources mentionedhere. 3. How many people are actually killed by drugs? The number of drug deaths in the US in a typical year is asfollows: Tobacco kills about 390,000. Alcohol kills about 80,000. Sidestream smoke from tobacco kills about 50,000. Cocaine kills about 2,200. Heroin kills about 2,000. Aspirin kills about 2,000. Marijuana kills 0. There has never been a recorded death due to marijuana at any time in US history. All illegal drugs combined kill about 4,500 people per year, or about one percent of the number killed by alcohol and tobacco. Tobacco kills more people each year than all of the people killed by all of the illegal drugs in the last century. Source: NIDA Research Monographs 4. Which drug causes the greatest burden on ourmedical facilities? Alcohol and tobacco are the clear leaders. Some authoritieshave estimated that up to forty percent of all hospital care inthe United States is for conditions related to alcohol. As a medical hazard, few drugs can compete with alcohol ortobacco on any scale. A study at Rockefeller University in 1967concluded that "Tobacco is unquestionably more hazardous tothe health than heroin." 5. Which drugs are the most addictive? This is a difficult question to answer because it depends upona lot of factors in both the drug and the person who uses it. Inan attempt to define clearly what is meant by addiction, andwhich drugs are the most addictive, Dr. Jack E. Henningfield ofthe National Institute on Drug Abuse and Dr. Neal L. Benowitz ofthe University of California at San Francisco ranked sixpsychoactive substances on five criteria. Withdrawal -- The severity of withdrawal symptoms produced by stopping the use of the drug. Reinforcement -- The drug's tendency to induce users to take it again and again. Tolerance -- The user's need to have ever-increasing doses to get the same effect. Dependence -- The difficulty in quitting, or staying off the drug, the number of users who eventually become dependent Intoxication -- The degree of intoxication produced by the drug in typical use. The tables listed below show the rankings given for each ofthe drugs. Overall, their evaluations for the drugs are veryconsistent. It is notable that marijuana ranks below caffeine inmost addictive criteria, while alcohol and tobacco are near thetop of the scale in many areas. The rating scale is from 1 to 6. 1 denotes the drug with thestrongest addictive tendencies, while 6 denotes the drug with theleast addictive tendencies. HENNINGFIELD RATINGS Substance   Withdrawal   Reinforcement   Tolerance   Dependence  Intoxication Nicotine         3             4             2           1            5       Heroin           2             2             1           2            2       Cocaine          4             1             4           3            3       Alcohol          1             3             3           4            1       Caffeine         5             6             5           5            6       Marijuana        6             5             6           6            4       BENOWITZ RATINGS Substance   Withdrawal   Reinforcement   Tolerance   Dependence  Intoxication Nicotine        3*             4             4           1            6       Heroin           2             2             2           2            2       Cocaine         3*             1             1           3            3       Alcohol          1             3             4           4            1       Caffeine         4             5             3           5            5       Marijuana        5             6             5           6            4       *equal ratings 6. Do illegal drugs cause violent crime? Of all psychoactive substances, alcohol is the only one whose consumption has been shown to commonly increase aggression. After large doses of amphetamines, cocaine, LSD, and PCP, certain individuals may experience violent outbursts, probably because of preexisting psychosis. Research is needed on the pharmacological effects of crack, which enters the brain more directly than cocaine used in other forms. Alcohol drinking and violence are linked through pharmacological effects on behavior, through expectations that heavy drinking and violence go together in certain settings, and through patterns of binge drinking and fighting that sometimes develop in adolescence. . . . Illegal drugs and violence are linked primarily through drug marketing: disputes among rival distributors, arguments and robberies involving buyers and sellers, property crimes committed to raise drug money and, more speculatively, social and economic interactions between the illegal markets and the surrounding communities. Psychoactive Substances andViolence, by Jeffrey A. Roth, Department of JusticeSeries: Research in Brief, Published: February 1994 All major authorities agree that the vast majority ofdrug-related violent crime is caused by the prohibition againstdrugs, rather than the drugs themselves. This was the samesituation which was true during alcohol Prohibition. AlcoholProhibition gave rise to a violent criminal organization. Violentcrime dropped 65 percent in the year Prohibition was repealed. There are about 25,000 homicides in the United States eachyear. A study of 414 homicides in New York City at the height ofthe crack epidemic showed that only three murders, less than onepercent, could be attributed to the behavioral effects of cocaineor crack. Of these, two were victim-precipitated. For example,one homicide victim tried to rape someone who was high on crackand got killed in the process. 7. Can we win the war on drugs this way? We could win the war on drugs if we could be successful in atleast one of three areas: We could stop drug production in other countries. On December 28, 1992 ABC Television aired a major special onthe drug war in Bolivia which, according to the BushAdministration, is our "best hope" for winning the drugwar in South America. They concluded decisively that there was nohope and that the war on drug production has already been lost. By the US Federal Government's own estimates, the entireUnited States consumption of illegal drugs could be supplied byapproximately one percent of the worldwide drug crop. In theirbest year, US Drug Enforcement Agents working together withforeign governments seized about one percent of the worldwidedrug crop, leaving 99 percent free to supply the US. The USGovernment also states that, in the unlikely event that drugproduction was stopped in South America, several countries wouldsuffer a major economic collapse. There is no credible evidence anywhere to suggest that thereis any possibility that drug production can be eliminated inother countries. "Peter Jennings Reporting: The Cocaine War, Lost inBolivia," ABC News, December 28, 1993 US Department of State, Bureau of International NarcoticsMatters, International Narcotics Control Strategy Report(INCSR) (Washington: US Department of State, April, 1993 We could stop drugs at the border. No. Any examination of the statistics regarding borderinterdiction shows quite clearly that border interdiction is anexpensive failure. In 1990, the General Accounting Officecompleted a major study on border interdiction. They reportedthat border interdiction was a waste of money and that noconceivable increase in funding or effort would make it anybetter. In 1988, Stirling Johson, the Federal prosecutor for New York,stated that the police would have to increase drug seizures by atleast 1,400 percent to have any impact at all on the drug market,assuming there were no corresponding increases in production.That was before the police busted twenty tons of cocaine in asingle location and had to revise all their estimates of thecocaine market upward. The best Federal Government evidence has concluded that thereis no way to stop, or even greatly reduce, either production ofdrugs in foreign countries or the smuggling of drugs into the US. There is no credible evidence anywhere that we could stop, oreven greatly reduce, the flow of drugs across our borders. Infact, all of the Federal Government's own evidence shows thatthis is impossible and it is a waste of money to try. Sealing the Borders: The Effects of Increased MilitaryParticipation in Drug Interdiction, Peter Reuter, The RandCorporation, Santa Monica, CA, 1988 "Drug Control: Impact of the Department of Defense'sDetection and Monitoring on Cocaine Flows," GeneralAccounting Office, September 19, 1991 We could stop the sale of drugs within the UnitedStates, The first question to address is how many drug dealers arethere? Under the law, all drug users are drug dealers because thelaws in most states state that any distribution of illegal drugsis considered a sale, regardless of whether there is a profit ormonetary interest involved. Therefore, under the law, anyone whoever passed a joint to the next person at a rock concert is a"drug dealer". If we use the strict legal definition ofa "dealer" then there are somewhere between 12 and 40million drug dealers in the United States. We might use a more restricted definition and assume that wewill imprison only the drug dealers who distribute drugs on aregular basis. Research has long established that most drug salesare between friends who have known each other for a long time.Still, under this tighter definition, most drug users would beclassed as "drug dealers" and we are left with the sameproblem of potentially incarcerating tens of millions ofAmericans. No. Most of the prisons and jails in the United States arealready far in excess of their planned capacity and correctionalinstitutions in 24 states are under Federal court order torelease prisoners. Arresting all of the drug dealers wouldrequire construction of at least five new prison beds for everyone which now exists, assuming that no new drug dealers camealong to fill the gap. In September, 1992 Sheriff Sherman Block announced that hewould release 4,000 prisoners, about twenty percent of the totalLos Angeles County jail population, because there was no room tokeep them and no more tax dollars to build more jails. For everyperson who goes to jail from now on, another one will bereleased. Tough drug laws have done all they can do and they havenot solved the problem. The "get-tough" policy is over. There is no credible evidence anywhere that we could stop, oreven greatly reduce, the sale of drugs within the United States.In fact, all of the Federal Government's own evidence shows thatthis is impossible and not only is it a waste of money to try,but it actually does more harm than if we did nothing at all. Many sources, including the list of major studies and SterlingJohnson, Federal Prosecutor for the District of New York, intestimony before the House Select Committee on Narcotics and DrugAbuse, September, 1988. 8. How many millions of people will have to goto prison? There are currently about 1.5 million people in state andFederal prisons and jails throughout the United States. At thecurrent time, at least 24 states are under Federal court ordersto relieve prison overcrowding. The following chart shows the growth of the US prisonpopulation since 1960. The US prison population was relativelystable from about 1926, when figures were first compiled, through1970. After this point, the effects of Nixon's war against drugs,and later the Reagan and Bush war against drugs, produced adramatic increase in the number of prisoners. There are an estimated thirty to forty million people who haveused illegal drugs in the last year. If we imprisoned all ofthem, we would have to build a prison large enough to hold thecombined populations of California, Arizona, and New Mexico. Thetotal cost to imprison them for five years, including the costsof arrest and prosecution would be roughly ten to fifteentrillion dollars, or about ten times the total Federal annualbudget. This does not include the related costs to society whichwould be caused by the imprisonment of millions of gainfullyemployed, tax-paying citizens. There doesn't seem to be any clear answer to this question. Ihave asked public officials of all kinds, including lawenforcement officers, elected officials and all three of the USFederal Drug Czars. To date, the only person who has ever repliedwith an actual numerical estimate is Michael Levine, one of theDEA's former top agents. He estimated that the optimum number ofdrug offenders to put in prison would be about 2.7 million -- inaddition to the people who are currently in prison. Hisassumption, he said, was that we would put all of the addicts inprison, and he estimated the number of addicts at about 2.7million, based on other government figures. Mr. Levine's planwould require that, for every prison cell which now exists, wewould have to build three more just like it. He did not say whathe would do about the fact that even this plan would leave tensof millions of recreational drug users free to continue theirdrug use with little fear of prosecution. 9. What does it cost to put a single drug dealerin jail? The cost to put a single drug dealer in jail is about$450,000, composed of the following: The cost for arrest and conviction is about $150,000. The cost for an additional prison bed is about $50,000 to$150,000, depending upon the jurisdiction. It costs about $30,000 per year to house a prisoner. With anaverage sentence of 5 years, that adds up to another $150,000. The same $450,000 can provide treatment or education for about200 people. In addition, putting a person in prison producesabout fifteen dollars in related welfare costs, for every dollarspent on incarceration. Every dollar spent on treatment andeducation saves about five dollars in related welfare costs. 10. What does this drug policy do to the blackcommunity? At the present time, one-fourth of all of the young black menin America are either in prison or on parole. Most of them werearrested on non-violent drug charges. In Washington, DC, the Bush administration's"demonstration" city, half of all of the black men inthe city are currently in jail or on parole. More than ninetypercent have arrest records. The same is true of inner city blackmen in Baltimore, New York, New Jersey, and Florida. Two-thirds of all of today's black male high school studentswill be dead, disabled, or in prison before their thirtiethbirthday. The majority will go to prison because of non-violentdrug charges. For every black man who goes to college, three willgo to prison. By the year 2000, about half of all black men in America willhave gone to prison. Most of them will go to prison fornon-violent drug charges. Most of those who go to prison will bereleased into society again. Because they are black men with aprison record, they will be permanently unemployable. "The Prevalence of Imprisonment," US Department ofJustice, 1980, and The Sourcebook of Criminal Justice Statistics. "Incarceration of Minorities," The SentencingProject, Washington, DC, 1992 Employment Problems of Released Prisoners, Department ofJustice, Bureau of Prisons, 1992 11. How does our policy compare with thepolicies of other countries? Europe is beginning to form uniform drug laws as a result ofEuropean unification. Europe is decriminalizing drugs along thelines of the programs used in England and the Netherlands. Mostof the countries have already approved the Frankfort Accord,which adopts decriminalization as the primary approach to drugs. Let's compare the results of two roughly comparable majorcities which both have a drug problem. The cities are New York,and Liverpool, England. In New York, heroin and cocaine addicts suffer from tremendous medical problems. In Liverpool, England, most heroin and cocaine addicts suffer few medical problems. In New York, most drug addicts are unemployed criminals. In Liverpool, most drug addicts are gainfully employed taxpayers. In New York, crime committed by drug addicts is a major problem. In Liverpool, it is a very minor problem. In New York, drug addicts often have their children taken away and live under miserable conditions. In Liverpool, most addicts live with their families in stable homes and manage to raise healthy, well-adjusted children. In New York, thousands of babies are permanently damaged every year by their mother's drug use. In Liverpool, health authorities report no cases of harm to infants as a result of their mother's drug use. In New York, sixty percent of all intravenous drug users are infected with AIDS, and they are a major cause of the spread of AIDS. In Liverpool, only one percent of the intravenous drug users are infected with AIDS and they are a very minor source of infection for the rest of the population. In the United States, drug use is illegal and the police hunt down drug users to throw them in prison. Four thousand people died from illegal drugs in the US last year and we now have more than 600,000 people in prison on drug charges. In Liverpool, England, the police do not arrest drug users any more. Instead, health care workers seek them out and encourage them to come in for counseling and medical treatment. Both counseling and medical treatment are provided on demand. The medical treatment often includes maintenance doses of narcotics under the management of a physician. Liverpool, England, has adopted the same approach as theNetherlands and has had substantially the same results. They bothchose decriminalizatiion. Many sources, including "Rx Drugs" Sixty Minutes,December 27, 1992. For additional information and resources on the situation inEurope, see DrugText 12. Do the illegal drugs have any legitimateuses? Heroin is a powerful pain-killer and could be used to controlextreme chronic pain or the pain of severe diseases, such ascancer. The medical literature shows that heroin is significantlyless hazardous than most of the drugs which are given in itsplace. Cocaine is used as a topical anesthetic in medicine. There are about 50,000 products which can be made from themarijuana (hemp) plant. It has been used since the dawn ofhistory for the widest variety of uses. These uses includefibers, fuels, materials, and medicine. The first American lawsregarding marijuana were passed in the 1700's and requiredfarmers to grow hemp (marijuana) because of its tremendouscommercial value for dozens of uses. It was grown throughout theUnited States as a commercial product well into the 1940's. Itwas made illegal in 1937 largely as a result of pressure from oiland chemical companies who feared the competition from marijuana.Despite the laws, during World War II marijuana was considered sovital to the national interest that the US Government exemptedfarmers from military duty if they grew marijuana. Local 4-Hclubs were encouraged to have their members grow marijuana andthe US Government produced a film called "Hemp forVictory"' Marijuana produces fibers which are ideal for ropes, cloth,paper, and dozens of other products. The fiber is unusuallystrong, soft, absorbent and cheap to produce. If we grewmarijuana solely for paper production, we could completelyeliminate cutting forests for paper. Marijuana produces eightytimes as much usable fiber per acre as a comparable stand offorest. Marijuana can produce several different kinds of fuel. In the1800's and 1900's hempseed oil was the primary source of fuel inthe United States and was commonly used for lamps and other oilenergy needs. The diesel engine was originally designed to run onmarijuana oil because Rudolf Diesel assumed that it would be themost common fuel. Mairjuana is also the most efficient plant forthe production of methanol. It is estimated that, in one form oranother, marijuana grown in the United States could provide up toninety percent of the nation's entire energy needs. Marijuana is useful for a wide variety of medical problemsand, according the the Drug Enforcement Administration's ChiefAdministrative Law Judge, "marijuana is probably the safesttherapeutically active substance known to man," and "itis safer than many of the foods we commonly eat." Marijuanais often the most effective treatment for chronic pain, glaucoma,nausea from chemotherapy, multiple sclerosis, epilepsy, and othermedical conditions. Marijuana can also be used to restore the life of depletedfarmland. It grows quite readily under even extreme conditionsand actually replenishes and extends the life of the soil inwhich it is grown. Depleted soil is now becoming a major problemin some of our most productive agricultural farmlands, such asthe Central Valley of California. For much of this farmland,marijuana could be the cheapest and most effective remedy. 13. Does marijuana lead to harder drugs? There is no evidence that smoking marijuana leads to the useof harder drugs. In the first place, it is chemically illogicalthat the consumption of any drug could give someone the cravingfor another drug they have never had. When the Marihuana Tax Act was first passed in 1937, HarryAnslinger, then head of the Federal Bureau of Narcotics testifiedbefore Congress and was asked specifically if there was anyassociation between the use of marijuana and the use of harderdrugs. He replied specifically that there was no such connectionand that the users of the different types of drugs commonly didnot associate with each other. This myth arose in the 1950's when it became apparent that theold motives for the law against marijuana would no longer beviable. It was then that Anslinger contradicted his earliertestimony and started saying that marijuana led to harder drugs.This change occurred most prominently in the hearings for theBoggs Act of 1951, after a series of doctors had just destroyedeverything Harry Anslinger had said about marijuana in 1937. For Harry Anslinger's testimony, see the hearings for the Marihuana Tax Act. For a short discussion of the origins of the"gateway" myth and how it arose at the hearings for theBoggs Act see The History of theDrug Laws, a short speech by Professor Charles Whitebread, ofUSC Law School. For a more complete discussion of some of these issues, pleasesee The Myth of Marijuana's Gateway Effectby John P. Morgan, M.D. and Lynn Zimmer, Ph.D. 14. What should we do about drugs? The overwhelming weight of the scholarly evidence on drugpolicy supports decriminalization. Every major study of drugpolicy in history has recommended a non-criminal approach. Thisis irrefutable. I recommend that you start with: The Consumers Union Report onLicit and Illicit Drugs, published by the Editors of ConsumerReports Magazine. 15. How dangerous is marijuana, really? Not very. The DEA's own Chief Administrative Law Judge, afterlistening to the evidence for two years concluded that marijuanain its natural form is safer than many of the foods we commonlyeat. More detailed information can be found in the followinglinks: Report of theNational Commission on Marihuana and Drug Abuse. This is thelargest study of drugs and drug policy ever conducted by the USFederal Government. It contains detailed information on allaspects of the medical effects of marijuana. DEADocket No. 86-22, Sept. 6, 1988, ANSWERS TO FREQUENTLY ASKEDQUESTIONS ABOUT MARIJUANA USE This is an excellent summary of many of the questionsregarding marijuana. It is very well-documented. Contributed byChristopher Reeve. PHARMACOLOGY OFMARIJUANA: JUST ANOTHER SEDATIVE by Frederick H. Meyers,M.D., Professor of Pharmacology, University of California, SanFrancisco, Ca. A Review of theScientific Literature Re Amotivational Syndrome This is an excellent synopsis of the information regarding the"amotivational syndrome" and marijuana. Complete withcitations for further reference. Contributed by Brian of DRCNet. 16. Would "legalization" costmore than it saves? No. The best analysis done to date by any Federal officialshows that "legalization" of the now illegal drugswould result in a net $37 Billion annual savings. This estimateis considered conservative. That is, it is likely that thesavings would be more. Federal Financial Analysis ofLegalization of Drugs This Federal financial analysis of legalization comes fromTheodore R. Vallance, Former chief of the Planning Branch of theNational Institutes of Mental Health. His main professionaleffort for many years was directed at just this sort of analysis.The analysis was published in the 7-10-95 issue of NationalReview. Reductions (in millions of $)           From            To              Saving  DirectLaw Enforcement                        13,203          3,300           9,903*Interdiction costs                     2,200           0               2,200*International anti-drug                768             384             384*OCDETF (Organized Crime & Drug         399             40              359          Enforcement Task Force)ONDCP (the "drug czar")                  69              17              52 IndirectVictims of Crime                        842             210             632Incarceration                           4,434           887             3,547Crime careers                           13,976          2,679           11,297                                                                        ________Subtotal                                                                28,374Less increase in prevention research and service                        (3,572)Less increase in treatment research and service                         (2,802)                                                                        ________Subtotal                                                                22,000Plus net income from drug taxes                                         15,000                                                                        ________Total                                                                   37,000                                                                        *1993 Figures. 17. How many are in prison and what arethey in for? How many are in prison? The Department of Justice announced that there are now 1.5million people in prisons across the United States? Who are they? What are they in for? TYPE OF OFFENSE (Sentenced Pop. Only) - FederalPrisoners Drug Offenses 59.6% Robbery 9.8% Property Offenses 5.5% Extortion, Fraud, Bribery 6.8% Violent Offenses 2.7% Firearms, Explosives, Arson 8.6% White Collar 1.0% Immigration 2.8% Courts or Corrections 0.8% National Security 0.1% Continuing Criminal Enterprise 0.8% Miscellaneous 1.5% Federal Bureauof Prisons Home Page Contents | Feedback | Search DRCNet Library | Schaffer Library | Major StudiesWT01-B29-64IA031-000655-B047-184http://206.61.184.43:80/schaffer/ACTIVIST/black1.htm 206.61.184.43 19970122115432 text/html 12504HTTP/1.0 200 OKDate: Wednesday, 22-Jan-97 11:54:25 GMTServer: WebSitePro/1.1f (S/N wpo-0deb)Allow-ranges: bytesContent-type: text/htmlLast-modified: Saturday, 28-Dec-96 07:26:03 GMTContent-length: 12286 How to Approach the Black Community How to Approach the Black Community by Clifford A. Schaffer Introduction There have been many people who have rightly criticized thefact that the drug policy reform movement has not made majorallies in the black community - despite the fact that the blackcommunity is clearly the most severely impacted by the drug war.Instead, the reaction in the black community is often one of evengreater calls for law enforcement presence and even greatersupport for the drug war. While this is largely true, it is simply a matter that mostblack people (like most white people) don't realize how we got towhere we are today with the drug problem. As soon as it isexplained in terms that are relevant and understandable to them,they readily understand and agree with the need for reform -specifically, not putting nearly so many people in prison. I have always found it relatively easy to get black people,particularly black leaders, to support drug policy reform. Theywill not support "legalization", but they will supportspecific steps of reform which both they and the"legalizers" agree are necessary. They already have aproblem with too many liquor stores in their communities, so theywill not support ideas which look like you are going to open up alegal chain of crack houses. They can be expected to argue forthe point that we simply need to stop and look at what we aredoing, and seriously question the whole program. They will alsosupport and argue for constructive, rather than destructiveapproaches to the problem. Ultimately, many black leaders will tell you privately thatthey support "legalization", if they are just given thefacts as a basis for their view. However, they will still have asignificant problem with the public presentation. One churchleader told us that his church had once issued a health kit whichincluded various first aid items, educational materials, phonenumbers to call, a lot of other things, and a condom. He saidthere was a storm of controversy about nothing but the condom andthey eventually had to take it out of the package because theywere spending all their time explaining it and defending it topeople, so they couldn't get anything else done. They ultimatelyfigured that it would be better to distribute the same packagewith everything but the condom. It is sad, but it is a functionalreality of the community they live in. It is one task to persuadethem of the need for reform. It is another task to help them findways that they can address the issue with their own community. How to Find Them, Approach Them, and Win Them Over Do your homework. Be up to date on the latest stats, issues, and arguments as they relate to the black community. Look in the phone book for any churches or other social organizations located in, or allied to, the black community. Call the head of the organization and arrange an appointment. Most of them, particularly churches, will give you one if you just ask. Be prepared with charts, graphs, statistics, historical information, and reference sources, so you have an interesting and persuasive presentation. Cover the racial origins of the laws, with appropriate citations and quotes. Cover the current situation with black men, including the lifetime risk of prison for black men - and how the probability of a drug conviction relates to that total risk. Don't expect them to trust white people. After the last 200 years, they are justified in being a little suspicious at times. Ask them to trust themselves and check everything you say. Then give them the reference sources to do it. Don't use the "L" word, the "D" word, or the "M" word. Use the "R" word - Reform - in terms that are specific to the concerns of the black community. Talk about constructive (treatment and education) rather than destructive (prison) approaches to the drug problem. They know that you (like most of those goody-good white people who come down to meddle in their community) are going to be gone tomorrow and not living with the consequences of whatever takes place in their community. Your arguments must, at all times, be expressed in terms which are meaningful and relevant to them. Understand their position. They CANNOT be seen as promoting or condoning drug use in any way at all. If you tell them you support the right of everyone to get loaded, you will find yourself in the parking lot in a matter of seconds. Remember that the Christian belief is very strong in the black community (though they do tend to have a somewhat more vigorous approach to their religion than those stuffy white people). The argument about what Jesus would do - build bigger prisons, or build hospitals and schools - will strike a resonant chord with many of them. Contrast love, compassion, and healing, with punishment, prison, and destruction. Help them to find a way to talk about it publicly. The issue of the disparity in the sentencing, and the sheer numbers of black men going to prison alone means that we should AT LEAST back up and take an honest look at what we are doing in the drug war. We must build, not destroy. And we must examine the entire drug war, not just the crack laws. Get them involved in our alliance. Get them connected to the Internet, if possible, (usually not possible), or get them on the mailing lists of the relevant organizations. Find someone from their group who will take the initiative in maintaining and responding to communications. Tell them about the online library and the fact that it has large amounts of information about the racial roots of the drug war, as well as other information. Questions I have listed below, a number of the common questions whichwill come up in such an interview, whether they are explicitlystated or not. What is their biggest concern? Their biggest single concern at this point is the ongoingmassive destruction of black men. Black men are being rendered"economically dead" by the massive imposition of prisonsentences. Their point of view may be somewhat skewed, in thatthey may view this as a result of the drugs, not the laws, and itmay not have occurred to them that, as bad as drugs are, criminalpunishment is not the way to address the problem. Why did this white boy come all the way over here to tellthis to me? Because I am concerned about the drug war for my own reasons,and I have the good sense to recognize that there are otherpeople who would also have concerns, for their own reasons. Wewill both achieve better results if we work together towardcommon goals. And, just as a matter of common sense and commondecency, I think it is pretty stupid to lock up half of all theblack men in America. There has to be a better way. Why should I trust you? Don't trust me. Trust yourself. I will simply give you apoint of view and the evidence which I think firmly supports it.I think the evidence will shock you, but I don't ask you tobelieve it. I will give you the reference sources where I got it,and I encourage you to do your own research and let me know ofany facts or issues that I have missed. My strongest allies havealways come from the people who went to the library and verifiedwhat I said. Why should black people support drug policy reform? Because the drug problem is tearing up the black community and we need to find a better approach - whatever it may be. Because the drug laws were based on racism from their inception, so there is no reason to expect them to be balanced and productive laws today. Because every major study of drug policy said that this policy only caused more harm than good, particularly for poor communities. Because it is what Jesus would do. Because we want to rebuild black men and make them productive citizens, not destroy them. Are you asking me to support legalization? Not at all. I am asking you to recognize the simpleproposition that prison has become a bigger threat to black menthan the drugs themselves. Black men can, and do, recover fromdrug problems and go on to live productive lives. They have amuch harder time recovering from a long stretch in prison. Weneed to discourage drug use but we do not need to destroy theirlives in order to save them. But some of these guys are dangerous and need to be lockedup! I fully admit that there are a good number of black men outthere who are dangerous and should be locked up for the good ofsociety. But we have now reached the point where about half ofall the young black men in America will have spent at least onestretch in prison before they are thirty. I find it hard tobelieve that we have to lock up half of all the young black menin America for the good of society. Whenever the numbers get thatlarge, we must stop and ask ourselves if this is really the bestcourse of action. Don't we need some jails? Certainly we do. But we learned long ago that, as bad asalcohol is, Prohibition only caused more problems than it solved.In the current situation, we can use our money to put one moreblack man in prison, or we can use the same amount of money toprovide education or treatment to more than one hundred blackmen. Suppose that someone gave us the decision on where we shouldspend the next million dollars of tax money on this problem -what should we do? Should we provide education and treatment forup to two hundred people, or should we put two more drug dealersin jail? How can I speak about this publicly? Talk about the terrible damage being done by not only the crack laws, but the drug laws in general. The crack laws are the worst example, but they are only one small part of a bigger system that is severely impacting black men. Talk about the need for education and treatment, not prison. Talk about the need for responses to the problem which build people rather than destroy them. Talk about the racial roots of the drug laws - how these laws were built on racism from their very inception, and how the image of the Negro Cocaine Fiend in 1914 is repeated in the image of the crack-fiend today. Talk about the need for an open and honest investigation of this entire drug problem - not just the mandatory minimums for crack. It is the entire drug policy which is wrong and it is the entire drug policy which must be fairly, openly, and honestly investigated. CliffSchaffer's Home Page WT01-B29-65IA087-000632-B037-191http://206.61.184.43:80/schaffer/ACTIVIST/groups.htm 206.61.184.43 19970122070916 text/html 4721HTTP/1.0 200 OKDate: Wednesday, 22-Jan-97 07:09:05 GMTServer: WebSitePro/1.1f (S/N wpo-0deb)Allow-ranges: bytesContent-type: text/htmlLast-modified: Saturday, 28-Dec-96 07:26:57 GMTContent-length: 4504 Local Activist Groups Contents | Feedback | Search DRCNet Library | Schaffer Library | Information for Drug Policy Reform Activists Local Activist Groups Some of the local groups around the world working for drugpolicy reform. If you would like your group listed here, please send theinformation to: schaffer@smartlink.net State City Details Hawaii The Hawai`i Drug Policy Options Group (HDPOG) was formed in 1993 by a group of concerned citizens seeking to open the discussion on alternativaes to current drug policy. General meetings are scheduled around public presentations by local as well as visiting experts on drug policy issues. Members of HDPOG conduct research, provide legislative testimony, and promote drug policy options through the media. For further information, contact Don Topping <dtopping@uhunix.uhcc.hawaii.edu>. Texas Houston Contact Al Robison, phone (713) 266-4329. E-mail:DTWN02A@prodigy.com We meet at 7:00 pm on the 3rd Monday of each month at Palmer Episcopal Church. Dallas Contact Alan Bryan, phone (214) 827-1514. E-mail: adbryan@onramp.net Regular Meeting: 2nd Monday of each month, call for details. Illinois Rockford Rockford Chapter, NATIONAL ORGANIZATION FOR THE REFORM OF MARIJUANA LAWS E.J. Pagel, Director P.O. Box 1786 Rockford, Illinois 61110-286 [800] 501-3753 Contents | Feedback | Search DRCNet Library | Schaffer Library | Information for Drug Policy Reform Activists WT01-B29-66IA086-000619-B008-110http://206.61.184.43:80/schaffer/ACTIVIST/answers.htm 206.61.184.43 19970122034655 text/html 8726HTTP/1.0 200 OKDate: Wednesday, 22-Jan-97 03:46:47 GMTServer: WebSitePro/1.1f (S/N wpo-0deb)Allow-ranges: bytesContent-type: text/htmlLast-modified: Monday, 16-Dec-96 08:40:57 GMTContent-length: 8511 Answers to Specific Arguments on Drug Legalization Answers to Specific Arguments on Drug Legalization by Clifford A. Schaffer If we legalize/decriminalize drugs then everyone will becomedrug addicts. Every major study of drug policy agreed that there is no evidenceto support this belief and, even if drug use did increase, decriminalizationwould still be a better approach. In Europe, several countrieshave decriminalized drugs and actually seen a significant dropin drug use. We need a combined approach of education, treatment, prevention,and stiff law enforcement. This is a smoke screen, designed to cloud the issue and make youropponent seem like they are taking the most rational, balancedapproach while you are the one who is suggesting the extremistmeasures. Don't let them get away with it. You can kick all oftheir extraneous arguments out of the way and refocus the issue We agree one hundred percent on education, treatment, and prevention.The only place where we part company is on prisons. My opponentwants to build prisons larger than the Nazi concentration campsof World War II. I don't think that is necessarily a good idea. We have to keep these drugs illegal to protect our children. I agree. That's why I am looking for a better solution -- becausewhat we are doing now is obviously not working. In fact, the currentpolicy is one of the main reasons that drug users find it profitableto get kids involved in drugs and distribute drugs free on schoolcampuses. I believe that we can find a better approach which wouldstop this. My son/daughter was turned into a psycho by drugs so we haveto stamp out this evil menace. (Keep in mind that the person who says this kind of thing is probablyunder tremendous emotional stress so it would not be polite orproductive to suggest that their kid was probably a psycho allalong. Keep a gentle, sympathetic demeanor.) We have made these drugs as illegal as they can be and these kindsof tragedies still happen. The fact that your son/daughter becamea victim of these drugs shows, in itself, that the current policydid not work for you and your family. All it really does is tomake it harder to provide treatment for the people who need it.I believe that there may be a better way to handle the problem,that just might have saved your son/daughter. Don't you thinkthat we should at least explore the possibility of a better wayto handle the problem? Or: What happened to your child is certainly a tragedy. But tell me,would your child have been better off if they spent twenty yearsin prison? I used to be a junkie until I was saved from the life of eviland I know that drugs should not be legalized! 1) It is illegal now and that didn't stop you. All it really doesis keep most people from getting help sooner because we are spendingall of our money on prisons and we cannot provide adequate treatment. 2) Would you be better off if you had spent twenty years in prison?If we really did it the way you are suggesting, you would stillbe in prison and would not be here to talk to me. You just want to legalize it -- you commie scum! Of course, I have my own ideas about what might be a good solutionto the problem, but that is not the point. The point is that weneed to bring all of our best minds together to consider yourideas for a better solution, as well as mine. The only way thatwe will ever find a better approach is by an open and honest discussionof the evidence and all of the possible approaches to the problem. They tried this in Europe with Needle Park and it didn't workso they are going back to throwing people in prison. Absolutely not true. Europe, in general, is committed to decriminalizationand we invite anyone to talk to the law enforcement officialsin Rotterdam, Amsterdam, or Liverpool, and see for themselves.There have been some policies which the European officials admitdid not work as well as others, such as Needle Park, but theyare still committed to a non-criminal approach to drugs. In addition,England, Italy, Switzerland, Spain, Germany, and Colombia haveall taken steps toward the legalization or decriminalization ofdrugs. In addition, both the head of Interpol and the BritishAssociation of Chiefs of Police have called for an end to drugprohibition. What do you think we should do about drugs? I have my own ideas about what might be a good solution to theproblem, but that is not the point, because I don't have all theanswers and nobody else does either. The point is that we needto bring all of our best minds together to consider your ideasfor a better solution, as well as mine. The only way that we willever find a better approach is by an open and honest discussionof the evidence and all of the possible approaches to the problem. For starters, we might just take the recommendations of any majorstudy of drug policy that you like and start from there. (Thenhand them a list of the studies of drug policy.) Well, why don't we legalize murder, and robbery, and all theother crimes, and then we won't have a crime problem. Drug use and murder are not the same in any sense so this is asilly comparison to begin with. But let's consider this argumentson its merits. There are about 25,000 homicides in the UnitedStates each year, and there are about thirty million people whouse illegal drugs. If we had thirty million murderers or robbers, we would have tofind another way to deal with the problem, simply because thecriminal justice system could not handle the load. This is thecase with the drug problem. It doesn't matter whether we wantto put all the drug users or dealers in prison, it simply is notpossible to do it by any stretch of the imagination. But that avoids the real issue. The real issue is what is themost effective way to deal with the problem. Even if we all agreethat drugs are bad, all of the evidence states that prison onlymakes the problem worse. We should make all the drug users get treatment and put allthe drug dealers in jail. Let's suppose I agree with you one hundred percent and I willrun out right now and place the order for the new prison cellswe will need. Now, please tell me, exactly how many prison cellswill we need to build to carry out your plan? If they say: I don't know. That is precisely the problem. No one has ever thought it throughas to what it will take to succeed with prison. Aren't you really promoting drug use? Not at all, and let me give you example. I personally think thatcigars are one of the most disgusting things I have ever encountered.They are addictive, dangerous to the health of the smoker andthe people around them, and they smell awful. I will do everythingI reasonably can to keep people from smoking them in my presence,and to encourage them to quit. However, at the same time, I havethe good sense to recognize that it would not accomplish anythingto throw George Burns in jail. We can't legalize drugs because it would send the wrong messageto our children. How many millions of people should we put in prison to send justthe right message? Is this really the best way you can think of to send a messageto children? If you can't do any better than that, perhaps weshould be spending our money on some simple courses in basic communicationor child-rearing. We have so many problems with alcohol and tobacco already.Why do you want to add to that? Maybe you missed something. These drugs are already here. Eventhe DEA admits that it has never had a significant impact on thedrug markets at any time. It is a not a question of adding toanything. It is a question of finding the most effective way todeal with a problem we already have.WT01-B29-67IA031-000655-B047-207http://206.61.184.43:80/schaffer/ACTIVIST/dangers.htm 206.61.184.43 19970122115442 text/html 10582HTTP/1.0 200 OKDate: Wednesday, 22-Jan-97 11:54:33 GMTServer: WebSitePro/1.1f (S/N wpo-0deb)Allow-ranges: bytesContent-type: text/htmlLast-modified: Saturday, 28-Dec-96 07:25:55 GMTContent-length: 10364 Pot (Drugs) are Dangerous - How to Deal with the Argument Pot (Drugs) are Dangerous - How to Deal with the Argument by Clifford A. Schaffer You have heard the argument before: Pot is dangerous. It causes cancer, auto accidents,grows hair on your palms, and makes you go blind. This is a guide on how to deal with this argument in allsorts of easy ways. Some of these arguments were developed duringdebates with doctors, so some of them assume that the opponent isa doctor. GeneralDiscussion First, it is generally pointless to get tied up in debatingthe details of health issues or, in general, any supposed dangerof drugs. The reason is that you get so wound up in tradingscientific references that you never get to the real bottom line-- prison. Dr. So-and-So (who the audience doesn't know anyway)says X, Dr. Whositt, says Y -- so what? Net result -- you convince nobody. Once you have won yourmain point, and established that criminal punishment is not aneffective approach to the problem -- no matter what you haveassumed about the dangers -- then you can go back and, at yourleisure, knock down their health evidence as well. My approach -- conceding all their evidence up front -- doesa complete end run. They expect me to argue that pot doesn'tcause cancer, etc. When I don't, and jump to the bottom linepolicy issue (prison), they are completely disarmed. They reallydon't know what to do. They never thought about their logicalnon-sequitir (Because XXXXX is dangerous, therefore prison is thesolution) and are completely unprepared to deal with argumentswhich address the logical disconnect. Once they are sitting therewith a stunned expression on their face -- knowing they have beencompletely cut off -- then I come back with the mop up campaignof addressing the health risks and comparing them with otherhealth risks for which we do not put people in jail. By thattime, they will be doing little but nodding their head andagreeing. I remember one debate in which my opponent showed up with awhole stack of medical references on the harmful effects ofdrugs. A few minutes into the debate he closed his folder andnever opened it again. Of course, as always, he conceded andagreed with me. TheSpecific Responses Now for the specific responses: Ok, you convinced me. Let's assume everything you say is true and it grows hair on your palms besides. How many millions of people do you suppose we ought to throw in prison for best results? Let's assume all the evidence you presented is 100 percent accurate. The evidence you presented shows that pot is perhaps three times as carcinogenic as cigarettes. What does this mean in terms of policy? Does it mean that the penalties for pot should be three times the penalties for cigarettes? Then, of course, there should be even higher penalties for cigars and chewing tobacco, right? So the argument is XXXXXX causes cancer. Therefore, the law is really based on trying to prevent people from doing things which might give them cancer, right? Should we have laws against staying out in the sun too long, eating cheeseburgers, or smoking tobacco? The reasons you have stated never did have anything to do with why the laws were passed in the first place. Please answer two questions: Why were the drug laws passed in the first place? When did the concerns over cancer become the reason behind the laws? If your concern is really the carcinogens, then we can just require that the active ingredient be distributed in its pure form. Or what if someone only uses it by distilling the active ingredient (a simple process) and thereby takes no carcinogens? Shouldn't they be free from penalties? Gosh, you convinced me. Let's solve the problem right away. We will elect you King so you can do _anything_ you want. And ... every pot smoker in America is lined up outside your door with a bag of dope in one hand and a signed confession in the other. Now what? Every major study of drug policy agreed that prohibition only multiplied the bad effects which already exist with drugs. For example, overdoses become more likely because users don't know what they are getting; there are no standards for drug purity so there is greater harm from contaminants, addicts are less likely to receive effective treatment, etc. The more you assume about the harmful effects of drugs, the more imperative it becomes to address them in a non-criminal manner. Your evidence states that pot may be a problem while driving. Let's assume (for the sake of argument) that this is true. Do we attempt to solve the problem of drunk driving by throwing wine and beer drinkers in jail? Why not? (Can you say "misapplication of resources"?) The argument that pot was found in the bloodstreams of any group of people who died from any cause is not indicative of anything other than that they might have used pot some time within the last two months before they died. It does not say anything about all the people who may have pot in their bloodstreams and still be alive and well. It doesn't even say anything about _why_ they died. For comparison purposes, as any competent doctor knows, we need control groups. We must be wary of false comparisons (as any competent doctor should know). For example, we had one previous example in which large numbers of people were dying with pot in their bloodstreams. It was called Vietnam. Pot smokers had a high death rate, but it had nothing to do with pot. Pot causes cancer. Therefore, the best approach to the problem is to put millions of people in prison. This is the basic argument. Can you say "non-sequitir"? Where did you get the idea that if something is a health hazard, we ought to throw people in prison? Name all the other health problems for which prison is the recommended treatment. Please make a list of the comparable health problems caused by say, alcohol, and then match the health problems with the appropriate criminal penalties. Then maybe you can tell me why every major study of drug policy in the last fifty years recommended decriminalization. (See the list of Biggest Studies of Drug Policy on my web page.) You know, we can dispense with all the details and cut to the bottom line. Rather than argue the details of what it _might_ cause, we can take a look at the actual stats on what it _does_ cause. When we look at the official stats, such as deaths from any pot-related cause, the numbers are trivial in comparison with the damage done by alcohol and tobacco. We are spending 99 percent of our budget on one percent of the real drug problems. If YourOpponent is a Doctor 16) Hey, Doc! What is the first rule of addressing a healthproblem? First, do no harm. Right? Putting people in prison doessignificant harm long before they are likely to get cancer. If my opponent is a doctor I will hammer him on points justlike the one above. If he is really concerned about pot as ahealth issue then, by God, he ought to be ready to address thatpart of the problem as he would any other health issue. Would heput people in prison for non-marital sex in order to preventvenereal disease? Obviously he wouldn't. Hit him with his ownvalues and evidence. And, if he is a doctor, I would hammer him repeatedly on thefact that he really didn't know anything about the subject. Like: So tell me why the Consumers Union Report on Licit andIllicit Drugs said that prohibition was the worst thing we coulddo for drug-related health problems. You haven't read it haveyou? The big problem here is ignorance, Doctor. It is one thingto read some medical literature about the harm these things cando and it is quite another to make the leap to an effectivepublic policy. Your problem, Doctor, is that you have read someof the medical evidence but haven't read the evidence on drugpolicy. Ignorance is a shameful thing in someone with as mucheducation as you have. In short, if I am in a debate with a doctor, he will fallbefore I am done -- because he is a doctor. I will goad him intoreading the CU Report by taunting him, calling him ignorant,cajoling him, or anything else I have to do. I will force him toeither read what I have read or look like a public fool. Oncethey read it, they always concede. For example, see my muchearlier post "Cliff Converts Doc". It was written by adoctor who fought me tooth and nail and then wound up tellingeveryone that I was right. Excerpts of my debate with him areposted on my web page. CliffSchaffer's Home Page WT01-B29-68IA086-000619-B008-130http://206.61.184.43:80/schaffer/ACTIVIST/showstop.htm 206.61.184.43 19970122034708 text/html 15231HTTP/1.0 200 OKDate: Wednesday, 22-Jan-97 03:47:02 GMTServer: WebSitePro/1.1f (S/N wpo-0deb)Allow-ranges: bytesContent-type: text/htmlLast-modified: Saturday, 28-Dec-96 07:24:57 GMTContent-length: 15013 Show Stopper Questions for Your Opponent ShowStopper Questions for Your Opponent by Clifford A. Schaffer These are the questions that drug warriors are simply unableto answer. They stop them cold every time. Please keep in mind with all of these questions that youropponents will try their best to squirm out of an answer. If youare talking to a politician, they will typically try to put out aten-minute smoke screen and hope no one recognizes that theynever did answer the question. If they try the smoke screen, trythe approach listed under Smokescreen: How manymillions of people do you think we ought to put prison for drugsto have the best results? I have asked many people this question over the years. It isat that point that they usually fall out of the debate. No onecan answer this question with anything that makes any sense,except zero. The first, and most obvious thing they do, is to tryto talk their way around it. This is not an essay question. According to various estimates there are at least twelvemillion regular users of illegal drugs, and possibly as many asforty million. We now have about 1.5 million people in prisonsand jails across the country, and all the jail cells are alreadyfull. It is immediately obvious to everyone that we cannot affordto put forty million people in prison, even if it was a goodidea. In fact, we cannot afford to put twelve million people injail, either. Most people, when asked this question, will immediately backoff of the idea that we should put drug users in prison, simplybecause it is obvious that there is no way we could jail enoughof them to make a dent in the problem. "Just send the drugdealers to prison." they will say. "OK," I ask. "How many do you suppose thereare?" They usually don't know, so you have to lead them a littlebit. Under the law, all drug users are technically dealersbecause anyone who ever passed a joint to another person at arock concert is considered a "drug distributor". Undermost state laws, it matters little what the context was, orwhether the person received any profit from passing the joint tothe next person. So, potentially, that would mean we wouldimprison up to forty million people -- obviously impossible. Therefore, we determine that we can't go by the current legaldefinition of a drug dealer, but we would have to make arequirement that we only go after those who are really in theregular business of selling drugs, either on a part-time, orfull-time basis. If we assume that about ten percent of the usersare "dealers" by this definition (a fair estimate),that would mean that there are somewhere between 1.2 million and4 million drug dealers. In order to succeed then, we would haveto build up to four prisons and jails for every one which nowexists -- and hope that solved the problem. One person, ex-DEA agent Michael Levine suggested that wejust jail the hard core drug users, a number he estimated atabout 2.7 million. I asked him if he really thought it was a goodidea to build two or three prisons for every one which nowexists, jail almost three million more people, and hope thatwould solve the problem. It seemed to me obvious that itwouldn't, since it would leave between ten and forty millioncasual drug users to go about their business. A few won't back off and will insist that we should jail allforty million people, if we have to. Some have even insisted thatwe should also jail another hundred million who indulge intobacco or alcohol. These people will look like fools in front ofthe vast majority of audiences, and just cause most people tocome over to the side of reform. Their Answer Any answer to this question is bound to be wrong. If theymention a low number, point out that we already have hundreds ofthousands of people in prison for illegal drugs and millions havebeen arrested and prosecuted. That obviously did not stamp outdrugs, so a small increase in the prisoners will not have anygood effect. A general line of BS. Drug warriors will do anything they can to get out ofanswering the simplest question about our drug policy. Don't letthem get away with evading a direct question. Come back to thepoint until they either give you an answer or admit they don'thave a clue. We are embarked on a campaign which is based on thebelief that we can put enough people in prison to effectivelycontrol the drug problem. The question is simple: How manyprisoners is the current plan going to take? They have asked us, the taxpayers to write a blank check forprisons. As the people writing the check for these taxes, it isonly fair for us to ask for the amount that is going to go on thecheck. Just tell us how many prison cells are going to berequired. No one knows the answer to that question. Bull. It is perfectly easy to calculate the number of prisoncells needed to address criminal problems. For example, there areapproximately 25,000 homicides in the US each year which meansthat we need a maximum of about 25,000 prison beds to hold theperpetrators. A similar estimate could be drawn for the number ofrobbers, rapists, etc. In all of these cases, the number ofprison cells required to hold the perpetrators is something ourcountry can manage. This is not the case with the drug laws. Your question assumes that we will imprison forty millionpeople. No, the question doesn't assume anything. I want you to tellme how many people you think we ought to put in jail, and thentell me your assumptions. As many as we have already. Does that mean you would be willing to end all further drugarrests beyond the amount we have now? Once the police reach thisquota, should they stop arresting drug offenders because we knowwe only have room for so many? Any number of million. If they mention five, ten, or twenty million, multiply thenumber they mention by $500,000 and tell them the cost of thatapproach. For example, the cost to incarcerate 1 million peopleis five hundred billion dollars; 2 million is one trillionDollars, 10 million is five trillion dollars, and so forth. Thencrucify them for wanting to build prisons larger than the Naziconcentration camps. I don't know. If they say they don't know, then say, "That isprecisely the problem. No one, including you, has ever sat downto figure it out. If you did, you would find out soon enough thatit is just plain impossible to solve the problem this way." Smokescreen Excuse me for interrupting, but that was not an essayquestion. The question can be answered with just a simple number.What will it take, 5 million, 10 million, 20 million? How manymillions of people will have to go to prison to solve the drugproblem this way? For DrugEnforcement Officers: What would you do if you got your fondestwish? What would do if, tomorrow morning, you woke up and everydrug user in America was lined up outside your door with a bag ofdope in one hand and a signed confession in the other? Their Answer Their immediate response is usually, "I would arrestthem, of course!" That is a perfect opportunity to ask "OK, how many doyou suppose there would be? I am just asking because I want tohelp you get whatever you need to do the job right." That will lead into the general discussion shown in theprevious question. For DevoutChristians: What would Jesus do if we gave this problem to Him?Would He build bigger prisons? Or would He build hospitals andschools? I usually preface this question by saying, "You are abetter Christian than I am, and you probably know more aboutJesus than I do. So you tell me . . ." Give them credit forthe strength and correctness of their belief. Their Answer Most Christians will be stunned by the simplicity and powerof this argument. Most of them will be able to immediately seethe sense behind what we are saying. Some of the immediatereactions I have gotten from Christians, including ministers,are: "When you put it that way, the answer is obvious." "That's pretty cut and dried, isn't it?" "Schools and hospitals, obviously." Most of the answers will be in that vein. A few Christians are exceptionally bigoted people and willinsist on hell-fire and damnation for anyone who dares totransgress their ideas of sin. They are in the definite minorityand the vast majority of people will see their reactions asextreme. On one occasion, a prominent minister told me that he thoughtperhaps Jesus might build bigger prisons because of the story ofSodom and Gomorrah. "Correct me if I am wrong," I said,"but I believe the story of Sodom and Gomorrah is in the OldTestament, not the New Testament." He got the point that theministry of Jesus was all about love and healing. One minister told me that he thought Jesus would build acertain number of prisons in order to keep the dangerous peoplefrom harming others. "That's probably true," I said,"but what about the prisoners -- up to two-thirds of them --who are there purely for non-violent drug offenses?" I havehere a list of every major study of drug policy in the last fiftyyears. Every one of them recommended decriminalization. Do youagree that the overwhelming weight of the scholarly evidence ondrug policy supports decriminalization? Before you answer, let me remind you that there are onlythree possible answers to this question. The first possible answer is yes, you agree. The second possible answer is no, you do not agree, in whichcase you should be able to provide a list of studies of drugpolicy comparable in quality and quantity to the list I haveprovided. The third possible answer is that you don't have a clue whatthe scholarly evidence says because you have never read the mostbasic research on the subject. Their Answer The answers that I have gotten to this question include: The scholarly evidence is not important. (From BobMartinez, former Drug Czar) Is the scholarly evidence not important in science, medicine,and every other field of law? Or is it not important only when itcomes to drug policy? I don't think anyone really knows the answer. Can you name any major study of drug policy which supportedwhat we are currently doing? (They probably can't.) So we haveten major studies, including the largest studies ever conductedby the governments of the United States, Britain, and Canada,which supported decriminalization and none that supported thecurrent policy. Wouldn't you say that is the overwhelming weightof the evidence? Everyone has their list of studies which they can make upto show anything they want. OK, so show me any comparable list of studies that you havein support of the drug war. (So far, in more than six years ofdebates, no opponent has ever mentioned a single major study ofdrug policy which supports the current drug war.) I don't have a clue. That is precisely the problem. You want to tell us what drugpolicy should be when you have not even bothered to read the mostbasic research on the subject. Here is a list of studies . . . . A few people have tried to bluff their way through by citingstudies about organized crime, alcohol, or something else. Theymay also cite magazine articles, books by particular authors,editorials or other opinion pieces, etc. Examine each onecarefully. Is it really a comprehensive study of the history andfacts relating to these drug laws, or is it just one person'sview? Did it consider all evidence and all views? Was itcomprehensive, or was it a simple magazine article of a fewpages? Did the author have an axe to grind or something to gainfrom the opinion expressed? Does the work contain a completediscussion of the history of the laws? Does it consider the lawsin the context of similar facts about tobacco and alcohol? People have mentioned a lot of different things in responseto this question, but none of them have met the criteria of aserious study of drug policy. Smokescreen Excuse me for interrupting, but that was not an essayquestion. That was multiple choice. What is your answer; yes, no,or don't have a clue? It costsabout half a million dollars to put a single drug user in prison,which includes $150,000 for arrest and prosecution, about$150,000 for a new prison cell, and about $30,000 per year timesat least five years. For the same cost we can provide treatmentor education for more than one hundred people. Which do you thinkis the better deal? Their Answer: Almost no one will attempt to argue that prison for oneperson is better than education or treatment for several hundred.Most often they will say, "It's not that simple, you can'tjust say that because you are not going to put one person inprison that you automatically have the money for treatment oreducation." You answer: It IS that simple. Right now, California and several otherstates are closing schools, libraries, and medical facilities inorder to build more prisons. The money is being taken fromeducation and treatment to fund more prisons. CliffSchaffer's Home Page WT01-B29-69IA031-000655-B047-256http://206.61.184.43:80/schaffer/ACTIVIST/speech1.htm 206.61.184.43 19970122115505 text/html 21315HTTP/1.0 200 OKDate: Wednesday, 22-Jan-97 11:54:46 GMTServer: WebSitePro/1.1f (S/N wpo-0deb)Allow-ranges: bytesContent-type: text/htmlLast-modified: Saturday, 28-Dec-96 07:24:52 GMTContent-length: 21097 Speech on Drug Legalization Fullerton Community College Speech by Clifford A. Schaffer This is one of my typical speeches First, I would like to inform everyone that the real subjecthere today is not drug decriminalization, or legalization, orre-legalization, or anything like that, because we still don'tknow if we will ever do any of those things. What is certain isthat, at the current rates of incarceration, we will build thelargest prisons in the world. The issue is prison. It is not upto us to justify decriminalization. It is up to those who supportthe current policy to justify putting millions of people inprison behind a drug policy which everyone admits cannot work. One of the reasons that I am here is because of my mother. Ihave heard many people say that the crusade against drugs is amoral issue. William Bennett, our first national Drug Czar, saidthat it is important to stamp out drugs because it is the moralthing to do. I will show you that there is nothing moral aboutit. On April 20, 1992, my mother told me she wanted to die. Shecalled me that evening and asked me if I would understand if shecommitted suicide. My mother is sixty-five years old and shelooks and acts at least ten years younger than her age. She stillworks because she enjoys her job. Why then does she want to die? A few years ago she had a minor operation on her ribs and,during the operation, some nerves were damaged. It wasn'tanyone's fault, it is just one of the ordinary risks of surgery.It could happen to anyone. Now the nerves fire constantly, atnear-maximum intensity. She says it feels as if someone isholding a blowtorch to her ribs -- twenty-four hours a day. Shecan no longer wear clothes which touch her skin. She can nolonger walk in a warm spring rain because the pain of a singleraindrop is too much to bear. Something as simple as a hug fromher smallest granddaughter will make her fall to the floor intears. She has spent the last few years traveling across the UnitedStates to find a cure. The doctors have tried a long list oftreatments including surgery, drugs, ointments, electricity, andmany other things. None of them worked very well and many of themwere dangerous. The best of them was a nerve block. The nerveblock required my mother to lay on her stomach while the doctorsinjected anesthetic directly into the nerve causing the problem.The needle had to be placed precisely on the nerve so it usuallyhad to be moved around for a few minutes to get just the rightspot. It reached the limits of human pain. The pain was so greatthat her body rigidly locked up, with her senses overloaded. Shecould not scream, breathe, or even see. On two occasions they punctured her lung with this procedure,and once they actually stopped her heart. To revive her, theygave her CPR, which means they had to pound on her ribs. When sheawoke she screamed at them to kill her. She said that she wasbitter for months because they had not let her die when they hadthe chance. She has since left written instructions that, if herheart ever stops again, she is not to be revived. Still, she saidthe nerve block is worth it, because it gives her relief foralmost three days and, besides, there is always the chance thatshe will luck out and they will kill her again. Only one treatment has ever worked to ease the pain. Thattreatment is morphine. Morphine does not make her into a drugaddict. It does not make her into some kind of mindless zombie.It does not even make her high. It just allows her to live arelatively normal life, free from the pain in her side. Whencompared with the other available treatments, morphine is thecheapest, safest, and most effective treatment for her condition. He doctors will not give her morphine, for two reasons. Thefirst reason is that they are afraid she will become addicted. Astudy conducted at Johns Hopkins Medical School showed that theaddiction rate for the medical use of morphine was less thanone-half of one percent. Even when patients do become addicted,morphine addiction can be easily managed in a proper medicalenvironment, so addiction is not a legitimate medical concern. The second reason they will not prescribe morphine is thatthey are afraid of the drug police. They know that the DrugEnforcement Administration and the local police can seize theirproperty and destroy their careers over a single questionedprescription, and the police do not even have to file criminalcharges to do it. It not only can happen, it does happen. Lastyear, the Drug Enforcement Administration sent two doctors toprison for prescribing Tylenol 3. That is Tylenol with codeine.Tylenol 3 is a prescription drug in only two countries in theworld, the United States and South Africa, and the United Statesis the only country which has ever sent a doctor to prison forprescribing this common medicine. There are many other caseswhere doctors have had their lives and careers ruined overequally trivial matters. My mother has mixed emotions when I speak out about herproblem. She says that she really does not want anyone's sympathybecause, since she has had this problem, she has discovered thatthere are so many more people who are in worse condition than sheis. Some people with AIDS get this same kind of condition allover their bodies. Every day of their lives is worse than anyhorror movie that you have ever seen. They can't get morphineeither. Seven thousand five hundred people go blind from glaucomaevery year because the best medicine - marijuana - is illegal.And the list goes on. There are literally millions of people with chronic pain,cancer, AIDS, glaucoma, and other conditions for which the safestand most effective medicine is a drug which is now illegal.Hundreds of thousands of them violate the drug laws every daybecause they need these medicines to live. On behalf of all of the families affected by AIDS, andcancer, and glaucoma, and a dozen other diseases, I am here totell you that this drug policy is indecent and it must bestopped. There is nothing moral about a drug policy which makessick people choose between prison and death. Drug policy is a complicated issue and we will not have timetoday to resolve all of the points under discussion. In the pastfifty years, however, there have been several occasions whenmajor commissions have been formed specifically to study theevidence and the options for drug policy and to makerecommendations. There have been both public and privatecommissions, domestic and foreign, performed by people of allpolitical persuasions from liberals to conservative law-and-orderRepublicans, and people who aren't even on our political map.They all recommended decriminalization. I would like to read to you some of the studies which havereached this conclusion: The LaGuardia Committee Report, commissioned by MayorFiorello LaGuardia, written by the New York Academy of Medicine,and published by the City of New York in 1944. The Baroness Wootton Report, published by thegovernment of the United Kingdom in 1967. The Report of the Canadian Government Commission ofInquiry into the Non-Medical Use of Drugs, published by theCanadian Government in 1969. Dealing With Drug Abuse: A Report to the Ford Foundation,published by the Drug Abuse Survey Project in 1972. The Consumers Union Report on Licit and Illicit Drugs,published by the Editors of Consumer Reports Magazine in 1972.This is a landmark study, a "must-read", used as abasic textbook at major universities. The Report of the National Commission on Marihuana andDrug Abuse, commissioned by President Nixon, and published bythe U.S. Federal Government in 1973. The Facts About Drug Abuse, published by the UnitedStates Drug Abuse Council in 1980. An Analysis of Marijuana Policy, published by theNational Research Council of the National Academy of Sciences in1982. The Report of the California State Research Advisory Panel,commissioned by the State of California, and published in 1990. The recommendations in these reports were endorsed by (amongothers) the American Medical Association, the American BarAssociation, The American Association for Public Health, theNational Education Association, and the National Council ofChurches. I might also add that the last two reports of the NationalCommission on AIDS have also recommended that we adoptnon-criminal approaches to drug abuse. We may debate the details of the many issues of drug policyall day, but one basic fact is undeniable. When all of the issuesand all of the evidence is considered, the overwhelming weight ofthe scholarly evidence on drug policy supports decriminalization. The first question that we need to ask ourselves is: How didwe get into this mess? Any study of the history of the drug lawsshows that they were based on two primary factors; racism andignorance. You may have wondered why marijuana, heroin, and cocaine areillegal while other equally dangerous drugs such as tobacco andalcohol are legal, and even promoted by the Federal Government.The primary reason is that alcohol and tobacco were associatedwith white people while the other drugs were associated --wrongly -- with people of color. Opiates were first outlawed because of the fear that Chinesemen were luring white women to their ruin in opium dens. Ruin wasdefined not as opium addiction, but as associating with Chinesemen. In the early years of this century, many of the majornewspapers printed lurid articles about superhuman Negro CocaineFiends who would take large amounts of cocaine which would causethem to go on a violent sexual rampage and rape white women.Police departments across the nation switched from .32 caliberpistols to .38 caliber pistols because as one Police Chiefstated, "Those cocaine niggers sure are hard to kill."Newspaper stories of the day told lurid tales of Jewish peddlersselling cocaine to poor southern blacks. There was also amovement to ban caffeine for the same reasons. There was noevidence to back up the myth of the Negro Cocaine Fiend simplybecause most black people did not have the money to buy cocaine.Any black man who did rape a white woman would have had to besuicidal because in 1905 there were 105 recorded lynchings ofblack men for unspecified offenses. Marijuana was later outlawed largely as a repressive toolagainst Mexican laborers who were competing with American workersfor jobs during the Depression. Racism was one of the primary themes of the campaign againstdrugs until the campaigns for civil rights in the 1950's and1960's made it unacceptable. At that point, the drug warriorsturned to other myths to defend their cause. You have heard someof those myths today. It is important to remember that many ofthe myths you heard today were made up in the 1950's and 1960'swhen it began to be apparent that the old myths just wouldn't cutit any more. These laws never did have anything to do with publichealth and safety. GRAPH We next need to understand the facts on the issue. My firstgraph shows the number of deaths caused by drugs, both legal andillegal, in the United States in a typical year. Tobacco kills about 390,000 people. Alcohol kills about 80,000. Sidestream smoke from tobacco kills about 50,000 people whodon't even smoke. Prescription drugs kill at least 10,000. Cocaine kills about 2,500. Heroin kills about 2,000. Aspirin kills about 2,000 Marijuana kills 0. Even the DEA itself says that there hasnot been a recorded death due to marijuana in the history of theUnited States. All of the illegal drugs combined killed about 4,500, orabout one percent of the number killed by tobacco. Tobacco killsmore people every year than all of the people killed by all ofthe illegal drugs in the Twentieth Century. More Colombians diefrom the effects of American tobacco than the number of Americanswho die from Colombian cocaine. As you may know, tobacco isheavily subsidized and promoted by the United States Government.The US Government demands that other countries buy more Americantobacco even while we threaten them with war for sending us theirmarijuana and cocaine. Right now we have about 1.3 million people in prison. Morethan 600,000 of them are there for non-violent drug offenses. Forevery person who died from illegal drugs last year, one hundredand fifty people went to prison. Most of them were black men. You may hear a good deal of take about the dangers of illegaldrugs. First let me state that the medical evidence is very clearthat, by any standard of measurement, alcohol and tobacco aresubstantially more dangerous to both the individual and tosociety than any of the illegal drugs. We have known this for atleast twenty-five years. This is not to say that use of any drugis entirely safe. We could safely assume that almost anything weput into our bodies is going to have some health risk, to agreater or lesser degree. That is not the issue. Just because something is hazardous does not automaticallymean that the best approach to those hazards is to throw millionsof people in prison. In fact, every major study of drug policyhas concluded that prison only makes those hazards worse andincreases the damage done to society. As one commission stated,the more we learn about the dangers of drugs, the more it willbecome apparent that massive prisons are a medical and socialdisaster. It is precisely because of those health hazards that wemust not send people to prison for drug offenses. We might win the war on drugs if we could be successful inone of three areas. First, we could try to stop the production of drugs inforeign countries. There is no credible evidence anywhere whichwould suggest that we could stop, or even greatly reduce, theproduction of drugs in foreign countries. The Federalgovernment's own evidence shows that this is impossible and it isa waste of money to try. Second, we could try to stop drugs at the border. There is nocredible evidence anywhere which would suggest that we couldstop, or even greatly reduce, the flow of drugs across ourborder. The Federal government's own evidence shows that this isimpossible and it is a waste of money to try. Third, we could try to stop the sale of drugs within theUnited States, even while we know that it is impossible to stoptheir production, or to keep them outof the United States. Thereis no credible evidence anywhere which would suggest that wecould stop, or even greatly reduce, the sale of drugs within theUnited States. Again, the evidence shows that this is impossibleand, not only is it a waste of money to try but, in fact, the waragainst drugs actually causes far more harm than good. The largest part of that harm falls upon the African-Americancommunity. GRAPH I have here a few graphs which were taken directly from USFederal Government statistics. The first graph shows the numberof people in prison over the last fifty years. The number ofpeople in prison was relatively stable for about fifty years,until the 1970's when President Nixon started the first majorcampaign against drugs. Then the number of inmates began to risesharply. It was also during the 1970's that a major recession hitthe country and African Americans, being at the bottom of theeconomic totem pole, were the first to lose their jobs and thelast to be rehired when the economy changed. As a result of thestresses on unemployed fathers, African-American families beganto fall apart and we saw the first great rise of black familiesheaded by single mothers. This became especially significantbecause of what happened in the 1980s. In the 1980s the rate of incarceration went through the roof.Since 1980 we have tripled the number of people in prison and wenow have the largest prisons in the world. We will almost tripletheir size again before the year 2000. GRAPH The next graph shows the racial breakdown of our prisons, andprojects those figures into the future, based on current trends.By the year 2000, our prisons will be larger than the Naziconcentration camps of World War II. About two-thirds of all ofthe people in our prisons will be black men, most of themarrested for non-violent drug offenses. For every black man whogoes to college, at least three will go to prison. Two-thirds ofall of today's black male teenagers will be dead, disabled, or inprison before their thirtieth birthday. The largest single groupof them will go to prison for non-violent drug offenses. Even as we speak, one-fourth of all of the young black men inAmerica are in prison, on probation, or on parole. In some innercities such as Washington, D.C. and Baltimore, which were testcases for the war on drugs, more than half of all the young blackmen in the city are under the supervision of the criminal justicesystem. It is estimated that more than ninety percent of theblack men in these cities have already been incarcerated at leastonce. When an African-American man goes to prison he becomeseffectively permanently unemployable because nobody will hire ablack man with a prison record. Most of the young black men inour nation's capitol are already economically dead as a directresult of the war on drugs. They become social pariahs, unwanted by employers and even bythe women in their own communities. They are unable to restorethemselves and the families that we will need to rebuild ourinner cities. The economic destruction of African-American mencaused by the war on drugs is perhaps the singlest biggest reasonthat African-American families continued to disintegrate in the1980's even in the midst of an economic boom. Even conservative black leaders are now beginning to say thatthe war on drugs is genocide and the new form of slavery and theyare right. Because of our misguided and ignorant drug policies,we have already destroyed the better part of an entire generationof African-American men. In 1973 President Nixon's National Commission on Marihuanaand Drug Abuse said that the real drug problem is not heroin, orcocaine, or marijuana. The real drug problem, they said, is theignorance of our public officials who have never bothered to readthe evidence. Today, we can prove that this is still true. I would like my opponent to answer one simple question. Ihave here a list of every major study of drug policy in the lastfifty years including the largest studies ever conducted by theUS Federal Government and the State of California. They allrecommended decriminalization. Do you agree that the overwhelming weight of the scholarlyevidence on drug policy supports decriminalization? Before you answer, remember that there are only threepossible answers to this question. The first possible answer is yes, you agree that theoverwhelming weight of the scholarly evidence supportsdecriminalization. The second possible answer is no, you do not agree and,therefore, you can provide a list of scholarly studies equal inquality and quantity to the list I have provided. The third possible answer is that you don't have a clue whatthe scholarly evidence says because you have never read the mostbasic research on the subject. What is your answer? Do you agree that the overwhelmingweight of the scholarly evidence on drug policy supportsdecriminalization? CliffSchaffer's Home Page WT01-B29-70IA031-000655-B048-23http://206.61.184.43:80/schaffer/ACTIVIST/args1.htm 206.61.184.43 19970122115520 text/html 79418HTTP/1.0 200 OKDate: Wednesday, 22-Jan-97 11:55:06 GMTServer: WebSitePro/1.1f (S/N wpo-0deb)Allow-ranges: bytesContent-type: text/htmlLast-modified: Saturday, 28-Dec-96 07:26:35 GMTContent-length: 79200 Arguments and Answers -- the drug policy debate Arguments and Answers - Page 1 by Clifford A. Schaffer This is a collection of actual arguments and answers from along chain of debates on drug policy. Somewhere in this archive,every argument you ever heard in favor of the drug war isencountered and rebutted. If I missed any, please send them to meby e-mail: schaffer@smartlink.net My opponent's comments are in boldface. My commentsare in plain text. {{1. "....After adjusting for covariants, themarijuana group showed small but statistically significantincreased risk for all three catagories of conditions(Respiratory, accidental injury, and other)."}} Other, longer studies, such as the Jamaican studies haveshown no statistically significant differences between marijuanasmokers and non-smokers, even when the marijuana smokers had anaverage daily dose about 28 times that consumed by the average USuser. Therefore, one study is not going to break the back of thecollected research on marijuana. The collected summation of marijuana research is this:"Marijuana, in its natural form, is probably the safesttherapeutically active substance known to mankind. It is saferthan many of the foods we commonly eat." -- Francis Young,Chief Administrative Law Judge of the Drug EnforcementAdministration, after two years of review of all of the evidencepresented by the DEA and by those asking for reform. That is thesame conclusion supported by every major study of drug policy. {{2. "Respiratory deposition of tar and adsorption ofcarbon monoxide in experimental subjects were four and five timeshigher, respectively, after smoking marijuana than after smokingtobacco."}} Assuming this is true, how does this prove that throwingmillions of people in prison is the best approach to the problem? {{3. "Marijuana has repeatedly been found to be thesecond most common drug, after alcohol, present in the blood ofnonfatally and fatally injured persons."}} There might be a good, logical reason for this. Marijuana isdetectable in the blood for up to two months after a personsmokes a joint, even though the high is long since gone. It maysimply be an indicator that far more people are smoking marijuanathan you thought. You also have to remember that common over thecounter drugs will make people test positive for marijuana. You will note that they did not say "drivers." Itis irrelevant what the passengers were using. And, by this sort of reasoning, the penalties for alcoholsale and possession ought to be even higher than the potpenalties. Why aren't you fighting even harder for alcoholProhibition? {{4. "Laboratory studies have shown decreaseddriving-related skills after smoking marijuana."}} Repeated real world experience has shown that marijuana isnot a major factor in traffic accidents. The reason is fairlysimple -- pot has a very mild effect on people and does notdestroy coordination the way alcohol does. The real problem hereis that the people who want to throw people in prison for drugsdo not actually know anything about the drug and its effects. {{5. "In a Swedish study following a cohort of 45,540male military conscripts for 15 years, heavier cannabis users hada nearly three times greater risk of death than nonusers....andhad an elevated risk of schizophrenia compared withnonusers."}} A Johns Hopkins study, just as credible, showed thatmarijuana smokers were more ambitious than their peers andusually succeeded better than the rest. The question here is "Death from what?" Theircannabis users could have been concentrated in those areas with ahigher risk of death, in light of the fact that they engage insomewhat more risk taking than their peers. Like, for instance,our soldiers who smoked pot in Vietnam. As for schizophrenia -- Did the pot cause the schizophrenia,or would it be more likely that a person with severe mentalproblems would try all sorts of self-medication to stop thevoices in their head? I have a relative with schizophrenia and Ican tell you what the answer is. And, if the person is developing schizophrenia -- for anyreason -- how does it help the situation to throw them in jail? {{" The insoluable particulate (tar) phase of thesmoke from marijuana contains about 50% of some carcinogenic arylhydrocarbons, including benz[a]anthracene, and benzo[a]pyrenethen the smoke from a comparable quantity of unfiltered Kentuckyreference tobacco."}} So? Should the prison sentences for tobacco be 50% of thosefor pot? Or should we also account for the fact that pot smokerstypically smoke far fewer cigarettes than a tobacco smoker? Justhow long should we put tobacco smokers in jail, anyway? {{"The smoking of one marijuana cigarette - 800 to900 mg, 1% to 3% delta-tetrahydrocannabinol - led to thedeposition in the lower respiratory tract of about a four-foldgreater quantity of insoluable particulates (tar) than smoking afiltered tobacco cigarette of comparable weight..."}} See above. {{"...the authors [Polen, et al, of the accompanyingarticle] are the first to use a systematic review of medicalrecords to assess the health consequences of marijuana...Theirfinding that near-daily marijuana smoking is a significantindependent risk factor for the development of respiratoryillness, injuries, and other medical problems requiring medicalattention CHALLENGES THE VIEW THAT MARIJUANA POSES INSIGNIFICANTHEALTH RISKS." }} It will have to do a lot of challenging, because there isalot of evidence to challenge. Actually, this is more evidencefor a change in the law because every major study of drug policysaid that prohibition only INCREASED the dangers which werealready present in illegal drugs. The more dangerous you assumethem to be, the more important it becomes to treat them in anon-criminal manner. But, of course, that is not really the point, anyway. Let'ssuppose that I totally believed everything you just said. Why doyou automatically assume that putting millions of people inprison is the best approach to the problem? If it wasn't a goodidea for alcohol, and we can see that it would be a dumb idea fortobacco, why do you suppose it is such a great idea for any otherchemical? {{So, it would appear the marijuana is more dangerous thantobacco. Itwould also appear that, given the statisticsconcerning fatal accidents, that marijuana use can be deadly.}} So how many people are actually killed by all these drugs ina typical year, anyway? And, while you're at it, there are perhaps thirty millionpeople who are regular users of pot. How many millions of peopledo you think we ought to throw in prison in order to control thisproblem? And why was the most common agricultural crop in America madeillegal in 1937 in the first place? Was it because of these"dangers", or was it for some entirely differentreason? How did the most common crop in America suddenly become adreaded menace to society? {{}}Netherlands has fewer addicts per capita than the US.So does almost every country in the world. So what?}} Gee, that would seem to argue that our prohibition isn't soeffective, wouldn't it? And you said it was easy to control!!! {{ Germany recently decriminalized possession of smallamounts of marijuana, as have several states in the U.S. Sowhat?}} Maybe you could tell me why hemp (and the other drugs forthat matter) were made illegal in the first place. {{"When a heroin addicts can get precise doses atregular intervals, he can function pretty normally." Theydon't want to get high?}} Ever heard of Dr. William Halsted? Or Senator JosephMcCarthy? What do they have in common? {{ I went and looked it up. You need 100 grams of herointo get a 5-year sentence or a whole kilo to get a 10-yearsentence. For cocaine, the figures were 500 grams and 5 kilos.That's a lot of dope.}} See the 7-8-93 op-ed piece by Federal Judge Weinstein in theNY Times. He points out that it varies from one city to another.In some major metropolitan areas, 100 pounds will not get you anyjail time, while in others, a marijuana seed might mean life inprison. {{ If there is no evidence that punishment reduces crime,we should shut down the prisons entirely.}} There are thirty million illegal drug users. Just tell me themost reasonable number to put in prison. {{ You say that junkies don't do any harm, but would youwant to live next door to one?}} A better question is if you would want to have a drug addict(William Bennett) as a drug czar? {{ I keep hearing this. No one provides any evidence. Itdoesn't seem logical that people who have so much troublesupporting a drug habit *outside* somehow acquire the necessaryincome when you lock them up.}} Talk to someone who has been in prison. {{ Then why lock up drunk drivers? Or any criminal?Generally, we lock people up because they are a menace tosociety. It is *always* possible to lose a potential"contributing member" in this way, but generally we aremore interested in the rights of potential victims: Who could beyou, me, or anyone.}} Anyone who commits an offense against another person shouldbe tried for the offense. What should be different is that aperson on cocaine who commits a crime should not get life inprison while a drunk would plead diminished capacity for the samecrime. We should have consistent standards for all drugs and weshould apply our limited resources to the part of the problemwhere it will do the most good. For example, we don't lock upwine drinkers to try to control drunk driving. Generally, we dolock people up because they are a menace to others. Of course,that never was the reason for the drug laws. You are far more likely to be the victim of something relatedto alcohol and tobacco than from the effects of the illegaldrugs. {{ The properties of heroin and alcohol are verydifferent, and the social context is also different. For example,most people can use alcohol in moderate amounts without everbecoming addicted. Also, alcohol can be brewed up in any bathtub,or derived from common products such as after-shave andmouthwash, so the potential for controlling abuse is much less.}} Yes, the properties are different. Alcohol is just asaddicting and far more damaging to the health. Yes, the social context is different. The illegal drugs wereoutlawed primarily because they were associated (wrongly) withracial minorities, while alcohol and tobacco were perceived as"white" drugs. The evidence shows that most drug users of all types use inmoderation. This can be shown quite quickly by a simplecomparison between the total number of users and the number ofaddicts. The fact that alcohol can be brewed in a bathtub is hardly asensible argument for any kind of policy. It is equallynonsensical for other drugs. Does that mean we should legalizemarijuana because people can grow it in their closet? {{ Since "every major study" agrees with you, itfollows that youagree with "every major study," forexample: * The President's Commission on Organized Crime (1986) * The National Report of the Bureau of Justice Statistics(1992) * The President's Commission on Model State Drug Laws(1993) So, can I quote these studies as authoritative, or haveyou suddenly changed your mind?}} The first study has little to do with drug policy andcannot be considered any kind of a study of the drug policyissue. The second is a statistical report with no considerationof the historical or medical aspects of the problem (or manyother aspects for that matter.) The third did not do any real research on drug policy. But, since I so rarely run into anyone who tries naminganything, I will give you credit. Let's assume, for the sake ofargument, that all three studies were about drug policy and righton the money. The score is now 10 to 3 against you. When you geta little closer I will name some more on my side. {{ I believe your chronology is wrong. I remember readinga book on the subject (_Chasing the Dragon_, as I recall), whichwas published around 1985. Unfortunately I don't have it to hand. . . But, as I recall, Britain had legalized prescriptionnarcotics in the 60s, and they were still legal at the time thebook was published. The result was an explosive increase in druguse, along with the accompanying things that drug abusers like todo: abuse their spouses, neglect their children and live off thepublic dole. I believe it was the Majors administration, sometimearound 1990, which flirted with stricter drug enforcement (stillnot very tough by American standards). Is this that what you'retalking about?}} The correct chronology is given in the text of the 60 Minutesshow contained in Hoover.zip. In the 80s, under US pressure, theBritish adopted a get-tough policy. It was a disaster, causingboth health problems and rising crime. In Liverpool at thecurrent time, they prescribe heroin and cocaine to addicts. Mostof the addicts are healthy, employed, and living with theirfamilies. One of the conditions of their treatment is that theymust not commit crimes. It works. They originally did it becauseof the AIDS infection rates, and the infection rate has droppedto less than one percent of the addicts -- while in the US therate is over fifty percent. They also found that Liverpool, whichhad become famous for crime, was suddenly peaceful again. It ishappening now and about a half dozen of my friends (includingdoctors) are now in England discussing it with them. }}The Dutch, may not be alone for long. Many otherEuropean countries are looking to decriminalization; many havesigned the Frankfort Accord agreeing that is the best approach. Idunno about that,}} The following countries have already either legalized drugsor taken steps toward legalization: The Netherlands, Germany,Switzerland, England, Italy, Spain, and Colombia. }}But it indicates that Germany is moving in the directionof common sense, while we are not. Yeah, they are liberalizinghash and persecuting the hard drug users. That's the direction ofcommon sense.}} Why is it common sense to persecute anyone? {{ Still, when soldiers returned to the States, wheredrugs were neither cheap nor easy to find, they gave up thehabit.}} The studies of the issue said that all of the soldierssurveyed reported they could get heroin after they got back anytime they wanted it. The reason they quit was because they wereno longer under stress. {{ And we also lock up left-handed people . . . as I havealready pointed out. However, there are very few people in prisonsimply for being junkies; most of them have committed otheroffenses.}} Absolutely not true. There are considerable numbers. See thetestimony of the Corrections Commissioner of New York inHoover.zip. See also the op-ed piece by Federal Judge Jack B.Weinstein in the 7-8- 93 New York Times. {{ Not at all. It is you have ignored my objection: Theargument that expensive to lock up junkies ignores the experiencewith drunk driving. The fact is that severe penalties discouragecrime, and therefore reduce the number of people who need to belocked up.}} There are thirty million illegal drug users in the US (giveor take). How many millions do you propose to lock up? {{ More deceptive figures. According to my 1993 WorldAlmanac, only 7% of prisoners serving terms of 1 year or more arein federal prisons.}} What does that have to do with the price of eggs? }}How many people must we imprison, and at what cost,before you think we will have solved the problem? --I dunno. }} You hit the nail on the head that time. You obviously neverthought about it. That is the problem in a nutshell. As PresidentNixon's commission said, the real drug problem is not marijuana,heroin, or cocaine. The real drug problem is the ignorance of ourpublic officials who have never bothered to read the evidence. {{}}There are way more alcholics than there are heroinaddicts however, and the cost to society is astronomical. Thishas much to do with the relative cheapness and availability ofalcohol. Do you really want to make narcotics equally cheap andavailable?}} Narcotics are freely available at reasonable prices to anyonewho wants them. {{There are way more alcoholics than there are heroinaddicts however, and the cost to society is astronomical. Doesn'tthat fact support continuing constraints against heroin, beforeit can cause damage on an "alcohol" scale?}} No, not necessarily, but it does make me wonder why youaren't campaigning even harder for alcohol prohibition. {{ }}Prohibition of alcohol did not work...{{{ Depends what you mean by "work".}} I will accept the Wickersham Commission's definition. Theysaid it was a hopeless disaster in all respects. {{ Alcohol consumption absolutely, positively went downduring prohibition.}} Absolutely false. The Wickersham Commission found thatalcohol use went down in the first year of Prohibition, but roseevery year thereafter, and that alcohol-related health problemswere much more severe. {{ Society, however, preferred its legal drug and repealedprohibition.}} No, the Wickersham Commission, which was originally empoweredto find ways to improve Prohibition, concluded that it washopeless folly which did more harm than if we did nothing at all. {{ It is also societies right to keep the lid on thePandora's Box of legalization of cocaine and heroin.}} So, how many millions of people should we put in prison fordrugs? {{ Clearly prohibition DID reduce consumption.}} That wasn't right the first time. It is equally wrong thesecond. {{ In Malaysia, they are executed (at least the dealersare).}} In Malaysia, the authorities kill more people for drugs thanthe drugs do. And they still have a growing problem. {{ I wouldn't be so quick to discount the deterrent effectof draconian measures.}} Neither would I. How many people do you think we ought toexecute to solve a problem that kills about 5,000 people a year? {{ I would personally love to see an intoxicant developedthat was safe, not physically addicting and doesnt make you (too)stupid. (I'm dead serious). Marijuana is almost OK, but I trulybelieve it makes one stupid (while under the influence) and a lotof kids would have their intellectual growth stunted if it werelegalized.}} The Chief Administrative Law Judge of the Drug EnforcementAdministration, after hearing years of arguments on the subject,concluded that "marijuana, in its natural form, may be thesafest therapeutically active substance known to man" andthat it is "safer than many of the foods we commonlyeat." There is no evidence to support what you said aboutintellectual growth. In fact, marijuana was a common food in the19th century. {{ Alcohol does not directly involve the brain's internal"reward via euphoria" mechanism, opiates do. They aremuch more "fun" and way more addicting.}} Nope. See the Consumers Union Report on Licit and IllicitDrugs for a good discussion of the issue. {{ The Liverpudlian addicts had to first come to thedoctor for help, before being registered. Are you suggesting thatpotential heroin users come to the doctor for "controlledmedically supervised doses" before starting the habit - ordo they come after realizing they may have a problem?}} They come after they realize they have a problem. But theprogram has dried up the sellers on the street, and it hasgreatly reduced the number one source of new addicts -- oldaddicts looking for recruits to support their habit. As a result,crime rates, health problems, and addiction have droppeddramatically. {{ Is it possible that heroin, at cigarette prices, maylead to a lot of folks to suffer severe vocational andinterpersonal damage, before finally presenting themselves for"Controlled, medically supervised doses"? Theexperience during Prohibition is instructive.}} Is it possible that tobacco addicts under the same conditionswould behave in the same manner as junkies? The experience inEurope, after WWII, when tobacco was scarce is instructive. Theexperience of Prohibition is instructive. It was a failure in allrespects. {{ Despite the obvious problems associated withprohibition, the rates of cirrhosis of the liver and of wifebeating plummetted.}} Wrong. See the report of the Wickersham Commission. {{I agree that substance abuse is the trigger for muchcrime, violent and non-violent. In those cases, if you caneliminate the abuse, you probably have a much better chance ofthe individual becoming a contributing member. }} The great majority of such crime is due to the effects ofprohibition, not the effects of the drugs. {{Instead of spending the money to maintain them inprison, some sort of supervisd home confinement, coupled withvocational training, counseling for the abuse, and routine drugtesting. Clean 'em up, train 'em, put 'em to work. That may soundto simplistic, but what we're doing now isn't working, IMO. }} The vast majority of drug users do not need treatment anymore than the vast majority of wine drinkers need treatment. Forthe others, treatment is at least seven times as cost effectiveas prison, with a far greater rate of success. {{ Alcohol is addicting to those predisposed.}} Correct. {{ Heroin is addicting (if used for non-analgesicpurposes) in everyone. Cocaine is the most addictive of all.}} Wrong. See the Consumers Union Report on Licit and IllicitDrugs for a good discussion. Heroin addicts commonly report thatit is much harder to kick tobacco than to kick anything else. Orsee the recent NIDA rankingsof addictive qualities. {{ Increased drinking during prohibition!! No way, noevidence, makes no sense. The logistics of obtaining, and theblack market price of alcohol during prohibition were HUGEnatural constraints on drinking for the vast majority. (ie. forall but the speakeasy crowd).}} See the Wickersham Commission report, or any of the otherstudies I have mentioned. {{ Be careful who you say things like " the deceptivething about... liver disease are DEGENERATIVE diseases which takea little while to develop" to {g}. In 20 yrs as a generalinternist, I've treated plenty of alcohol relatedliver disease.}} If you are a doctor, let me ask you a question. My mothersuffers from severe chronic pain as the result of a nerve injuryduring surgery. It is bad enough that it has driven her to thepoint of seriously considering suicide. She has been to the MayoClinic, the National Pain Institute, the USC Pain Clinic and along list of others. She has tried a long list of treatments. Youname your best list, she has tried it. The doctors, and her ownexperience, tell her that the best treatment for her condition iseither morphine or heroin. The doctors will not prescribe it toher because they are afraid of the DEA -- they have said so. TheDepartment of Health and Human Services has issued two reportswhich have stated that the undertreatment of pain is a nationaltragedy and that is caused by fear. The California MedicalAssociation recently encouraged doctors to prescribe morenarcotics and said that the reason they did not was because offear of the police. I will not ask you if you would prescribe morphine for mymother because I have asked every other doctor who has appearedhere and they all copped out. I expect you would too. Just tellme: Who should determine the medicine my mother gets -- her andher doctors -- or the police? {{ It is clear that when prohibition was repealed, liverdisease jumped up within the year, because of resumed drinking.}} No, alcohol use continued the rise that it had alreadystarted during Prohibition. And, even if this was true, are yourecommending that we bring back alcohol Prohibition? Why not? {{ I'm sorry, but the statement that heroin is harmlessflies in the face of long-agreed-on clinical experience.}} What does your clinical experience tell you about the effectsof prison? Is it beneficial or harmful to someone with a drugproblem? {{ Show me the references. I will be willing to betanything, that they are not the result of well designed trials}} Read any of the studies that I posted. I would suggest thatyou start with the Consumers Union Report on Licit and IllicitDrugs, so you would understand how we got into this situation. By the way, did you know that the medical communityunanimously opposed these laws when they were proposed and saidthey would be a medical, social, and criminal disaster? Did youknow that one of the first actions of the drug police was to jailmore than 3,000 doctors, especially those who advocated drugtreatment? And, can you tell me why hemp is illegal? {{ Historically technical question. Shouldnt be too hardto look up. I doubt very much that it was the OVERT crime issue.Society was not much affected by bootleggers killing otherbootleggers.}} One of the major factors was a campaign to "save thechildren." You see, the bootleggers discovered that theycould escape harsh penalties by having kids do the dirty work,and there was quite a bit of concern about that. Sound familiar? {{ However one related factor may well have been societywas very concerned about corruption in the police and judiciary.It would have been scary, back then, to think this corruption wasabout to become institutionalised.}} Prohibition gave us the institution of organized crime, whichis still with us 60 years later. {{ This doesnt seem to be much of a factor, however, inour current "prohibition"}} Where have you been? The entire narcotics squad of the LACounty Sheriff was sent to prison for corruption. The situationis the same in New York and other major cities. I seriously doubtif there is an honest drug enforcement agent living. I could goon with stories of their corruption that would curl your hair. {{I don't like that picture very much at all.}} You painted a picture of what could happen. How about apicture of what IS happening? According to the current rates ofincarceration, we will put more people in prison than AdolfHitler did, including about one-half of an entire generation ofblack men. Do you want to continue with that? {{ No, only studies which are about legalizing drugsconclude that it is important to legalize them.}} You obviously have not read them, have you? {{ "Decriminalization" is not the same as"legalization." The "decriminalization" ofsmall amounts of marijuana -- reducing possession to the statusof a traffic fine -- has already been tried in several states,without stirring much controversy. This is a good deal differentfrom legalizing crack and heroin however. You really won'timpress anyone by trying to equate the two.}} The issue is not legalization or decriminalization (whateverthey may mean), because we don't know if we will do either, oranything like them. The issue is prison, because that is what weare doing now. How many millions of people do you think we oughtto put in prison? {{ What makes you think they *want* to contribute?}} What makes you think they don't? Most drug users are employedindividuals, not much different from their neighbors. {{ Not at all. Heroin is far more addictive than alcohol.}} Not true. See the recent NIDA rankings of addictivequalities. Isn't it true that an alcohol addict is far more likely todie during withdrawal than a heroin addict? {{ This makes it an important substance to control.}} Let's assume that this statement is true. Where did you getthe idea that jailing massive numbers of people is the bestmethod of control? {{ Heroin is also far less widely used than alcohol, anddomestic production is close to zero. This makes it relativelyeasy to control.}} "relatively easy to control"? Someone is out oftouch with reality here. There is no credible evidence anywherethat any of these drugs are under control. {{ You left out the key step: motivate 'em. That's thehard part.}} Yeah, it is so much easier to throw them in prison at a halfmillion dollars a pop. {{ This information is outdated. I have here a psychologytextbook, _The Mind_, by Dr. Richard M. Restak, which says:"Sigmund Freud was convinced that cocaine could be used tocure heroin addiction. . . .}} Now that you brought up Sigmund Freud, you ought to know thathe kicked the cocaine habit but died from the effects of cancercaused by his cigar smoking. He could not quit, even though mostof the lower part of his face had been removed by surgery. Whatdid you say about one drug being more addictive? By the way, if you are a doctor, you should be able to tellme who Dr. William Halsted was, and what was so remarkable abouthim. {{ I believe then you should urgently warn the people atthe Hoover Institute that this so-called expert, Cliff Schaeffer,is feeding them bad information. I have a book here about theBritish drug experience (_Living With Heroin_), which waspublished in 1988, and prescription narcotics were still legalthen. Obviously, the supposed American-style drug crack-downSchaeffer told you about didn't happen.}} My associates and I have talked directly with the Britishauthorities and some of my friends (doctors) are there right nowtalking to them. The British did try a crackdown, and it was afailure. The British Association of Chiefs of Police, as well asthe head of Interpol have now called for decriminalization. {{ These "sensible" policies led to a majorincrease in drug-related crime, according to _Living withHeroin_.}} The doctors in Liverpool and the doctors in other Europeancountries disagree. {{ Liverpool and the Netherlands are too utterly differentfrom the United States in too many ways to document here.}} So what are the specific differences that would make theirplans impossible here? {{ First offense simple possession usually just gets youprobation. Keep it up, and you'll eventually have to do some jailtime. Hardly anyone goes to prison for simple possession.}} Absolutely false. That is the reason that 52 Federal judges(about ten percent of the total Federal judiciary) have refusedto enforce the drug laws. {{ A lab. rat will starve himself pushing the cocainelever (instead of the rat chow lever) when offered the choice.This tells me that there is a whole lot more biology involved indrug addiction than simply volition.}} It seems to indicate that it gets beyond their ability toconsciously control their actions. Which makes it all the moresilly to punish them as a response. {{ How confident are you that you would remain clean ifoffered cheap legal cocaine or heroin?}} As confident as I am that I can walk past the tobacco andalcohol displays without the least desire to take either. {{ And even if you have the knowledge that lets youresist, what about the millions that dont?}} For the millions that don't, prison hardly seems theappropriate response. {{We may just have a difference in semantics, here. Ibelieve the majority of drug related crime is caused byindividuals seeking funds to support the habit.}} That is a direct result of Prohibition. Without prohibitionsuch criminal activity is not necessary. That is why the policeauthorities in the Netherlands, England, and other countries havecalled for decriminalization. {{The vast majority of individuals who drink are notalcoholics. I'm not familiar with statistics on theaddict/non-addict fractions of the total population of drugusers. The ones who need treatment are the ones whose addictionis affecting their live and the lives of those around them.}} The vast majority of drug users of all t ypes (exceptperhapstobacco) are not addicted. I agree that drug use whichgets to the point of affecting their lives or others, it is timeto change their habits. But why should there be a differentstandard for how we view that when the problem occurs because ofalcohol as opposed to cocaine or heroin? {{Thanks for your post. I also hate to think of what lifewould be like in this country if drugs were legalized. Especiallysince, if we did legalize them, it would be sooo hard to turnback.}} Well then, we could look to Europe for guidance. Most majorcountries in Europe are going toward decriminalization orlegalization and they report that it is much better than the drugwar. {{Do I want to continue with that? Of course not! Whatsane person would want to throw so many people in prison. }} Clearly, nobody. But that's what we are doing. If you reallydon't like it so much then we ought to honestly investigate ouralternatives. {{But the scenario I see, if we legalize drugs as youpropose, would be worse.}} When did I propose legalizing drugs? {{ Do you want to see this country worse off? So a lot ofpeople wouldn't go to jail. Instead, they could easily die.Abusing drugs tends to have that effect. I know - I have knownmany who have died from it. It is a terrible waste. }} So how many people actually die from drugs each year, anyway? {{ Your proposal would result in the quality of drugsgoing up, the cost of drugs in money going way down, and the risk(prison) going way down. }} Yeah, it would probably eliminate most of the bathtub gin andwood alcohol which is sold to unsuspecting buyers, it wouldeliminate the Mafia's prime source of revenue, and it would keepa lot of little people from having their lives ruined with astretch in prison. {{ Instead of government programs to fight drug use, therewould be advertising campaigns to encourage drug use.}} Who said that? You are assuming an awful lot that I did notsay. {{ As you propose legalizing drug use, you must considerthe fact, that due to all these facts, drugs use would soar.}} No, that is simply not true. In areas which have changedtheir laws, drug use has stayed the same or gone down. Every major study of drug policy agreed that there was noevidence to support your conclusion. Furthermore, they agreedthat EVEN IF drug use did go up, the benefits ofdecriminalization would be so great that it would far outweighthe problems of increased use. {{I think thowing drug users in prison is a terriblewaste. I think legalizing drugs is much worse.}} I agree with you on the first point. There never was a goodreason to start this policy in the first place. But those aren'tthe only two options. {{Oh yes, your stat on one-half of a generation of blackmen interested me. Are you saying that an absolute minimum of 50%of black males are drug abusers? I assume many get away with it,and don't go to prison, so what is the actual figure??? }} The actual figures appear to be about the same as for thewhite population. However, the drug laws were originally intendedto target minorities (look it up) and they target minoritiesabove all other groups today. For example, about 95 percent ofall the people sentenced under the mandatory minimums are blackmen. Over time, because of the police pressure on drugs, andbecause of the limited economic opportunities for black men, manyof them will turn to drug dealing as a way to make a living andthen, with the first stint in jail their future is formed. Blackmen who have been to prison are virtually permanentlyunemployable, so they return to the streets and act as bad rolemodels for the kids. {{}}Legalization will flood the market place with cheaperdrugs --thats the box I want to keep the lid on. Interestingarticle in the _Journal of Drug Issues_ (Spring 1993) analyzesthe issue on the basis of dynamic simulation modeling andconcludes: "The model suggests that elimination of drugseizures by itself would pose little risk of increasedprevalence, but neither would it alleviate the load on thecriminal justice system. A policy of reduced arrests at theretail level probably would reduce the criminal justice load, butwould also lead to a relative increase in cocaine use andaddiction by a factor of two or three or more. A more sweepingpolicy that eliminates both seizures and arrests would certainlyreduce the criminal justice load, but would lead to a relativeincrease in cocaine use and addiction by a factor of four toeight or more."}} So, under the worst circumstances they cite, there would beperhaps 10,000 to 20,000 deaths per year from cocaine (4 to 8times the current 2,500), compared to more than 400,000 fortobacco, and more than 100,000 for alcohol. For heroin thenumbers would be similar, and for marijuana 4 to 8 times zero isstill zero. On the other hand, we would not have an expensive andfutile policy to put millions of people in prison. In fact, forthe same money that it took to put one person in prison we couldprovide treatment for about one hundred. Relative to your earlier statements on treatment, perhaps youmissed the recent study that said that treatment saves sevendollars in related social costs for every dollar spent ontreatment. On the other hand, prison costs an additional fifteendollars for every dollar spent on prison. {{ I've seen you in these discussions before, and peoplehave gone over the fiscal issues for addicts ad nauseam. Try itagain; maybe you'll make more sense this time.}} OK, let's start out with the simple aspects. How many peopledo you think we ought to throw in prison? }} And why do they steal money to buy drugs?}} Because the drugs are illegal and therefore higher priced. {{ I do have an interesting book here, called _Living WithHeroin_ which studied the drug situation in the English town ofWirral. On page 99, there is a report which shows that, . . . The'extra' crime Wirral has experienced in recent years appears tobe closely related to the community's heroin 'epidemic.'"}} Liverpool found that their addiction and crime went up asdrug enforcement went up. They found it just about disappearedwhen they took their current approach. It may also interest youto know that the British Association of Chiefs of Police and thehead of Interpol have both come out for decriminalization.Apparently they know something you don't. {{ What about the legalized prescription-narcotics?Doctors are getting burned out .. .}} Not so in Liverpool. The doctors report a high rate ofsuccess with their patients, perhaps because they base theprescription on the addicts continued good behavior. {{ Junkies just are not good patients. Actually, theyaren't really "patients" at all. . . .}} Yeah? I could have guessed that. I also find most of thempersonally distasteful. That still does not mean that the bestapproach to the problem is to try to throw them all in prison. {{According to the 1992 report of the Bureau of JusticeStatistics, the number of individuals surveyed (18-25 age group)who reported using an illicit drug in the past month hasdramatically decreased:}} Do you thnk it may have anything to do with the surveyprocess? For example, with increasing penalties, and increasingpublicity about the penalties, they call people up at random andask them if they have used any illegal drugs (committed a felony)in the last month. I know what I would tell you, regardless ofthe truth. From what I have seen of that age group (having fourdaughters in that age group) the use habits are not terriblydifferent than they were in the 60's -- but none of them wouldadmit it to a telephone interviewer, either. {{ The United States unfortunately has a far higher crimerate than other nations; this accounts for the higherincarceration rate.}} That was not true until the war on drugs went into high gearand it is currently true only because of the war on durgs. {{ Most prisoners are not convicted of drug-relatedoffenses. }} Correct, but the largest single portion are and nearly all ofthe rise in prison population over the last fifteen years can beattributed to drug offenses. {{ The high rate of recidivism is not due to the weaknessof the prison system, but the broader failures of Americansociety. Poverty, poor education, the lack of family support, theprevalence of narcotics and a tradition of violence combine toproduce a high crime rate, which is not susceptible to any easysolution.}} Perhaps you did not see the 60 Minutes piece on Pelican Bay.They showed a series of convicts being released from California'stoughest prison. They were put out at the bus stop with $200 (outof which they had to buy their only civilian clothes) with noinstructions, help, advice, or anything else. They had no jobskills, little education, and no real chance at employment anywaybecause of their prison record. What do you expect they would do? {{* To begin with, heroin is one of the most powerfuldrugs known to man. The effect of a heroin dose is to flood thebody with endorphins. This is incapacitating in the short run andcan lead to long term personality changes.}} Wrong. I can cite a whole long list of internationallyrecognized medical experts in the field who state that, exceptfor the fact that heroin produces addiction, otherwise it is"harmless". Their words, not mine. Can you tell me whoDr. William Halsted is? {{* Heroin is also extremely addictive.}} True, but no more than alcohol or tobacco {{The overwhelming majority of heroin users becomeaddicts.}} Absolutely false. There is no evidence to support thisnotion. {{* Heroin is incredibly dangerous. A dose that is normalfor one addict may kill another. Even a "normal" dose,to which an addict has long been accustomed, can kill him indifferent environmental circumstances.}} See above about "harmless." The doctors inLiverpool state that they have patients on "massivedoses" with no risk of overdose. They say "heroin isnot a dangerous drug" and they prescribe it every day. Thenumber of people killed by heroin in the US runs about 2,000 ayear or about one half of one percent of the number killed bytobacco. Aspirin also kills about 2,000 people a year. TheConsumers Union Report on Licit and Illicit Drugs investigatedthe issue of heroin "overdoses" and did not find asingle instance which they believed could be attributed to a true"overdose". Nearly all of the "overdoses",they said, had symptoms which were fundamentally incompatiblewith an overdose, such as instant death, or pulmonary edema. Theysaid their research showed that the most probable cause of thesedeaths was the impurities mixed with the heroin, not the her oinitself. As the doctors in England put it, if an addict is buyingheroin on the black market which is 10 percent heroin and 90percent cement, it does not take a genius to figure out what isgoing to cause the most problems. The low number of deaths from heroin is all the moreremarkable because it is usually taken in the most dangerousmanner possible. {{* Tolerance for heroin declines rapidly afterwithdrawal. A junkie who abstains for only a short time can killhimself with a "normal" dose when he resumes.}} False. See above. {{* Even if the addict takes a "normal" dose ina stable environment, the lethal dose is not much greater thanthe effective dose, so the chances of a fatal miscalculationremain high.}} False again. See above. {{* Beyond that is the effect of withdrawal, includingchills, runny nose, aching, abdominal cramps, vomiting anddiarrhea. Insomnia and irritability may persist for weeks.}} My mother-in-law gets that when she gives up her morningcoffee. Should we put her in prison to improve her mood? {{* Withdrawal symptoms may be reoccur long after the drugis withdrawn if the addict experiences environmental cues relatedto his former drug experience.}} Same is true with any other addictive drug. Talk toex-smokers. {{* Street heroin is likely to contain impurities,anything from quinine to rat poison.}} True, which is why every major study of the issue said thatProhibition causes more problems than it solves. {{* Self-administered injections are also dangerous, oftenleading to septisemia, endocarditis, damaged veins, hepatitis orAIDS.}} More reasons why the doctors in Liverpool decided to take theapproach they did and why the cities of Los Angeles and SanFrancisco have decided to openly violate state drug laws (at theurging of the medical community) to properly address the issue. {{* The addict lifestyle is unhealthy. Doing heroin is notconducive to balanced diets, regular exercise, safe sex norregular check-ups. Addicts often experience health problems notdirectly related to drugs.}} So let's throw them in prison to improve their health? Doesnot make sense. {{ The drug policy of the United States is to punishdealers severely. However, *users* face little or no punishment.}} There are tens of thousands of people now in prison who knowyou are wrong. One woman got a mandatory minimum of ten years,even though she was not a user or a dealer. {{ Hence, demand remains high. Economic theory predictsthat where there is a high demand, there *will* be a supply . . .The principle effect of our enforcement policy is to raise theprice.}} Now that doesn't sound like a very effective approach, doesit? We might have done just as well by taxing it. {{ Strict drug laws have practically eliminated narcoticsin Singapore and Turkey, which were once important centers of thedrug trade.}} Actually, no. And these countries kill more people than thedrugs do. Is that what you want? {{}}Sixty Minutes corroborated Schaeffer's version.Wouldn't be the first time they screwed up. Did you see theepisode on Dungeons & Dragons?}} As I said in another message -- we talked to the docto rsinvolved personally. Those doctors confirmed that 60 Minutes wasaccurate. {{ My point was, when Americans moved from a loose-drugenvironment (Viet Nam) to a tight-drug environment (the U.S.)they gave up the habit. }} As stated before, the studies of this phenomenon found it hadnothing to do with availability because all the returningsoldiers reported that they could get heroin any time they wantedin the US, they just did not want it anymore. {{ Holland is a very small country, with a culturesignificantly different from the United States. In any case, youhave not provided any figures to support your contention thatdrug use didn't increase in Holland after legalization.}} I offered to put you in touch with the Dutch authorities soyou can ask them yourselves. One of them volunteered to come tothe United States to speak for us because he wanted to stop thiskind of disinformation. {{ I don't have that study (of over 20 years ago) here,but I'm old enough to remember that Nixon was greatly embarrassedwhen his commission recommended decriminalizing marijuana. It didnor recommend legalizing narcotics.}} You may also remember that the commission was composedentirely of Nixon's handpicked law and order conservatives andthey refused to even hear testimony from anyone who supportedlegalization or decriminalization. Still, they concluded therewas no real choice in the matter. As they said, the real drugproblem is not heroin, or cocaine, or marijuana. The realproblem, they said, is the ignorance of our public officials whohave never bothered to read the evidence. Nixon refused to evenread his own report. {{ But you apparently do not understand the differencebetween marijuana and narcotics. Allow me to explain. Marijuanais a herbaceous plant which grows wild in the United States andis easily cultivated. It is not highly toxic nor highlyaddictive.}} Then maybe you can explain to me how hemp became illegal. {{ Narcotics are derived from the opium poppy or from thecoca plant, which are not grown in the United States, and whichmuch be subjected to an elaborate refining process beforeconsumption. Narcotics take various forms, all of them far moretoxic and addictive than marijuana.}} Nothing derived from the coca plant is a"narcotic". It is defined that way in law, but alwayshas been incorrect. Seeing as how there has never been a recorded human death dueto marijuana, almost anything would be more toxic. {{ While young and naive people may easily leap to theconclusion that all drugs are the same, this is simply not thecase.}} True, alcohol and tobacco are far more dangerous than most ofthe illegal drugs. {{ None of your "credible studies" support thepoint you are trying to make. Not one advocates legalizingnarcotics.}} Which ones have you read, and what did they say? (I will betI get a short answer, or none at all, to that question.) ((Note: When I pressed my opponent on this point, heultimately admitted he had never read any of them.)) {{ This program was only recently adopted, so we don'tknow yet how well it works, but it certainly is not simply"being locked ia a cage."}} Check that again. Most prisons are so overcrowded that thereare no rehabilitation efforts of any kind. Those words on paperthat you sent are nice, but they don't mean s**t in the realityof today's prisons. {{ The experience of a recovering alcoholic may be similarto that of a heroin addict, but the fact is that mostalcohol-users never become alcoholics. Most heroin-users dobecome addicts.}} False. See the references cited earlier. {{ The error of our present drug policy is that we punishthe dealers, but fail to effectively punish the users. Dealingdrugs is a high- risk activity; using them is low-risk.Therefore, there continues to be a demand for drugs. The maineffect of our policy is to raise the price.}} There are thirty million drug users. How many millions do youthink we ought to throw in prison? {{I assume you are not just being cute, and therefore youdo not propose legalizing drugs. Excuse me for misreading you. Iam glad you want to keep them illegal. }} I did not say that either. Please read my other message toyou. }}So how many people actually die from drugs each year,anyway? {{Good question! I haven't a clue. But neither do you. Inyour stats on drug caused deaths, what is included? If a heroinaddict gets so run down he dies of pneumonia, is that listed asheroin caused? }} The official Federal figures, which have been prettyconsistent for a long time show the following approximate annualdeath rate: Tobacco -- 400,000 Alcohol - 100,000 Sidestream tobacco smoke --- 3,000 to 50,000 Prescription drugs - at least 10,000 All illegal drugs combined -- 4,500 Cocaine - 2,500 Aspirin -- 2,000 Heroin - 2,000 Marijuana - No recorded deaths in human history. The above figures do not include pneumonia type deaths. TheAMA published figures recently which stated that the total of allsuch deaths for illegal drugs was about 20,000, still only asmall fraction of the damage caused by alcohol and tobacco. As Ihave pointed out in other messages, there is a good deal ofresearch to suggest that making drugs illegal increases thehazards of drugs -- such as impure bathtub gin duringprohibition. {{There were approximately 25,000 deaths on the highwaylast year in which at least one driver was drunk. Were thoselisted as alcohol caused deaths? }} No, they were not listed as such in figures I gave above. {{ I don't know the numbers, but I know that your figuresare low. }} Then how do you know my figures are low? {{ I also know that any drug caused death is a waste of alife. You keep asking, over and over, how many people do we haveto throw in prison. Let me ask you - how many deaths will it takefor you to cry "Enough!"}} Enough what? At the current rate we can't enforce this law nomatter how many people it kills. There just aren't enough jailcells available to solve the problem this way and there is no waywe can build them. It doesn't matter what you want to do, it is amatter of what you can do -- and there is no way we can solve thedrug problem with prison. The reason I keep asking this question is a simple one. Youcan figure out yourself what a good policy would be if you willjust seriously address this question. There are thirty milliondrug users out there. We are currently working on putting an evenmillion of them in prison, with no perceivable difference in theproblem on the streets. Should we put five, ten, or twentymillion people in prison? Just tell me what the most reasonablenumber is and you will have figured out why this policy cannotwork. {{ Naturally, the people who were running the program gavean objective account of the results, and of course a message froman e-mail friend in Liverpool settles the issue. There is reallyno need to read any academic studies from Liverpool University;you can learn everything you need to know just by watchingtelevision.}} Well, no, actually you would be better off to go to Liverpooland talk to both the medical and police authorities there -- as afew of my close personal friends are doing right now. One, by theway, is a member of the Board of Directors of the CaliforniaAcademy of Family Physicians. But, he has already talked with thedoctors and other officials there and confirmed that the 60Minutes show is an accurate portrayal. {{ If you want it compared, then it's practicallyidentical, otherwise it's "utterly different."}} Kinda sums up your attitude about comparing us with othercountries, doesn't it? Singapore and Turkey are good comparisonsbut the Netherlands is not. {{ Surprise! The study I have been referring too comesfrom Wirral, which happens to be a suburb of Liverpool. Youinsist, without having seen it, that this study is mistaken.However the information from Liverpool, which you know about froma 15-minute television episode, must be good and also relevant tothe situation in America.}} Then why did the British Association of Chiefs of Police --including the Liverpool Chief of Police -- vote fordecriminalization? As I said above, members of our group are overthere right now - - for the second time -- talking with theofficials there. {{ You don't see any danger, then, from extrapolating froma small, homogenous country to a large, unhomogenous one?}} Considering the same thing is happening all over Europe, thatkind of equates to a large, unhomogenous one, doesn't it? And, bythe way, what is the exact difference which would keep theirapproaches from producing benefits here? That is, assuming youknow enough about what is happening over there to know thedifference. {{ They "go to jail" quite frequently; theydon't do much prison time unless they deal or commit some othercrime.}} There are at least 52 Federal judges who disagree with you. Iwill take their word, and the word of the New York StateCorrections Commissioner, over yours. {{ Prescript ion was a miserable failure in England,according to _Living With Heroin_.}} Check again, and this time talk to some of the peopleactually involved, as we have done. {{ By and large, the Legalizers are disturbed, unhappypeople who have friends and loved ones who are in prison orstrung out. The aim of the Legalizers is simply to spread themisery around as much as possible. The more druggies there are,the more "normal" it is. The farther the web ofdestruction spreads, the better. The more people they can ruinand destroy, they happier they will be. The driving force behindlegalization is Revenge.}} Now we come down to the real driving force behind drugprohibition -- bigotry and ignorance. Do you really think that itis the desire of such organizations as the British Association ofChiefs of Police? {{ To advocate legalizing narcotics isn't politicalsuicide (the surgeon general did it) . . . but it is incrediblydumb.}} No she did not. I suppose then, that the British Associationof Chiefs of Police, the head of Interpol, and the ColombianAttorney General, as well as the California Medical Association,the California Society of Addiction Medicine, etc., etc., etc.,etc., are incredibly dumb? (I could go on with a list of about 40pages of such people, but why belabor the point?) {{ If I were strung out, it's entirely possible my ownfamily would turn me in. Lots of druggies get turned in by theirown families; it's the only way to ensure treatment.}} Judge Gray was on a radio show one night and one of thecallers was a heroin addict who wanted help to get off drugs. Hesaid he had called the police to ask for help but they just threwhim in jail when he was desperately ill (with things other thandrugs), he got a criminal conviction and no help at all. The pity is that people who think they ought to throw peoplein jail "for their own good" hardly ever get the samefavor granted to them. {{ Interesting study. The fact that everyone is doingdrugs has "nothing to do with drug availability."Presumably, then, they would do just as much if there were nodrugs to be found . . . clever.}} That is not going to happen, so why worry about it? {{ Even the most strung-out junkie still wants to gethigh. They keep increasing their dosage, every chance they get.Higher dosage -}more drug tolerance -} fewer highs -} higherdosage. It's a vicious circle.}} So the solution is to throw millions of people in prison? {{ Heh, half of all drug arrests are for minors. How doyou propose to legalize drugs for adults and keep them away fromthe kids?}} You admit it is not happening under the current system, sowhat's the difference? You can't think of anyone who couldcontrol the sales to children better than the current people whosell drugs, right? {{ "Worth more" means more expensive. Moreexpensive means less demand . . . even if one assumes that peoplein prison have just as to spend as those outside . . .}} More expensive means more profits -- enough to corrupt entirelaw enforcement agencies, like the LA County Sheriffs who went toprison. {{Perhaps you are correct in saying the vast majoritywouldn't become addicted. Perhaps. But then, I didn't like iteither, and I did become an addict. Was one for about 12 years.}} It is as illegal as it can be and that didn't stop you, didit? What makes you think it stops anyone else? Our policy, as itis, does not seem to have benefited you. Would your life have been improved if you had spent twentyyears in prison? By what you are recommending, you still probablywould not be out on the streets to engage in this conversation.And, couldn't you still get your drugs if you decided you wantedto? {{ I don't believe a non addict ever truly understandswhat it is like.}} On the other hand, maybe it is the addict who does notunderstand. In general, I don't believe that becoming an addictgives anyone any great insights into national policy. That isgiving more credit to drugs than they deserve. {{ When you and Mona say that it isn't magical, you don'tknow what you are talking about. When the first buzz of the drughits me, I become alive, and feel that I have become reallyhuman. When straight, I do not have that feeling. }} That is not my experience with any of the drugs I have triedand it is not the experience of the majority of people I know. Ifyou do not have the feeling of being human when you are straightthen it seems the problem is there whether you have the drug ornot. I (and most people I know) feel alive all the time so thereis not much need for drugs of any sort. {{ I continued using while convinced that I would die fromit. }} So prison, by comparison, would not do nearly as much todissuade you, would it? {{ However - I very rarely drove while high, because offear of getting caught. Addiction is _not_ logical. }} Another good reason why stiff penalties are unlikely todissuade addicts from using. Their behavior is not logical. {{ If it is legalized, there will be folks who will justtry it to see what it is like, and will never be straight again.You do not account for those people. }} Yes I do. I don't like their behavior but I don't pretendthat putting them in prison is the proper approach to theirproblem, either. {{Drugs _are_ magical to the addict. }} Lots of things are magical to the addict. The addicts I haveknown used drugs of all types without regard for much ofanything. If they could not get heroin they would do other thingssuch as sniff gasoline, or inject coffee (quite a rush, they tellme). That still does not mean that it is a good idea to throwthem in prison. {{}}As for inflicting pain, I must agree that is a noblegoal. Sarcasm does not become you. If you never want to inflictpain, then never raise a child. Never become a supervisor. Neverperform any function where you have the responsibility to modifysomeone's behaviour. Pain, whether it be a swat on the butt, awritten reprimand, or a jail term, is an integral part ofbehaviour modification.}} I don't believe in inflicting pain to the point where itrenders someone permanently unemployable and submits them tothings like gang rape, for trivial causes. Punishment, when used,should be corrective, not destructive. {{I issue a mild protest over your figures on black maledrug use. You said 50% go to prison for drug abuse. Now you say50% go to prison period, with drug use the single biggest cause.But it is not a big point - I was just very shocked at your stat.}} No, you misinterpreted. I am very careful about what I say onthis subject, because I have been saying it for a long time tolots of people. {{The two most dangerous? Do you think smoking a cigaretteis as dangerous as free basing cocaine? C'mon Cliff! Sure, a lotmore people die from tobacco, but that is because a whole lotmore people use that. Tobacco is legal and marketed. That issomething I want to avoid for cocaine.}} Compare the death rates. The death rate, per user, forcocaine is less than that for tobacco. And, just for interest, Iquote from a study done in 1967 - "Cigarette smoking isunquestionably more damaging to the health than heroin." --Drs. Vincent P. Dole and Marie Nyswander, Rockefeller Univ. {{What do you think about increasing educational efforts?Teach school kids more about it. Pound home what it can do, andwhat help is available. }} As all of the major studies have said, most of theeducational efforts have been based around ridiculous scaretactics which the kids soon discovered were hokey anddisregarded. The main problem is a massive lack of accurateinformation by the people teaching the courses. {{What about more money to help folks get straight? Ithink it would be poetic to increase the taxes on tobacco andalcohol to pay for this. }} A recent Rand study showed that every dollar spent ontreatment saved seven dollars in related social costs. How aboutjust increasing the taxes on alcohol and tobacco until they paytheir own costs? {{Judge Gray's idea is intriguing. If we were to go tolegalization, that would be a much better way to handle it thenjust turning it over to the market. Of course, that would makethe government our pushers. Sounds a little scary. }} His basic thought is that drugs are here anyway, so we shouldnot kid ourselves that we are stopping them. The truth is that wecurrentlyinflict smaller losses (percentage-wise) on the drugdealers than K-Mart suffers from shoplifters. As you probablyknow, shoplifters are not about to put K-Mart out of business.Given the fact that they will be here forever, let's at leastguarantee that there are pure, reliable sources which will notmake the related problems worse, and which will provide a taxbasis for providing treatment. Keep in mind that Judge Gray is a former prosecutor withnumerous drug convictions. He has also sentenced more than hisshare of people to prison for drug offenses, and is not regardedas lenient. When he first came out for a change in policy a little overtwo years ago, he was vilified by all kinds of people. He justgot back from the State Bar Convention and reported that theatmosphere has changed completely. He says he is getting more andmore support from other judges and law enforcement officials.They don't all agree on what would be a better response, but theyagree that our current policy is a failure and should beabandoned. {{As to your repeated mentioning of the Netherlands andLiverpool, I am reminded of another drug success story. Accordingto reports, we had found a way to successfully combat heroinabuse. It was low cost, and supplied free to addicts. Amreferring to the methadone program. It took us a long time torealize what a horrible waste it was. But all the reports wereglowing..... }} The medical authorities I have talked to, and the research Ihave read (see the list) have indicated that the methadoneprograms were a major improvement. Not perfect, but a majorimprovement. Of the authorities I have talked to they have allsaid that the biggest problems with the methadone program werecreated by the government itself. First, they said, was aconsistent pattern of lies about the results. The Europeanauthorities have reported the same thing about what the USGovernment says about their programs. Second, there wererestrictions on methadone which, in effect, granted monopolies tocertain people and allowed them to abuse the situation. It wouldbe much better, they said, if addicts could go to their regulardoctors for prescriptions, like any other medication. Also, many of them point to the methadone programs as proofthat the narcotics are not especially dangerous, becausemethadone is prescribed routinely without any significantoverdose problem. {{Let us look at some of your stats. You say the deathrate for tobacco is 400,000. For alcohol it is 100,000. Forcocaine it is 2,500. You then answer my question by saying the2,500 does not include pneumonia type deaths. What does itinclude? No doubt (correct me if I am wrong) it is a count ofthose who OD, and die. Probably from ER's. How many of the400,000 tobacco deaths are based on that criteria? }} As I said, the AMA published figures on this subject, andsaid that, using the same standards of classification for thedeaths, the comparable figure for illegal drugs is about 20,000,to tobacco's 400,000+. {{ Only way to die of an OD of tobacco is to be in atobacco wharehouse as it burns down. So, using that criteria, thedeath rate for tobacco is probably close to zero. }} Absolutely wrong. You must have missed the news shows thatreported on the problem of nicotine poisoning in people who workin the fields and pick tobacco. There are far more people whoreceive permanent nervous system damage (and even die) from thatthan from most of the illegal drugs. Nicotine, you may haveforgotten, is an insecticide. {{ Now if we include lung cancer, etc, with the tobaccodeaths, we must also include pneumonia, suicides, trafficaccidents, dehydration, AIDS, etc, in the cocaine deaths.}} The AMA's figures included those causes. Tobacco still killsat least 20 times as many people as the illegal drugs. {{ Many people become very aggresive on crack, and get infights - and get killed. That is a cocaine caused death.}} Wrong. A study done in NY during the height of the crackepidemic showed that, of 414 homicides, only three could betraced to the effects of cocaine in any form, and two of thesewere victim- precipitated. For example, in one case the murdervictim tried to rape someone who was high on crack and got killedin the process. The study showed the only drug with a realconnection to violence was alcohol. This was recently confirmedby the DOJ report "Psychoactive Substances andViolence." {{ In the same way, how many alcohol deaths are caused byOD? Maybe a few hundred?}} Wrong again. Alcohol overdose death is not at all uncommon,especially on college campuses. Former HEW Secretary JosephCalifano once estimated that about 40 percent of all hospitalcare in the US is due to alcohol related conditions, includingoverdoses. {{ It is not easy to OD on alcohol so badly you die. Youtend to pass out first.}} False. People are simply lucky if they pass out, but alcoholoverdose deaths are not at all uncommon. The main reason youdon't hear about them so much is because they are not news. {{ So your stats include liver disease, etc. I have met aheroin addict, who was unconscious, half in a gutter, on a coldnight. If he had died of exposure, he should have been listed asa heroin caused death. It, of course, wouldn't have been.}} So maybe we should adjust the death figures for heroindownward. As I said, even if you assume that, for whateverreason, the deaths from illegal drugs are grossly underestimated,you still don't get anywhere near the deaths caused by alcoholand tobacco. You should take a big clue from this. The reasonsfor the drug laws never did have anything to do with the reasonsyou are stating. When the laws were first passed, no medicalevidence was even presented to show that these drugs were harmfuland, in fact, the medical authorities in the US were opposed tothe laws. While we are on the subject of history, maybe you cantell me why hemp was outlawed? {{Please see the above. Also, your figures are nowcounting deaths only. Not fair for a discussion like this. Howmany messed up lives do cocaine and heroin cause? If a man issent to prison, it does not kill him, it messes up his life. So -lets compare like to like. }} So we take someone who already has a problem and mess up hislife some more? Interesting approach, but I fail to see how itprovides any benefit. {{You say there are approximately 1,000,000 people inprison for drug abuse. That is 1,000,000 messed up lives.According to your stats, that leaves 29,000,000 still abusingdrugs outside. That leaves 29,000,000 messed up lives. Now, tosave the 1,000,000 in prison, youwant to vastly increase the29,000,000. }} The first point you should recognize from these stats is thatit is folly to believe that anything is under control right now.So, basically, you are supporting a campaign that has no way toachieve your stated goals, even if it was a good idea. The livesmessed up in prison are messed up permanently. Black men (by farthe majority of those prosecuted for drug offenses) are virtuallypermanently unemployable once they have a prison record. They canrecover from a drug habit (and many do) but it is much moredifficult to recover from a stretch in prison. And, as for the other 29,000,000, the vast majority of themare not any more messed up than the average wine drinker. Thatmuch is self-evident, or the problem would be far worse than itis. {{Have you ever had a person you truly cared about who wasan addict? }} Sure, one of my aunts and a cousin I grew up with, amongothers. I deplore their behavior and I wish they would stop but,at the same time, I recognize that neither they nor society wouldbe better off if we spent a million dollars to put them inprison. {{What do I think is a reasonable number of people toimprison in order to stop drug abuse? Enough so that the overallwelfare of the country comes out ahead. }} I agree with that last part. So how many should we put inprison to come out ahead? Just tell me what the number is so wecan make plans to build that many prison cells. {{ I think we are a long way from passing the point wheremore people are messed up by the prison than by drug abuse. }} How would you know if you admit you don't know the stats ondeaths or people in prison? {{How many additional deaths, resulting from thelegalization of drug use, would it take for you to cry "Toomany!" }} What evidence do you have to show that there would beadditional deaths? Other than your own opinion, that is. All theevidence I have seen says that the death rate would probably godown with a more intelligent policy. CliffSchaffer's Home Page WT01-B29-71IA031-000655-B048-43http://206.61.184.43:80/schaffer/ACTIVIST/args2.htm 206.61.184.43 19970122115530 text/html 39289HTTP/1.0 200 OKDate: Wednesday, 22-Jan-97 11:55:21 GMTServer: WebSitePro/1.1f (S/N wpo-0deb)Allow-ranges: bytesContent-type: text/htmlLast-modified: Saturday, 28-Dec-96 07:28:11 GMTContent-length: 39071 Drug Legalization Debates - Part 2 Contents | Feedback | Search DRCNet Library | Schaffer Library | The Drug Legalization Debate DRUG LEGALIZATION DEBATES Part 2 - About 15 pages by Clifford A. Schaffer The following pages are actual excerpts from some of mydebates on drug policy. The person I am debating in many of these questions is an M.D.with about 25 years experience in medicine. You can see how hestarted out from the first paragraph. He wound up agreeing withme and posted a message telling everyone he had changed his mindand supported a plan similar to the plan used in Liverpool. I SAID: Research done at the Federal hospital at Lexington,KY, was unable to establish what a lethal dose of heroin mightbe. In addition, the doctors in Liverpool who prescribe heroin toaddicts every day state that "heroin is not a dangerousdrug" and they have some patients on massive doses of heroinwith no risk of overdose. {{ Cliff, you must stop this dangerous garbage before you killsomeone. Opiates cause the suppression of respiration. You quietly stop breathing and die. The LD50 (dose required tokill half the population of a test animal) of the various opiateshas been well worked out. Specific opiate antagonists such asnaloxone can and are LIFE-SAVING in opiate overdose cases.Naloxone does nothing but antagonize the respiratory effects ofopiates.}} You had better talk to the doctors listed in Signer.zipbecause they are the ones who told me, as well as the doctors inLiverpool who prescribe it. They announced it on 60 Minutes sothey reached far more people than I ever will. The people whotold me are -- without doubt -- the leading authorities in theworld on the subject. One of them, in fact, has headed upCalifornia's official investigation into the subject for the last25 years. There have been other doctors on these boards who havealready recognized that the credentials of the people I amreferring to were far superior to their own. If you would like tocompare credentials, I will list theirs. Of course, even if heroin was a significant health hazard,that still would not mean that prison was a productive approachto the problem. Every major study said that it was preciselybecause of these dangers that we should not take this approach --because this policy only made things worse. {{ It is true that habitual users become resistant to theseeffects, but, for God's sake believe me when I say that a naiveuser is in mortal danger from the same dose of heroin.}} Naive users can be in mortal danger from a lot of things,including alcohol, automobiles, and firearms. I can't begin toimagine all the things that we might have to protect you from.That does not mean it is a good idea to throw them in prison, oryou either, even if you did succumb to the temptations of heroin. {{Please give us the words actually used the doctors by thedoctors you are quoting above. If you want to be believed, backup your opinions WITH QUOTES.}} Dr. Benson Rowe stated that heroin was "harmless".Present in the room at the same time, and voicing no protest wereDr. Frederick H. Meyers, Dr. Herbert Berger, and the otherslisted in Signer.zip. You may look them up in Who's Who. Also,the doctors in Liverpool stated on 60 Minutes that "Heroinis not a dangerous drug." They ought to know because theyprescribe it every day. The full transcript of the program is inHoover.zip. {{ The reason, of course, that you cant is that these notionsfly in the very face of modern neuro-pharmacology.}} As I said, I will be glad to compare the credentials of thesepeople with anyone you would like to name. The following message is from David C. I thought it wasparticularly good. PMFJI, {{Drugs are illegal because using them is very bad forpeople, and therefore very bad for the country.}} Either I missed something and you finally made tobacco andalcohol illegal in America or you are saying that tobacco andalcohol are not drugs or you are saying that using tobacco oralcohol is not very bad for people. I don't think there are anyother possibilities. Either way this would seem to be a verysilly thing to say. Let me inject some statistics into your debate: DRUGS Drug Crimes per 100,000 people Australia - 403 USA - 234 Canada - 225 Denmark - 176 Switzerland - 129 Norway - 116 Austria - 77 Belgium - 40 Netherlands - 38 Japan - 31 Israel - 25 Spain - 15 Portugal - 13 Italy - 6 PRISON Prisoners per 100,000 people USA - 426 Poland - 204 Bulgaria - 160 Hungary - 142 Canada - 94 Austria - 87 Germany - 77 United Kingdom - 77 Finland - 75 Australia - 60 New Zealand - 60 Italy - 60 Portugal - 58 Switzerland - 54 Spain - 49 Denmark - 47 France - 40 Netherlands - 27 Greece - 24 Source: UN Centre for Social Devt. and Humanitarian Affairs.Looks to me like we both have a serious drug problem - and thatit is the probable cause of some crimes. Also looks like youwouldn't really want to stuff too many more Americans in jail -its obviously not working. Australia generaly follows theAmerican model RE: Drug law, although minor offenders are treatedmuch more leniently (ie users). Looking at the statistics would lead one to think that some ofthe programmes that continental Europe have for limitting druguse might be worthwhile. "Liberal" or not, if they workthey would be better than whatever it is we are doing now. Ithink your society and mine are obfuscating their moral duty inthe treatment of drug offenders if we continues to simply lockthem up. And, it would seem, wasting a lot of money. I assume you have never been inside a prison? The probabilityof meeting death in a prison is much higher than outside of it.Prohibition of alcohol didn't work very well early this century.I don't think that the track record of prohibition of drugs isdoing very well either. I am told that over half the population of Australia hassmoked marijuana (no source). Should we just build a prison wallaround the place and lock the lot up?? Regards David C. {{How many people would I imprison to stop the flow ofthese drugs? Enough to save the rest. Or, if you can come up withanother alternative that would stop the widespread destructioncaused by drug abuse, I would throw out the prison idea, and gowith that. }} Thirty million people in prison? What an idea! First, face thefact that there is no way in Hell that we can afford to throwenough people in prison to make this policy effective. You mightas well go out and throw rocks at the moon and claim that you aregetting closer every time. We can't do it even if it was a goodidea. So, it looks like the first thing we ought to do is look forOption #2. Any suggestions? {{You see the horrors of putting drug abusers in prison. Isee the horrors of drug abuse period.}} Every major study of drug policy agreed that prison onlyincreased the existing dangers of drugs, and made the situationworse. In the case of drugs like heroin, they said that nearlyall of the damage to the individual health and to society was theresult of the fact that the drugs were illegal and thereforeunregulated. {{Consider the possibility that continued vigorousprosecution of the drug laws may limit FUTURE incarcerations inthe long term.}} So how many millions should we put in prison right now? {{ In the meantime I'm comfortable leaving the question inthe hands of our elected representatives.}} Certainly any change in the laws will have to come from them.But tell me, where do you agree or disagree with the conclusionspresented by the CU Report, and why? {{ for God's sake, you gave a reference. If discourse is tomean anything, you must be prepared to back up the reference.}} It would be nice if you did the same, or maybe just answeredsome of the simple questions I have asked. Like: who is Dr.William Halsted and how does his story relate to what you saidearlier? I am beginning to believe you have not read the CU Report oryou would know the answer to this one right off the top of yourhead. {{ }} Dr. Benson Rowe stated that heroin was"harmless". {{ The full quote, in context, please.}} The occasion was the signing of the Hoover Resolution at theHoover Institute at Stanford. Present in the room were the peoplelisted in Signer.zip, as I said. Dr. Benson Rowe is ProfessorEmeritus of Cardiac Surgery at the University of California atSan Francisco. In introducing himself to the assembled group, heexplained how he became interested in the drug issue. He said itwas immediately after World War II when he began doing surgery onsome addicts with damaged heart valves. In order to find out whatwas damaging their heart valves he went to the county coroner andresearched the issue with the bodies of people who had died. Hediscovered, much to his surprise, that the coroner and everyother medical authority agreed that heroin was not the cause ofthe injury to the heart valves. The cause of the injury, insteadwas the impurities in the street drug, and the infections whichresulted from injecting anything in unsanitary conditions. Hesaid that, after almost fifty years of research on the subject,he was convinced that, except for the fact that heroin causedaddiction, it was otherwise medically "harmless" to thebody. The other doctors in attendance nodded agreement. At the same conference I asked Dr. Frederick Meyers about whatmedication he would recommend for my mother's condition. He saidthat opioids were the drug of choice and that they should have noharmful effects on my mother. {{}}Also, the doctors in Liverpool stated on 60 Minutesthat "Heroin is not a dangerous drug."{{{ The fullquote, in context, please.}} See below. The show aired December 28, 1993. Ed is Ed Bradley.Julia is an addict. Alan Perry is a counselor at the clinic. As Isaid, the full text is in Hoover.zip which you could have lookedup and read yourself. Ed: Julia says she's now able to have normal relation, to holddown a job as a waitress and to care for her 3 year old daughter.Without the prescription, where do you think you would be? Julia: I would probably be dead now. Ed: Once, they have gotten their prescriptions, addicts mustshow up for regular meetings to show that they are stayinghealthy and free from crime. But how can anyone be healthy ifthey are taking a drug like heroin? Alan Perry: Pure heroin is not a dangerous drug. We havepeople on massive doses of heroin. Ed: Alan Perry is a former Drug Information Officer for thelocal Health Authority and now a counselor at the clinic. So howcome we see so much damage caused by heroin? Alan: The heroin that is causing that damage, is not causingdamage because of the heroin in it, it is causing damage becauseof the bread dust, coffee, crushed bleach crystals, anything thatcauses the harm and if heroin is 90% adulterated that means only10% is heroin, the rest is rubbish, and if you inject cement intoyour veins, you don't have to be a medical expert to work it out,that's going to cause harm. Ed: Many at the clinic like George still suffer from thedamage caused by street drugs. Alan Perry believes you can'tprescribe clean drugs and needles to addicts without teachingthem how to use them. Alan: You know the major causes of ill health to druginjectors is not even the dirty drugs they take, it is their badtechnique. Not knowing how to do it. In America I have seenaddicts missing legs and arms and that is through bad technique.So we show people how to, not how to inject safely, but how toinject less dangerously. We have to be clear about that, you havestoned people sticking needles in themselves in a dangerousactivity. The strategy is called "harm minimalization." {{There is a program in Oakland, Calif. When a drug abusercomes in, and is convicted of a felony charge, he has thepossibility of a new program. . . .}} You seem to miss the point of these programs. These programscame about as a result of recognition that prison does not work.The point of these drug courts is to do anything they can to keeppeople out of prison. {{But good news! Did you watch NBC news tonight? If so, yousaw the description of a drug program in Oakland. See my post toDavid C. for a quickie description. It keeps drugs illegal, andkeeps many users out of prison, and sobers them up. Wow. }} You should have caught the A&E special about what ishappening in Europe. They featured the Chief of Police of Oaklandand the Sheriff of San Francisco both saying that the drug warshould be abandoned because it is absolutely hopeless. Youprobably missed the news that the mayors of San Francisco,Oakland, and San Jose held a press conference (along with theirrespective law enforcment officials) to announce their signing ofthe Hoover Resolution. {{But there was even more good news with it. A man wasquoted who was trying to sell the program. He pointed out that itsaved a whole lot of money. Said it costs $20,000 a year to keepa druggie in prison. So, unless the average amount of time servedfor a drug offense is 23 years, your figure of $450,000 is wayhigh. }} The $450,000 figure is composed of the following: $150,000 forarrest and prosecution, according to figures compiled by theState of New York. About $150,000 for a prison cell, which iswhat it costs here in California. In New York this figure is alittle lower - but still over $100,000. Then add about $30,000per year for an average term of five years. Total: about $450,000 {{Also, Mr C. pointed out the number of prisoners per100,000 in this country. It 426, which comes to a little over1,000,000 altogether. So Cliff's figure of 1,000,000 now inprison on drug charges must have also been a bit off. (Maybe heused it like the figure for black males - there are 1,000,000 inprison, and some of them are there on drug charges.)}} As earlier, you are misstating what I said. Let me try itagain. There are currently about 1.4 million people in theprisons and jails of the US and the population is rising rapidly,primarily because of drugs. The 1.4 million figure is thepopulation in the prisons on a given census day, which means theactual count of people who went through those prisons is higherthan that figure. By the Federal Government's own estimates, wewill soon reach the points where we have more than 1.5 millionpeople in prison (on a given census day) and about two- thirds ofthose people will be there for drug charges. The full figures, ifyou care to read them, are available in the Sourcebook ofCriminal Justice Statistics, published by the DOJ and availableat your local Government book store or through your locallibrary. {{Drugs are illegal because using them is very bad forpeople, and therefore very bad for the country. }} Absolutely false. That never was the reason for the laws. {{ It is far to our benefit to have a nation of soberpeople. }} No doubt about that, but prison does not achieve that verywell. {{It merely depends on what you want to discourage. Usingdrugs is a behavior which is subject to negative reinforcement.}} The average drug user never sees any such negativereinforcement from the criminal justice system, except perhapsthat it makes their drugs cost a little more. If that is yourobject, you should face the fact right now that this is afailure. {{How, then, would you persuade them to seek treatment?}} My good friend Judge James P. Gray says he does it all thetime with people with alcohol problems, without threatening themwith prison. {{Well, yes, "separation from society" now meansprison. You have some other alternative?}} So answer the question: How many millions of people do youthink we ought to put in prison for drugs? {{Once again, the British experiment with prescriptionheroin has been a failure: "The prescription ofpharmaceutically pure heroin in controlled doses is, in mostessential respects, a thing of the past in Britain."("Drug Problems and Criminal Justice Policy inBritain," _Contemporary Drug Problems_, Summer 1992)}} My good friend, Dr. Clarke Smith, a member of the CaliforniaAcademy of Family Practice just got back from there last week andreported that heroin and cocaine are CURRENTLY being prescribedand that the authorities consider it quite successful. The 60Minutes show on this subject aired on December 28, 1993, and wehave personally confirmed the facts with the British doctors onseveral occasions. The doctors say that their biggest problemwith the program is that the United States Government keeps lyingabout it. }}prison as rehabilitation is a disproven illusion According to who?}} According to Thomas Coughlin, the New York State Commissionerof Corrections, for one. {{Work-release programs are already a standard part of theprison system in many states, and have been for many years.}} Most convicts do not have the opportunity to participate inany such programs. These programs have been virtuallydiscontinued in California. {{ Once again, what you saw that 15-minute televisionepisode doesn't prove a thing. What may have occurred (accordingto Ed Bradley) in one clinic in Liverpool does not allow one togeneralize to the entire society. Anyone can create a"successful" heroin maintenance program by taking theaddicts who are stable anyway and putting them in the program.That is, if there are 500 addicts and 20 or 30 of them arestable, then when you put the 20 or 30 stable addicts in amaintenance program, you can claim a big "success," butyou haven't really accomplished anything. Britain has beenpracticing heroin maintenance since 1926, according to"Contemporary Drug Problems," and very few physiciansprescribe it anymore. If you want to impress anyone with thesupposed successs of the Liverpool program, you will have to comeup with something better than a TV report. I have been to thelibrary and researched the issue; if you want to continue thedebate, so should you.}} The more I think about this message, the more I see someonewho is in serious denial here. I have told you of the 60 Minutesshow, the A&E one hour show (originally produced by the BBC),and the fact that we have personally contacted the doctorsinvolved to confirm that both shows were accurate. As I said, agroup -- headed by Dr. Clarke Smith, a member of the Board ofDirectors of the California Academy of Family Physicians, went toEurope to confirm what is happening in several areas. The doctorsconfirmed to us that the shows were accurate and your informationis, shall we say, outdated. Decriminalization and even outrightlegalization are being called for by both medical and policeauthorities all over Europe. As far as research goes, you candownload Signer.zip in library 13 of the Issues forum and startcontacting some of the doctors listed there. If you want to knowwho they are in more detail, look them up in Who's Who, also atyour local library. If you have researched this so well in the library, whyhaven't you read any of the studies I mentioned? So I am calling your bluff again. The doctors involved inLiverpool are named in the text of the 60 Minutes program inHoover.zip. They are listed with information in Liverpool, or youcan simply call the public health service in Liverpool, as weoriginally did, and ask to be put in touch with the doctorsrunning the program. Go ahead. Call them and tell us the results.And while you are at it, remember to ask them about the vote ofthe British chiefs of police. {{ The Chinese are biologically the same as the Americans.They react to addictive substances the same as we do.}} Aren't the Europeans biologically the same as us, too?Therefore, the programs which are currently working in Europeshould work here. {{ Try reading what I wrote before you comment on it:"People who had boring or stressful jobs turned to opium:court eunuchs, wealthy housewives, harried clerks, soldiers goinginto combat, students preparing for exams." These peoplehave their counterparts in America.}} Court eunuchs have their counterpart in America? Other studiesof the same period of time showed that opium use in China was nota lot different from alcohol use in the US. That is, the majorityof the users were weekend recreational users who could take it orleave it. The percentage who appeared to be addicted was not muchdifferent than the percentage one would expect from alcohol. And, since you seem to be so good at history, you ought toknow that the first anti-opium laws in the US had nothing to dowith public health and safety. The first anti-opium law was an1875 San Francisco ordinance banning the smoking of opium inopium dens, a peculiarly Chinese custom. The stated reason forthe law was the fear that Chinese men were luring white women totheir "ruin" in opium dens. "Ruin" wasdefined not as opium addiction, but as associating with Chinesemen. The racism behind these laws was overt from the verybeginning. At the same time, opium remained available in allsorts of medicinal preparations, more commonly used by whites. {{ Again, you should read what I wrote. During the periodof legal narcotics trade, between 1858 and 1906, the incidence ofnarcotics use increased from around 5% of the population toapproximately 25%.}} And it was on a steady decline from 1906 to 1914 when theHarrison Narcotics Act was passed, primarily because of the PureFood and Drug Act of 1905 which made manufacturers list theingredients and therefore allowed consumers to intelligentlychoose. You may also recall that the major medical societies allstated that the Harrison Act was a medical, criminal, and socialdisaster and urged its repeal. After the passage of the Act, theproblems of drug use rose sharply. And, maybe you could share with us the reasons why hemp -- thelargest crop in America -- was made illegal? {{ Great idea, only what is more positively reinforcingthan a heroin rush?}} Well, most people I know think that the mundane old stuff likemaking an honest living, and being sober enough to enjoy yourfamily is a whole lot better than any drug high. {{ "Drug users referred to treatment by the criminaljustice system stay in treatment longer on average than thosewith no legal involvement, and length of time spent in treatmentis an important predictor of success. . . . Clients monitoredthrough TASC are as successful in reducing their drug use andcriminal activity as are those voluntarily in drugtreatment." _Bureau of Justice Statistics National Report_(1992).}} That's easy to do if you are behind bars for twenty years. Andthe ones that went to prison are "as successful" as theones who went voluntarily. Because it is so expensive to processthem through prison, don't you think it would be a better idea toget them to go voluntarily? {{ I don't see what this has to do with drug offenses.Since you are unaware of the fact, I should explain that mostdrug offenses are non- violent.}} The only people who seem to be unaware of this fact are thedrug warriors. {{Fine, then I can assume that you won't mind sitting inthe passenger seat.}} The stats show quite clearly that illegal drugs are arelatively minor problem on the road. {{}}Heroin is a very safe drug when legal.{{ Just sprinkle a little on your breakfeast cereal? Or a BringYour Own Balloon (BYOB) Christmas party? We'll invite yourchildren over, after all it's safe. Come on, you can't reallybelieve this. }} That is the word of the world's leading medical experts on thesubject, including the doctors in Liverpool who prescribe itevery day. There is a long list of them in Signer.zip. If youneed more information on them you can read Who's Who or I canprobably put you in touch with a good number of them. (I haveoffered that before but you seem strangely reluctant to try toreply to any of my messages.) {{}} Pot is safer than alcohol or tobacco, and has nevercaused a documented human death according to all theliterature.{{ Except when you're flying planes, trains or automobiles.}} Even then, accidents caused by pot are pretty rare. Forexample, a study of OSHA statistics showed that about .014% ofon=the-job accidents were caused by illegal drugs. {{How many millions in this country drink? Are you willingto live with a similar abuse rate for drugs like cocain, heroin,pot and speed?}} Gosh no, but why aren't we doing the same thing for alcoholand tobacco if it is such a good idea? If prison is the best wayto keep people from becoming addicted to drugs, why aren't wejailing wine drinkers and cigarette smokers? {{Were it not so embedded in our culture, I would might beinclined to say yes. Until then, I'll settle for mandatory deathsentences for manslaughter cases related to alcohol abuse,mandatory prison terms for those selling to minors, and so on. }} Let's suppose you got your fondest wish. Let's suppose thattomorrow morning, you woke up as President and found outside yourhome, every drug dealer in America lined up with a bag of dope inone hand and a signed confession in the other? What would you do? {{How many more children are you willing to hand over tolives of dependency, isolation and neglect? }} Not one -- which is one the main reasons that the currentpolicy ought to be stopped -- because it is devastating thechildren in the black community. {{ Gosh, a serious question! It's been *so* long!}} I have asked you lots of serious questions but you don't wantto answer them. So here is an old one, slightly rephrased: Let'ssuppose I believe everything you say about drugs and the bestkind of drug program. You say that prison must be an integralpart of that program. So, as a taxpayer who has to pay for theprisons, I ask you: There are thirty million drug users in theUnited States. How many millions do you want to throw in prison? Further supposing I believe everything you say: If prison issuch a good idea for these drugs, why isn't it an equally good(or even better!) idea for alcohol and tobacco? {{ The failure of our present program is that it treatsdealers as criminals and addicts as victims.}} No, as the judges and other law enforcement officials havetold me, it is a disaster (not just a failure) because it neverwas a good idea in the first place. {{ This is a rather arbitrary distinction, since mostdealers are also addicts and most addicts are involved incrime.}} Under the law all users are dealers. {{ Also, it is also useless trying to suppress drug dealingwithout suppressing drug abuse. Therefore, I believe that asuccessful drug policy should place greater weight on curtailingdrug abuse.}} We agree there. {{ Drug abuse occurs for a number of reasons. People whoare poor and uneducated turn to drugs because they have nothingbetter to do with their lives. Unfortunately, you can't do muchabout that, short of a general reform of American society. It isimportant, however, that treatment programs offer addicts analternative lifestyle. Taking someone out of a rotten, no-futurelife in a miserable slum and putting them in treatment isuseless, if they can only go back to a rotten, no- future life ina miserable slum.}} We agree there. {{ In this light, vocational training is very important. Itis important that training be suited to the individual and alsoprovide him with the opportunity for pursuing a meaningfulcareer. But in all cases, it should be made plain that thealternative to honest work is prison.}} We agree that vocational training is very important. Well, we don't have any programs funded to meet the"honest work" part of it so the alternative is alwaysprison. Of course, once they go to prison, it doesn't matter ifthey get vocational training or not, because nobody is going tohire them anyway. As a society, that is called shooting ourselvesin the foot. {{ A lot of affluent people, who have plenty otheropportunities, also use narcotics. For such individuals, thestigma of going to jail is very important, and so punishment is astrong deterrent.}} Poor people get jail. Affluent people get the Betty FordClinic. That disparity in the outcome of this policy is one ofthe reasons that every major study of drug policy has recommendeddecriminalization. {{ The MADD movement provides a good model of how effectivelegislation can produce a real social change: There is now astrong stigma against drunk driving, and so the offense hasdeclined. Legalized gambling provides a counter-example: There isno stigma against playing Lotto or video poker, and so millionsof people gamble who never did it before.}} Your analogies are weak. Drunk driving is a public behavior.There is a useful purpose to enforcing laws on public behaviorand, because the behavior is public, the laws have a chance toconfront the offender and stop the situation. The same is nottrue with drug use. {{ So, treatment and punishment are both important forcontrolling the drug problem. }} The information supplied above does not support thisconclusion. {{ One often hears the argument, however, that we shouldtreat addicts *instead* of throwing them in jail. However, theseare not logical alternatives. Many addicts will not accepttreatment unless they are already in jail or are threatened withimprisonment.}} The Rand Corporation recently issued a study which said thatevery dollar spent on drug treatment saved an additional sevendollars in related social costs. On the other hand, every dollarspent on putting drug users in prison costs about an additionalfifteen dollars in related social costs. Of course, the British have a way of getting addicts to accepttreatment and become crime-free. They simply tell the addictsthat they will lose their legal prescription if they don'tstraighten their lives out. It works a whole lot better than whatyou are recommending. {{ Judges often do sentence minor drug offenders totreatment rather than prison. This has merit; we definitely needto expand drug treatment and make it more available.}} We agree on this point. I would also point out that judgesoften sentence minor offenders to unconscionable prison termsover trivial offenses, like the young woman who got a mandatoryminimum of ten years without even touching drugs. {{ But we also need to end the cycle by which addicts gointo treatment, then relapse. }} You missed the 60 Minutes show and the A&E show onLiverpool (obviously) so you might be interested in what thedoctors there said. They said that all modes of treatment orpunishment for drug use that they could find produced the sameessential result. That is, about five percent of the addicts peryear would come off of drugs by themselves, regardless of whatyou did. They said it seemed to be as much a process ofmaturation as anything else. Therefore, they said, rather thanpunish them and seriously impact their health with dirty heroin,dirty needles, etc., they opted to give the addicts prescriptionsfor heroin and cocaine, and teach them how to manage theiraddiction until they can mature off of it. As a result, most ofthe health problems have been eliminated, most of the crime hasbeen eliminated, and most addicts are employed and living withtheir families. {{ For this reason, I would support a program ofaccelerated minimum sentences for second and subsequent offenses.When an addict proves untreatable, the next best alternative isto separate him from society. In addition, the acceleratedschedule of punishments provides incentive to reform.}} So I ask again. How many people do you propose to put inprison? {{ The aim of treatment programs is to end addiction. }} The primary aim of the British program is to keep addictshealthy long enough to end the addiction. {{ But it is also important to prevent untreated addictsfrom becoming a menace to society. }} Their crimes are primarily property crimes and are a result ofthe fact that drugs are illegal. In Liverpool, where they havetried another approach, the addicts are no longer a menace tosociety. {{In this light, methadone programs have been verysuccessful. While methadone is addictive, it can be taken orallyand is much more long- lasting in preventing withdrawal than isheroin.}} Many famous medical experts, such as Dr. Frederick H. Meyerspoint out that the prescription of methadone (a narcotic) in suchlarge amounts proves that narcotics are not inherently dangerous. {{ A heroin addict needs an injection every few hours andoften becomes violent if he doesn't get it. }} A recent report by the Department of Justice titled"Drugs and Violence" says that the only drug which hasany real connection to any kind of violent crime is alcohol. Evenif what you said was true, it would seem that we would be farbetter off with an approach like they are using in Liverpool. Amanaged daily prescription would seem to be the best way toinsure that this does not happen. If you had read any of thestudies I have mentioned, you would know that tobacco and alcoholusers exhibit the same kinds of anti-social behavior when theyare deprived of their drug. {{ Finally, I would support expanded drug testing. Atpresent, the police are well equipped to test drunk drivers, butnarcotics users may evade punishment, unless they happen to havethe drugs in their possession. Definitely, police stations shouldbe equipped to test persons arrested for reckless driving andsimilar offenses for drugs. Regular drug testing should also be apart of all prison programs.}} Why wouldn't you support the same thing for alcohol andtobacco? They do far more damage than illegal drugs so we wouldbe far better off to put the same effort against them. How aboutit? Should we throw George Burns in jail because he refuses togive up cigars? And do you want to punish people based solely on their drugtests? After all, you have money in your pocket right now withcocaine dust on it and it is possible that enough of it got in toyour system to make you register positive. That is, of course, ifyou didn't already test positive because you took a coldmedication, or a headache pill, or a cough syrup, or ate certainkinds of bread, etc., etc., etc., Contents | Feedback | Search DRCNet Library | Schaffer Library | The Drug Legalization Debate WT01-B29-72IA031-000655-B048-63http://206.61.184.43:80/schaffer/ACTIVIST/args3.htm 206.61.184.43 19970122115540 text/html 61464HTTP/1.0 200 OKDate: Wednesday, 22-Jan-97 11:55:30 GMTServer: WebSitePro/1.1f (S/N wpo-0deb)Allow-ranges: bytesContent-type: text/htmlLast-modified: Saturday, 28-Dec-96 07:26:17 GMTContent-length: 61246 25 More pages of the Drug Legalization Debate 25 More pages of the Drug Legalization Debate by Clifford A. Schaffer But there is a more pressing argument. I know human natureto at least some degree. People do things for many reasons, butprimarily because they get more pleasure than pain from thething. Your argument is that if you remove a whole lot of thepain from drug use, that people will not use drugs more. Are youtherefore saying that making heroin illegal causes people to wantto use it more? Why? Do people enjoy paying fines? Do they likeprison? Please provide me with some sensible reasons why youbelieve people would not use drugs more, or would use them less,if drugs were legal. The basic reason is the same simple reason that most peopledo not spend their days staggering around on booze. I tried itand realized that I enjoyed being sober a whole lot more. Thevast majority of the people are the same way. As I said before,there is nothing magical about these drugs which causes them tobe hypnotically attractive. As a matter of fact, I don't think Iwould like them much myself because one of the most commoneffects is to make users puke. Maybe it is hard for other peopleto understand, but I don't think that puking is much fun. As for inflicting pain, I must agree that is a noble goal.Take a group of people who are not well off anyway and make itour goal to inflict as much pain on them as we can. Let's consider a certain little statistical fact. The numberof people in prison is currently only a small fraction of thetotal number of users. Therefore, the current system cannotinflict pain on more than a small number of the users and must beseen as quite ineffective in your stated goal. Withoutconsidering the fact that our prisons are currently overloaded,just tell me how many more millions of people we should put inprison to inflict the proper amount of pain. Please also confirm your quote to me on the percentage ofblack men going to prison on drug charges. You said it was 50%.Is that accurate? If so, what percentage of black men, in total,abuse drugs? If 50% go to prison, total use must approach 100%.If not, what is the figure? (I guess this has one point in yourfavor. If 100% of black males now are drug abusers, legalizingdrugs would not cause the percentage to go up.) About half of all black men in America will be incarceratedat least once by the time they are thirty. The source of this isinformation extrapolated from the DOJ report The Prevalence ofImprisonment, and studies by the Sentencing Project that showthat about one-fourth of the black men under 30 are _currently_in prison, on probation, or parole. Drug offenses will be thesingle biggest cause for this. The figures on drug use throughthe population are about the same for whites as it is for blacks.The disproportionately high percentage of blacks arrested can beaccounted for by a number of factors. The first is that theselaws originally were intended to target minorities and thetactics used to enforce them tend to target minorities overwhites. For example, it is easier to pick up twenty streetdealers in a minority community than it is to get the same numberby busting middle class white houses. Also, the drug businessprovides a unique opportunity for young black men. These andother factors create a situation where, in certain inner cityneighborhoods, ninety percent of the black men have already beento prison at least once. Also, black men are more likely to beconvicted because of poor legal representation, and more likelyto be sentenced to prison when they are convicted. Okay!! Finally. What other options do you have in mind?This has the possibility of being a very productive thread. Nosnide insults or sarcasm. What other options are there? There are quite a few. The first point that I would make isthat we should have a consistent philosophy and approach to allrecreational drugs. That is, if you would not think it good for7-11 clerks to sell cocaine to children, then we should beequally tough about tobacco. At the same time, if you recognizethat throwing tobacco smokers in prison would becounterproductive, then it stands to reason that it would becounterproductive for other drugs. Figure out what would be agood policy for the two most dangerous drugs -- alcohol andtobacco -- and it will be easy to figure out what should be doneabout the others. Judge Gray has called for "regulated distribution".His idea is that drugs would be available at government regulatedstores of some sort at prices that would be low enough todiscourage the black market. Advertising would be prohibitedunder his idea and all drugs would be sold in plain wrappers withwarning information and, most importantly, a number to call toget help. The Netherlands has taken a different approach. They stillhave drug laws but make it a point not to enforce them except incases where there are bad drugs, or people are making themselvesobnoxious. Their primary purpose is to reduce the harm done bydrugs and part of their plan is to get people to come in fortreatment. In Liverpool, they are prescribing heroin and cocaine toaddicts as part of the public health service. Part of the priceof getting the prescription is that addicts must agree to stopcommitting crimes and to get their lives together. With some drugs, such as marijuana, it is doubtful whetherany sort of regulation is even desireable. The Dutch ignore it tothe point of allowing it to be sold openly in coffee shops and itdoes not seem to cause any problems. Now there are burglars in my neighborhood. Some of them dothe same crime for years - and will keep on doing it for more.Is, therefore, the threat of prison not relevant? Should weremove that threat? Should we legalize buglary, because prisononly makes it worse? I don't think so. You have indicated thatlegalizing hard drugs would lower the rate of drug abuse. Perhapsyou also believe legalizing burglary would lower that crime. Idisagree on both counts. The threat of prison is a deterrent topotential burglars, robbers, murderers, etc. I believe it is alsoa deterrent to potential drug abusers. Once addiction has beenreached, that threat is less powerful. But that does not mean weremove it. I get this tired, irrelevant argument a lot. First, burglaryis not the same as drug use so comparisons of the legal methodsfor controlling them are silly. Second, if we had thirty millionburglars (or criminals of any kind) we would have to find anothermethod of dealing with the problem just because the criminaljustice system could not handle the load. In this case it doesn'tmatter what you want to do, it is a matter of what you can do. You also indicated that I should be imprisoned as a drugaddict. I assume you are being sarcastic again. (Which, BTW, isrude.) Since I have now been sober for 13 years, and 15 days,prison is not called for. However, remember that drugs took 12years of my life. If I had been jailed in year two or three, andthat huge shock had persuaded me to stay sober, I would havegained 9-10 years of a productive life back. I, in retrospect,really wish that had happened. I miss those 12 years a lot. No, I was not being sarcastic, I was simply following thelogical conclusion of what you said. I would point out that,under the current laws you might have done a lot more than acouple of years in jail. And, when you got out, you would bevirtually unemployable (at anything decent, anyway) which wouldhave severely impacted your attempts at recovery. You again brought up several times that legalizing drugs(which you oppose) in other countries lowered the rate of drugabuse. Because of my knowledge of the way people act, I find thateither I do not understand what you mean, or your stats aresimply wrong. As I said above, if you made burglary legal, wouldthere be fewer of them? If you sold hamburgers for 10cents, wouldwe buy fewer? I just find the idea that making hard drugscontrolled, legal, and cheap would result in less use of them. My point again that you are not acquainted with all of thefacts on this issue. It is happening in Europe. As one Dutchofficial put it, junkies are their own worst advertisement andthey really don't need much in the way of education to persuadepeople that drug addiction is something they want to avoid. As I said before, I recommend that you read the CU Report,and see the A&E special which recently aired on this subject. You asked about your mother being unable to get the drugsshe needs. I do not know the situation at all. I believe that anydrug that would help your mother should be available to her,including marijuana and heroin. Of course, that is not the pointhere. Then you do not understand a whole lot about the drug war.The repression of medical use and research into these drugs wasan integral part of the whole campaign from the very beginning.When the laws were first passed the drug police jailed more than3,000 doctors, specifically aiming at those who were treatingaddicts, and those who voiced disagreement with the policy. Theyeffectively shut down all research into the medical uses and evenresearch into the causes and cures for drug addiction for overfifty years (and it is still difficult to do honest drug researchin this country). It was a deliberate, calculated reign of terroragainst the medical profession which is still intact today. If you will research this a little you will discover why thisreign of terror exists. That is, if these drugs are under theprovince of the medical profession where they really belong, thenthe whole drug prohbition will fall apart quite rapidly. As I said before, your assumptions about why these laws arehere are totally wrong. The reasons you have stated never didhave anything to do with the laws. We have discussed this. You play with stats to advanceyour point, regardless of the intellectual integrity. You have not presented any stats in contrast to mine, so Iwonder how you can say this. You also said that eight times the number that die from ODon drugs, die from that drug use for other reasons - pneumonia,for example. You ignored my point that many deaths would not beattributed to drug use because there was something else handy,such as exposure, or AIDS. No I didn't. I quoted the AMA figures on the subject. Youhave cited nothing but your own opinion in response. You have again cooked your figures. Lets say a policemanpulls over the car of a junkie tonight for erratic driving. Asearch shows five rocks in his pocket. He is arrested. Knowing heis busted, he pleads guilty. According to your figures, that cost$150,000. Balderdash. Aren't we deliberately missing some points here? For everyone which does what you suggested (and there are fewer of them asthe penalties go up) there are others who fight it all the way.The AVERAGE cost is what is being cited. They then build a cell - especially for him. They can'tuse the one that some burglar is now leaving. Well, yes they could. That is what is happening now --violent offenders are being released early so we can throw moredrug users in prison. That doesn't make a lot of sense, does it?Therefore, in order for the law not to cause more harm than good(by releasing another offender early) we have to build a newprison cell. No - that would mean you had to prorate the cost of thecell by everyone who uses it. Would be an honest way, but wouldnot boost your cause. Balderdash again. By what you are saying, the total number of people sent toprison would not increase beyond what it is today -- therefore nobeneficial effect from tougher penalties. An official in Oakland who desperatly wanted to show howmuch money was being saved by his drug program as opposed toprison, put the cost of prison at $20,000 per year. You say$30,000. Balderdash. No, the figures I used come from the Wall Street Journal andthe DOJ. The figures vary somewhat from jurisdiction tojurisdiction, and according to the type of prison but they areall in the same range. You can get the most current figuresyourself by calling the National Clearinghouse and Data Centerfor Drugs and Crime. In Phoenix they put folks in tents!! Its warm, and theyhave many cots like in the army, but it is cheap. And a gooddeterrent. Folks don't like it. So my guess for my addict aboveis about $2,000 to arrest and and convict, $1,500 for theprorated cost of the cell, and $10,000 for the six months hewould actually serve. Comes to $13,500, as opposed to your$450,000. But, of course, your guess is not any more informed than someof your other statements. Personally, I will take the testimonyof people like Thomas Coughlin, the New York State Commissionerof Corrections, before I would accept yours. I am developing a deep mistrust for your facts andfigures. Many of them _may_ be correct, but when I find some tobe in error, I know that you would deliberatly mislead if youfelt you could get away with it. So now I divide by two, an thendoubt. So go read the resources I have mentioned yourself. If youhad done that in the first place, we wouldn't be having thisdiscussion now. Drugs are not magical in a literal sense. They just have aprofound effect on the minds of some people, that some of thosepeople have compared to magic. I thought so. But, of course, either way it does not indicatethat prison is the correct approach. PatI ask you - how many more deaths, and destroyed lives,would it take before you said legalizing drugs was a bad idea?Will await your answer. Please make it public. Thanks. You have dodged this question about four times now. I amnot asking your opinion on whether you think legalizing drugswould have that effect. I am asking _If it did._ Please answer. Ithink the lurkers here deserve an answer. As I said, I never said I supported legalization, so thequestion is misdirected. If legalization is what you have statedthen I wouldn't support it whatever the figures are. The answer here depends upon what you mean by"legalizing drugs". If you mean that cocaine, heroin,etc., would be sold as freely as convenience store clerks selltobacco to children then it is possible that addiction and deathswould increase, although the evidence clearly shows that theywould still not approach the death rates imposed by alcohol andtobacco. So, even in that case, one has to wonder why the majorpush should not be against alcohol and tobacco first. But, of course, I am asking you if you have any evidence(besides your own opinion) that it would increase the deaths. Sofar, you have not responded to that. You said it is not okay with you if a junkie frys hisbrain, or dies, from drug abuse. Why not, if he chooses to takethe drug? I thought that was the core of your argument - that wehad no right to interfere with him, because he could choose whathe wanted, and endure the results. Where am I missing this? This point is not, and never was, the core of my arguments. Ireally don't care what you think about anyone's individual"right" to use recreational drugs, as long as yourecognize that prison is not the proper approach in any case. But, to get back to this point, let's consider a specificexample. My mother is desperately ill with severe chronic pain. Iwon't bore you with the medical history, so let it suffice to saythat she has been all over the US and talked to the nation;sleading medical experts on the subject. They have all said thatthe best medications for here condition are the narcotics -heroin and morphine. She cannot get either one because thedoctors are afraid they will be prosecuted over any questionedprescription. In these cases, don't you think that the people whoshould be making the decision on the medical use of drugs shouldbe the doctors, in consultation with their patients? Both the Dept. of Health and Human Services and theCalifornia Medical Association have issued reports stating thatthe undertreatment of pain in this country is a "nationaltragedy" and the only reasons for it are the fear andignorance created by the drug war. Can we at least agree that any policy which denies medicineto sick people has something seriously wrong with it -- bothmorally and practically? You said it was "tyranny" to send a person toprison for drug abuse, because we would be denying him his rightto make choices. Tyranny is a judgemental word. Is it tyranny toprohibit sexual harassment? I never used the word "tyranny". Who are yourquoting? ((Who are we to cram our views down the throat of somepoor, middle aged, overweight, pathetic, animal of a businessmanager? We are a society. We look out for each other. I won'tlet that manager hurt people if I can stop it. Why? Because Icare about the people he is hurting, more than I care about hispride. Would be willing to bankrupt him in a lawsuit, to stophim, and the others like him, from hurting people. That sameconcern is why I want drugs to remain illegal. I care about thepeople who are having their lives messed up by drugs. I want itto stop. Yes, prison is not a good way to do this, but it is thebest way I see available to us right now. I agree that you have a paternalistic attitude towardinterfering in other people's lives. I don't agree that prison isthe correct approach, even if your attitude was either moral orjustified. It is also obvious that you are not acquainted with all theways we might do this. Try reading some of the studies I havementioned. If you can come up with a way that will assuredly reducethe amount of human suffering because of drug abuse, please shareit. You know by now that I don't buy the "make it legal, andpeople will stop using it" argument. Okay - you don't buyprison is better than legalization. Do you have any other ideas??What can we brainstorm? Imagine you and I were co-dictators ofthis country. We could change any law, as long as we both agreed.What would we do about drug abuse?? A good point here, which is why I was one of the co-authorsof the Hoover Resolution. It is true that we can come to a bettersolution if we will all sit down, read the facts, and discussthem. The immediate problem here is that you are not yetacquainted with all the facts, or the possible options. First, Iwould recommend that you take a trip to the local library andread The Consumers Union Report on Licit and Illicit Drugs. Youwill find it fascinating, whatever your views may be. Or, you may just want to check out what they are doing inEurope. PatDo you think some adict who chokes to death on his ownvomit is not a victim? PeterHe "victimized" himself. PatYes, that is the core of the pro-legalization argument. Absolutely false. There is a lot here that you don'tunderstand. I say so what? He is just as dead. Don't you care? That_does_ make legalization seem much more attractive. If, say, anadditional 200,000 people die in the first year, the legalizerswould simply say they "victimized" themselves, andtherefore it is no big thing First, show me some evidence that this would happen. There isno evidence anywhere that I can find. For openers, you might tryreading some of the studies I have mentioned. Second, even if it did happen, there is even less evidencethat prison is the best approach to minimizing the problem. As Ihave said many times before, all the major studies said thatprison was the worst approach. Third, even if it did happen (which all major studies refute)all major studies agreed that abandoning prison would still be abetter approach. Fourth, as we have discussed before, legalization and prisonare not the only options. . Please see this point. Responding that you don't thinkmore peole would die is not addressing this. I am asking you"What if they _do_ die?" Is that even an issue to you? Sure it is. That's why I want to see an approach which worksa whole lot better than what we are doing now. Every major studyagreed that the current system kills people from a whole lot ofcauses. You referred back to Frank again, and said that Frank wasreferring to "responsible" freedom. I had wonderedwhether, if you were with Frank, drunk, and about to climb down acliff, whether he would smile and nod, or try to stop you bywhatever means necessary. Frank said "a situation in whichany outside authority can proscribe the actions of an individualagent, even if the motivation is to "protect" thatagent "from himself" is indefensible. It is a god-givenright to not only be wrong, but to also injury onself,overtly/intentionally or covertly/unintentionally." We have already established that tough laws and big prisonscould not stop you from harming yourself with drugs. Should weperhaps just attach a 24-hour bodyguard to you because you are aknown risk? How about isolation? Now, please, lets you and I get serious. Assumelegalization is _not_ an option. Can you think up options tolower the amount of suffering caused by drug abuse? Visits toLARC's by high school classes? How about producing a very long lasting drug that makescocaine and heroin not function? Antabuse does a similiar thingfor alcoholics, but only stays in the system for about a weekafter the last use. How about prison farms, where addicts areseperated from the general population, and spend most of theirtime in education and hard manual labor, for the duration oftheir sentence? Any ideas at all???? There are lots of ideas, some of which I have already sharedwith you. In Europe they are trying even more than we havediscussed here and nearly all of those programs are having betterresults than what we experience here. As for the prison farms and hard manual labor, I suggestagain that (assuming you are right) we should start with theaddicts we know -- namely you. What's wrong with that? It wouldimprove your life greatly, wouldn't it? So, our government is wasteful and inept. That doesn'tpreclude imprisonment as being a proper course of action. No, but the absolute futility of this approach, combined withthe fact that every major study of the issue says it does moreharm than good would preclude it as a proper course of action. I would also like to ask you exactly when prison became a"proper course of action" because no such fact was everestablished when these laws were first passed. I know of one who died from heroin. He was in my weddingparty. I know of another who died in an automobile wreck whileunder the influence of cocaine. He was my best man. They're theonly two statistics I need to be familiar with. Unfortunately Iknow more. Perhaps if they had been in jail, they would bestatistics. The obvious point here is that drugs are illegal as hell butthey did not stop either one of these tragedies. This makes itall the more curious why you would support a policy that didnothing for your friends. At the risk of sounding offensive, I dare say that untilyou have lived and shared in the misery associated drug addictionand abuse, you know absolutely nothing beyond the politicallyslanted statistics that you've read or have access to. Perhapsyou do know something about this misery, in which case you've letyour mind lead your heart. I hear this a lot and it is BS from beginning to end. First,let me assure you that I have a pretty fair amount of experiencewith addicts, as do all of the doctors and others listed inSigner.zip. I dare say that the experience of any one of themwould far outweigh the experience you have had. I don't think that knowing someone who was an addict or evenbeing an addict yourself provides any great insights into aproper national policy. That gives entirely too much credit todrugs. As for not knowing anything beyond the politically slantedstatistics, it is apparent that you have not been to the libraryand read the studies I have mentioned many, many times. If youhad, you would find that the statistics -- and theirinterpretation -- are quite clear to anyone who has bothered toread the evidence. As President Nixon's own commission said, thereal problem is the ignorance of our public officials who havenever bothered to read the evidence. Increased "incidence," not increased"reports." And yes, I expect that a 25% incidence ofnarcotics would indicate harm to society. Perhaps you are wrong here, because the major studies of theissue stated that, despite the widespread usage, it did not seemto be a major problem. Furthermore, even if it was, there was noevidence presented to Congress to show that the HarrisonNarcotics Act was an appropriate approach to the problem. Infact, as stated earlier, the medical officials in this countryfelt it was not the proper approach. Furthermore, if you willread the Consumers Union Report (which you seemed to have missedin your trips to the library) you will find that most members ofCongress did not realize that they were passing what would turnout to be a Prohibition law. Similarly, when hemp was outlawed in1937, most members of Congress did not realize that they wereoutlawing a commercial crop which was grown in virtually everystate in the US. you equate the social, economic, and political milieu of19th century China with that of modern day America I am not doing anything of the kind. It seems to me you were. But, regardless, the information youpresented did not support the stated conclusions. I suggest you write to the Bureau of Justice Statisticsand tell them that their figures are in error. I suggest you research your facts a little better. You havemissed most of the major research on this issue. Drug abuse imposes its own costs on society. True enough. The point is that there is no evidence thatprison does anything to reduce those costs. In fact, every majorstudy of the issue (which you missed on your trip to the library)said it only increases the costs. why we shouldn't help smokers and excessive drinkers kickthe habit Sounds like a good idea. It's the Christian thing to do. So let's get really Christian and throw them all in jail fortheir own good. If you are a Christian, let me ask you a simplequestion. If we gave this problem to Jesus, what would he do?Would he build bigger prisons, or would he build hospitals andschools? Would he punish people, or would he heal them? Beforeyou answer, please note that I have talked to a lot of members ofthe clergy and they all come back with the same answer. As onesaid, "Put that way, the answer is obvious." When the smokers start robbing me at gun point, I'll startto worry . . . Then you should start to worry the minute cigarettes comeunder drug Prohibition. If you had read the major studies of theissue you would know that tobacco users commit the same kinds ofanti-social behavior as other addicts when they are deprived oftheir drug of choice. I don't think you understand that drug addiction isphysically harmful. _American Academic Encyclopedia_:"Tolerance develops to most of the effects of these drugs,which means that the dose must be regularly increased to maintaina constant effect." This leads to a gradual physicaldeterioration which is generally obvious in long-time junkies. The statement by the American Academic Encyclopedia does notestablish any harm to the body other than increased craving. Yourstatement is easily proven wrong by the doctors I have talked to(listed in Signer.zip) who are the world's leading experts on thesubject. And, of course, I have been asking everyone on this board whoDr. William Halsted is and how he is relevant to this issue. But,of course, you don't know such basic facts as that, so thereain't much point in asking you, is there? There are only 15,000 - 20,000 hard drug users in theNetherlands. It's a small country. I have no figures onmortality. However, I would expect they have a similar proportionof OD cases to what we have here. In 1992 they had 28 deaths from heroin overdose in the entirecountry. This is all the more remarkable when you consider thatheroin is usually injected and thus bypasses all the bodiesdefenses against overdose. _Contemporary Drug Problems_ is not a "book" butan academic journal. In this case, the author of the article"Drugs and crime in an accommodating social context: thesituation in Amsterdam" was written by Martin Grapendaal, EdLeuw and Hans Nelen, who are introduced as follows: . . . If you would like some more direct information, I can put youin touch with Michael Hessing (former chief of police ofRotterdam), Robert Van der Hoeven, the DA, etc., etc., etc. To accuse someone of lying would be rude, and sonaturally, I have not done so. I merely express a healthy degreeof skepticism as to Cliff's statements. As to his motives, I donot care to speculate. Please read Signer.zip in library 13. I met with Friedman andothers on February 23, 1993 at the Hoover Institution and signedwhat became known as the Hoover Resolution. I have becomereasonably well known for this, having persuaded such people asWilliam Von Raab, Dear Abby, and others to support theResolution. If you like, I will send you the transcript of theradio show Hugh Downs did about me. I am fairly well known inthis field so, if you knew anything about it, you would runacross my name eventually. As to my motives, I have stated them quite clearly on anumber of occasions. My mother cannot get the medicine she needs. To begin with, there is no need to lock them all up, andcertainly not to imprison them all simultaneously. If you read"Narctics Reform," you understand that I neveradvocated locking up *all* heroin users. First-time offendersshould be allowed treatment + probation, provided they have notcommitted any other offense. Subsequent drug offenses would bepunished according to an accelerated schedule: Second-timeoffenders would be obliged to do some jail time, third-timeoffenders would get a longer sentence, and so on. Since therecidivism rate for drug offenses is only 30%, this would reducethe number of addicts requiring long-term confinement to arelative handful. So, let's try the question again. How many people should belocked up? Don't give me vague generalities, give me somenumbers. I have not expressed any opinion, pro or con, as to thelegalization or decriminalization of marijuana. However, elevenstates have already decriminalized simple possession ofmarijuana, without any obvious harmful results. Of course, you are not familiar with how hemp or any of theother drugs became illegal in the first place, are you? I believe that the difference between promoting thelegalization of narcotics and the use of narcotics is a very finedistinction. One leads to the other. Correct me if I am wrong, but I think we have alreadyestablished that you have never read the major research on theissue and therefore would not be quite qualified to make thisjudgment. As it turns out, those who are now recommendinglegalization are those who have spent decades trying to limitdrug abuse. You prefer being robbed at gunpoint? That is a falseeconomy. If someone commits a robbery, as my good friend Judge Graywill tell you, that is an entirely different issue and theyshould be brought before a court of law. Until then, however, itis pointless to try to control private drug use with criminallaw. With stubborn cases who refuse to reform, that may be theonly alternative. These represent only a small minority, however. So you still have not answered the simply question of howmany should go to jail. I bet you never thought about it, didyou? Child-molesting doesn't *necessarily* involve violence northreat of violence. In the case of teen prostitution, it's apurely commercial arrangement. It may interest you to know that Joseph Califano, in a reportto the governor of New York in 1980, estimated that 70 percent ofall child molestation and abuse cases are related to alcohol. Soit again brings up the question of why you aren't campaigning foralcohol prohibition. Well, er, no. Not quite. Cliff said exactly this --"Wait! You just convinced me that prison is the rightapproach! We ought to start by throwing the known drug addicts(that's you) into prison "for their own good." A goodtwenty year stretch in the pen will change your mind about howappealing these drugs are." I told you that any time you thought it would be a good ideafor you to spend ten years locked in a small room as some thug'ssexual plaything I would be more than happy to do what you thinkis the best thing for you. I thought he was being sarcastic, and replied "Youalso indicated that I should be imprisoned as a drug addict. Iassume you are being sarcastic again. (Which, BTW, is rude.)Since I have now been sober for 13 years and 15 days, prison isnot called for." Oh, but you are still a known risk for addiction aren't you?How else are we going to protect you from yourself? Dr. Andrew, Re the issue of comparative toxicity of drugs, the followingmight interest you. Marijuana is not included, of course, becausethere are no recorded deaths from marijuana in human history(source: DEA). Therefore, there would be little point inreporting the death rate from pot. Because the death rate isZERO, there seems to be even less point in jailing people for itsuse. Actually, I think these numbers might be understated withrespect to the number of users of heroin and cocaine. Otherfigures I have seen are somewhat higher and, as I mentioned, Ibelieve the survey method itself promotes underreporting of usersfor several reasons. Therefore, it seems quite possible that thedeath rates per user for heroin and cocaine may be somewhat lowerthan the figures stated below. With respect to the number of deaths by heroin, you mayrecall that the CU Report stated that they could not find anyheroin "overdose" death in which they believed themedical evidence supported the label of "overdose."Oooooops! Sorry! I forgot you haven't read the CU Report! By the reasoning that you have given before (what littleactual reasoning we have seen) we ought to throw people in jailfor (fill in the blank) because this drug can kill people. Bythose standards, the heaviest penalties ought to be for alcoholand tobacco. You are, of course, free to present any valid citableinformation which would conflict with these figures -- but youhaven't done it yet, so I don't expect you to start now. from: Thinking About Drug Legalization by James Ostrowski, Cato Institute Paper # 121, May 25, 1989$2.00 to order or for information, write Policy Analysis Cato Institute 224 Second St. SE Washington DC 20003 Estimated Per Capita Death Rates by Drugs ---------------------------------------------------------- Drug Users Deaths per Year Deaths per 100,000 ---------------------------------------------------------- Tobacco 60 million 390,000 (a) 650 alcohol 100 million 150,000 (b) 150 Heroin 500,000 400 (c) 80 (400) Cocaine 5 million 200 (c) 4 (20) ---------------------------------------------------------- (a) "Reducing the Health Consequences of Smoking: 25 Years of Progress" Surgeon General's Report (1989). (b) Estimates vary greatly, depending upon whether all health consequences, or only those traditionally associated with alcoholism, are considered. The Fifth Special Report to the U.S. Congress on Alcoholism and Health from the Secretary of Health and Human Services contains two references indicating a death toll of 200,000: The report states, first, thatalcohol "plays a role in 10% of all deaths in the UnitedStates," which comes to about 200,000 deaths each year. P. vi. Itfurther states that present estimates of the death toll from alcohol abuse are as high as 93.2 per 100,000. Ibid., p. x. This ratio translates into a total of about 210,000. (c) These figures were determined as follows: Drug AbuseWarning Network (DAWN) heroin and cocaine fatalities for 1984, 1985, and 1986 were averaged. The number of suicides wassubtracted. The figures were discounted to account for deaths in which both heroin and cocaine played a role. Since DAWN covers about one-third of the nation's population but almost all major urban areas where drug use florishes, totals weredoubled to arrive at yearly estimates of 2,000 for heroin deaths and 1,000 for cocaine deaths. Finally, these figures were dis- counted by 80 percent in accordance with the analysispresented in the text. Cliff, I've been practicing medicine for 20+ yrs. I'm also active in medical politics (currentlypresident-elect of the medical staff of a major tertiary carehospital). We have a rich tradition of communicating and discussingamong ourselves all matters relevant to clinical practice,economics and ESPECIALLY governmental control. The communication is accomplished via formal (peerreviewed) journals as well as by a welter of "popular"medical periodicals. As I said before, I will be more than happy to compare yourcredentials on this subject against the credentials of thedoctors who made the statements. But let's start with the simplepoints first; The total amount of heroin you have prescribed in your careeris _______? Please fill in the blank. If you are an average US doctor you have never laid yourhands or eyes on medicinal heroin and certainly have neverprescribed it. Therefore, it would seem obvious that yourknowledge is inferior to the doctors I have talked to who haveactually worked with it. As I also said, I will be happy to putyou in touch with some of them. As I suggested to ForrestJohnson, you can call them yourself if you like. Try, forinstance, just calling the publich health service in Liverpooland ask to speak with the doctors in charge of their program. Iwould be interested to hear the response you get. If you were really knowledgeable about the subject (like someof the doctors I have talked to) you would also be able to tellme about the supplies of heroin in the US which are legal, howthey got here, and what they are used for. But, of course, youcan't even tell me who Dr. William Halsted is (even though youCLAIMED to have read the book which describes him in some detail)so we will not move on to the hard questions. Why is it that you have such a difficult time answeringsimple questions? What is the problem here anyway? NOWHERE AND AT NO TIME HAVE I RUN ACROSS ANY MENTION OFDOCTORS JAILED FOR TREATING PATIENTS OR VOICING DISAGREEMENT WITHANYTHING. As I said before, it is becoming increasingly apparent thatyou have not read the Consumers Union Report or any of the otherstudies I mentioned. If credibility is an issue, yours is fadingfast. Were you telling us all a big story when you said you readit? We have one journal (Medical Economics) that searches out,investigates and reports on ANY "sensational" aspect ofnon-clinical MD related activity. They would go nuts if they thought they were missing astory such as this. Again, I say that you have not read the materials you saidyou read. It did not happen last week, it happened immediatelyafter the laws were passed and had the effect of stopping alldrug research and treatment for several decades. (Did you perhapsmiss the part about "several decades"). But, to go on to more recent matters -- It is also apparentthat you have not read the reports issued by the Department ofHealth and Human Services about the undertreatment of pain, andyou are not familiar with the California Medical Association'srecent statements on the issue. Your communication is lacking.You can get a full copy of the HHS report by calling1-800-4CANCER. Also, as I stated previously, Dr. Harvey Rose of Sacramentowas prosecuted for giving Darvon to an 84-year old woman withcrippling arthritis. It almost destroyed his practice. I will putyou in touch with him if you like. As a result of his experience,he wrote California's Intractable Pain Treatment Act which seeksto give doctors some protection against this kind of arbitraryprosecution. Also, in 1992, the DEA sent two Chicago doctors to prison forprescribing Tylenol 3. As you may know (assuming you really are adoctor -- we have had some pretenders here before) Tylenol 3 isnot even a prescription drug except in the US and South Africa,and the US is the only country in the world which has ever jaileda doctor for prescribing it. You may also be interested in the case of Florida vs.Martinez which appeared on Court TV and has been repeated severaltimes because it was such an interesting trial. Mr. Martinez isan AIDS counselor who was handing out morphine to anyone whowould come in and ask for it. Mr. Martinez does not have any kindof medical training (other than OJT as a AIDS counselor) andfreely admitted that he was violating both state and Federal druglaws. His only defense was that his actions were a medicalnecessity because of the barbaric policies on drugs. Thetestimony was quite interesting. When the jury heard all of theevidence they voted unanimously for acquittal and stated that Mr.Martinez was a "hero". Also, my mother's doctors have stated that the specificreason that they will not give her morphine (or heroin) isbecause they are afraid of prosecution if they do. These doctorshave included the doctors at the Mayo Clinic, the National PainInstitute, the USC Pain Clinic, etc., etc., etc. As you recall, Iasked you if you would prescribe it for her and got the usualcop-out. Your credibility is lacking in more than one respect. Your inflammatory statement demands proof. As I have said before, your credibility is fatallyjeopardized by these sorts of wildly improbable statements. The proof demands that you actually read the things you saidyou read. Your credibility also hinges on whether you can answerany of the simple questions I have put to you. For example: Whowas Dr. William Halsted and why is his story relevant to thethings you have said? (He asked for the umpteenth time.) Frankly, I would think that anyone who had been in medicalpractice for more than 20 years would be able to answer thesequestions a whole lot easier. Why is it that a practicingphysician cannot answer simple questions on this issue when heclaims to be an expert? There was an article in my morning newspaper. . . .Itfirst reported that the heroin hitting the streets today is morepure, costs less, and is more lethal. Cliff and Mona please note- lethal means that heroin is not harmless. A newspaper article with an unsupported statement about drugs They also quoted Lee Brown, the country's drug policydirector, as saying that since some of the stigma has beenremoved, heroin is now more socially acceptable. It use isincreasing. He also said its use is increasing because you cannow get purer doses for less money. (That is fundamental economictheory coming out again. Please note, as it gets to be a morequality product, and the price goes down, its use goes up -despite the Netherlands.) Heroin is more socially acceptable? Who does he hang aroundwith? If quality is going up and price is going down, thenobviously the drug war is not having its desired effect. Thismuch seems obvious. He stated there are now 2.7 million hard-core, chronicdrug users in this country. That much is correct. How many of them do you want to put inprison? - Recognizing, of course, that jailing them would requireTRIPLING the size of every prison and jail which now exists inAmerica. Rep. Charles Schumer, D-N.Y., was quoted ast callingheroin a vicious drug that tempts its users into a lifetime of aliving hell. (Hmmmmmmm.... they don't, apparently, just stop thefirst time they vomit.) Charles Schumer -- Now there is an informed, intelligent,reliable, impartial source that you can rely on. (Being sarcastichere, in case you didn't catch it. This guy is famous for hisignorance of the subject.) Thomas Constantine, administrator of the DEA, who camethere from the New York State police, gave a short history on howthe quality and purity of heroin is increasing. Street heroinpurity has gone from 7% a decade ago to an average of 36% now. InNew York and Boston, it reaches 95%. So he said interdiction was not working. I think we coveredthat before. Opium production has quadrupled in the last decade. Ten years ago the DEA estimated that only one percent of theentire world's opium supply would be required to supply theentire demand in the US. Now I guess it is down to one-fourth ofone percent. End of article. It appears that heroin is not harmless,and as its quality goes up and its price goes down, its use goesup. Lets keep it illegal. It appears that you have a newspaper article with a bunch ofunsubstantiated statements. Of course, even assuming that heroinis as dangerous as stated, that still does not establish thatthrowing people in prison is the best approach to the problem.The example of alcohol is instructive in this regard. So, in conclusion, you have leaped from one unsubstantiatedstatement to a conclusion which would be a non-sequitir in anycase. You frequently take sentences one at a time, and respond,thereby answering points I am not making. Yes, because the points you made in those sentences cannot besubstantiated by an evidence I have found. You proceed from wronginformation to wrong conclusions. Let's get the information rightfirst, and then we might be able to move on to correctconclusions. Also, frequently your response is not responsive. If yousay "Heroin is harmless!" and I respond "Butaccording to your stats, 20,000 people a year die from it!"it is _not_ appropriate to then say "But putting them inprisons doesn't work." Please respond to the thought, orskip it. It is very hard to maintain a dialog when you jumparound. Please get it straight what I have said. I did not say that20,000 people die every year from heroin. (If you can't get thisstraight then there is all the more reason to question the otherthings you say). What I said was that the AMA estimated that 20,000 people diefrom ALL illegal drugs from ALL causes, including overdose,accidents, etc. Simply stating the number of people who die does not provideany support for the notion that prison is a beneficial approach.As I have stated previously, far more people die from alcohol andtobacco which, by your reasoning, would show that prison ought tobe an even better idea for these drugs. In order to show thatprison is a beneficial approach, it must be shown that the numberof deaths would decrease with more people put in prison -- insome proportion that would provide a real benefit in terms of thecost. (You know, a simple cost-benefit analysis -- which you havestated previously you have never even seriously considered.) Perhaps not. The post was addressed to Mona, not you.Please pay attention. You stated that a junkie's right to fry his own brains wasthe core of the arguments for (for lack of a better word)"legalization". I pointed out that you are wrong. Youcan take those arguments away entirely and prison is still not agood idea. Okay, you are being cute. Since your true position appearsto be in favor of legalizing drugs, I will attribute that to you,and simply ignore any more comments like the above. If I amwrong, state your position on legalization. We have been over this ground before. My position is that weshould have one consistent philosophy and approach to allrecreational drugs. That would require re-thinking our approachto not only heroin, cocaine, and marijuana, but alcohol andtobacco as well. You cannot have everything both ways, Cliff. If you arenot being sarcastic, then you really do believe that I should beimprisoned. For twenty years. Because I am an addict. Of course,that thought is contrary to your beliefs most of the time. So doyou _really_ want me in prison because I am an _uppity_ addict?The only things your really know about me are that I am an addict(whom, you believe, should not be imprisoned), and I disagreewith you on this policy (and I should be imprisoned.) Or, of course, maybe there is some hypocrisy in yourbelief system. You are the first addict I have run across who believes thatspending ten years in a small cell as someone's girlfriend (hopehe doesn't have AIDS) would improve his life. If you reallybelieve it, I am willing to grant it. I don't see any other waythat we could protect you against all the harmful things youmight do to yourself. It is a common failure of those who get frustrated in adiscussion to take their opponents view, and change it tosomething else, and then oppose that. Please stop doing that. That's called setting up a straw man. You might want to takeyour own advice here. I am truly dismayed. If an additonal 200,000 people diedin the first year alone, you would still say that your "noprison" policy is best. Good grief, Cliff, how many would ittake? I was trying to pick a number high enough so you would say"If that many more people died, of course I would change mymind about legalization." You didn't. That many deathswouldn't be enough. Am not sure what I can say. Doesn't make muchsense to keep raising the ante until you do say Enough. As I said, since I don't agree with the policy you are askingabout in the first place, then it doesn't make much sense toanswer such a question. And, you seem to have missed the question that I have beenasking of everyone. What evidence do you have to show that this(or any number of increased deaths) would happen? As I said, allthe evidence I have run across says the opposite -- and I havenamed that evidence. Do you have any evidence? (Apparentlynothing besides your own opinion, right?) Can we at least agree that any policy which deniesmedicine to sick people has something seriously wrong with it --both morally and practically? I agree wholeheartedly. See, we do agree on some things. Now let's proceed to thenext point. Why is this happening when everyone I talk to seemsto agree that it is wrong? Ok, an example. You state it costs an average of $450,000to imprison someone for drug abuse. Part of that cost, accordingto you, is $150,000 for building the cell. This implies thatevery drug offender has to have a new cell built for him. Allmust be in one man cells, and none of them are reused upon therelease of the drug abuser. This is clearly absurd. You stick byit. I don't have to provide a stat for what the prorated use of acell would cost to see that. It is obvious. When I see you cookstats like that, I then doubt all of your stats because of aperceived lack of intellectual integrity. Those are the costs stated by people such as Thomas Coughlin,the New York State Commissioner of Corrections. I will believehim before I believe you, particularly when you have notpresented any evidence to back up your statements. The cells may indeed be reused on the release of the drugabuser, but you seem to miss the major point here. It would seemobvious that we have not put enough of them in prison to stop theproblem. Sending a drug abuser (or better yet, a violentcriminal) out the back door when another drug abuser comes in thefront door does not accomplish anything. Therefore, the prisonpopulation will have to increase significantly before this policybecomes effective. The question is, at what level of prisonpopulation will this program have a real effect? As you havestated, you don't have a clue what the answer to that one is, soit really doesn't matter what numbers I cite. Cliff, you clearly don't understand what addiction islike. You don't understand how people become addicts. You don'tseem to be very concerned over messed up lives, or deaths, thatcould be caused by legalizing drugs. If messed up lives, anddeaths, are not the issue, than what is? If those are not theissue, than is it only the money angle? Is it the pride of yourposition? What is your motivation? Aside from the fact that you seem to have missed my positionon this issue: As I have stated, I have relatives who are addicts, includingone that I grew up with like a brother. As I have stated, while Ideplore their behavior I have to recognize that prison would notbenefit them or society. My objective is to make them wholeagain, not to destroy them by turning them into someone'sgirlfriend in a small steel room for ten or twenty years. You maylike that and think that is beneficial for you, but I do notaccept that as an appropriate remedy for the people I know. My motivation is that I would like to a) change the laws so my mother can get the medicine sheneeds. Even you have agreed that denial of medicine is wrong.(Now you need to understand why it is happening.) b) develop a policy which helps people instead of destroyingthem. c) Destroy the mythology which surrounds this issue, whichwas the original basis for these laws in the first place. It isincreasingly apparent that you do not understand how the lawscame about, and therefore have an incorrect understanding ofwhere we are today. You have asked a number of people about imprisoning30,000,000 drug abusers. I believe that all the serious folks Iknow of say they are willing to imprison enough to lower thesuffering rate. I know of no one who believes that would take30,000,000. Am not sure how many it would take. That is exactly my point. The people who support this policy(including you) have never bothered to answer (or even ask) suchbasic questions as this. THAT IS THE PROBLEM. Don't feel lonesomehere, because I have asked every government official that I haverun across and all I ever get in response is a rather stupidexpression on their face. How good can this policy be if no onehas ever thought about where we are going with it? If I ever see that the rate of human misery is, overall,going up because of putting drug abusers in prison, I would lookinto overturning at least some of the laws. Then look again, and do it more closely. I know you have rejected my descriptions of addiction, andhow addicts act. Not so. I believe you completely. As I said, that is thereason that the CU Report and others have said that drugprohbition will not work -- because the addicts do not respondrationally and, therefore, the laws don't mean much to them interms of deterrence. Obviously, the laws did not deter you. But please consider what I told Cliff (when he told me hethought I should be thrown in prison). I was a practicing addictfor 12 years, and those years are now lost forever. If you hadthrown me in prison, for the typical sentence for a first timepossessor, I _might_ have been so rattled that I would havesought help, and stopped. If you had done that in year two of thetwelve, you would have given me ten years of life back. Mona, Ireally would like those years back. Prison would have been very,very worth it. I have no doubt that you would like those years back. Wetried everything we could with law enforcement to give them toyou and our efforts did not succeed. That's why I think we shouldhave thought about it a little better and developed a plan whichmight have helped you more than this one did. As far as I cansee, the only thing this policy did for you was to make treatmentless available because all the money is being spent on prisons. Yes, we might have given you ten years of life back (assumingyou would respond to jail when you admit that the thought of yourown death did not deter you). You would have spent that ten yearslocked in a small steel and concrete room playing the role ofsomeone's girlfriend. I don't know your personal sexual tastesbut, for the addicts I have known, I would not consider that asan acceptable remedy to their problem. Most of the ones I haveseen who went through something like that wound up considerablymore screwed up than when they went in. CliffSchaffer's Home Page WT01-B29-73IA031-000655-B048-86http://206.61.184.43:80/schaffer/ACTIVIST/groups1.htm 206.61.184.43 19970122115550 text/html 5781HTTP/1.0 200 OKDate: Wednesday, 22-Jan-97 11:55:42 GMTServer: WebSitePro/1.1f (S/N wpo-0deb)Allow-ranges: bytesContent-type: text/htmlLast-modified: Saturday, 28-Dec-96 07:25:41 GMTContent-length: 5564 Presentations to Social Clubs about drug legalization Presentations to Social Clubs How to make presentations to social groups such aschurches, Lions Clubs, Rotary, and other similar groups. By Clifford A. Schaffer How to find them. Many of them will be listed in your local phone directories.If no chapters of a particular group are listed in your area, itdoesn't necessarily mean they don't exist. You can also look inthe Encyclopedia of Associations, at your local library, tocontact their national headquarters and ask for any chapters inyour area. What kind of groups typically have meetings where people canmake presentations? Here are just a few examples: Lions, Rotary, Elks, Moose, churches, synagogues, Chambers ofCommerce, Business groups, other social clubs, political parties,etc. Any place where more than a few people gather for nearly anypurpose may be an opportunity to make a presentation. How to get a date to speak to their group. First, put together a coherent, sensible presentation ofmaterial pertinent to your area of interest. It is best topresent factual, interesting material, rather than politicaldiatribe. Visual displays and graphics are always good to helpkeep the audience's interest. Second, call them. You will be surprised at the number ofsocial groups which are looking for, or receptive to, speakers.Calling them is the toughest part for many people, but it isreally easy. The worst that can happen is that they will say no,and you have heard that before. What is interesting to these groups? Many of these groups want speakers for their regularluncheons.all the time for their lunch and, therefore they covera wide variety of topics over the year. You will often find asituation where there is someone who is designated to find goodspeakers for the meetings who invariably has a hard time findingenough interesting speakers to fill the bill. Therefore, in manycases, there is a wide degree of latitude in what these groupswould like to hear. The facts about hemp are usually interestingto these groups, but there are any number of other subjects whichwould also get a good reception with a good presentation. Dress and act conservatively. The people in these groups are business people for the mostpart, and will expect and appreciate a business like demeanor andapproach. Whether you like it or not, they are most likely torespond favorably to conservatively dressed and"normal" looking and acting people, as opposed to the"hippy" look. Use Visual Aids Charts, graphs, pictures, and other visual aids can be veryhelpful in getting your point across. There are a number ofcharts and graphs on these pages as samples of things you mightuse. Read the Persuasive Strategies and Debate Materials These social groups tend to be politically and sociallyconservative so wild-eyed arguments about how it is everyone'sright to get loaded will not get a good reception. The bestapproach is a soft, factual approach which presents some part ofthe vast amount of information which most people don't know aboutdrugs. Don't promote or even defend the use of drugs, drugdealers, or anything else that your audience will find hard toaccept. You will often have a long way to go to convince them, sodon't try to bring them too far, too fast. But I am afraid to make presentations to groups. What are you afraid of? That you will look like a fool? (Asif that hasn't happened before.) Seriously, speaking in front ofa group is one of the items which produces the highest levels offear in many people. They realize everyone is looking at them andthey get nervous and freeze up. The more nervous they get, themore they worry about it, and the more nervous they get. Forget it. If you are afraid of embarrassing yourself andlooking like a fool, don't worry. In the first place, most peopledon't have to stand up in front of a group to look like fools, solooking like a fool is nothing new. Get over it. Everyone lookslike a fool now and then. The truth is that most members of mostaudiences are so awestruck by anyone who can get up in front ofan audience and speak (because they know they couldn't do itthemselves) that they will never notice that you are nervous - atleast not to the degree that you feel nervous. Experience will get you over it. The first presentation isthe roughest, and from that point it gets progressively easier.By this time I have done so many, and encountered all thequestions that come up so many times, that I could do thesethings in my sleep. There are a lot of other people who are alsoquite adept at presentations and they started out as shywallflowers just like you. Give it a try. You will find it is alot of fun. CliffSchaffer's Home Page WT01-B29-74IA031-000655-B048-99http://206.61.184.43:80/schaffer/ACTIVIST/whenab.htm 206.61.184.43 19970122115557 text/html 7466HTTP/1.0 200 OKDate: Wednesday, 22-Jan-97 11:55:50 GMTServer: WebSitePro/1.1f (S/N wpo-0deb)Allow-ranges: bytesContent-type: text/htmlLast-modified: Saturday, 28-Dec-96 07:24:39 GMTContent-length: 7249 The Washington Hemp Education Network The Washington Hemp Education Network Operating Abstract Abstract The following text defines the structure and mission of anon-profit educational organization known as the Washington HempEducation Network (W.H.E.N.). This organization consists ofvolunteer members. Mission Statement The mission of the Washington Hemp Education Network(W.H.E.N.) is to empower the people of Washington State, througheducational activities about the history, status, and uses (bothcurrent and potential) of the Hemp plant (cannabis sativa, alsoknown as marijuana), to make informed choices about the issuessurrounding re-legalization of Hemp in Washington State. Recognition of Benefit The Washington Hemp Education Network recognizes asbeneficial all responsible commercial, medicinal, and spiritualuses of the Hemp plant conducted for peaceful ends. Program and Goals To achieve the stated mission, the Washington Hemp EducationNetwork will plan and implement legal, nonviolent projects that: Raise public awareness of the history and beneficial uses of the Hemp plant; Educate the public to recognize and reject misinformation about Hemp; Facilitate changes in current laws to allow the people of Washington State to grow Hemp openly and engage in normal market activities with Hemp products; Through education and coalition, help to empower people who have been disempowered by misguided government policies concerning Hemp; Promote research and development of sustainable, environmentally responsible Hemp cultivation, and of beneficial products derived from Hemp. Project Criteria All projects planned and implemented by the Washington HempEducation Network will be consistent with the Mission,Recognition of Benefit, and Program and Goals statements definedherein. Endorsement and Support The Washington Hemp Education Network will endorse andsupport only those projects undertaken by individuals or otherentities that are consistent with the Mission, Recognition ofBenefit, and Program and Goals. Method of Operation This organization will meet regularly and will operate on theprinciple of consensus. As defined by the Center for ConflictResolution, Madison, WI, consensus is "a decision-makingprocess in which all parties involved explicitly agree to thefinal decision. Consensus decision making does not mean that all parties arecompletely satisfied with the final outcome, but that thedecision is acceptable to all because no one feels that his orher vital interests or values are violated by it." A board of directors will not be elected; rather, thefounding charter members will constitute the decision-makingbody, will serve as the projects and issues forum facilitationgroup, and will exercise no power other than that of presidingover meetings as defined by the Method of Operation, and ofapproving membership applications and filling vacancies in thecharter member group when a charter member leaves the group. Other future members may be added to the decision-making bodyof charter members if a consensus decision for such action ismade by the charter members. Members other than charter membersare encouraged to participate in discussions on issues that arebeing addressed during the decision-making process; participationin the final consensus decision is limited to charter members. Consensus Procedures o For each meeting, the charter members will appoint a rotating clerk, who will convene the meeting and govern the discussions during the meeting. The clerk is responsible for compiling and disseminating the agenda and supporting materials at least four days prior to the meeting. o If one or more members feel that a decision must be reached, the clerk must clearly state the issue to be decided and allow each member to speak uninterrupted about the issue. After each member speaks once about the issue, it can be debated if necessary by the group; however, members must not interrupt other speakers and must wait until granted the floor by the clerk before speaking. o Members must listen attentively and strive to understand each point of view, knowing that through the consensus process each decision must ultimately be a compromise of all points of view. o The clerk will develop a decision statement as the debate proceeds. The clerk will then document the evolution of the debate and will modify the position of the group by incorporating each point of view into the decision statement. o When all points of view have been made known, and the decision statement has reached a static state, the clerk will call for consensus on the statement. Three possible positions may be taken by the charter members: Consent, Object, or Stand Aside: o Consent indicates the member agrees to support the decision as the best compromise that can be achieved by the group. o Object indicates the member will not allow consensus to occur; if ONE member objects, the decision is discarded and no action is taken on the issue by the organization at that time. o Stand Aside indicates the member cannot agree with the decision but will not prevent the decision from being adopted by the group; the decision stands as long as no one indicates Object. These procedures should suffice for most issues facing thecharter members of W.H.E.N. If a situation should arise thatcannot be resolved by the above procedures, the clerk willreference the consensus handbook published by the Center forConflict Resolution. Charter members who are absent fromannounced meetings are by default relinquishing their consensusvote for the affected meetings only. Dave Hall, Olympia, WA: LEGALIZE IT, TAX IT, THEN LEAVE ME THE HELL ALONE!! CliffSchaffer's Home Page WT01-B29-75IA031-000655-B048-114http://206.61.184.43:80/schaffer/ACTIVIST/junkemal.htm 206.61.184.43 19970122115606 text/html 3438HTTP/1.0 200 OKDate: Wednesday, 22-Jan-97 11:55:59 GMTServer: WebSitePro/1.1f (S/N wpo-0deb)Allow-ranges: bytesContent-type: text/htmlLast-modified: Saturday, 28-Dec-96 07:25:28 GMTContent-length: 3221 How To Reduce Junk E-Mail How To Reduce Junk E-Mail From: Ryan Rossman <rossm_ry@catseq.catlin.edu> The 3 keys to reducing "junk" email. Accurate Subject headings. If you send it to the whole list, make sure it applies to the whole list. Be substantial, ask yourself am I contributing to the list or detracting? Subject Lines: One way to make it easier to get to the meaty information youwant is to have *accurate* subject lines. If the subject line ofyour post says Re: Proposed Strategies and you are talking aboutsomething completely different, or are branching off from thisdiscussion create a new subject heading. Example: Instead of just Re: Proposed Strategies which doesn't reallytell anyone what the content of the message is about. Try... Discussion of CD Tactics (was Re: Proposed Strategies) This is very helpful, in discovering and only reading theposts you want to read. Personal Posts: Short, one or two line posts that only make a personalstatement torwards one or two people should be done in private.The main goal is to respect other members of the group enough soas to not post something that they are just going to have delete. There are two ways to avoid problems with being personal. If all you really want to do is make a short 1 or 2 line personal rseponse to someone don't send it to the entire list just send it to that person. If you are making personal comments make sure that there is also something substantial that is pertinent to everyone included in the post. Basically if it doesn't have something that applies to thewhole list, don't post it to the whole list. Please don't hestiate to be controversial or disagree withothers, this is called freedom of speech and its why a revolutionwas waged, but do NOT use drctalk-l for excessive personalbanter. If it has substance with a little banter, I don't think we have a problem.Meaning that you can say nice "Amens!" and "Way togo!" **IF** you also include something a little bit moremeaningful. If there is no substance and a lot of banter youprobably shouldn't have sent it to the whole list. This includesthe 1 or 2 line personal notes. If we still have a problem with "junk" posts andthe traffic volume is still too high there are more stringentmeasures that can be imposed. CliffSchaffer's Home Page WT01-B29-76IA031-000655-B048-147http://206.61.184.43:80/schaffer/ACTIVIST/howlte.htm 206.61.184.43 19970122115636 text/html 7319HTTP/1.0 200 OKDate: Wednesday, 22-Jan-97 11:56:17 GMTServer: WebSitePro/1.1f (S/N wpo-0deb)Allow-ranges: bytesContent-type: text/htmlLast-modified: Saturday, 28-Dec-96 07:25:37 GMTContent-length: 7102 How to Write Letters to the Editor How to Write Letters to the Editor A personal note by Cliff Schaffer: Over the years, I have written a lot of letters to the editorand about three out of four of them get published. A lot ofpeople have asked me what are the good techniques for writingletters to the editor. The first thing I tell people is toremember that they fit about ten letters in a typical editorialsection (out of the hundreds they receive) so the ones theypublish either: 1) Are the best single expressions of what many people said. 2) Make some point exceedingly well. 3) Are signed by some prominent person. In all cases, the letters are usually short and to the point,and the editors have edited them even further to make themshorter. Most people who write letters to the editor wouldprobably like the satisfaction you get when you see your letterpublished. That way, at least you are certain that they read it.However, it is also apparent that the media can be influenced byletters they do not acknowledge. We have found many times that asimple letter to someone in the media wound up in major mediacoverage weeks or months later. I was going to write up a formal set of rules for how towrite letters to the editor, but I found someone who had done italready. He did quite a good job in saying the same essentialthings I would have said. =================================== How to Write Letters to the Editor by Richard Rider Short, concise letters are always more likely to be publishedthan long, meandering ones; try to keep them under 150 words. Thelonger letters are also more likely to be edited. It's betterthat you do your own editing. Ever notice how you read letters to the editor in the paper?Most people read the shorter letters first and then perhaps laterread the longer ones. Thus your shorter letter has a betterchance of being read. WHAT TO WRITE? Unlike single-issue or special-interestgroups, libertarians can select from an enormous range ofsubjects. Replying to editorials, agree or disagree, is veryeffective. Every day the news offers us all too many topics on which tocomment. Be timely; try to respond within two or three days of thearticle's publication. Pick an issue of particular importance toyou - don't be afraid to let some passion show through. Here are some stylistic considerations: 1. State the argument you're rebutting or responding to, asbriefly as possible, in the letter's introduction. Don't do alengthy rehash; it's a waste of valuable space and boring toboot. 2. Stick to a single subject. Deal with one issue per letter. 3. Don't be shrill or abusive. Editors tend to discardletters containing personal attacks. Even though you're dying tocall Jesse Jackson a preachy parasite, stifle the urge. 4. Your letter should be logically organized. First a briefrecitation of the argument you are opposing, followed by astatement of your own position. Then present your evidence. Closewith a short restatement of your position or a pithy comment ("Jimmy Breslin says possession of firearms should belimited to law enforcement officers. I say when only the policehave guns, the police state is just around the corner."). 5. Use facts, figures and expert testimony whenever possible.This raises your letters above the "sez you, sez me"category. For instance: "Anthony Lewis calls for taxing therich as a way to balance the budget. Is he aware of the fact thatif we confiscated the entire income of the top wage earners inthis country (those with income above $200,000), this would runthe federal government for exactly 8 days?" Readers respect the opinions of people with special knowledgeor expertise. Use expert testimony to bolster your case("George Will claims we need to draft to defend America. ButGeneral Edward C. Meyer, Army Chief of Staff, recently stated . .."). 6. Proofread your letter carefully for errors in spelling,punctuation and grammar. Newspapers will usually edit to correctthese mistakes, but your piece is more likely to be published ifit is "clean" to begin with. Read your letter to afriend, for objective input. One suggestion is that a letter shouldn't be mailed the sameday it is written. Write, proofread and edit the piece. Then putit aside until the next day. Rereading your letter in a freshlight often helps you to spot errors in reasoning, stiltedlanguage and the like. On the other hand, don't let the lettersit too long and lose it's timeliness. 7. Try to view the letter from the reader's perspective. Willthe arguments make sense to someone without a special backgroundon this issue. Did you use technical terms not familiar to theaverage reader? Should your letter be typed? In this day and age, generally yes. Double or triple space the letter if it is short. For faxing purposes, we appreciate it if the letter is all on one page, so single spacing might be the only option available. Direct your missives to "Letters to the Editor," or some similar sounding title. 10. Always include your name, address, day-time phone numberand signature. The papers will not publish this information, butthey may use it to verify that you wrote the letter. If we arefax broadcasting your letter, do not put a date on it. We mayhave to wait a day or two before broadcasting it out, dependingon how many letters are waiting for dissemination. 11. Most important - WRITE! Do not try to do a perfectletter. Just give it a good effort and send it off. Letterwriting is the one thing that any one of us can do on our ownwithout the need to work through a group. No committees arenecessary. Just do it! Don't be discouraged if your letter isn't published. Theeditor may have received more responses on that issue than hefeels he can handle. If we are faxing your letter, you will almost certainly bepublished somewhere. The only drawback is that we do not have agood feedback system, so you may not know which of the paperspublish your letter, particularly the smaller ones. -DRider@AOL.com CliffSchaffer's Home Page WT01-B29-77IA031-000655-B048-170http://206.61.184.43:80/schaffer/ACTIVIST/GHANDI1.HTM 206.61.184.43 19970122115649 text/html 31241HTTP/1.0 200 OKDate: Wednesday, 22-Jan-97 11:56:40 GMTServer: WebSitePro/1.1f (S/N wpo-0deb)Allow-ranges: bytesContent-type: text/htmlLast-modified: Saturday, 28-Dec-96 07:25:50 GMTContent-length: 31023 A Summary of M.K. Gandhi's Technique for Political Action A Summary of M.K. Gandhi's Technique for Political Action By Mary Sibley February 1995 PREFACE I have prepared this description of the political actiontechnique of M.K. Gandhi at the request of Dave Hall fordistribution to the DrugReform Coordination Network (DRCNet) andother drug policy reform advocates who may have an interest inGandhi's technique. I have read much about Gandhi's technique andknow that I still do not fully comprehend its application andimplications. My knowledge is especially scanty in the area oforganizational structures through which Gandhian campaigns wereconducted, although I surmise that Gandhi's campaignorganizations were highly structured. I am currently seekingtexts describing and analyzing Gandhi's organizationalstructures. If anyone has such a text, I would appreciate accessto it. If anyone has studied Gandhi's life and work and readssomething within this that seems to be wrong, misleading, or amisinterpretation, I would welcome suggestions. In addition, Iwould be glad to participate in further discussion. CREDITS For assistance in organizing my thoughts, I give credit toJoan V. Bondurant, whose book "Conquest of Violence: TheGandhian Philosophy of Conflict" (second edition, 1965,Princeton University Press) I consulted occasionally whilewriting this. In the text that follows, annotations are sparse.If anyone is interested in reading more about a particular topic,let me know and I will provide references. INTRODUCTION How this Discussion Is Organized This discussion is organized into three sections. The firstsection discusses the cultural context and other conditions underwhich Gandhi conceived and conducted political campaigns. Thesecond section discusses the fundamental principles of a Gandhiancampaign. The last section discusses the steps in a Gandhiancampaign and includes my opinions about the similarities betweenthese steps and steps that have been taken by drug policy reformadvocates. A Short Definition of Gandhi's Political TechniqueGandhi's political technique is a process of creatively engagingwith others to transform an unjust cultural, economic, social, orgovernmental system into one that is more just. Scope of Gandhi'sTechnique Gandhi is most famous for his political activism withrespect to ending British rule in India. He used the techniquenot just to work toward reform and ultimately removal of Britishrule in India, but also in many conflict situations betweenIndians only. For example, he organized and led programs designedto change how the upper class Hindus treated the lower classHindus. Gandhi himself considered his most important work theconstructive programs designed to remove the underlying causes ofpoverty and to rebuild strong local economies in impoverishedareas. Without this work, poor Indians would not have had thesustenance needed to participate in the many campaigns that ledto home rule. Martin Luther King applied techniques similar toGandhi's in the United States when working to end civil rightsinjustices based on race. Many of King's programs, speeches, andwritings strongly resemble Gandhi's, with terminology and otherspecifics tailored to the issues and systems at hand. Another20th century leader who has successfully used similar techniqueswhen engaging a cruel and conscience-less government is VaclavHavel. The injustices that these leaders were working to overcomeoccurred in widely varying cultures, social systems, andgovernments. Because I assume that most readers are specificallyinterested in political strategies with regard to changing unjustlaws in the U.S., the following discussion focuses on theapplication of Gandhi's techniques in conflicts with governments. SECTION 1. CONTEXT AND CONDITIONS The Cultural Context in which Gandhi Developed His Techniques India is multi-cultural with most cultures based onreligions. The Hindus are the largest group, followed by theMuslims, who constitute a large minority. Then come a muchsmaller number of Sikhs. Many other religious groups exist, butthey are very small in numbers. People of these religions hadlived side-by-side in relative peace for thousands of years whenthe British arrived. As the British became establishedeconomically, they started an insidious campaign to divide theIndian people along religious lines, especially by planting inMuslims fear of discrimination from Hindus should the British notkeep the Hindu influence in check. The British were quitesuccessful in promoting disunity between the Hindus and Muslims,a legacy that to this day engenders hatred and bloodshed. TheSikhs were selected to be the native component of theBritish-controlled police force. The Sikhs were a large enoughminority to provide enough police for British purposes, and yet asmall enough group that Sikh police were patrolling andincarcerating primarily Hindus and Muslims. After a couple ofhundred years of British encroachment on the cultures,inter-cultural fear and suspicion that had not existed before theBritish became the norm. Gandhi's Starting Place in Society Gandhi was born a Hindu. The Hindu society is stratified(some say "calcified") into classes referred to ascastes. The caste into which one is born determines the jobs onemay have, the education one may pursue, the privileges one isallowed, the places one may gather water, the people with whomone may eat, etc. The highest caste is the Brahmans; the lowest,the untouchables. Outside of these are the outcastes. Theoutcastes are those who violated the rules of their caste to theextent that the authorities within the caste cast them out.Thereafter, they are to be shunned by others in the caste--no onemay help them, they are not allowed to work within the caste,etc. Gandhi was a member of the Bania caste, which participatedin business and government in his home state. Gandhi was publiclyordered an outcaste when he was in his late teens because he wentto Britain to study law; his caste's leaders said it was againstthe religion to leave the country. The leaders actually went sofar as to inform the caste members that if they saw him off whenhe left for England, they would be fined! Gandhi wrote in hisautobiography, "The order had no effect on me, and I took myleave . . ." ( M.K. Gandhi, "An Autobiography: TheStory of My Experiments with the Truth," Part I, ChapterXII, [1927] translation by Mahadev Desai, published in the U.S.in 1957 by Beacon Press, Boston). SECTION 2. FUNDAMENTAL PRINCIPLES Gandhi adhered to four fundamental principles familiar to theWesterner. Three are truth, non-violence, and self-suffering. Thefourth is concerned with means and ends. All campaigns conductedunder his guidance were consistent with these principles(occasional errors arose due to the experimental nature of thetechnique and limitations in campaigners' previous experience).These fundamental principles are summarized below. Truth Gandhi did not fully define the "truth" but insteadsaid that he was seeking after it. He was seeking after itthrough socio-political action, just as others might seek afterit through a mystical or spiritual path, the study ofmathematics, or the creation of art. I gather from my readingsthat the goals of most his contemporaries were much moreimmediate and concrete (like a cost-of-living increase forworkers in a textile mill, the right for untouchables to walkpast a temple used by Brahmans, the replacement of British rulewith home rule, etc.). The replacement of British rule was amighty goal. Those who held it accepted the need for a largenumber of intermediate goals that they collectively agreed (oftenafter long and arduous debate) would contribute directly orindirectly to achievement of the mighty goal. Some of theintermediate goals included things that even the most uneducated,illiterate, and impoverished could grasp immediately, like: (1)Having all Indians weave their own cloth rather than buy Britishcloth (most Indians made their own clothing) and (2) Repealing asalt taxation and regulation scheme that drove the cost of saltso high that the poor could not afford it. Salt is an essentialdietary element in India's climate and can be collected fromIndia's ocean beaches or retrieved from inland deposits by anyoneafter a bit of instruction. The salt laws brought the Britishsignificant revenues. Enforcement of the salt laws included finesand incarceration for those who were caught making or collectingsalt for personal use and most especially if the person wasproducing and distributing marketable amounts outside of thegovernment's regulatory structure. Non-Violence Gandhi maintained that no human or group of humans could knowthe complete truth. No matter how close one thinks one might beto the truth, one could be in error either wholly or in somelesser way that is not immediately apparent. Because of this, hemaintained that no one could use violence toward others to presshis or her view of the truth forward. This principle excluded allacts of violence, and Gandhi's definition of violence was broad.As one might expect, physical violence could not be used againstan opponent. He also maintained that there should be no violencein one's expression and words. The non-violence principlerequired that an opponent be treated with utmost respect. Smearcampaigns aimed at defamation of character were not in hispolitical action toolbox, just as murder of lawmakers, judges,bureaucrats, and police were not in his toolbox. Gandhi'snon-violence is a full antonym for violence. Not only doesnon-violence refrain from destructive acts, it is aggressivelyand provocatively constructive. Thus, Gandhi's campaigns did notseek to defeat an opponent, but instead to convert the opponentto a more just position and to challenge the opponent to act uponthe new position. In addition, Gandhi held that there must be anopportunity for an opponent to save face, so long as nofundamental principle or aim of the action was therebycompromised. Self-Suffering Self-suffering is an integral element of Gandhi's techniqueand a necessary corollary to provocative non-violent action.Self-suffering can take the form of material and socialsacrifice. For example, loss of employment, property, or incomeas a result of holding to one's view of the truth is a form ofself-suffering. Self-suffering reaches its personal extremes inincarceration, physical injury, and the sacrifice of one's life.Gandhi wrote: "Suffering injury in one's own person is . . .of the essence of non-violence and is the chosen substitute forviolence to others." (M.K. Gandhi, "Non-violence inPeace and War," 2nd edition, Ahmedabad: Navajivan, 1944, p.49). He also wrote, "Non-violence in its dynamic conditionmeans conscious suffering. It does not mean meek submission tothe will of the evil-doer, but it means the pitting of one'swhole soul against the will of the tyrant." (M.K. Gandhi, in"Young India," August 11, 1920 ). Self-suffering ispreferred over submitting to humiliation and pr ovides a way topreserve one's personal dignity in the face of those who wouldtreat one unjustly. Throughout his writings and campaigns, Gandhiemphasized that inviting self-suffering is something that mustnot be done lightly. One who invites self-suffering must beprepared for the fullest possible sacrifice that may result fromone's actions. Means and Ends Gandhi believed that means do not serve ends, rather meanscreate ends. Thus, to attain an end that is positive andtruthful, one must use means that are positive and truthful. Thisphilosophy can be summarized by his statement, "the meansare the ends in the making." Means that create ends have twointeresting implications. First, one cannot define a just,non-violent end and then use unjust and violent means to attainit--for the end will be in character with the means used. Thisview precludes taking actions under the philosophy summarized inthe statement "the ends justify the means"--aphilosophy that seems to permeate current U.S. policy-making.Indeed, the "ends" being created by current governmentpolicy with regard to some drugs are very different than theofficially stated goals. A second implication is that, while one must always be movingtoward a goal of pure truth and justice, the end cannot bedefined precisely in advance. Each action one takes creates thenext action and that one, the next, each action always in keepingwith the last and moving progressively closer to truth andjustice. Through actively engaging with fellow activists and theopponent, one grows in understanding of what must be done, a stepat a time, to create the most just and truthful end. The technique becomes dynamic when it succeeds in provokinginternal change in the opponent. Thus the knowledge andunderstanding of both the activist and the opponent growsimultaneously toward truth and justice. However, the techniqueis not self-propelling; it is usually used in a context of astagnant, inert, or deliberately destructive force and requirestremendous energy. The activist must constantly reassess theopponent's comprehension and adjust the program so that it ismore than reactive to the opponent's change--every change must beviewed as an opportunity to press the campaign further forward. What Gandhi's Contemporaries Thought About the FundamentalPrinciples A few of Gandhi's contemporaries adhered to the fundamentalprinciples as inviolable guides by which to conduct one'spersonal life as well as one's social or political actions.However, the majority of his contemporaries accepted thefundamental principles as policies. They recognized the successof the principles in empowering the disempowered and realizedthat, even if viewed as policies, the principles were the key towinning "home rule" with an unarmed and impoverishedarmy of the disenfranchised. This acceptance as policy rather than principle caused Gandhisome dismay. When the activists with whom he was working rejectedthese even as policy, he would leave the political sphere andreturn to his constructive work toward remedying the devastatingeconomic problems in the villages of India. Eventually, hiscontemporaries always asked him to return to the politicalsphere. SECTION 3. STEPS OF A GANDHIAN CAMPAIGN The Progress of a Campaign Upon discovering an opportunity for reform or change, acampaign is conducted through several steps. Each step is anecessary prerequisite to the next, for each must fully developthe context in which the next occurs. The early steps develop thepublic stage upon which later steps, if they become necessary,can be played out. Some of the steps initiated early in thecampaign, especially education, continue throughout the campaign.The progression is designed to maximize early in the campaign allopportunities for the opponent to make positive changes and saveface without campaigners moving to more provocative measures. Thecareful progression provides fullest opportunity for thecampaigners to adjust their position if they discover that theyhave inadvertently violated a fundamental principle. It givescampaign leaders the opportunity, through engaging with theopponent early in relatively low-risk situations, torealistically assess their own strengths and weaknesses and thoseof the campaigners and to determine what more provocative stepscan and cannot be taken successfully. A Summary of the Steps of a Gandhian Campaign The steps of a campaign are: -- Investigation of the facts, situation, and conditions -- Education of the campaigners, the public, and the opponent -- Negotiation and arbitration -- Preparation of the campaigners for more provocativemeasures -- Agitation -- Issuing of an ultimatum -- Economic boycott and forms of strike -- Non-cooperation -- Civil disobedience -- Creation of alternate structures In India, these steps eventually led to the establishment ofa parallel government in some places, which provided Indians withsome of the experience needed to assume self-government whenBritish rule was removed. The steps of a campaign are described in the paragraphsbelow. In brackets I have mentioned my current opinion of wheredrug policy reform advocates have made the most progress.Investigation of the Facts, Situation, and Conditions A Gandhiancampaign is founded on an objective assessment of the facts. Allfacts are considered; none are rejected or downplayed if they donot fit the expectations of the campaigners--to do so would be tomove away from the complete truth. The situation of campaignersand those experiencing the injustice are examined. As full anunderstanding of the situation as possible is developed among allinvolved. The conditions at the time--public awareness andopinion, the situation of the opponent, and other relevantfactors are all considered and weighed. [Drug policy reform advocates seem to me to be strongesthere. The only difficulty I've seen is the occasional attempt toreject or downplay a pertinent fact that doesn't quite"fit," but this is usually remedied through discussionamong reform advocates.] Education of the Campaigners, the Public, and the Opponent With the facts in hand and the situation and conditions fullyexamined, education begins. All who join the campaign must beeducated; they become representatives through their associationand must be fully informed. The public is often unaware of ormisinformed about injustices; they must be educated to understandwhy change is needed. Many opponents are similar to thepublic--they are unaware or misinformed. Gandhi felt that therewere only a few pponents who would actually want injustices to beperpetuated or continue. Gandhi was an optimist and believed eventhose few could be converted. [Drug policy reform advocates areweak here, but getting stronger. At the International Conferencefor Drug Policy Reform last November, attendees recognized theneed to raise public awareness about injustices of the drug war.I understand that organizations like NORML are following up withactivities geared toward education of the general public. TheWashington Hemp Education Network (W.H.E.N.) was started by agroup of marijuana policy reform activists in Washington Statewho recognized the need for education. My personal experience hasbeen that many of the people who join W.H.E.N. recognize theinjustices and are looking for the facts. Others join becausethey have much knowledge and want opportunities to educate andpersuade others. Some relish entering the opponents' sphere andeducating! Also, Cliff Schaffer's persuasive strategies providean excellent example of guidelines that have been tailored tomove the opponent toward the truth given an opponent's entryposition in a discussion. Such guidelines must be assessed andmodified periodically to ensure that they keep pace with theinevitable progress the opponents will make when so persuaded.] Negotiation and Arbitration Remedy for the injustice is sought first through establishedchannels within the existing system. Petitioning for change ofunjust laws, challenging unjust laws in the courts, and otherlegislative or legal methods fall under this step. [Drug policy reform advocates working on reform of marijuanalaws have done plenty of negotiation and arbitration at thefederal level and in many states. I am not aware of as high of alevel of negotiation effort for substances like heroin, cocaine,etc.] Preparation of the Campaigners for More Provocative Measures Immediately upon recognizing the existence of a conflictsituation that might lead to more provocative measures, Gandhi'stechnique calls for intense preparation. The motives ofcampaigners are examined, weaknesses of the group are identified,and exercises in self-discipline undertaken. The goal of thisstep is to assess and develop the campaigners' ability to adhereto fundamental principles and to continue action in the face ofsignificant risks. There is much discussion of the issues athand, the current situation and conditions, and of the potentialresults of various courses of action. [I have not heard of drugpolicy reform advocates undertaking such self-examination andparticipating in mutually agreed upon exercises inself-discipline. I have heard discussions and analyses aboutpotential actions that fall under subsequent steps.] Agitation Agitation includes legal high-profile activities such asrallies and picketing. Such events are opportunities for theleaders to assess the group's readiness to proceed with higherprofile and more difficult steps without deteriorating intoviolence. Mass gatherings also provide an opportunity to begininstructing campaigners who have not been trained previously inthe fundamental principles, to communicate developments in thecampaign, and to explain the next step. [I haven't heard much about this kind of agitation. AgitationI have heard about has involved small numbers of people and, asfar as I know, it has not been part of a sequence of steps suchas described here. I do not believe that Hemp Fests, even if noone smoked, would meet the criteria by which Gandhi definedagitation because they are not part of a highly focused politicalcampaign and do not have a strong educational focus.] Issuing of an Ultimatum A strong appeal is made to the opponent. The appeal is quiteexplicit. It states the problem, identifies a constructivesolution and the responsibilities of each party in the solution,and explains what the campaigners will do if the opponent doesnot participate in the solution. The ultimatum should includeprovision for the opponent to save face within the scope of thefundamental principles. The opponent is fully informed about thenext step. In fact, from this step forward, every single steptaken is preceded by a full advance disclosure to the opponent ofwhat will be done, when, and where. Before each step commences,the opponent is offered the opportunity to change. [If drug policy reform advocates started a Gandhian campaigntoday, I believe that they would be years from being able toissue ultimatums that actually carried any weight.] Economic Boycott and Forms of Strike In India, Indians boycotted foreign cloth with such successthat they had a significant impact on the mills in Britain.Strikes have been used extensively in the U.S. for in all kindsof reform campaigns A scene in the movie "Gandhi" showsthe power of a nationwide strike. [To conduct an economic boycottrequires economic alternatives for the boycotters. To conduct aneffective strike, a campaign needs great numbers of campaignersand who have economic alternatives. As far as I can tell, drugpolicy reform advocates are generally dependent on the dominanteconomic structures and so are weak on this point.] Non-Cooperation Non-cooperation involves refusal to support the portions ofthe system that require reform or accept benefits from thesystem. For example, during the campaign to remove British rule,Indians resigned from government posts, removed their childrenfrom government schools, returned awards and medals that they hadreceived from the government, and so on. Economic boycott andstrikes described in the previous step can be regarded as formsof non-cooperation. [The judges who refuse to try drug cases areengaged in non-cooperation. People who refuse to provide urinesamples as a condition of employment are engaged innon-cooperation.] Civil Disobedience Civil disobedience extends non-cooperation to the active andopen breaking of selected laws. Gandhi set complete and voluntaryobedience to laws as a prerequisite for civil disobedience. Lawsto be broken were selected very carefully for their position atthe heart of the problem or for their symbolic value. Civildisobedience involves a deliberate courting of arrest and, uponarrest, no defense is offered in the courts. In fact, fulladmission of guilt is required. The prosecutors, juries, andjudges are challenged to see the injustice of the law that theyare defending against the civil disobedient and to cease theircooperation with the injustice. In mass campaigns involving civildisobedience in India, prisons filled up very quickly. Veryoften, the leaders were arrested in an attempt to dishearten thecampaigners and end the campaign. Sometimes they were arrestedupon delivery to the authorities of their notice of intent todisobey! Other times, the government ignored them completelywhich, of course, encouraged more people to join the campaign. Ifthe government ignores the first civil disobedients, theprovocative nature of increasing numbers of civil disobedientseventually compels the government to act. And compelling theopponent to act is the point of civil disobedience. Two importantorganizational points must be mentioned here. Every campaign inwhich the leaders may be arrested must provide succession ofleadership. A succession procedure must be planned in advance sothat civil disobedience continues apace no matter how manyleaders have been arrested. The second point involves support forthe families of the civil disobedients. There must always bepeople who are willing to forego civil disobedience and remainfree to take care of the children, the aged, and the ill. Supportpeople should be identified in advance and should, under nocircumstances, court arrest. [Medicinal marijuana suppliers and users come to mind as apossible example of civil disobedients, although an analysiswould reveal that very few of these civil disobedients actuallymeet all of the criteria set forth by Gandhi.] Creation of Alternate Structures If, after all of these steps, the existing system fails tobecome more just, an alternate means of ensuring justice must bedeveloped. This is especially important when the existing systemis so corrupt that people are disobeying it not just as part of acampaign, but simply because they find themselves unable toconduct their lives peacefully without disobeying it. Such asystem is approaching inevitable collapse by virtue of itsinherent flaws. Alternate structures must be built in advance notonly to provide for immediate needs, but also to prevent (or atleast mitigate) the potential release of destructive,anger-driven energy that often follows an oppressive system'scollapse. [Medicinal marijuana buyers' clubs provide an exampleof an alternate structure.] Demands of Gandhi's Technique on Campaigners Gandhi's technique exacts a great deal from a campaign'sleadership and those who follow them. They must tirelessly planand monitor the progress of the campaign, reassess their positionand the position of the opponent, and respond creatively andprovocatively to events as they unfold. Leaders must be flexibleenough to respond to change. At the same time, they must have the insight to know whichpotential responses might lead to stagnation of the campaign orwill compromise a fundamental principle--for either will lead tosetbacks. Leaders must be consummate communicators: with the opponent,the public, potential supporters, and those who have joined thecampaign--else misunderstandings and misinterpretations can ariseas the campaign is adjusted to changing conditions and events.Leaders must have an ability to organize, inspire, and use fullythe talents of an extremely diverse group of people who volunteertheir services to a campaign. People with widely varyingperspectives and beliefs must be transformed from a disorganizedscattering of supporters in conflict not just with thegovernment, but often with each other, to a coherent, responsiveunit that can target its actions and responses with great force.Finally, all in the campaign must have an ability to manage ordispel the tension and anger that can arise when their effortsappear to be frustrated, when there are disagreements amongcampaigners, and when they directly confront an often-hostileopponent. CONCLUSION Many drug policy reform advocates have been using politicalaction techniques similar (though not identical) to the stepsdescribed above. But drug policy reform advocates have notcatalyzed into a dynamic, coherent group that can actsynchronously to achieve a clearly defined goal. I believe that,if reform advocates' efforts were synthesized in a Gandhiansequence with an underpinning of the fundamental principles,success would be inevitable. --Mary CliffSchaffer's Home Page WT01-B29-78IA087-000632-B037-13http://206.61.184.43:80/schaffer/GOVPUBS/hr666.htm 206.61.184.43 19970122070740 text/html 4337HTTP/1.0 200 OKDate: Wednesday, 22-Jan-97 07:07:34 GMTServer: WebSitePro/1.1f (S/N wpo-0deb)Allow-ranges: bytesContent-type: text/htmlLast-modified: Saturday, 28-Dec-96 06:13:52 GMTContent-length: 4120 Exclusionary Rule Reform Act of 1995 (Reported in theHouse) Exclusionary Rule Reform Act of 1995 (Reported in the House) HR 666 RH Union Calendar No. 7 104th CONGRESS 1st Session H. R. 666 [Report No. 104-17] To control crime by exclusionary rule reform. IN THE HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES JANUARY 25, 1995 Mr. McCollum introduced the following bill; which wasreferred to the Committee on the Judiciary FEBRUARY 2, 1995 Committed to the Committee of the Whole House on the State ofthe Union and ordered to be printed _________________________________________________________________ A BILL To control crime by exclusionary rule reform. Be it enacted by the Senate and House of Representatives ofthe United States of America in Congress assembled, SECTION 1. SHORT TITLE. This Act may be cited as the `Exclusionary Rule Reform Act of1995'. SEC. 2. ADMISSIBILITY OF CERTAIN EVIDENCE. (a) In General: Chapter 223 of title 18, United States Code,is amended by adding at the end the following: `Sec. 3510. Admissibility of evidence obtained by search orseizure `(a) Evidence Obtained by Objectively Reasonable Search orSeizure: Evidence which is obtained as a result of a search or seizureshall not be excluded in a proceeding in a court of the UnitedStates on the ground that the search or seizure was in violationof the fourth amendment to the Constitution of the United States,if the search or seizure was carried out in circumstancesjustifying an objectively reasonable belief that it was inconformity with the fourth amendment. The fact that evidence wasobtained pursuant to and within the scope of a warrantconstitutes prima facie evidence of the existence of suchcircumstances. `(b) Evidence Not Excludable by Statute or Rule: `(1) Generally: Evidence shall not be excluded in aproceeding in a court of the United States on the ground that itwas obtained in violation of a statute, an administrative rule orregulation, or a rule of procedure unless exclusion is expresslyauthorized by statute or by a rule prescribed by the SupremeCourt pursuant to statutory authority. `(2) Special rule relating to objectively reasonable searchesand seizures: Evidence which is otherwise excludable underparagraph (1) shall not be excluded if the search or seizure wascarried out in circumstances justifying an objectively reasonablebelief that the search or seizure was in conformity with thestatute, administrative rule or regulation, or rule of procedure,the violation of which occasioned its being excludable. `(c) Rule of Construction: This section shall not beconstrued to require or authorize the exclusion of evidence inany proceeding.'. (b) Clerical Amendment: The table of sections at thebeginning of chapter 223 of title 18, United States Code, isamended by adding at the end the following: `3510. Admissibility of evidence obtained by search orseizure.'. Union Calendar No. 7 104th CONGRESS 1st Session H. R. 666 [Report No. 104-17] A BILL To control crime by exclusionary rule reform. -_________________________________________________________________ FEBRUARY 2, 1995 Committed to the Committee of the Whole House on the State ofthe Union and ordered to be printed CliffSchaffer's Home Page WT01-B29-79IA087-000632-B037-36http://206.61.184.43:80/schaffer/GOVPUBS/hr666a.htm 206.61.184.43 19970122070751 text/html 3468HTTP/1.0 200 OKDate: Wednesday, 22-Jan-97 07:07:44 GMTServer: WebSitePro/1.1f (S/N wpo-0deb)Allow-ranges: bytesContent-type: text/htmlLast-modified: Saturday, 28-Dec-96 06:13:49 GMTContent-length: 3251 Exclusionary Rule Reform HOUSE CHAMBER ACTION FOR THE LAST THREE LEGISLATIVE DAYS 02-08-95 Exclusionary Rule Reform: By a recorded vote of 289 ayes to142 noes, Roll No. 103, the House passed H.R. 666, to controlcrime by exclusionary rule reform. Agreed To: The Volkmer amendment that exempts searches and seizurescarried out by or under the authority of the Bureau of Alcohol,Tobacco and Firearms from the relaxation of the exclusionary rule(agreed to by a recorded vote of 228 ayes to 198 noes with 3voting 'present', Roll No. 101). Earlier, a Conyers amendment wasoffered but subsequently withdrawn that contained identicalprovisions; The Traficant amendment that exempts searches or seizurescarried out by or under the authority of the Internal RevenueService from the relaxation of the exclusionary rule; and TheFields of Louisiana amendment, as amended by the McCollumsubstitute, that provides that none of the provisions shall beconstrued so as to violate the fourth article to theConstitution. Rejected the Serrano amendment that sought to exempt searchesor seizures carried out by or under the authority of the Immigration and Naturalization Service (rejected by arecorded vote of 103 ayes to 330 noes, Roll No. 102). 02-07-95 Exclusionary Rule Reform Act: House completed all generaldebate and began consideration of amendments to H.R. 666, tocontrol crime by exclusionary rule reform; but came to noresolution thereon. Consideration of amendments will resume onWednesday, February 8. Rejected: The Conyers amendment that sought to limit and codify the'good faith' exception to searches and seizures with warrantslater to be found invalid; and to enact the current limited 'goodfaith' exception for searches in which evidence was not excludedif it was retained in a 'good faith' reliance on a statute, whichwas later held to be unconstitutional (rejected by a recordedvote of 138 ayes to 291 noes, Roll No. 98); and The Watt amendment in the nature of a substitute that soughtto strike provisions applying the 'good faith' exception to theexclusionary rule to warrantless searches; and to replace it withthe text of the fourth amendment of the United StatesConstitution (rejected by a recorded vote of 121 ayes to 303noes, Roll No. 99). H. Res. 61, the rule under which the bill is beingconsidered, was agreed to earlier by voice vote. 02-06-95 Reports Filed: The following reports were filed as follows: H. Res. 61, providing for the consideration of H.R. 666, tocontrol crime by exclusionary rule reform (H. Rept. 104-20). Source: http://thomas.loc.gov/ CliffSchaffer's Home Page WT01-B29-80IA087-000632-B037-60http://206.61.184.43:80/schaffer/LIBRARY/hr666b.htm 206.61.184.43 19970122070802 text/html 3317HTTP/1.0 200 OKDate: Wednesday, 22-Jan-97 07:07:53 GMTServer: WebSitePro/1.1f (S/N wpo-0deb)Allow-ranges: bytesContent-type: text/htmlLast-modified: Saturday, 28-Dec-96 06:39:26 GMTContent-length: 3100 DRUG REFORMERS ATTACK HOUSE BILL HR 666 DRUG REFORMERS ATTACK HOUSE BILL HR 666 California NORML Press Release: February 9, 1995 Contact: Dale Gieringer, Cal NORML (415) 563-5858. DRUG REFORMERS ATTACK HOUSE BILL HR666 "THE BEAST" FOR DOUBLE STANDARD ON EXCLUSIONARYRULE Outraged drug reformers denounced Congress' passing of abill, HR 666, nicknamed "The Beast," which weakens theexclusionary rule against illegal police searches in some cases,such as drug offenses, but not gun trafficking or tax crimes. Thebill, which permits illegally seized evidence to be used if thearresting police exercise "good faith," was amended byRep. Harold Volkmer (D- Missouri) to exclude searches by theBureau of Alcohol, Tobacco and Firearms, out of concern for therights of gun owners. A similar amendment by Rep. James Traficant(D-Ohio) excludes the IRS. California NORML attacked HR 666 as "A grotesquetravesty of justice," saying "Whatever logic there maybe in the 'good faith' exception to the exclusionary rule istotally obliterated by making an exception for particularoffenses. By what logic do we let the DEA run roughshod over theFourth Amendment when ferreting out home marijuana gardeners,while making the BATF wear kid gloves in pursuing armstraffickers?" Rep. Volkmer defended his amendment in light of the BATF'smisconduct at Waco, saying "I haven't seen any agency asabusive as the BATF." However, NORML counters that the DEAis even more abusive. "To speak of the DEA and 'good faith'is an oxymoron," says California NORML coordinator DaleGieringer, "This is an agency whose agents are trainedprofessional liars and chronic perjurers, engaged in tramplingthe privacy of citizens, buzzing their land with helicopters,spying on garden stores, seizing property without due process,denying medicine to patients who need it, and running a networkof drug-dealing informants." "HR 666 sets a constitutional double standard forprotection of privacy that violates the 14th Amendment right toequal protection of laws. In effect, it says it's O.K. to playloose with the rights of home marijuana gardeners, but not gun,alcohol, or tax criminals. HR 666 subverts the Fourth Amendment,the bulwark of our constitutional right to privacy. We call onthe Senate and President to reject this grotesque perversion ofjustice." CliffSchaffer's Home Page WT01-B29-81IA031-000655-B048-188http://206.61.184.43:80/schaffer/ACTIVIST/bumper1.htm 206.61.184.43 19970122115657 text/html 4280HTTP/1.0 200 OKDate: Wednesday, 22-Jan-97 11:56:50 GMTServer: WebSitePro/1.1f (S/N wpo-0deb)Allow-ranges: bytesContent-type: text/htmlLast-modified: Saturday, 28-Dec-96 07:25:58 GMTContent-length: 4063 Bumper Sticker Ideas Bumper Sticker Ideas This page is a compilation of ideas people had for goodbumper stickers for a drug policy reform campaign. Enjoy. "Visualize Drugpeace," "It's the Prohibition -- Not Drugs," "Stop the War on Us," Prohibition love it or leave it. Peace on Drugs. CIA Cocaine in America. DEA: the competition Make love on drugs, Not war on drugs Fight real crime- End the drug war. - Ben Masel (I think) Just say know (or no thank you) Why can't we all just get abong? As Ira Glassner noted in his editorial printed in lastsundays NY times --in response to "It's Drugs Stupid"---Hey,"It's Prohibition Stupid." Legalize it, Don't Criticize it. Drug Prohibition is the Problem Not the Solution I read once that if you take a black sharpie and black-outthe "kids off" on the DARE bumper stickers, it reads, "DARE to keep drugs" Pro-MJ and I vote! Free the weed, the stalk and the seed! Free Pot (from tyranny) Drugs Are Real Expensive "Stop the Violence: End the Drug War" PROHIBITION = <the word "CONTROL" surrounded bya big slashed circle> REGULATION = CONTROL How about "DECLARE PEACE" superimposed over theimage of a pot leaf on one side and a hand with the V-shaped peace sign on the other? Stop drug violence End the drug war [Perhaps using red/white octagon STOP sign and yellow/blackdiamond END sign] DARE: Lying to kids about drugs [Lying to kids has to be in high contrast, bright yellow onblack] Save the trees Legalize hemp Prohibition _is_ our drug problem "It's Prohibition, Stupid" - (inspired by E.Nadelmann) Tax it. For Freedom of Diet -- Abolish Neo-prohibition! End the Drug War. Begin the War on Real Crime THE DRUG WAR BREEDS CRIME NOBODY'S SAFE FROM THE DEA WANT SAFE STREETS? END THE DRUG WAR! MAKE AMERICA SAFE: END THE DRUG WAR! OUR DRUG WAR: $100,000,000,000.00 DRUG LORD SUBSIDY PROHIBITION IS A FAILURE "WAR ON DRUGS" = WAR ON AMERICA LAND OF THE PRISONER HOME OF THE DRUG WAR (as in "land of the free, home of the brave".Superimposed on a waving American flag. In fact it would be really cool if"free" and "brave" were printed but scribbled out and"prisoner" and "drug war" were written in.) US OUT OF COLOMBIA - DEA OUT OF MENDOCINO ...Fight Crime, Not Drugs... ....End Drug Prohibition -- Before It's Too Late... How about: School free drug zone. >Prohibition: Didn't work Then >Of Drugs Doesn't Work Now! >Freedom still works better - Abolish Prohibition DEA OUT OF L.A. Save Our Children -- Stop the Drug War, or Save our Community -- Stop the Drug War CliffSchaffer's Home Page WT01-B29-82IA031-000655-B048-214http://206.61.184.43:80/schaffer/ACTIVIST/actlist.htm 206.61.184.43 19970122115711 text/html 65160HTTP/1.0 200 OKDate: Wednesday, 22-Jan-97 11:57:01 GMTServer: WebSitePro/1.1f (S/N wpo-0deb)Allow-ranges: bytesContent-type: text/htmlLast-modified: Saturday, 28-Dec-96 07:26:49 GMTContent-length: 64942 LIBERTY ACTIVISTS' LIST LIBERTY ACTIVISTS' LIST v 1.36 06/1995 So you're sick of the "War on Drugs"? Here's aninternational list of over 200 organizations which support druglaw reform, although most of them are in the US. Look for one inyour area. Please distribute this list widely, and send in anygroups which are not listed already. There's an active group herefor almost any taste. Joining your favorite organization is best,though if you're worried about persecution, just send anonymousmoney or a letter of appreciation. Take advantage of yourdemocratic rights while you still have some! If you're already in a law reform organisation, you can usethis list to contact others with similar interests, and shareinformation or facilities. Just knowing that there are othersworking on these issues can be a big morale booster. The power of pro-liberty organisations can be multiplied manytimes by fast and efficient communication, which spreads news andpromotes co-ordinated action. Electronic mail and conferencing isthe most efficient way to achieve these necessary abilities. Forexample, this list doubled its size in eight months ofcirculation over the Internet. I strongly encourage active groupsand individuals to use this powerful technology. This listing was originally kicked off with a list of groupsreproduced with permission from the February, 1992 issue of HighTimes magazine (contact details at the end of the list). Since then, it has grown considerably through the kindness ofthose who have contributed additional entries, including ChrisKlausmeier, Macca Macpherson, Dave Thomson and Keith Lim. Please reproduce and distribute widely with thisacknowledgment. Post it on bulletin boards if you can. PLEASE SEND NEW LISTINGS I don't know any more about most of these groups, than whatappears here. If you know about other active groups not listedhere, or if any entries need correction, please e-mail me atschaffer@smartlink.net, or mail to the address below, forincorporation in future editions of this list. Aldis Ozols GPO Box 127 SYDNEY 2001 AUSTRALIA * * * * * *AUSTRALIA* Adelaide University NORML c/- Clubs Association University of Adelaide Adelaide 5000 Internet: daroussy@teaching.cs.adelaide.edu.au groo@smug.student.adelaide.edu.au Australian Hemp Products 227 Grinsell Street Kotara, Newcastle, NSW 2289 Phone: +61 49 52 7802 Fax: +61 49 52 5211 (Grant Steggles) Australian Parliamentary Group for Drug Law Reform c/- Michael Moore, MP GPO Box 1020 Canberra ACT 2601 Phone: +61 6 205 0166 Fax: +61 6 205 0431 Notes: A group of Members of Parliament supporting the reform of drug laws. BIO-Logical PRODUCTS PO Box 768 Potts Point NSW 2011 Phone: +61 2 983 9857 Fax: +61 2 440 0140 Notes: Sells clothing made of hemp, and distributesinformation about the uses of hemp for paper, fuel, etc. Brisbane HEMP PO Box 332 Albert St 4002 Phone: +61 7 844 7499 Notes: Meetings at 50 Baynes St, West End on Monday nights at7.30pm. Flinders NORML c/- Clubs and Societies Association, Inc. Flinders University Bedford Park, SA 5042 Hemp For Paper Consortium c/- Harmsens 430 Tinderbox Road TINDERBOX TAS 7054 Phone: +61 02 29 2063 IDUN Communication Centre, NUAA PO Box 822 Bondi Junction 2022 New South Wales Phone: +61 2 369 3455 Fax: +61 2 369 3282 (Dave Burrows) Note: Injecting Drug User Group Network, promoting drug lawreform, harm reduction, education, outreach, and research. Mullers and Packers Union, C/o Clubs and Societies, Monash University, Clayton, Victoria 3168 Internet: c/- smalshy@yoyo.cc.monash.edu.au (a 'donated'account - messages will be passed on to the Secretary of the club) Notes: President is Tony Carden. Last Contacted: 2/93 New South Wales NORML GPO Box 91 Sydney, NSW 2001 Notes: This group is no longer very active, though some members can be contacted at the above address. Nimbin HEMP PO Box 177 Nimbin, NSW 2480 Phone: +61 66 89 1602 South Australia HEMP PO Box 7013 Hutt Street Adelaide 5000 Phone: +61 8 293 2838 Also: PO Box 1019 Kent Town 5071 Notes: Membership $10(conc) $15(waged) Last contact: Apr 95 West Australia HEMP PO Box 115 Mirrabrooke 6061 Phone: +61 9 344 1445 West Australia NORML PO Box 907 Morley, WA 6062 (Carl Turney) *BELGIUM* International Anti-Prohibitionist League (Europe) 97 Rue Belliard, Rem.512 1040 Brussels Phone: (32 2) 230 4121 Fax: (32 2) 230 3670 *CANADA* Assembly of the Church of the Universe 329 Wentworth St. North Hamilton, Ontario L8L 5W1 CANADA (416) 521-1804 (Rev. Bros. Walter A. Tucker & Michael A.Baldasaro) Notes: officially registered religious organisation Last Contacted: Dec 93 B.C. Anti-Prohibitionist League P.O. Box 8179 Victoria, B.C. V8W 3R8 CANADA (604) 382-7758 Last Contacted: Apr 94 Canadian Association for the Legalisation of Marijuana(C.A.L.M.) (B.C.) R.R. 1, Site 850D, Comp 2 Grand Forks, B.C. V0H 1H0 CANADA Last Contacted: Sep 93 Canadian Foundation for Drug Policy 70 MacDonald Street Ottawa, Ontario K2P 1H6 CANADA (613) 238-5909 (temporary number until a separate one isacquired) Fax: (613) 238-2891 (also temporary) Last Contacted: Dec 94 Canadian Hemp Association 312 Adelaide St. W. Suite 608 Toronto, Ontario M5V 1R2 CANADA cha@io.org (416) 977-4159 (Robin Ellins) Notes: A national organization to facilitate and promote thegrowth of a hemp industry in Canada. Last Contacted: Jun 94 (C.H.A. post to alt.hemp) Cannabis Canada Suite 420 21 Water St. Vancouver, BC. V6B 1A1 CANADA (Dana Larsen) Internet: Dana Larsen <muggles@hempbc.com>,http://www.hempbc.com Notes: The magazine of Canada's Cannabis Culture. 84 pages oncannabis paper. Citizens On Drugs (C.O.D.) 64 Augusta Ave. Toronto, Ontario M5T 2L1 CANADA (Tim Potts, Kenn Quayle) Phone: (416) 504 6131 Fax: (416) 703 7832 Internet: greenie@io.org Notes: Meetings are on the first and third Wednesday of each month at 7:00 pm at the Niagara Neighbourhood Health Centre(674 Queen St. W.). Fane of the Psilocybe Mushroom Association P.O. Box 8179 Victoria, B.C. V8W 3R8 CANADA Notes: officially-registered religious organization;publishes Sporeprint newsletter Last Contacted: Apr 94 Freedom Party of Ontario P.O. Box 2214, Station A London, Ontario N6A 4E3 CANADA (519) 433-8612 Notes: officially-registered Ontario political party;supports individual choice without either condoning or condemning cannabis use. Friends International 370-1027 Davie St. Vancouver, B.C. V6E 4L2 CANADA (604) 681-3704 (Leeroy Campbell, Jan Campbell) Notes: publishes Hempfest Times newsletter Last Contacted: Jun 94 HEMP BC 324 W Hastings Vancouver BC V6B 1K6 CANADA Internet: memery@hempbc.com, http://www.hempbc.com (604) 681-4620 (Marc Emery) (604) 681-4604 (fax line) Last Contacted: May 95 Notes: Canada's Largest retail and wholesale cannabis store.Carries everything related to cannabis, marijuana, and hemp. HEMP Canada PO Box 37154 769 Southdale Road East London, Ontario N6E 1B0 CANADA (519) 686-1415 (Mike Bourque - Director) Last Contacted: Apr 94 Hemp Lobby Hornby Island (604) 335-1276 (John West) Last Contacted: May 93 Hemp to Save the Rainforest 830 Gulfview Place Victoria, B.C. V8Y 2R6 CANADA (Thurles Loughran) Last Contacted: Mar 94 Hempsters #114-1472 Commercial Drive Vancouver B.C. V5L 3X9 Last Contacted: May 94 International Anti-Prohibitionist League (Canada) c/o Marie-Andree Bertrand PO Box 6128 University of Montreal Criminology Dept. Montreal, Quebec H3C 3S7 CANADA Last Contacted: Sep 93 League for Ethical Action on Drugs (LEAD) 1047 Yarmouth Street Port Coquitlam, B.C. V3C 5H4 CANADA (604) 942-1910 (Dana Larsen) Notes: uses a harm-reduction philosophy in lobbying for drugpolicy reform Last Contacted: Jun 94 Libertarian Party of Canada 922 Cloverley St. North Vancouver, B.C. V7L 1N3 CANADA (604) 980-7370 Last Contacted: Sep 93 Ligue antiprohibitioniste du Quebec 4566 rue de la Roche Montreal, Quebec H2J 3J6 CANADA (514) 454-7744 NAUN 155 Sherbourne Street #310 Toronto M5A 3W2 CANADA (Stean Collins) Note: Injecting Drug User Group Network, promoting drug lawreform, harm reduction, education, outreach, and research. NORML B.C. Depot 4, P.O. Box 7193 Victoria, B.C. V9B 4Z3 CANADA (604) 474-4771 (Norm Cholette) Last Contacted: Sep 93 NORML Canada R.R. #1 King City, Ontario L0G 1K0 CANADA (416) 833-3167 (Umberto Iorfida) (416) 833-3577 (Computer line) Last Contacted: Sep 93 Patriotic Canadians for Hemp Box 293 Ucluelet B.C. V0R 3A0 CANADA (604) 726-7239 (Chris Bennett, Tracy Chester) Notes: a.k.a. Sister Sativa's Genuine Hemp, Mama Indica'sHempseed Treats Last Contacted: Jun 94 Society of Free Thinkers (SOFT) P.O. Box 327 Paradise Newfoundland and Labrador (NfLb) A1L 1C7 CANADA Notes: Not solely dedicated to drug law reform. Methodsinclude posters, letters and leaflets. Anonymity is granted to members, uponrequest. Last Contacted: Jan 93 Simon Fraser University League for Ethical Action on Drugs(SFU LEAD) c/o SFSS Clubs Administration Simon Fraser University Burnaby, B.C. V5A 1S6 CANADA (604) 291-3181 (SFSS General Office: messages) Notes: area of interest is in finding policy alternatives tothe WoD that do not infringe on civil liberties. Last Contacted: Jun 94 *CANADA - INDIVIDUALS* J. Wayne Marsden (604) 668-6886 Notes: Libertarian Party candidate Last Contacted: Sep 93 *DENMARK* Fri Hash Bevaegelsen (Movement for legalization of marijuana) Hampens plads 1, Christiania Baadsmandsstraedet 43, 1407 KBH K Phone: +45 32966614 Internet: Nicolaj Tscherning Moller<frihashb@inet.uni-c.dk> *FINLAND* Suomen kannabisyhdistys PL 20 SF-00770 Helsinki Internet: sky@katto.kaapeli.fi WWW: http://katto.kaapeli.fi/~sky/ *FRANCE* Collectif d'Information et de Recherche Cannabique (CIRC) (Association for Marijuana Research and Information) 118-130 av. Jean Jaures 75019 PARIS CEDEX 19 Phone: +33 1 42 38 04 83 Fax: +33 1 42 38 02 99 Minitel: 3615 CIRC MLC: Mouvement for a Controlled Legalization President: Francis Caballero. Attorney. 59, av. Victor-Hugo 750016 Paris FRANCE Phone: +33 1 42 22 48 23 *GERMANY* AKZEPT (Bundesverband fu"r akzeptierende Drogenarbeit und humane Drogenpolitik e.V.) Friedrichstrasse 165 10117 Berlin Phone: +49 30 229 9043 ARCHIDO (Archiv und Dokumentationszentrum fu"r Drogenliterature.V.) Universita"t Bremen Fachbereich 8 Postfach 33 04 40 28334 BREMEN Phone: +49 421 218 3173 Fax: +49 421 218 4265 Notes: Working on a federal level for drug legalisation inGermany. Bundesarbeitsgemeinschaft Kritischer Polizistinnen und Polizsten (Hamburger Signal) e.V. c/o Reinhard Borchers Gaertnerstrasse 21 D-20253 Hamburg Phone: +49 40 422 5843 Fax: +49 40 422 9322 Internet: R.Borchers@cl-hh.comlink.de Notes: An organisation of German Policemen and Policewomen. Last contact: Feb 95 EIGDU C/- DAH Secretariate Berlin Dieffenbachstrasse 33 10967 Berlin Phone: +49 30 690087 56 Fax: +49 30 690087 42 (Werner Hermann) Note: Injecting Drug User Group Network, promoting drug lawreform, harm reduction, education, outreach, and research. H.A.N.F. e.V. Hanf als Nutzpflanze foerdern c/o Gecko Headshop Osterfelder Str. 2 42103 Wuppertal Phone: +49 202 304295 Fax: +49 202 316795 Kommunale Drogenpolitik (Verein fu"r akzeptierende Drogenarbeit e.V.) Kreuzstra(ss)e 29 28203 Bremen Phone: +49 421 76045 Fax: +49 421 75727 *HOLLAND* See *NETHERLANDS, THE* *ISRAEL* Israel Organization For the Reformation of Pot Laws, The PO Box 11438 Ariel 44839 Phone: +972 3 936 5407 Last contact: Jan 95 *ITALY* CORA - Coordinamento Radicale Antiproibizionista c/o Partito Radicale Transnazionale (Transnational Radical Party) Via di Torre Argentina 76 00186 ROMA (ITALY) Phone: +39 6 689791 Fax: +39 6 68805396 Telex: +39 6 610495 PRLIFEI Note: CORA also has a BBS. Its phone number is +39 669920412, or on the Internet, "telnet agora.stm.it". Inparticular, look at 'Conference Drugs' and 'News Cora' for info on Coraactivities. *NETHERLANDS, THE* IRDRHR (International Institute for Resource-sharing on Drugsand Human Rights) Drugs Peace Institute PO Box 15563 1001 NB Amsterdam giro 6663463 *NETHERLANDS, THE - INDIVIDUALS* Guido H. Koppes Tuinstraat 47-07 5038 DA Tilburg Phone: +31 13 356331 Internet: Guido Koppes <guido@freenet.scri.fsu.edu> *NEW ZEALAND* ADUN C/- Mainline communications 33 Hill Cresent, New Lynn Auckland 1007 Phone: +64 9 826 0977 Fax: +64 9 826 0977 Internet: Barry F Ryker <spike@bazza.ak.planet.co.nz> Note: Injecting Drug User Group Network, promoting drug lawreform, harm reduction, education, outreach, and research. Auckland University NORML C/- AUSA Private Bag 92019 Auckland University Auckland Christchurch NORML c/- PO Box 22301 Christchurch Internet: C/- Greg Kerdemelidis<gkerde@genix.equinox.gen.nz> Dunedin University NORML c/- OUSA PO Box 1436 Dunedin Hamilton NORML PO Box 19088 Hamilton Notes: Branch contact is Kath (phone 855 0762). Nelson Polytech NORML Contact: c/- Nelson Polytech Students' Association Last Contacted: September 1993 NZ NORML PO Box 19467 Avondale Auckland 7 Phone: (09) 828 4707 (Mike Finlayson) Notes: Palmerston North contact is: Linda Davis c/- StudentMail, City Court Hostel, B2-4, Massey University. Hawkes Bay contact is: Johnny Ropitini c/- Ropitini, Kakirawa Flats, Miriama Rd, RD 11, Paki Paki, Hastings. Wellington NORML C/- P.O.Box 11639 Wellington Notes: Located at Shop 272, Cuba St, Welington. Open everyFriday night 5.30 pm to 8.00 pm, and Saturday morning from 10.00 am to1.00 pm. *NORWAY* Fremskrittspartiets Ungdom Box 8867 Youngstorget N-0028 Oslo Phone: (+47) 22 41 07 69 Fax (+47) 22 42 32 55 Notes: This is the youth organisation of the Progress Party.A recent committee meeting voted in favour of cannabis legalisation,and it is likely that the national assembly of the youth organisationwill accept this as policy in early 1994. The mani body of the party doesnot as yet support this. *SLOVENIA* STIGMA Saranoviceva 5 61000 Ljubljana Slovenia Phone: +386 61 133 7011 Fax: as for voice phone (Dare Kocmur) Note: Injecting Drug User Group Network, promoting drug lawreform, harm reduction, education, outreach, and research. *SWITZERLAND* Verein Schweizer Hanf Freunde (Swiss Association of Hemp Friends) Postfach 323 9004 St. Gallen Last Contacted: Jan 93 *UNITED KINGDOM* Alchemy 261 Portobello Road London W11 Bridge (Drug Advice) Equity Chambers Piccadilly Bradford Phone: +44 274 72 3863 Campaign to Legalise Cannabis International 54c Peacock Street Norwich NR3 1TB CODD (Committee for an Open Debate on Drugs) BCM Entwine, London WC1N 3XX European Movement for Normalisation of Drug Policy (BritishSection) c/- Dr Russell Newcombe c/- 10 Maryland Street LIVERPOOL L1 9BX Phone: +44 51 709 3511 Fax: +44 51 709 4916 Legalise Cannabis Campaign BM Box 2455 London WC1N 3XX Phone: +44 71 585 1031 Libertarian Alliance 25 Chapter Chambers Esterbrooke Street London SW1P 4NN Phone: +44 71 821-5502 Fax: +44 71 834-2031 Internet: liberty@capital.demon.co.uk National Council for Civil Liberties 21 Tabard Street London SE1 4LA Phone: +44 71 403 3888 Peoples Right To Smoke Marijuana PO Box 23 Chigwell, Essex IG7 5EH Release (Drugs Legal & Emergency service) 169 Commercial Road London E1 6BW Phone: +44 71 377 5905 (daytime), +44 71 603 8654 (24-hourhelpline) *UNITED STATES OF AMERICA* Note: This portion of the list has been extensively revised by Chris Klausmeier, with extensive help and prodding fromBrian at University of Massachusetts at Amherst Cannabis ReformCoalition. Advocates for Self-Government 3955 Pleasantdale Road, #106-A Atlanta, GA 30340 Phone: (404)417-1304, (800)932-1776 Fax: (404)417-1305 Notes: The Advocates for Self-Government is a non-profiteducational organization. Our purpose is to present the freedomphilosophy honestly and persuasively to opinion-makers so that they can encounter, evaluate, and when ready embrace the ideals of self-government. Contributions are tax deductible undersection 501(c)(3). Last Contacted: July 1993 Alabama TEACH Rt 3 Box 620 Blountsville, AL 35031 (Johnny Bynum) Alaskans for Hemp Awareness 1013 E. Dimond Blvd. #227 Anchorage, AK 99515 Phone/Fax: (907) 248 HEMP Internet: 73237.422@compuserve.com (Len Karpinski) Notes: Since 1990 Albert Hofmann Foundation Notes: This organisation no longer accepts members and nolonger sells reference books. For psychedelic-related issues, please refer to the entry for the Multidisciplinary Association for Psychedelic Studies, below. Last contact: May 95 Alliance for Cannabis Therapeutics PO Box 21210 Washington, DC 20009 Phone: (202) 483 8595 Notes: Working to reform laws which prevent medical access tocannabis. American Anti-Prohibitionist League 4017 SE Belmont, Box 103 Portland, OR 97214 Phone: (503) 235 4524 Internet: Floyd.Landrath@f69.n105.z1.fidonet.org (Floyd Ferris Landrath) American Cannabis Research Experiment PO Box 3240 Charlottesville, VA 22903 Internet: jeg5s@uva.PCmail.virginia.edu American Cannabis Society PO Box 9208 Madison, WI 53715 American Civil Liberties Union 132 West 43rd St. New York, NY 10036 Phone: (212) 944 9800 Notes: While not explicitly a drug law reform group, the ACLU promotes human rights and supports alternatives to currentlaws. American Hemp Council PO Box 71093 Los Angeles, CA 90071-0093 Phone: (213) 288 4152 American Medical Marijuana Movement (San Francisco Headquarters) 3745 Seventeenth Street San Francisco, CA 94114 Phone: (415) 864 1961 Americans Against Hemp Prohibition P.O. Box 2062 Westminster, MD 21158 Phone: (410) 857 6484 Fax: (410) 346 7968 Ann Arbor NORML PO Box 6014 Ann Arbor MI 48106 Phone: (313) 677 0099 [RB] (Rich Birkett) Antiochans for Hemp Awareness Antioch College Community Government Yellow Springs, OH 45387 Phone: (513) 767 6427 Arizona NORML 703 W 12th Place Tempe, AZ 85281 Arkansas NORML PO Box 191031 Little Rock, AR 72219 Phone: (501) 562 3868 [GS]; (501) 371 0701 [WD] (Glen Schwarz - President; Wayne Davis - Legal Sponsor) Notes: Victory for Hemp! AZ 4 NORML PO Box 50434 Phoenix, AZ 85076 Phone/Fax: (602) 491 1139 BBS: (602) 921 2878 [Hemp Pipeline] (William R. Green) Beloit College Cannabis Club 700 College St. Beloit, WI 53511 Internet: C/- Vincent Whitacre<whitacre@stu.beloit.edu> Bill of Rights Society PO Box 44485 P.C., CA 91412 Boulder Hemp Initiative Project P.O. Box 729 Nederland, CO 80466 Phone: (303) 784 5632 Internet: bhip@darkstar.cygnus.com (Blair Wilson, Laura Kriho) Notes: Holds weekly meetings at 6.30 pm on Tuesdays inHellems Room 81 on the CU campus in Boulder. Bryan / College Station NORML PO Box 9077 College Station, TX 77842 Phone: (409) 268 HEMP (Craig Edge) Buffalo BACH 336 Esser Avenue Buffalo, NY 14207 Phone: (716) 873 0255 (Marilyn Craig) Business Alliance for Commerce in Hemp (BACH) PO Box 71093 Los Angeles, CA 90071-0093 Phone: (213) 288 4152 (Chris Conrad) California Marijuana Initiative 23342 Angeles Forest Hwy. Palmdale, CA 93550 California F.E.A.R. Phone: (714) 544 2577, (415) 380 9108 or (805) 496 2595. Notes: Fights against unjust forfeiture laws. See entry under'F.E.A.R.' California NORML 2215R Market St. #278 San Francisco, CA 94114 Phone: (415) 563 5858 Internet: canorml@igc.apc.org Cannabis Action Network (CAN WEST / National Headquarters) 2560 Bancroft Way #46 Berkeley, CA 94704 Phone: (510) 486 8083 Fax: Same Internet: caninfo@ccnet.com (Debby Goldsberry) Notes: CAN is a grassroots organization working to educateand mobilize concerned individuals to create change. We work withactivists in every area of the country to do national educational tours,regional conferences, rallies and other events. Last contact: Feb 95 Cannabis Action Network (CAN South / Southern RegionalOffice) 1025 Foucher New Orleans, LA 70115 Phone: (504) 899 1960 (Kevin Aplin) Notes: See above Last contact: Feb 95 CARE Art L. PO Box 1612 Bellflower, CA 90706 Cato Institute 1000 Massachusetts Ave. Washington, DC 20003 Phone: (202) 546 0200 Fax: (202) 546 0728 CCDS/BB 41 Sutter St., Suite 1688 San Fransisco, CA 94104 Central Valley NORML 4546 E. Ashlan Suite 3219 Fresno, CA 93726-2700 Phone: (209) 22 NORML (226 6765) Internet: CVNORML@aol.com Note: Public meetings on the second Monday of each month at7:00 PM at: The Matachi House, 985 N. Van Ness, Fresno, CA Christic Institute 8773 Venice Blvd. Los Angeles, CA 90034 Phone: (310) 287 1556 Fax: (310) 287 1559 (Bill Davis) Citizens Advocating the Protection of Privacy 12611 Research Blvd. #121 Austin, TX 78759 Phone (512) 448 4804 Notes: Specifically concerned with employer drug testing, especially by Motorola and Texas Instruments. Citizens Advocating the Protection of Privacy (Arizona) Internet: CAPPAZ@delphi.com Claremont Hemp Council c/o Chris Klausmeier Platt Campus Center Harvey Mudd College Claremont, CA 91711 Phone: (909) 398 4831 [CK]; (909) 624 3306 [MH] Internet: cklausme@jarthur.claremont.edu (Chris Klausmeier, Mark Hornaday) Notes: Registered 5-college organization at ClaremontColleges. Clergy for Enlightened Drug Policy St Luke's Methodist Church Wisconsin Ave. and Calvert St., NW Washington, DC 20007 Phone: (202) 333 4949 Club de Hashischins POB 313 Old Bridge, NJ 08857-0313 Internet: hash@whitebase.ukp.com Columbia University Harm Reduction Education Session (CUHRES) 203 Ferris Booth Hall Columbia University New York, NY 10027 Internet: (til May 95) C/- Noah Ben Potter<nbp2@columbia.edu> Notes: An undergraduate discussion group addressing societalresponses towards "problem behavior," at-risk populations,possible ways of "deinstitutionalizing" individuals. Community for Creative Non-Violence 425 Second Street, NW Washington, DC 20001 Phone: (202) 393 1909 Community Improvement, Inc. 104 E. Fowler Ave, Suite 203 Tampa, FL 33612 Phone: (813) 931 8028 Cures Not Wars 9 Bleecker Street New York City, NY 10012 Phone: (212) 677 7180 (answering machine) Notes: Focussed on `harm reduction. Organizes the annual `Stop the Drug War' rally and concert in New York'sWashington Square Park in May. Dallas/Fort Worth NORML PO Box 280586 Dallas, TX 75228-9186 Phone: (214) 502-4211 (Dana George) Daytona Beach Hemp Awareness Council PO Box 10384 Daytona Beach, FL 32120 Delaware Valley NORML 154 Uploand Ave Horsham, PA 19044 Des Moines Area Greens PO Box 25058 West Des Moines, Iowa 50265 Phone: (515) 270 8791 (Greg Nepstad) Drug Policy Foundation 4455 Connecticut Ave NW, Suite B-500 Washington, DC 20008-2302 Phone: (202) 537 5005 Fax: (202) 537 3007 Internet: 76546.215@compuserve.com, DPLetter@aol.com Notes: With donations of $25 or more you get a year'ssubscription to The Drug Policy Letter. Drug Policy Foundation (New York office) 888 Seventh Ave, Suite 1901 New York, NY 10106 Phone: (212) 887 0685 Fax: (212) 489 8455 Drug Reform Coordination Network (DRCNet) (also Foundation for Drug Policy Awareness) PO Box 381813 Cambridge, MA 02238-1813 Phone: (617) 648 2655 Fax: (617) 648 2713 Internet: drcnet@netcom.com Notes: Publishes "The Activist Guide" monthlynewsletter, and sends frequent announcements to its "rapid response team" by post,e-mail and fax. Full membership $25/year, $18 for newsletter only, $10 for rapidresponse team only, all material free by e-mail. DRCNet seeks local-action coordinators and volunteers for educational outreach andcoalition building activities. Last contact: Mar 95 DU NORML Student Government Office DUC -- North 2055 East Evans Denver, CO 80210 Phone: (303) 778 7574 (Todd Hall) Duke-CAN PO Box 92266 Durham, NC 27708 Internet: David Shaner Lebauer (President)<dsl4@acpub.duke.edu> End Drug Crime PO Box 1623 Albany, NY 12201 Phone: (518) 434 3279 Families Against Destructive Drug Rehab (FADD) 4654 Dower Drive Ellicott City, MD 21043 Families Against Mandatory Minimums (FAMM) 1001 Pennsylvania Ave., NW, Suite 200-S Washington, DC 20004 Phone: (202) 457 5790 Fax: (202) 457 8564 (Julie Stewart - President) Notes: National grassroots network working to overturnmandatory sentencing. In Oregon, contact is Lorraine Heller (292 5364). Family Council on Drug Awareness PO Box 71093 Los Angeles, CA 90071-0093 Phone: (213) 288 4152 Farmville BACH c/o Peter Gillis Longwood College Farmville, VA 23909 F.E.A.R. 265 Miller Avenue Mill Valley, CA 94941 Phone: (415) 388 8128 Internet: k.bergman@genie.geis.com Notes: While not specifically a drug law reform organisation,FEAR opposes the Civil Forfeiture laws which have been imposed inthe name of the "War on Drugs". Last contact: Jan 95 Flint Hills NORML SGS Union PO Box 70 Kansas State University Manhattan, KS 66502 Phone: (913) 532 5254 (Terry Weber) Florida Legalization Organization c/o Michael Geison PO Box 350 LaCrosse, FL 32658-0350 (Mchael Geison) Notes: Working to relegalize cannabis through publiceducation, Voter registration, and statewide hemp rallies. Foundation for Drug Policy Awareness (see Drug Reform Coordination Network) Freedom Fighters of America 235 Park Ave. So., 5th Flr. New York, NY 10003 Friends of Hemp PO Box 981 Mars Hill, NC 28754 Phone: (704) 652 8919 Fully Informed Jury Association (1 - National HQ) PO Box 59 Helmville, MT 59843 Phone/Fax: (406) 793 5550 or (800) TEL JURY (Don Doig, Larry Dodge, Kathy Ballard) Notes: Not explicitly a drug law reform group, the FIJApromotes awareness of the rights of Juries to judge the law itself. Fully Informed Jury Association (2) 4730 W Northern #1063 Glendale AZ 85301 Phone: (602) 930 1268 Fully Informed Jury Association of Iowa (Iowa FIJA) John Hartog PO Box 16223 Des Moines, Iowa 50316 Phone: (515) 262 4660 The Future of Freedom Foundation PO Box 9752 Denver, CO 80209 Gainsville NORML / Florida Legalization Organization PO Box 350 La Crosse, FL 32658-0350 (Michael Geison) Georgia NORML (aka St Petersburg NORML) PO Box 821 Lithia Springs, GA 30057 Phone: (404) 739 1870 (James Bell) Green Panthers! P.O. Box 9845 Washington D.C. 20016 Phone: (202) 363 0068 Fax: (202) 265 1078 (Loey Glover, Terry Mitchell - National Coordinators) Notes: We are the ONLY militant resistance to the War onDrugs. NOTE: Above address/phone may no longer be correct.Apparently the new phone number is: (513) 522 6264. GVSU NORML Student Activities Office Kirkhof Center Grand Valley State University Allendale, MI 49401 (Dave Speas) Hager for Congress, c/o Libertarian Party PO Box 636 Bloomington, IN 47402-636 Internet: hagerp@moose.cs.indiana.edu Notes: Paul Hager is a candidate for the Libertarian Party, and is pushing hemp law reform as a major element in hiscampaign. Hawaii NORML PO Box 2056 Pahoa, Hawaii 96778 Phone: (808) 965 8600 Fax: (808) 965 6242 (Roger Christie) Help Eliminate Marijuana Prohibition 5632 Van Nuys Blvd. Van Nuys, CA 91401 Hemp Advocates PO Box 10176 South Bend, IN 46680 Hemp Coalition, The PO Box 2382 Albany, NY 12220 Hemp Environmental Activists PO Box 4935 East Lansing, MI 48826 Phone: (517) 484 8287 (Don Patterson) Notes: We work for industrial uses of hemp, marijuana formedicine, and personal privacy rights. Hemp Hemp Hooray! c/o Craig Howard PO Box 1912 Mason City, IA 50401 Phone: (515) 696 5755 Hemp Renaissance Marin County, California Phone: (415) 721 1936 Internet: c/- pearl@crl.com Hemptek Industries Inc PO Box 27809 Dept HT-4C San Diego, CA 92198-1809 HJA NORML PO Box 11 Hollidaysburg, PA 16648-0011 (J.S. Vipond) Hoosier Cannabis Relegalization Coalition PO Box 5325 Bloomington, IN 47407 Internet: hagerp@iuvax.cs.indiana.edu (Paul Hager or Dennis Withered) Houston NORML PO Box 1952 Bellaire, TX 77402 Phone: (713) 465 8418 (Rich Potthoff) Human Environmental Mandate Proponents 1004 E. Preston St. Baltimore, MD 21202 Phone: (410) 547 6706 Modem: (410) 685 2894 (Larry Monoghan) Idaho BACH 3310 Driftwood Dr. Coeur d'Alene, ID 83814 Phone: (208) 773 3974 (Tom Klein) Indiana NORML, Inc. 3601 N. Pennsylvania St Indianapolis, IN 46205 Phone: (317) 923 9391 Fax: (317) 924 2920 (Dana York, Steve Dillon) Indianapolis NORML 3746 North College Avenue Indianapolis, IN 46218 Illinois Drug Ethics Alliance PO Box 4205 Urbana, IL 61801 Phone: (217) FOR JOSH (367 5674) Internet: Joshua Sloan <jsloan1@prairienet.org> Notes: Pro-relegalization. Illinois Marijuana Initiative / Illinois NORML PO Box 2242 Darien, IL 60559 Phone: (708) 836 8426 Internet: mmonningh@igc.apc.org, mrosing@igc.apc.org Institute for HEMP PO Box 65130 St. Paul, MN 55165 Phone: (612) 222 2628 Internet: insthemp@igc.apc.org (John Birrenbach) International Society for Individual Liberty 1800 Market Street San Francisco, CA 94102 Phone: (415) 864 0952 Fax: (415) 864 7506 Internet: 71034.2711@compuserve.com [71034,2711 viaCompuserve] (Vince Miller, Jim Elwood) Notes: Promotes liberty in 80 countries. Produces literatureseries including "Ending Our Drug Nightmare" and"Looting of America". Iowa Grassroots Party / Ames NORML PO Box 1136 Ames, IA 50014 Phone: (515) 233 6081 (Dr. Derrick Grimmer) Notes: Iowa's largest vote-getting 3rd party since itsinception in 1990. Iowa NORML / Iowans for Medical Marijuana Carl E. Olsen PO Box 4091 Des Moines, IA 50333 Phone: (515) 243 7351 Internet: carlolsen@dsmnet.com, iowanorml@commonlink.com, 73043.414@compuserve.com, Carl_E._Olsen@commonlink.com Note: Iowa NORML publishes a quarterly newsletter. Island Group 1803 Mission St. Suite 175 Santa Cruz, CA 95060 Phone: (408) 427-1942 Kalamazoo Cannabis Action Network C/- Western Michigan University Faunce Student Services Box 84 Kalamazoo, MI 49008 Lawrence, KS NORML PO Box 442478 Lawrence, KS 66044 Phone: (913) 832-9074 Internet: David Almquist <lawnorml@databank.com> Notes: We publicly protest the laws against hemp everySaturday night and noon on Sundays in downtown Lawrence with an array ofsigns including "Honk For Hemp". Last contact: Jan 95 Legalize? SIG PO Box 3240 Charlottesville, VA 22903 Internet: jeg5s@uva.PCmail.virginia.edu Notes: This is a MENSA Special Interest Group, open only toMENSA members. Libertarian Party 1528 Pennsylvania Ave. SE Washington, DC 20003 Phone: (202) 543 1988 or (800) 682 1776 Notes: USA's 3rd largest political party, pro-legalizationplatform. Libertarian Party of Iowa PO Box 1041 Waterloo, Iowa 50704 Phone: (319) 235 2894 Fax: (319) 232 8407 (Randy Herod) Little Sisters of the Mother Herb Route 1 Box 2142 Crewe, VA 23930 (Sandy Hayer) Phone: (804) 645 1038 Lone Reefer, The PO Box 515 Harmony, PA 16037 Phone: (412) 766 1842 Louisiana Cannabis Action Network 1025 Foucher New Orleans, LA 70115 Phone: (504) 899 1960 Last update: Apr 95 Los Angeles NORML 8749 Holloway Drive West Hollywood, CA 90069 Phone: (213) 652 8654 (Bruce Margolin) Maine Vocals PO Box 189 Anson, ME 04911 (Don Christen) Mankato State NORML PO Box 3663 Mankato, MN 56002-3663 (Ed Kroce) Notes: Active NORML chapter at a southern Minnesotauniversity. Working on informing the public, elected officials, and makingmarijuana relegalization a public debate. Marijuana Policy Project PO Box 77492 Washington, DC 20013 Phone: (202) 462 5747 Fax: (202) 232 0442 Internet: MPProject@AOL.COM Notes: The MPP's mission is to provide the marijuanalaw-reform movement with full-time, organized lobbying on the federal level.Membership dues are $50 annually or $5 monthly. Members receive themonthly newsletter, "Marijuana Policy Report." Last contact: Feb 95 Marylanders for Drug Policy Reform 2499 Davidsonville Road Gambrills, MD 21054 Phone: (410) 721-0129 Massachusetts Cannabis Reform Coalition (MASS CANN) 1 Homestead Road Marblehead, MA 01945-1122 Phone: (617) 944 2266 (CANN) (Bill Downing, Steven Epstein) Medical Marijuana Restoration Association 3745 17th St. San Francisco, CA 94114 Phone: (415) 864 1961 (Dennis Peron) Michigan Hemp Coalition PO Box 4935 East Lansing, MI 48826 Phone: (517) 484 8287 (Dan Patterson) Notes: MHC is a coalition of all the hemp groups in Michigan. Mid-South Tennessee NORML PO Box 254 Pulaski, TN 38478 Phone: (615) 565 3898 (Kenny Breeding) Milwaukee NORML 207 E Buffalo Street PO Box 92251 Milwaukee WI 53202 Phone: (414) 273-HEMP (Tom Scannell) Minnesota Grassroots Party PO Box 6197 Minneapolis, MN 55406 Phone: (612) 722 4477 Fax: (612) 729 2048 (Steve Anderson) Internet: stevea@geom.umn.edu Notes: Minnesota's largest vote-getting 3rd party since its inception in 1986. Last contact: Mar 95 Minnesota NORML PO Box 80522 Minneapolis, MN 55408 Phone: (612) 822 3396 Fax: (612) 777 4853 (Tim Davis) Notes: Affiliate of national NORML, active in publicoutreach, lobbying, and relegalization agitation. Missouri NORML 15 N. 10th Street Columbia, MO 65201 Phone: (314) 443 6866 Fax: (314) 443 1413 (Dan Viets) Mood For A Day POB 903 West Jordan, UT 84084 Phone: (801) 254 0278 Notes: Local hemp group, publishes a quarterly tabloid,"Regrowth", subs. $5 MOTHERS AGAINST MISUSE and ABUSE (M.A.M.A.) 2255 State Road Mosier, OR 97040 Internet: mama@igc.apc.org Notes: Founded in 1982 - Approach based on personal responsibility and informed decision making. Last Contacted: July 93 Movement Support Network Center for Constitutional Rights 666 Broadway, 7th Floor New York NY 10012 Multidisciplinary Association for Psychedelic Studies, Inc.(MAPS) 1810 Tippah Avenue Charlotte, NC 28205 Phone: (704) 358 9830 Fax: (704) 358 1650 Internet: RICKMAPS@aol.com, st.maps@cybernetics.net Notes: A non-profit organisation of scientists and otherresearchers interested in the study of psychedelic drugs and theireffects. National Drug Strategy Network 1899 L Street, Suite 500 Washington, DC 20036 Phone: (202) 835 9075 Fax: (202) 833 8561 Note: We publish "NewsBriefs," a monthly newsletterwith news about drug abuse, drug enforcement, and drug policy from around theworld. National Organization for the Reform of Marijuana Laws(NORML) 1001 Connecticut Avenue, NW, Suite 1119 Washington, DC 20036 Phone: (202) 483 5500 Fax: (202) 483 0057 1-900: (900) 97 NORML [$2.95/minute] Internet: natlnorml@aol.com (Richard Cowen - Executive National Director) Notes: Oldest and most active drug reform organization. Nevada NORML Sean B. Kind 4542 E. Tropicana Ave. Box 142 Las Vegas, NV 89121 (702) 698-1500 Notes: Newly organized and eager to grow! New Age Patriot PO Box 419 Dearborn Heights, MI 48127 Phone: (313) 563 3192 (Bruce W. Cain) New Jersey NORML PO Box 680 Navesink, NJ 07752 Phone/Fax: (201) 827 4780 [(800) 742 2002 in New Jersey andPhiladelphia] (Ken Krug) New Options Inc PO Box 19324 Washington, DC 20036 Phone: (202) 822 0929 No More Drug War Foundation PO Box 18780 Denver, CO 80218 NORML Colorado 137 W. County Line Rd. #500 Littleton, CO 80126 Phone: (303) 470 1100 (Mark Culverhouse) NORML Green Bay PO Box 22081 Green Bay, WI 54305 Phone: (414) 498 0648 (Bobbie Brien) Notes: Working for the legalization of hemp/pot. Northcoast Ohio NORML PO Box 771154 Cleveland, OH 44107-0049 Phone: (216) 521 WEED (John Hartman) Internet: john4norml@aol.com Notes: Promotes annual freedom festival to benefit NORML,conducts rallies, offers legal referrals and drug test info. Meets the fourthThursday of every month at the Lakewood Public Library, 15425 Detroit Rd,Lakewood, OH. The meetings start at 7pm and are open to the public. North Idaho NORML 3310 Driftwood Drive Coeur d'Alene, ID 83814 Phone: (208) 773 3974 (Tom Klein) North Iowans for Cannabis Education (NICE) PO Box 1912 Mason City, IA 50401 Phone: (515) 696 5755 (Craig Howard) Notes: We found the "Grow Hemp for the War" poster. NAUN C/- NASSEN 55 Dock Street #112 Tacoma, WA 98402 Phone: (206) 272 4857 Fax: (206) 272 8415 (Dave Purchase) Note: Injecting Drug User Group Network, promoting drug lawreform, harm reduction, education, outreach, and research. Ohio Hempery 14 N. Court Street #327 Athens, OH 45701 Phone: (614) 593 5826, (800) BUY HEMP [Info Hotline] (Donald Wirtschafter) Notes: Sells a variety of legal hemp products, e.g. paper,linen, twine. Ohio NORML PO Box 36 New Plymouth, OH 45654 Phone: (614) 385 4167 (Cliff Barrows) Ohio University NORML 415 Carriage Hill Drive Athens, OH 45701 Phone: (614) 592 5118 (James Davis) Oklahoma NORML PO Box 12545 Oklahoma City, OK 73157 Phone: (405) 840 4367 (Michael Pearson) Oklahoma Tulsa Chapter NORML 1023 West 23rd Tulsa, OK 74107 Phone: (918) 583 9041 (C. Rabon Martin) Omaha Hemp Movement 3144 N. 57th Street Omaha, NE 68104 PARTIE Party / Save Our Constitution! PO Box 46853 Mt. Clemens, MI 48046 Phone: (313) 463 3486 (Marvin "Marvin Marvin" Surowitz) Notes: People's Alliance to Reform, Transform, and ImproveEverything Partnership for a Free America c/o Sameer Parekh 829 Paddock Lane Libertyville, IL 60048-3743 Phone: (708) 362 9659 Internet: pfa@ddsw1.MCS.COM Partnership for a Lie Free Government PO Box 29 Fairfield, KY 40020 (Chuck Porter) Notes: Supports Gatewood Galbraith for governor, and allpoliticians who will speak the truth. Partnership for a Responsible America (Texas) [Part RATEX] PO Box 926042 Houston, TX 77292 Phone: (713) 683 9639 (Richard Lee) Partnership for a Responsible Drug Policy 792 8th St. Lake Oswego, OR 97034 Phone: (503) 697 3974 (Anthony Taylor) Patriots of Truth for United Earth, The Bob and Peggy Ross Po Box 262 Rose Lodge, OR 97372 Pay for Schools by Regulating Cannabis (PSRC) PO Box 86741 Portland, OR 97286 Phone: (503) 229 0428 Notes: Voter-initated ballot to legalize and tax cannabis inOregon. Last contact: Mar 95 Penn State University NORML 529 South Pugh Street State College, PA 16801 Phone: (814) 867 2266 (Robert Kampia) Pittsburgh NORML PO Box 4839 Pittsburgh, PA 15206 Notes: Affiliated with Pennsylvania NORML. Pot o' Gold Newsletter PO Box 5448 Evanston, IL 60204 Fax: (708) 328 1922 Internet: pfraterdeus@igc.org Progressive Economic Alliances Cultivating Energy PO Box 623 Kula, Maui, HI 96790-0623 Phone/Fax: (808) 878 3630 Project for a Calculated Transition Green Haven Correctional Facility Drawer B Stormville, NY 12582 Quad Cities Hemp Coalition Box 3592 Rock Island, IL 61201 Religious Coalition for a Moral Drug Policy 3421 M St. NW, Ste. 351 Washington, DC 20007 Rocky Mountain HEMP Network (also Green Democrats ofColorado) 1090 S Wadsworth Blvd #D Lakewood, CO 80226-4308 Phone: (303) 838 1235 Saint Paul NORML PO Box 2865 St Paul, MN 55102 Phone: (612) 776 5467 Saint Petersburg Association for Cannabis Emancipation(S.P.A.C.E.) PO Box 505 St. Petersburg, FL 33737 Last update: Apr 95 San Diego NORML 4895 Guymon St. San Diego, CA 92102 Phone: (619) 263 5733 (Joe Cravotta) San Diego County NORML PO Box 171396 San Diego, CA 92197 Phone: (619) 281 8586, (619) 571 0088 Internet: sdnorml@pro-harold.cts.com (Charles Blue) San Diego Hemp Council Internet: sdhc@pro-harold.cts.com Sanduski County NORML PO Box 282 Freemont, OH 43420 Phone: (419) 334 8215 (Doug) Santa Rosa Junior College Hemp Club Address mail to: Santa Rosa Junior College Attn: Student Activities Office / Hemp Club 1501 Mendocino Avenue Santa Rosa, CA 95401 Save Our Constitution (1) PO Box 3079 Ann Arbor, MI 48106 Phone: (313) 746 9670 Save Our Constitution (2) PO Box 4935 East Lansing, MI 48826 Save Our Liberties 187 Acalanes Dr. #14 Sunnyvale, CA 94086-5520 Phone: (415) 964 3655 Notes: Sells "End the Drug War" Stamps forenvelopes (Not postage stamps). SIUC NORML Office of Student Development Student Center, SIUC Carbondale, IL 62901 Phone: (618) 529 4821 (Drew Hendricks, Jerome Handler [anthroplogy] - CampusAdvisor) Notes: Campus-based education about civil rights aspects ofmarijuana issue. Sonoma Civil Rights Action Project PO Box 410 Cazadero, CA 95421 Phone: (707) 847 3642 (Carol Miller) South Bend NORML PO Box 10176 South Bend, IN 46680 Phone: (219) 233 6581 [SG]; (219) 287 9809 [PS] (Sean Gloster, Pete Szaday) Southern California NORML PO Box 71093 Los Angeles CA 90071-0093 Phone: (213) 288 4152 (Lenny Shaw) Stop Forfeiture of Children's Homes PO Box 91 Waterbury, VT 05676 (Dr. Kathleen DePierro) Students for Drug Policy Reform University of Washington HUB 207 Box 121 FM-25 Seattle, WA 98195 Students for the Legalization of Marijuana (aka University of Illinois NORML) PO Box 4205 Urbana, IL 61801 Phone: (217) 352 4367 (Joshua Sloan) Susquehanna Valley NORML PO Box 10505 Harrisburg, PA 17105-0505 Phone: (717) 697 4255 (Casey) SVA Freedom Fighters 209 E. 23rd St. New York, NY 10010 Phone: (212) 679 7350 ext. 206 (Happy) Texas Hemp Campaign (aka Texas NORML) PO Box 13549 Austin, TX 78711 Phone: (512) 441 4099, (512) 837 4674 Internet: thc@hitex.austin.tx.us (Joe Ptak) Notes: Branches at Corpus - (512) 882 3009, Houston - (713)683 9639, and San Antonio - (512) 654 8720. Therapeutic & Ecological Applications of Cannabis Hemp(TEACH) PO Box 1297 Youngstown, FL 32466 (Robert Lawrence) Tide Water NORML PO Box 8861 Virginia Beach, VA 23450 Phone: (804) 425 9978 (Karen Trimper) TN NORML RR 1 Box 47A Goodspring, TN 38460-9801 Tree Free EcoPaper 121 S.W. Salmon, Suite 1100 Portland, OR 97204 Phone: (1-800) 775 0225 Internet: treefreeeco@igc.apc.org Notes: Wholesale suppliers of hemp paper and hemp pulp.Samples and analysis certificates available. Truth In Marijuana Education (TIME) PO Box 7036 Chico, CA 95927 Phone: (916) 345 1154 (Ed Ostler) Notes: Not for profit, hemp info. publisher/distributor. Notethat _High Times_ gives the address as PO Box 2036, Zip code 95972- this may be incorrect. Tucson Hemp Coalition Box 78093 Tucson, AZ 85703-8093 UB NORML SUNY at Buffalo Student Association 111 Talbert Hall Amherst, NY 14260 UMSOM (aka Michigan NORML) 11280 McKinley Taylor, MI 48180 Phone: (313) 287 9077 (Chuck Kyle) Union County NORML 271 Indian Trail Unionville Road Indian Trail, NC 28079 Phone: (704) 821 8478 (Jerry Morse) University of Kansas NORML (KUNORML) PO Box 45 Lawrence, KS 66044 Phone: (913) 841 8278 (Laura Green) Internet: kunorml@falcon.cc.ukans.edu Last contact: Jan 95 University of Kentucky HEMP Student Organizations Office 9 Student Center Lexington, KY 40526 Phone: (606) 258 8227 Internet: bmkrem00@mik.uky.edu or lmcost00@ukpr.uky.edu University of Massachusetts at Amherst Cannabis ReformCoalition (UMACRC) SAO mailbox #2, 415 Student Union Building, UMass, Amherst, MA 01002 Phone: (413) 546-3413 (Aaron Wilson) Internet: verdant@titan.ucs.umass.edu Notes: Non-students welcome... drop in! University of Minnesota NORML CMU 235 300 Washington Ave. SE Minneapolis, MN 55455 Phone: (612) 673 9412 [Marni Frish] Fax: (612) 777 4853 (Marni Frish, Matt Neis) Notes: Promotes marijuana legalization. US HEMP 461 W. Apache Trail, Suite 130 Apache Junction, AZ 85220 Phone: (602) 983 7065, +1 (800) 501 HEMP Internet: ushemp@ibm.net Notes: Manufacture of hemp buttonfly jeans, willie nelsonline, Vans Hemp tennis shoes, jean jackets, shorts. Call for freecatalog of hemp goods. Vermont FEAR (Forfeiture Endangers American Rights) PO Box 537 Waitsfield, VT 05673 (Denny Lane) Notes: Community awareness, public forums, grassrootsorganizing. Vermont Legislative Liason RR #1 Box 638 West Charleston, VT 05872 (Daniel Shea) Phone: (802) 895 4173 Vermont Vocals 19 Bay St. Newport, VT 05855 Virginia BACH Route 1, Box 2142 Crewe, VA 23930 Phone: (804) 645 1038 (Lennice Werth) VPI and SU NORML PO Box 654 Blacksburg, VA 24063 Phone: (804) 953 9189 Internet: norml@vt.edu or samills@vt.edu Notes: Registered student organization; an affiliate of NORML Last contact: May 95 Washington Citizens for Drug Policy Reform PO Box 1614 Renton, WA 98057 Phone: (206) 622 1456 Fax: (206) 682 9937 Internet: 3281350@mcimail.com Notes: Executive Director - Hal Nelson; Attorney - JeffSteinborn; Business Manager - Tom Cluck; Technical Director - Gerald X.Diamond. Washington Hemp Education Network (W.H.E.N.) PO Box 1217 Olympia, WA 98507 Phone: (206) 589 8981 Internet: 72643.3237@compuserve.com Last contact: Jan 95 West Virginia HEMP Inc. 700 Kanawha Dr. Sutton, WV 26601 Phone: (304) 765 7444 (Roger Belknap) William Patterson College NORML 300 Pompton Road Student Government Association Office Wayne, NJ 07470 Phone: (201) 473 2452 (Darrin Feder) Wisconsin NORML PO Box 3481 Madison, WI 53703 Phone: (608) 257 5456, (608) 257 HEMP Internet: bmasel@igc.apc.org (Ben Masel) WWU/NORML Viking Union Box E-9 Western Washington University Bellingham, WA 98225 Phone: (206) 671 8921 Internet: norml@henson.cc.uwu.edu *USA - INDIVIDUALS* Carol Moore PO Box 65518 Washington, DC 20035 Larry Rowland PO Box 4392 Danville, VA 24540-0107 Phone: (804) 793 9509 Sandy Wells Coolidge House 307 Huntington Ave. Boston, MA 02115 Daytime (617)-859-8237 Evenings " " 4921 * * * * * _High Times_ is a monthly magazine produced in the US,devoted to psychedelic drugs and alternative culture issues. Their address is: c/- Trans-High Corporation 235 Park Avenue South New York NY 10003 USA Phone: +1 212 387 0500 Internet: hightimes@igc.apc.org For subscription details, call 1-800-827-0228 within the US. * * * * * Citizens for Truth in Drug Education (Maddi Webster & Steve Drury) P.O. Box 381813 Cambridge, MA 02238-1813 (617) 944-2266 DARE watchdog group Colorado Parents Against DARE (Gary Peterson) 1805 Crestmore Place Fort Collins, CO 80521 (303) 493-2290 North Carolina Parents Against DARE (Steve Wallace) 933-2997 CliffSchaffer's Home Page WT01-B29-83IA086-000619-B002-92http://206.61.184.43:80/schaffer/GovPubs/currsmug.htm 206.61.184.43 19970122032043 text/html 87115HTTP/1.0 200 OKDate: Wednesday, 22-Jan-97 03:20:31 GMTServer: WebSitePro/1.1f (S/N wpo-0deb)Allow-ranges: bytesContent-type: text/htmlLast-modified: Saturday, 28-Dec-96 06:15:37 GMTContent-length: 86897 Money Laundering: Drugs - Cocaine - Marijuana Money Laundering: U.S. Efforts To Fight It Are Threatened By Currency Smuggling (Chapter Report, 03/09/94, GAO/GGD-94-73). U.S. banking and tax laws require the filing of reports oncurrency transactions exceeding $10,000. People disguisingillicit income are sidestepping U.S. reporting rules by smugglingcash out of the country--apparently with relative ease. Once thefunds are deposited in a foreign financial institution, they aremuch harder to trace and can be spent or transferred back to theUnited States with less risk of exposure. Treasury Department andU.S. Customs Service officials have no way to estimate the amountof currency being smuggled, although law enforcement officialsGAO spoke with believe that the amount issubstantial--potentially billions of dollars each year. Inaddition to discussing the extent of currency smuggling, thisreport describes the techniques used to smuggle currency and U.S.efforts to curtail it. --------------------------- Indexing Terms----------------------------- REPORTNUM: GGD-94-73 TITLE: Money Laundering: U.S. Efforts To Fight It AreThreatened By Currency Smuggling DATE: 03/09/94 ************************************************************************** * This file contains an ASCII representation of the text of aGAO * * report. Delineations within the text indicating chaptertitles, * * headings, and bullets are preserved. Major divisions andsubdivisions * * of the text, such as Chapters, Sections, and Appendixes,are * * identified by double and single lines. The numbers on theright end * * of these lines indicate the position of each of thesubsections in the * * document outline. These numbers do NOT correspond with thepage * * numbers of the printed product. * * * * No attempt has been made to display graphic images,although figure * * captions are reproduced. Tables are included, but may notresemble * * those in the printed version. * * * * A printed copy of this report may be obtained from the GAODocument * * Distribution Facility by calling (202) 512-6000, by faxingyour * * request to (301) 258-4066, or by writing to P.O. Box 6015,* * Gaithersburg, MD 20884-6015. We are unable to acceptelectronic orders * * for printed documents at this time. * ************************************************************************** Report to the Chairman, Permanent Subcommittee onInvestigations, Committee on Governmental Affairs U.S. Senate March 1994 MONEY LAUNDERING - U.S. EFFORTS TO FIGHT IT ARE THREATENED BY CURRENCY SMUGGLING GAO/GGD-94-73 Currency Smuggling Abbreviations ===============================================================ABBREV BSA - Bank Secrecy Act CMIR - Report of International Transportation of Currency or Monetary Instruments CTR - Currency Transaction Report FinCEN - Financial Crimes Enforcement Network IRS - Internal Revenue Service Letter ===============================================================LETTER B-256098 March 9, 1994 The Honorable Sam Nunn Chairman, Permanent Subcommittee on Investigations Committee on Governmental Affairs United States Senate Dear Mr. Chairman: This report was prepared in response to your request toassess the extent to which currency and monetary instruments arebeing smuggled out of the United States in order to avoidreporting requirements. The report identifies what efforts arebeing taken to prevent the smuggling and discusses how efforts tocombat money laundering are affected. As arranged with the Subcommittee, unless you announce itscontents earlier, we plan no further distribution of this reportuntil 30 days from its issue date. At that time, we will send itto other congressional committees, various bureaus and officeswithin the Department of the Treasury, and other interestedparties. Copies will be made available to others upon request. The major contributors to this report are listed in appendixIII. Please contact me on (202) 512-8777 if you or your staffhave any questions concerning this report. Sincerely yours, Laurie E. Ekstrand Associate Director, Administration of Justice Issues EXECUTIVE SUMMARY ============================================================Chapter 0 PURPOSE ----------------------------------------------------------Chapter 0:1 A major weapon in this country's efforts to combat moneylaundering are banking and tax laws that require the reporting oflarge cash transactions. To avoid these requirements, currencyand other negotiable instruments are being smuggled out of thecountry. The Permanent Subcommittee on Investigations, SenateCommittee on Governmental Affairs, asked GAO to assess the extentof currency smuggling and determine what the Customs Service isdoing to curtail it. BACKGROUND ----------------------------------------------------------Chapter 0:2 Money laundering is the process of disguising illicit incometo make it appear legitimate. In 1970 Congress enacted the BankSecrecy Act as a major step in fighting money laundering. Theact's implementing regulations require that several types ofreports be filed, such as the Currency Transaction Report, whichbanks and other financial institutions are to file on currencytransactions exceeding $10,000. Another report is required fromanyone transporting more than $10,000 in currency or monetaryinstruments into or out of the country. In 1984, the InternalRevenue Code was revised to require an additional report. Personsengaged in a trade or business who receive more than $10,000 incash payments in a single transaction or series of relatedtransactions must file a report with the Internal RevenueService. Requirements to report large cash transactions have made itincreasingly difficult to disguise and conceal the huge amountsof cash that criminal activity such as drug trafficking cangenerate. According to law enforcement officials, oneincreasingly popular method of circumventing the reportingrequirements is to smuggle the currency out of the country. Oncethe funds are deposited in a foreign financial institution, theyare much more difficult to trace and can be spent or transferredback to the United States with less risk of exposure. RESULTS IN BRIEF ----------------------------------------------------------Chapter 0:3 Treasury and Customs officials said that the amount ofcurrency being smuggled out of the country cannot be determined.Moreover, because of the clandestine nature of smuggling, a soundbasis for estimates is difficult to establish. While estimatesvary, law enforcement officials GAO interviewed agreed the amountis substantial and could be billions of dollars a year. Smugglers use a variety of techniques and conveyances. Forexample, bulk shipments are sometimes driven across the border orhidden in air or ocean cargo shipments. Individuals have beenstopped attempting to board aircraft with several hundredthousand dollars in cash hidden on their bodies. Some have evenswallowed rolls of bills wrapped in condoms. The U.S. mail isalso being used to ship currency out of the country withoutreports being filed. Smuggling currency out of the country is relatively easy. Thenation has thousands of miles of unguarded borders; where portsdo exist, the inspection of outbound cargo and passengers is notgiven the same emphasis as inbound inspection. Althoughcomparative data are not available, the Customs Serviceacknowledges that most of its resources are devoted to inspectingpassengers and cargo entering the country. Nonetheless, in the4-year period ending September 30, 1992, the Customs Serviceinterdicted and seized $171 million in currency and negotiableinstruments that was being taken out of the country without beingreported. The level of effort given outbound inspections is generallydetermined at the local level, and resource allocations areconstrained by the necessity of maintaining an adequate level ofinbound interdiction efforts. However, Customs has recentlyincreased the Service-wide oversight of and emphasis on itsefforts to interdict unreported currency leaving the country. GAO'S ANALYSIS ----------------------------------------------------------Chapter 0:4 CURRENCY SMUGGLING CIRCUMVENTS REPORTING REQUIREMENTS --------------------------------------------------------Chapter 0:4.1 Faced with the difficulties of laundering money domestically,many individuals take currency and other negotiable instrumentsto other countries, where it can be put into the flow of commerceand returned to this country under an air of legitimacy. Theextent of the outbound currency problem is unknown, although someestimates are available. The 1984 President's Commission onOrganized Crime estimated that as much as $5 billion a year incurrency generated by the illegal drug trade was being taken outof the country. More recently, an Arizona law enforcementofficial has estimated that as much as $3 billion is beingsmuggled into Mexico or elsewhere every year just through thatstate's border. Although these are not analytically basedestimates, they are experts' assessments of the magnitude of theproblem. (See pp. 16 and 17.) Foreign and U.S. currencies are brought into and taken out ofthe country on a routine basis and for legitimate reasons. Infiscal year 1992 businesses and individuals filed over 32,000reports with Customs of almost $30 billion in currency andnegotiable instruments leaving the country. These reports can beused to trace the funds. Consequently, currency is being smuggledout of the country to avoid any record that would associateindividuals or businesses with large amounts of funds. (See pp.15 and 16.) A number of methods are being employed to smuggle currencyout of the country. Law enforcement officials GAO intervieweddescribed them as ranging from simple to complex. The variety ofconcealment techniques makes smuggling extremely difficult todetect. For example, currency has been found hidden on passengersand in luggage, commercial cargo, false compartments, vehicles,vessels, mail, and commercial aircraft. As with drugs, there haveeven been instances where individuals have swallowed currency ortaped it to various parts of their bodies. (See pp. 17 through28.) Individuals caught smuggling currency represent manynationalities and are stopped en route to a number ofdestinations. Consequently, no typical profile or country ofdestination exists. (See pp. 36 and 37.) CUSTOMS HAS HAD SOME SUCCESS IN COMBATTING CURRENCY SMUGGLING --------------------------------------------------------Chapter 0:4.2 The Customs Service has traditionally emphasized thoseprograms directed at inspecting the flow of persons and cargointo the country. Enforcement efforts to interdict illegalexports do exist, however, and include one program,"Operation Buckstop," specifically aimed at selectivelyinspecting passengers and cargo leaving the country to ensurethat currency being transported outside the United States isreported. (See pp. 29 and 30.) Customs does not collect data on a nationwide basis that canbe used to compare the resources used on inbound and outboundinspections. Outbound inspections, however, are the exceptionrather than the rule. Only 85 of the 338 Customs ports have staffperforming outbound inspections on a full-time basis. These stafftotal 130 of the 6,228 inspectors in Customs. (See p. 29.) GAO visited 28 ports in 11 Customs districts and found a widevariation in how and when Operation Buckstop inspections weredone. Resource constraints were a major factor in making thesedecisions. Other considerations included the perceived threat ofcurrency smuggling at particular ports, the adequacy offacilities to accommodate outbound inspections, and theavailability of specialized equipment for examining bulk cargo.(See pp. 29 through 32.) Customs efforts to combat currency smuggling have resulted insubstantial amounts of currency being interdicted. However,Customs officials acknowledged that the seizures represent only afraction of the amount that is probably taken out of the countryunreported. In the 4-year period ending on September 30, 1992,$171 million was seized by Customs inspectors as it was beingsmuggled out of the country. (See p. 34.) Fifty-two of Customs'338 ports reported 862 seizures totalling $42.4 million in fiscalyear 1992. (See app. II.) Most of the currency seized (71percent) was being smuggled on commercial aircraft, while 17percent of the seized currency was found on commercial oceanvessels. (See p. 38.) Eighty-six percent of the currency wasseized at 10 ports, and more than a third was seized at 1 port,New York's JFK airport. In the first 11 months of fiscal year 1993 seizures hadincreased to 913 for a total of $39.2 million. (See pp. 44 and45.) Increases over the number of seizures in fiscal year 1992could be related to an increase in smuggling activity, anincrease in Customs outbound inspection activity, or both. CUSTOMS EFFORTS TO IMPROVE AND INCREASE OUTBOUND CURRENCYINSPECTIONS --------------------------------------------------------Chapter 0:4.3 Customs has increased the oversight and emphasis givencurrency interdiction efforts on a nationwide basis. Theseefforts include the preparation of an Inspector's handbook toensure uniform procedures during Operation Buckstop inspectionsand special initiatives, such as testing the use of speciallytrained dogs to detect U.S. currency. In addition, certaingeographical areas and means of conveyance have been targeted forspecial attention. (See pp. 43 through 45.) The primary factor limiting any increase in OperationBuckstop initiatives is scarce resources. Any personnel,equipment, and funds directed to outbound interdiction effortsare generally at the expense of those Customs programs directedat inbound interdiction. Because its overall level of resources is not increasing, theCustoms Service is faced with the challenge of determining theappropriate balance between inbound and outbound interdictionefforts. (See pp. 44 and 45.) RECOMMENDATIONS ----------------------------------------------------------Chapter 0:5 GAO is not making any recommendations in this report. AGENCY COMMENTS ----------------------------------------------------------Chapter 0:6 Customs officials provided GAO with oral comments on a draftof this report. (See p. 45.) They said the report was factuallycorrect and an objective presentation of the problems faced byCustoms in combatting currency smuggling. INTRODUCTION ============================================================Chapter 1 Money laundering is the disguising or concealing of illicitincome in order to make it appear legitimate. Recognizing thatmoney leaves a trail that can be traced to an underlying crime,Congress has enacted legislation to make money laundering moredifficult to conceal and easier to prosecute. These efforts havebeen rewarded in that laundering money through U.S. financialinstitutions and businesses is now considered to pose anincreased threat to those seeking to disguise illicit cash. Law enforcement officials believe that successes incombatting money laundering have caused criminals to avoidstringent U.S. reporting requirements by smuggling the cash outof the country. Once across the border the money is much moredifficult to trace and can be more easily hidden under the guiseof normal business transactions. This report describes the knownextent to which currency and other monetary instruments are beingsmuggled out of the country, the methods used, and what CustomsService efforts are under way to interdict these funds. CRIMINALS FACE PROBLEMS IN DEALING IN LARGE AMOUNTS OF CASH ----------------------------------------------------------Chapter 1:1 Criminal enterprises such as drug trafficking generateenormous amounts of cash. It is estimated that the sale ofillegal drugs in this country could be as much as $100 billioneach year. Although the preferred medium of exchange is cash, thetransactions often are small and drug traffickers must contendwith a large volume of small-denomination bills. Although the process of money laundering has been broken downinto a number of steps, it is generally agreed by law enforcementand regulatory officials that the point at which criminals aremost vulnerable to detection is "placement." Placementis the concealing of illicit proceeds by converting the cash toanother medium that is more convenient or less suspicious forpurposes of exchange, such as property, cashier's checks, ormoney orders; or depositing the funds into a financialinstitution account for subsequent disbursement. Because of the problems associated with converting andconcealing large amounts of cash--about 450 paper bills weigh 1pound, so that $1 billion in $100 bills would weigh over 11tons--placement is perhaps the most difficult part of moneylaundering and is currently the primary focus of U.S. lawenforcement, legislative, and regulatory efforts to attack moneylaundering. REPORTING REQUIREMENTS HAVE INCREASED THE RISKS OF LAUNDERINGMONEY ----------------------------------------------------------Chapter 1:2 Federal efforts to detect placement and track theinternational movement of money and monetary instruments acrossthe nation's borders were significantly enhanced with the passageof the Bank Secrecy Act (BSA) in 1970. The act requiresindividuals as well as banks and other financial institutions toreport large foreign and domestic financial transactions to theDepartment of the Treasury. The implementing regulations of theact require the following reports: Currency Transaction Report (IRS Form 4789): this report mustbe filed by financial institutions\1 for each deposit,withdrawal, exchange of currency, or other payment or transfer,by, through, or to such financial institutions that involves atransaction in currency of more than $10,000. Currency Transaction Report by Casino (IRS Form 8362): thisreport must be filed for each currency transaction in excess of$10,000 by any licensed casino operating in the United Stateswith gross annual gaming revenues in excess of $1 million. Report of International Transportation of Currency orMonetary Instruments (Customs Form 4790): this report must befiled when currency or monetary instruments over $10,000 aretransported from or into the United States. Report of Foreign Bank and Financial Accounts (Treasury FormTDF 90-22.1): this report must be filed annually by U.S. personswho have a financial interest in or signature authority over bankaccounts, securities accounts, or other financial accounts in aforeign country that have a combined value in excess of $10,000. The act has been amended to provide substantial criminal andcivil penalties for institutions that fail to file the requiredreports and for individuals who deliberately evade certainreporting requirements. In addition to the BSA reports, Section 6050I was added tothe Internal Revenue Code in 1984 requiring any person engaged ina trade or business (other than financial institutions requiredto report under the Bank Secrecy Act) who receives more than$10,000 in cash payments in a single transaction or series ofrelated transactions to file a report with the Internal RevenueService (IRS). The Secretary of the Treasury requires the reportbe filed on an IRS Form 8300, Report of Cash Payments Over$10,000 Received in a Trade or Business. Data from the BSA reports and the Forms 8300 are maintainedon two computer databases. One is used by IRS in investigationsinvolving tax fraud and evasion. The other is used by lawenforcement agencies at the state and federal level in criminalinvestigations, not only of money laundering, but also inidentifying suspicious transactions that might indicate otherpossible criminal activity; evaluating the merits of anypotential criminal cases; and tracing, analyzing, or identifyingthe disposition of proceeds from any illegal activity. By far, the report most frequently filed has been theCurrency Transaction Report (CTR). In May 1993, we testifiedbefore the House Banking Committee\2 that over 95 percent of theBSA reports filed up to that time were CTRs and that since 1987the annual filings of CTRs had increased at an average rate of12.7 percent. We also pointed out that Treasury and lawenforcement officials generally believe that in the past,traditional banks and other financial institutions were theprimary means used by money launderers. The officials alsobelieve that increased efforts by federal regulatory and lawenforcement agencies, as well as enhanced cooperation by thebanks themselves, have significantly improved bank compliancewith the reporting requirements, making it much more difficultfor banks to be used for money laundering purposes. Given the increased level of risk, criminals must now pursuemoney laundering methods less susceptible to detection. One suchmethod is to take the cash out of the country, after which it isnot subject to U.S. reporting requirements and can bereintroduced into the financial system with the appearance oflegitimacy. -------------------- \1 As defined by Treasury, "financial institutions"include banks, federally regulated security brokers, currencyexchange houses, funds transmitters, check cashing businesses,and persons subject to supervision by state or federal banksupervisory authority. \2 Money Laundering: The Use of Bank Secrecy Act Reports byLaw Enforcement Could Be Increased (GA0/T-GGD-93-31, May 26,1993). OBJECTIVES, SCOPE, AND METHODOLOGY ----------------------------------------------------------Chapter 1:3 The Chairman of the Permanent Subcommittee on Investigations,Senate Governmental Affairs Committee, asked us to assess theextent to which currency is being smuggled out of the U.S. andidentify what efforts the Customs Service is taking to preventthe smuggling. Rather than attempt to provide a quantifiedestimate of how much smuggling is occuring, it was agreed that wewould present the estimates of knowlegeable law enforcementofficials. To address these objectives, we reviewed pertinent laws andregulations and an extensive body of published material,including congressional hearings and reports; academic andperiodical literature; and reports prepared by federal and stateagencies, private research associations, and other experts. Wealso met with knowledgeable officials and reviewed records withinthe Customs Service and the Financial Crimes Enforcement Network(FinCEN). To review ongoing interdiction efforts by Customs we obtainedService records and held discussions with knowledgeable Customsofficials at the headquarters, district, and port levels. To theextent possible, we verified the statistical information weobtained through a review of the source records and observations. We also visited Customs ports and district offices that werejudgmentally selected based on the locations having a high degreeof outbound interdiction activity. Overall, the Customs districtswe visited were responsible for 87.4 percent of all the outboundcurrency seizures during fiscal year 1992. We ensured that ourvisits included land border crossings with both Canada andMexico, seaports on both the Atlantic and Pacific coasts, andmajor airports throughout the country. To provide a basis forcomparison, we visited some smaller ports as well as ports thathad no outbound currency seizures. As shown in appendix I, we visited 11 districts and 28 ports.Since the sites were selected judgmentally as described above,the results of our work cannot be projected nationwide. At eachof the ports visited, we met with Customs officials and observedinspection activities. Where available, we analyzed documentationon outbound currency inspections and seizures. We attempted toidentify all the currency smuggling schemes that Customs haddetected and to determine the rationale for local differences ininterdiction efforts. To determine the status of efforts to combat outboundcurrency through the U.S. mail, we met with officials in both theCustoms Service and the Postal Service in Washington, D.C. Wereviewed the current status of proposed interagency agreementsand discussed the status of current inspection efforts. We provided the Customs Service with a draft of this reportand received oral comments from agency officials. We did our work between February 1992 and November 1993 andin accordance with generally accepted governmental auditingstandards. CURRENCY SMUGGLING IS BEING USED TO EVADE REPORTINGREQUIREMENTS ============================================================Chapter 2 Transporting large amounts of foreign and domestic currencyinto or out of the U.S. is legal and a relatively commonoccurrence. However, Treasury regulations require that thedestination, method of transport, and owner of the funds beidentified. Individuals attempting to remove large amounts ofillicit cash out of the country prefer to remain anonymous andthat the shipment be unrecorded. Consequently, they often resortto smuggling. The exact amount of money being smuggled out of the countryis unknown. Because of our open borders and the priority giveninbound interdiction efforts, billions of dollars in U.S.currency could be leaving the country each year unreported. REPORTING REQUIREMENTS FOR TRANSPORTING CURRENCY INTO OR OUTOF THE COUNTRY ----------------------------------------------------------Chapter 2:1 Businesses and individuals transport currency into or out ofthe country for a number of legitimate reasons. For example,financial institutions and exchange houses operating on theborder may need to take currency back into the country. Also,businesses and individuals may find they can negotiate betterdeals in foreign markets by having currency on hand. As discussed earlier (see ch. 1), any individual or businessthat transports more than $10,000 in currency or monetaryinstruments\3 into or out of the country must file a Report ofInternational Transportation of Currency or Monetary Instruments(CMIR) or face a fine or imprisonment. Generally, this filing ismade at the Customs port where the funds cross the borderalthough some CMIRs can be mailed to Customs headquarters inWashington, D.C. The information to be reported on the CMIRincludes the name and other identifying information of theindividual transporting the funds, the method being used totransport the funds, the amount being transported, the owner ofthe funds, and the destination of the funds. In fiscal year 1992, more than 200,000 CMIRs were filed toreport about $61 billion in currency entering or leaving thecountry. The amounts being transported can be quite large. Infiscal year 1992, 43 percent of the outbound CMIRs filed bybusinesses and 6.5 percent of the outbound CMIRs filed byindividuals were for amounts of at least $100,000. The largestoutbound business CMIR was for $72,852,579, while the largestoutbound individual filing was for $23,800,000. Overall, theaverage business CMIR was for $1,124,111, while the averageindividual CMIR was for $61,680. Table 2.1 provides a breakdownof the CMIRs filed by amounts reported, type of filer, andwhether the funds were entering or leaving the country. Table 2.1 Distribution of CMIRs Filed in Fiscal Year 1992 Amount Amount (billion (billion Direction Number s) Number s) -------------------- -------- -------- -------- -------- Inbound 124,786 $6.836 50,537 $24.057 Outbound 6,348 $0.389 26,123 $29.365 ------------------------------------------------------------ Source: U.S. Customs Service. Customs officials told us that there is no reason to assumethat the number of CMIRs being filed should be relatively equalfor inbound and outbound traffic and, as table 2.1 shows, theyare not. Since we do not know how many outbound CMIRs should havebeen filed, we cannot draw any conclusions about compliance withthe reporting requirements from the disparity between inbound andoutbound filings. -------------------- \3 As defined by Treasury regulations, "monetaryinstruments" include forms of payment that are bearernegotiable, such as traveler's checks and money orders. Forclarification purposes, the word "currency" as used inthis report will also refer to monetary instruments. THE AMOUNT OF CURRENCY BEING SMUGGLED OUT OF THE COUNTRY ISUNKNOWN ----------------------------------------------------------Chapter 2:2 Despite the fact that U.S. currency is routinely taken out ofthe country for legitimate purposes, Customs officials said thatcriminals are anxious to avoid the paper trail created by filinga CMIR. Thus, they resort to currency smuggling by carrying moneyout of the country in some surreptitious or concealed manner. Treasury and Customs officials told us that it is notpossible to measure accurately how much currency is beingsmuggled out of the country. Moreover, because of the inherentclandestine nature of the activity, it is very difficult toestablish a sound basis for estimates. These officials believe,however, that the millions of dollars in currency beinginterdicted (see ch. 3) represent only a small fraction of thetotal amount being smuggled. Currency smuggling has been recognized as a problem since atleast 1984, when the President's Commission on Organized Crimereported that as much as $15 billion of the $50 to $75 billion inillegal drug money then being earned in the United States movedinto international financial channels each year. Of the $15billion, as much as $5 billion was thought to be transported inthe form of currency, with the remainder being wired abroad afterdeposit in the U.S. banking system. A 1987 Customs Service report on money laundering methodsreported that the currency flow between two countries, Colombiaand Panama, and the United States indicated that approximately $1billion a year in U.S. currency was being returned to thiscountry, but a corresponding flow of U.S. currency was not beingreported as sent to those countries. Treasury's Financial Crimes Enforcement Network (FinCEN)reported in July 1992 that currency smuggling was extensive andappeared to be increasing. Nonetheless, the report concluded that"The extent of currency smuggling is subject to a great dealof conjecture." In February 1992 hearings before the Permanent Subcommitteeon Investigations, Senate Committee on Governmental Affairs,federal as well as state law enforcement officials expressedtheir concerns with the emerging trend of currency being smuggledinto Mexico. An Arizona Assistant Attorney General testified thatlaw enforcement personnel were aware of the export of cash drugproceeds and estimated that as much as $3 billion in U.S.currency a year was being smuggled out of the country fromArizona into Mexico or elsewhere. A Deputy Attorney General forCalifornia testified that individuals had been caught walkingacross the California border into Mexico with shopping bagscontaining as much as $500,000 in currency. However, as discussedbelow, Mexico is not the only destination of U.S. currency beingsmuggled out of the country. CURRENCY SMUGGLING METHODS VARY CONSIDERABLY ----------------------------------------------------------Chapter 2:3 Smuggling currency out of this country is relatively simplebecause of the nation's border characteristics and because of ourhistoric treatment of exports and outbound passengers.Geographically, the contiguous United States has approximately11,323 miles on two oceans and the gulf coast, 3,987 miles ofshared border with Canada, and 1,933 miles of shared border withMexico. While Customs maintains over 300 ports where vehicles andcargo can leave the country by air, land, or sea, there is littleto prevent a person leaving the country by simply crossing theborder at other locations. Smugglers use a variety of techniques to take money out ofthe country. The remainder of this chapter presents some examplesof methods used by currency smugglers, sorted by type ofconveyance used. AIR --------------------------------------------------------Chapter 2:3.1 Customs officials believe that smuggling currency bycommercial airlines has long been a preferred method, since (1)the passenger can stay close to his money during the transport,(2) so many destinations can be reached easily and quickly, and(3) so little preplanning is required. Passengers on commercialair carriers can smuggle currency concealed on their persons, inhand-carried baggage, or in the checked luggage compartments ofthe aircraft. Commercial flights can be direct routes to foreigndestinations or may connect with other domestic flights prior tooverseas departure. Customs provided us with several examples ofhow currency is smuggled out of the country on commercialairlines. In March 1988 Customs seized $402,334 from a passengerdeparting from Los Angeles International Airport en route toColombia. While performing a search for outbound currencyviolations, an inspector found a duffel bag with two 5-quartcooker/fryers packed in boxes. The unusual weight of the boxescaused the inspector to examine their contents, whereupon henoticed that the screws holding the bottoms of the appliances hadbeen tampered with. Upon removing the screws, the inspector foundbundles of U.S. currency stuffed into the bottoms of theappliances. In November 1988 Customs seized $1,017,832 being transportedin checked baggage from Miami to Colombia. The currency consistedprimarily of $20 bills stacked in groups of 100 and bound byrubber bands. The currency was packed among the wiring inelectric space heaters and in suitcases. A follow-upinvestigation resulted in the seizure of an additional $2,400,000from a garage at the residence of one of the violators identifiedin the investigation. This currency was wrapped in foil andconcealed in microwave ovens and heaters awaiting shipment. In January 1991 a Chicago O'Hare security guard at the X-raysecurity point observed a large amount of currency hidden in afalse-bottom briefcase. The guard notified Customs officials, whoresponded by performing a search of passengers boarding theflight to Paris, which had a connection to Hong Kong. The CMIRrequirement was announced over the intercom prior to passengersboarding the flight. The suspected violator approached aninspector and declared $9,650. He was told that he had to declarecurrency only if it exceeded $10,000. While boarding theaircraft, the suspect was stopped in the jetway and advised againof the currency requirement. He orally declared $100,000 but thencompleted a CMIR for $105,000. He again was afforded anopportunity to amend his declaration and did so for $170,000.Customs' inspection disclosed the suspect was carrying $184,200,which was then seized. In September 1992 federal and state authorities performed anoutbound currency search of a commercial carrier's crew membersdeparting from New York-JFK with final destination to Colombia. Aflight attendant was stopped and informed of the currencyreporting requirement. She declared a total of $1,000. Uponexamination of her hand-carried crew bag, a Customs inspectorfound $2,600 in a roll of toilet paper, $12,400 in an envelope,$20,000 in a wooden box, $1,627 in her wallet, $5,000 in acarry-on garment bag, $40,000 in a box of laundry detergent, and$13,300 in her jacket pocket. In total, she was carrying $95,541.The money was seized and the flight attendant was arrested. Currency smugglers have become more sophisticated in theirconcealment methods as Customs has targeted international flightsfor outbound searches. One such technique is concealment on orwithin the body itself. Figure 2.1, for example, shows anindividual who had strapped money to his waist and anotherindividual with money taped to his lower body. Customs documentedone case at New York-JFK where a woman had swallowed $7,500 in 15condoms, hidden $3,500 in 7 condoms in a body cavity, andconcealed $47,894 in her baggage. Figure 2.2 shows examples of money being extracted from alotion bottle and currency secreted in a false-bottom briefcase. Figure 2.1: Examples of Individuals Attempting to SmuggleCurrency by Concealment on the Body (See figure in printed edition.) Source: U.S. CustomsService. Figure 2.2: Examples of Attempts to Smuggle Currency inPersonal Baggage (See figure in printed edition.) Source: U.S. CustomsService. Currency smuggling by air is not limited to passengers butalso may include air cargo. In the largest such detected case,inspectors at New York-JFK found $6,469,024 in 26 sealed metalcontainers. In another case, inspectors found $1,752,106 in cashand money orders in a water heater. Figure 2.3 is a Customsdiagram of how this money was concealed. In still another case,airline employees accidentally pierced the support railing on apallet containing empty fruit boxes, eventually leading to thediscovery of $989,915 hidden in hollowed-out portions of thewood. Figure 2.3: Diagram of Hot-Water Heater Used to Conceal$1,752,106 in Currency (See figure in printed edition.) Source: U.S. CustomsService. LAND --------------------------------------------------------Chapter 2:3.2 Smuggling currency across land border crossings lacks some ofthe advantages of using air carriers. First, there are only twocountries--Mexico and Canada--that border the United States. Ifthe actual currency is bound for some other country, it still hasto be converted or shipped again from the intermediate stop.Also, the smuggler must physically go to the border rather thansimply board an international flight. At the same time, border crossings offer advantages forsmugglers. Customs presence tends to be less at the outboundstations, and inspections are infrequent because they createmassive traffic jams. Even if outbound searches are beingperformed, the individual still can wait until the last minute toturn around, seek another crossing, or prepare a CMIR. If thesmuggler wishes to exit at an official crossing, Customsmaintains 98 ports on the Canadian border and 36 on the Mexicanborder. Also, the smuggler can easily carry the currency acrossthe border at some point where it is not patrolled. Another advantage of land border crossings is that thesmuggler often has a vehicle in which to conceal currency.Customs agents have found currency in obvious locations, such ason the seat and in the trunk, as well as in concealed locations,such as false compartments, dashboards, and door panels. Customsofficials said that unless they have some evidence that theseunusual concealment methods are being used, they are not likelyto perform the detailed searches necessary to disclose the hiddenfunds during routine inspections. Figure 2.4 shows some of the problems associated withpreventing currency smuggling at land border crossings. In manylocations on the Canadian border there is no Customs presence atall, and individuals and vehicles can cross the border at will.For example, one picture shows a crossing on an isolated countryroad in Vermont while another shows a crossing on a residentialstreet in a Vermont town. Another picture shows the unpatrollednature of the border in a Washington town, where an individualcan enter Canada simply by walking across a park. Figure 2.4: Typical Unpatrolled Crossing Points on theU.S.-Canadian Border (See figure in printed edition.) Even where Customs does have a checkpoint, the emphasis isgenerally on inbound traffic. Figure 2.5 graphically illustratesthe differences in control of inbound and outbound traffic on theMexican border. In this typical crossing at San Ysidro,California, there is a considerable backup on the Mexican side,while cars and pedestrians from the United States cross intoMexico unimpeded. Figure 2.5: U.S.-Mexican Border Crossing at Otay Mesa,California (Inbound on Left, Outbound on Right) (See figure in printed edition.) In another example of currency being smuggled across a landborder, Customs stopped an individual crossing into Mexico as apedestrian at Otay Mesa, California. When asked if he hadcurrency to declare and informed of the CMIR requirement, theindividual told the Customs agents he was carrying $9,000. Asearch of the individual disclosed $14,010 in a portfolio, $2,126in his pants pockets, and $200 in his wallet. After he refusedonce more to complete a CMIR, Customs seized the currency--exceptfor $200 he was allowed to keep in order to continue on to hisstated destination--and allowed the individual to leave thecountry. A follow-up investigation revealed that this individualhad submitted CMIRs during previous crossings, proving that hewas aware of the reporting requirement. In another case, four individuals were crossing the border atHidalgo, Texas, in a van. Asked by Customs if they had currencyto declare, they responded that they did not. After a searchlocated two suspicious envelopes, they again were asked and againresponded that they had nothing to declare. A search of theenvelopes led to the seizure of $18,657 and the arrest of two ofthe occupants. In November 1990, Customs inspectors and Border Patrol agentslocated in Holland, Vermont, seized $1,289,700 destined forCanada. The violators were arrested for attempting to transportunreported currency out of the United States using heavy-dutyall-terrain vehicles on a back road. SEA --------------------------------------------------------Chapter 2:3.3 Smuggling money by commercial shipping is even morecumbersome than by land, since (1) it may require the use ofother parties such as exporters or ship personnel and (2) thesmuggler may be physically separated from the currency for longperiods. At the same time, however, shipping offers certainadvantages for smuggling. Ships leave U.S. harbors bound forcountries around the world, and ship cargo typically involvessuch large containers that currency is very easy to conceal anddifficult to detect. Customs recently has begun to target sea shipments foroutbound inspections, and several large dollar value seizureshave been made. In September 1989, for example, Customsinspectors in Newark seized $763,240 that had been concealedbeneath the floor of a refrigeration unit in a ship bound forColombia. In July 1992, Customs inspectors at the Newark seaport seized$7,175,161 from two 20-foot containers loaded with dried peas onboard a vessel destined for Colombia. The violator, a packing andshipping company, had freshly painted each container in order toconceal the false front walls. A subsequent investigation led tothe seizure of an additional $4,000,000 when a suspect wasapprehended at his residence, bringing the total seizure amountto over $11 million. According to Customs, the violator said theseizure represented approximately 1 month's drug profits. In March 1992 the press reported that Panamanian authoritieshad seized $7.1 million from two containers on a ship inboundfrom Miami. The money had been scheduled for deposit in a Spanishbank in Panama. The money launderer was believed to have beenusing a U.S. paper company as a front for his operations. A report prepared by Customs Office of Intelligence inJanuary 1989 noted that smugglers were likely to continue theiruse of commercial shipping due to the minimal risk involved. MAIL --------------------------------------------------------Chapter 2:3.4 Federal law enforcement agencies agree that a significantamount of currency is being sent out of the country through theU.S. mail and commercial carriers without being reported.Officials at Customs, the U.S. Postal Inspection Service, andFinCEN said that although the extent of the problem could not bemeasured, the U.S. mail and private mail couriers are being usedto send currency (primarily money orders) out of the countrywithout the required CMIR being filed. The volume of mail andpackages leaving the country each day--as well as the largeamount of currency that a single package can hold--makes this arelatively easy and safe means of smuggling money out of thecountry. An intelligence report issued by Customs in January of 1989cited several cases that lend credibility to the belief thatsmugglers use mail and international air courier companies tosmuggle currency overseas. In March 1988, for example, Customsofficials in Los Angeles reported that they were working a jointinvestigation with Newark, New Jersey, involving the shipment ofcashier's checks for amounts under $10,000 to Panama in which thesmuggler used three private delivery services and the U.S. PostalService. More recently, a Customs inspection at a private carrier'shub in Memphis found large amounts of currency in packagessupposedly carrying business documents. One of the packagescontained $30,000 in money orders, the second $30,000 intraveler's checks, and the third $16,800 in money orders.Although the packages were sent by two separate entities, allwere bound for Colombia. Similarly, the Postal Inspection Service has seized currencybeing mailed to overseas locations during its own moneylaundering investigations. Specific data on the number and dollaramount of seizures made by the Inspection Service areunavailable, but the Service estimates that as many as 25separate criminal organizations are involved in sendingunreported currency and money orders out of the country through 1major airport on the East Coast alone. CUSTOMS HAS HAD SOME SUCCESS IN COMBATTING CURRENCY SMUGGLING ============================================================Chapter 3 In order to collect revenues and interdict illegal imports,most Customs resources are dedicated to inspecting passengers andcargo entering the country. Even so, the Service does have anationwide effort under way to interdict illegal exports.Included in this initiative is one program specifically aimed atthe interdiction of currency being smuggled out of the country. In the 4-year period ending in September 1992 Customs seizedover $170 million in unreported currency. Although this is asubstantial amount, Customs officials acknowledge that it issmall in comparison to the amount that is probably leaving thecountry undetected. Recent Customs initiatives have increased the direction andemphasis given to efforts to curb currency smuggling. Given alimited pool of resources, however, any increase in outboundinspection programs is generally at the expense of Customs'inbound interdiction efforts. OUTBOUND INSPECTIONS FOR UNREPORTED CURRENCY AND OTHERILLEGAL EXPORTS ----------------------------------------------------------Chapter 3:1 The Customs Service has traditionally emphasized thoseprograms directed at inspecting the flow of persons and cargointo the country. Relatively few resources have been devoted tooutbound inspections. Customs performs its outbound currencyinterdiction program as a part of an overall outbound enforcementeffort that includes other contraband items, such as precursorchemicals for the manufacture of illegal drugs, stolen vehicles,high-technology equipment, guns and weapons, and any materialbeing exported to embargoed nations. Customs does not collect data for measuring how much time andeffort are spent on outbound inspection efforts as opposed toinbound inspections. Based on the following statistics, however,outbound inspections appear to receive less emphasis than inboundinspections: Only 85 of the more than 300 ports have dedicated outboundenforcement teams. However, these 85 ports include many of themajor ports, including international airports. Of the 6,228 Customs inspectors nationwide, only 130 havebeen assigned to outbound inspections on a full-time basis as offiscal year 1993. Although no records are available on the level of outboundinspections, Customs officials said the rate was much lower thanfor inbound traffic, where about 8 percent of cargo is subject toinspection. Of the various Customs programs targeting illegal exports,one program--"Operation Buckstop"--is specificallyintended to prevent the unreported export of currency from theUnited States. Historically, outbound inspections for the purposeof interdicting currency were done at only a few locations and asspecial operations. The locations chosen for the inspections werelimited to suspected routes of unreported currency destined fornarcotic producing and bank-haven countries. Operation Buckstopwas initiated as a nationwide special operation in February 1986,and between 1988 and 1991 it was expanded and incorporated withother national outbound enforcement programs. Today, Operation Buckstop is the generic term for all CustomsService efforts to inspect outgoing passengers and cargo tointerdict currency being smuggled out of the country. In general,these efforts mirror inbound inspections. Individuals and cargoshipments are screened and some are chosen for more detailedexamination based on the judgment of the Customs inspector.Because of limited resources and the emphasis on inboundinspections, however, outbound inspections are the exceptionrather than the rule. Consequently, Customs is very selectivewhen targeting ports for implementing a Buckstop operation. According to Customs officials, there is no typical OperationBuckstop inspection effort. Participation and specific operatingprocedures are left to the discretion of individual Customsdistrict offices and ports. Some Operation Buckstop efforts areport initiatives, while others are coordinated at the districtlevel. Some districts and ports have inspectors specificallydedicated to Buckstop inspections on a full-time basis. Othershave a cadre of inspectors dedicated to outbound inspections,some of whom participate in Buckstop efforts. Finally, somelocations use whatever inspectors are available at the time. Districts and ports also vary in the number of inspectorsinvolved and the frequency with which they perform Buckstopinspections. For example: The San Diego district has a designated team of inspectorsfor Buckstop operations that rotates among the seven ports withinthe district. One day the team may be at the San Ysidro landborder crossing, the next at the international airport, and thenext at the seaport. Some large airports, such as Los Angeles International (LAX)and New York-JFK, have dedicated teams of Buckstop inspectorsthat work selected flights but differ on the frequency ofinspections. Inspections at LAX are performed 8 hours a day,while outbound inspections at New York's JFK are performed from 6a.m. to midnight. Only a limited number of flights can betargeted for inspections, based on the workload and theavailability of the dedicated inspectors. In the St. Albans, Vermont, district, an outbound inspectionthat includes Buckstop efforts is performed at land bordercrossings for a 24-hour period once every 6 months. There are nofull-time outbound or Buckstop teams; rather, the inspectorsavailable at the time perform the inspections. To augment these efforts, Customs headquarters and some ofthe ports involved in Operation Buckstop have developed specialinitiatives from time to time. For example, we identified thefollowing during our site visits: Operation Million Air. This effort specifically targetedprivate aircraft. In San Diego, it included Customs' Office ofEnforcement agents, personnel from Customs' Command CommunicationIntelligence Unit, and special agents from the Federal AviationAdministration. The first operation resulted in five seizures,two of them involving a total of $223,786 in currency. Operation Pistachio. In this effort, Chicago O'Hareinspectors specifically targeted weekend flights, becauseOperation Buckstop normally is restricted to the regular workweek. Currency seizures totalling over $350,000 from previousinspections prompted this initiative. Operation Backdoor. The Nogales, Arizona, district targetedtwo land border crossings and seized nearly $400,000 frommotorists over an 8-month period. This effort was similar to oneknown as "Operation Pipeline" in Blaine, Washington. Operation Cyclops II. This initiative resulted in the seizureof over $1 million in negotiable monetary instruments passingthrough Los Angeles International Airport. Five arrests were alsomade. As with all inbound or outbound inspections, OperationBuckstop inspections are performed by port personnel workingunder the authority of Customs' Office of Inspection and Control.If the inspectors determine that an individual is in violation ofthe reporting requirements during their examinations, theindividual is detained and the local Office of the U.S. Attorneyis contacted to determine the likelihood the case will beprosecuted and what action to take. For variousreasons--including an extensive caseload of higher priorityoffenses--the U.S. Attorney may decline to prosecute. In thisevent, Customs can still seize the currency and seek civilforfeiture of the funds. If the amount in question is less than$500,000, the forfeiture may be pursued administratively. Resource constraints contribute significantly to determiningwhen and where Buckstop inspections are performed. At the portsvisited, we found that the staffing on outbound enforcement teamsranged from a minimum of 3 to a maximum of 20 persons. Tosupplement their staffing, some districts and ports obtainassistance from the National Guard, state and local authorities,and special task force operations. However, the extent to whichthese resources were used varied, and no records were kept todetermine the level of effort expended. Customs officials said the lack of resources was not merely amatter of personnel. They noted that much of the traffic leavingthe country is bulk cargo, which is difficult to inspect withoutlarge and sophisticated equipment. Customs has a shortage of suchequipment and the equipment it does have--like thepersonnel-tends to be devoted to inbound inspections. To illustrate the level of Buckstop inspections, we obtainedstatistics from Chicago O'Hare, one of the country's busiestinternational airports. As of September 1992, an average of 1,888flights a month left O'Hare for foreign destinations. The numberof flights inspected each month averaged 64, from a low of 18 toa high of 135. An average of 32.17 percent of the passengers onthese flights was interviewed or otherwise subjected toinspections. These inspections resulted in 59 seizures ofoutbound currency totaling $1,759,328. Table 3.1 Operation Buckstop Inspections at Chicago O'Hare Airport,Calendar Year 1992 Number Number of Number of of Number of passengers checked flights passengers interviewe bags Month targeted departing d examined -------------- -------- ---------- ---------- ---------- January 18 2,095 1,087 1,090 February 27 3,281 1,455 2,414 March 21 3,160 1,413 427 April 33 5,120 1,570 458 May 104 19,127 10,712 1,011 June 57 11,152 1,976 638 July 92 14,443 3,716 5,418 August 87 14,199 4,498 2,802 September 135 22,490 7,864 2,451 October 57 9,124 2,199 1,393 November 72 10,962 2,098 536 December 65 10,397 1,806 1,648 ============================================================ Totals 768 125,550 40,394 20,286 ------------------------------------------------------------ Source: U.S. Customs Service. In June 1992 Customs dedicated 10 full-time inspectorpositions to outbound inspections at O'Hare. While this hasincreased coverage, the team typically works overlapping shiftsthrough the regular work week. These shifts result in coveragefor 13-1/2 hours daily. At the time of our visit, almost noinspections were made at other hours during the day or onSundays, except for special operations. SEIZURES OF CURRENCY BEING SMUGGLED OUT OF THE COUNTRY ----------------------------------------------------------Chapter 3:2 In fiscal year 1989 Customs began to accumulate statisticsfor all seizures of currency resulting from all outboundinterdiction efforts, including those seized as a result fromOperation Buckstop inspections. From fiscal year 1989 throughfiscal year 1992, Customs made 2,940 outbound currency seizurestotaling $171.3 million. Customs officials said that this figurerepresents only that amount that can be attributed to the directinterdiction of currency being smuggled out of the country. Wewere also told that on a number of occasions currency has beenseized during an investigation and it was later determined thatan attempt to smuggle it out of the country had been planned. Inthese cases, however, the seized currency is not counted asresulting from interdiction efforts. Table 3.2 shows the number and dollar values of outboundseizures since fiscal year 1989 compared to all currency seizuresmade by Customs over the same period. Table 3.2 Outbound and Total Currency Seizures, Fiscal Years 1989Through 1992 Percentage of seized rrency Amount All Amount attributable Fiscal Outbound (millio seizures (millio to outbound year seizures n) \a n) seizures ------ -------- ------- -------- ------- -------------- 1989 595 $ 22.0 4,102 $ 225.0 9.78 1990 821 52.5 4,222 446.0 11.77 1991 662 54.4 3,600 272.2 19.99 1992 862 42.4 3,507 220.6 19.22 ============================================================ Total 2,940 $171.3 15,431 $1,163. 14.72 8 ------------------------------------------------------------ \a Includes all seizures of currency by Customs includingseizures resulting from inbound, outbound, and other enforcementprograms Source: GAO analysis of Customs data. Due to the lengthy forfeiture process and the methods used tomaintain statistics, we were unable to determine the percentageof the above seizures actually resulting in forfeitures to thegovernment. Customs officials said that many of the smallerseizures are returned during the administrative adjudicationsafter a fine has been levied. However, most of the seizuresexceeding $100,000 are eventually forfeited. Figure 3.1 describesthe number and value of seizures of $100,000 or more made since1989. Figure 3.1: Number and Dollar Amount of Outbound Seizures of$100,000 or More (See figure in printed edition.) A relatively small number of ports account for the bulk ofcurrency seizures. However, as shown in figure 3.2, 10 of theseports accounted for about 85 percent of the $42.4 million seizedduring the year. New York-JFK alone accounted for more than athird of the seizures. (See app. II for a list of the 52 portsthat reported seizures in fiscal year 1992.) Figure 3.2: 10 Ports Accounted for Most of the OutboundCurrency Seizures in Fiscal Year 1992 (See figure in printed edition.) Customs does not maintain overall statistics on the number ofoutbound inspections made, so there is no readily available wayto determine the frequency with which violations are identifiedduring a Buckstop inspection. Customs officials at the ports wevisited told us that most outbound currency seizures result fromlabor-intensive "cold hit" examinations rather thanlong-term investigative actions. They also said that seizurescome from individuals of varying nationalities and headed fordestinations around the world, which makes it even more difficultto profile any particular suspects or target specific flights.Table 3.3 summarizes Customs' outbound currency seizures asdetermined by the violators' nationalities for fiscal years 1991and 1992. Table 3.3 Outbound Currency Seizures by Violator Nationality, FiscalYears 1991 and 1992 Number Number of Dollar of Dollar Violator seizures amount seizures amount nationality FY 1991 FY 1991 FY 1992 FY 1992 ------------------ -------- --------- -------- --------- North America 163 $10,460,1 267 $11,895,2 40 74 Central America 11 344,645 18 491,229 South America 99 10,194,25 185 9,620,764 6 Caribbean 16 394,262 51 1,092,771 Europe/Russia 27 1,828,738 56 1,537,783 Middle East 45 1,698,771 70 1,910,750 Far East 107 3,229,151 112 3,856,227 Africa 153 5,369,641 81 2,662,549 Unknown 41 20,860,19 22 9,371,172 3 ============================================================ Totals 662 $54,379,7 862 $42,438,5 97 19 ------------------------------------------------------------ Source: U.S. Customs Service. For fiscal years 1991 and 1992, smuggling attempts oncommercial airlines yielded the most seizures by dollar value. Asdiscussed in chapter 2, Customs officials believe that commercialair travel is a favored means for smuggling currency because thetravel time is short, the individual stays close to the money,and almost any destination is readily accessible. For thisreason, Customs tends to perform more outbound inspections atairports. Customs officials were not sure whether the largevolume of seizures on commercial airlines was due to this beingthe most prevalent type of conveyance or to this being the areawhere Customs devoted more resources. Table 3.4 shows theseizures for fiscal years 1991 and 1992 by method of conveyance. Table 3.4 Outbound Currency Seizures by Method of Conveyance, FiscalYears 1991 and 1992 FY 1991 FY 1992 percent percent FY 1991 of FY 1992 of dollar dollar dollar dollar Type of transport value value value value ------------------ --------- -------- --------- -------- Commercial $34,352,8 63.17 $30,109,4 70.95 aircraft 35 31 Land vehicles 3,895,267 7.16 3,822,489 9.01 Commercial vessels - - 7,372,766 17.37 Pedestrians 48,824 0.09 371,699 0.88 Private vessels - - 20,000 0.05 Bicycle - - 18,871 0.04 Unknown 7,765,299 14.28 - - Other 8,317,572 15.30 723,263 1.70 ============================================================ Totals $ 100.00 $42,438,5 100.00 54,379,79 19 7 ------------------------------------------------------------ Source: GAO analysis of Customs data. Customs officials believe that the impact of OperationBuckstop is much greater than the actual seizures appear to show.They said that the program is also resulting in additionalcompliance with CMIR requirements. They pointed out that inperforming the inspections, the inspectors often requiretravelers to complete a CMIR on the spot rather than seizing thecurrency. For example, Chicago-O'Hare made 59 seizures ofoutbound currency totaling $1,759,328 during calendar year 1992.Customs officials told us that during this same period, theycaused an additional $4,747,288 to be reported on CMIRs. PORT FACILITIES MAKE OUTBOUND INSPECTIONS DIFFICULT ----------------------------------------------------------Chapter 3:3 The physical location of outbound inspections can pose aproblem for Operation Buckstop that has no parallel for inboundinspections. When performing inbound inspections, Customs can keepindividuals or goods from being released until Customs officialshave conducted the necessary examinations. At each port, Customsmaintains a facility for these purposes. Outbound inspections are much harder to perform. One reasonis that individuals and businesses traditionally have beenallowed to leave the country without having to be inspected andare resistant to the delays and inconvenience involved inoutbound inspections. This difference is obvious in the aerialphotograph of the border crossing at San Ysidro, as shown inFigure 3.3. Note the backup on the inbound (Mexican) sidecompared to the no traffic backup on the outbound (U.S.) side.During Operation Buckstop inspections, the same type of backupwould take place on the outbound side. While conditions at seaports and airports are somewhatdifferent, the principle is the same. Outbound searches add tothe departure time. Customs officials said that even if they hadsufficient resources to perform the same level of outboundsearches they perform for inbound traffic, the resistance fromindustry and international passengers would be another factorthat would have to be considered. Figure 3.3: Aerial Photograph of the U.S.-Mexican BorderCrossing at San Ysidro, California (Outbound Lanes at Top, Inbound Lanes Below) (See figure in printed edition.) Source: U.S. Customs Service. OUTGOING U.S. MAIL IS PRECLUDED FROM OPERATION BUCKSTOPINSPECTIONS ----------------------------------------------------------Chapter 3:4 As we noted in chapter 2, federal law enforcement agenciesagree that a significant amount of currency is being sent out ofthe country through the U.S. mail and commercial carriers withoutbeing reported. Customs performs warrantless searches of parcelsbeing sent out of the country by commercial carriers, but thelegal authority of Customs to inspect outgoing U.S. mail withouta search warrant is a matter of dispute between Customs and thePostal Service. \4 Consequently, Customs inspects outbound mail only after ithas determined through an investigation that there is probablecause for obtaining a search warrant. As discussed in a previous report,\5 the Postal Servicebelieves that Customs does not have the statutory authority toinspect outgoing mail without a search warrant. As a result, thePostal Service has precluded Customs from initiating routine andrandom inspection efforts such as Operation Buckstop for U.S.mail being sent out of the country. Without the ability to perform warrantless searches, Customscannot conduct outbound inspection programs such as OperationBuckstop when the U.S mail is involved. Customs officials told usthey believe that if there were Operation Buckstop searches doneon the U.S. mail--even on the limited basis as done at otherborder crossings--millions of dollars in unreported currencywould be seized as well as the country's borders made more secureagainst other types of illegal exports. Customs and the Postal Service are aware of this problem andhave been working toward a solution. In July 1992, the agenciesbegan drafting proposed amendments to the Bank Secrecy Act andTitle 39 statutes governing postal operations under which Customswould perform warrantless searches of outbound mail. They alsobegan working on an agreement to implement warrantless searchprocedures should the amendments be enacted. However, as ofNovember 1993, Customs and the Postal Service had been unable toreach an agreement on either the proposed amendments or theworking arrangements. -------------------- \4 The authority of Customs to perform certain warrantlesssearches of mail coming into the country was upheld in a 1977Supreme Court decision (United States v. Ramsey, 431 U.S. 606(1977). \5 Export Controls: Use of the Mail to Illegally ExportSensitive Technology (GAO/C-NSIAD-90-31, May 18, 1990). CUSTOMS IS INCREASING THE EMPHASIS GIVEN OUTBOUND INSPECTIONS ----------------------------------------------------------Chapter 3:5 The Customs Service is aware of the impact of currencysmuggling on efforts to combat money laundering and hasimplemented several initiatives to emphasize the importance ofoutbound inspections to interdict unreported currency. Theseefforts are also designed to increase and improve management ofoutbound inspections on a nationwide basis. In its 1991 U.S. Customs National Financial EnforcementStrategy and Implementation Plan, Customs cited as a keyobjective the need to continue exploring and developing new andinnovative outbound operations in the private aircraft, cargo,passenger, land border, and courier areas. This directive alsoinstructed the district directors to integrate outbound currencyinterdiction initiatives into their district drug strategies. In an effort to increase the overall effectiveness ofoutbound currency searches through greater uniformity andcoordination, a Customs' survey team of headquarters and regionalstaff visited seven major airport locations participating in theOperation Buckstop initiative during 1991. The survey team'sobjective was to determine whether the success experienced inoutbound currency interdiction at Miami and New York-JFK wasattributable to a greater incidence of smuggling or to personnel,procedures, or strategies in place at these locations. In its report, the survey team acknowledged that eachlocation was facing increased pressures on inbound processing asthe number of flights and arriving passengers and cargo workloadontinued to rise. This workload, coupled with the ever-presentnarcotics threat, had caused Customs headquarters to direct localports to allocate resources accordingly. Fewer and less-intensiveOperation Buckstop operations resulted. The survey team made thefollowing conclusions and recommendations in order to increasethe overall effectiveness of Operation Buckstop: The outbound currency threat is "as great as ever"and Customs is not addressing the problem on a continuing basis.The ports should establish dedicated outbound teams that wouldconcentrate on Operation Buckstop. Resources are available that are not being fully used insupport of Operation Buckstop. Ports need to increase their useof such resources as the National Guard, state and local lawenforcement authorities, and joint task forces. Also, portsshould conduct special outbound initiatives using assetforfeiture funds when appropriate. The use of specialized equipment such as X-ray vans foroutbound currency interdiction under Operation Buckstop hasreceived lower priority than for incoming cargo. Customs needs topurchase more of this equipment. There are no national directives on training, procedures,intensity, or regularity of inspections required under OperationBuckstop. Program standards, such as a national directive, areneeded to resolve inconsistencies and reemphasize the importanceof Operation Buckstop. As a result of the airport survey report, Customs isdeveloping a national directive and establishing a National TaskForce to develop a handbook to ensure that minimum uniformstandards are adhered to during Buckstop operations. The draftsof these documents emphasize the factors management feels arecrucial for a successful outbound program, including effectivetargeting and thorough port threat assessments and good workingrelationships with Customs' Office of Enforcement. Customsdistricts were informed of these plans in May 1992, but, as ofNovember 1993, the directive and handbook had not yet been issuedin final form. On March 1, 1993, Customs initiated a joint operationinvolving the Service's Office of Inspection and Control andOffice of Enforcement. "Operation Outlook" is asustained outbound enforcement operation that emphasizes currencyinterdiction. Its purpose is to assess the threat of outboundcontraband, including unreported currency, on adistrict-by-district basis and determine the resources requiredto address the threat. Under Operation Outlook, Customs has takenseveral steps designed to enhance its ability to combat currencysmuggling. These include the following: Several dogs have been specially trained to detect concealedU.S. currency and are on duty at several ports on a test basis.These dogs have also been used to assist other ports in specialoutbound enforcement efforts. Certain conveyances, such as commercial parcel shipments,have been targeted and certain areas of the borders have been"blitzed" with additional staff and equipment resourcestemporarily assigned. Several efforts have begun to explore the feasibility ofincreasing the use of intelligence sources, both in Customs andother agencies, to better target specific cargo shipments andcarriers for outbound inspections. On the basis of the results of the first 6 months ofOperation Outlook, Customs is optimistic about the operation. Atotal of 599 outbound currency seizures were made from Marchthrough August of 1993, a substantial increase from the 499seizures made during the same time period in 1992. The 599seizures represented $26.6 million in currency. In the 5-monthperiod prior to Operation Outlook, October 1992 through February1993, 314 seizures totaling $12.6 million had been made. The Customs Service has also increased the significance ofcurrency smuggling in its strategic plan. The Customs 5-yearplan, released in September 1993, identified four goals that mustbe addressed in order for the Service to achieve its mission:Trade, narcotics, money laundering, and outbound enforcement. Theinterdiction of unreported currency is specifically highlightedunder both the money laundering and outbound enforcement goals. CONCLUSIONS ----------------------------------------------------------Chapter 3:6 Certain criminal activities, such as illegal drug sales,produce a tremendous amount of currency that would be regarded assuspicious unless it is disguised as legitimate. Consequently,U.S. efforts to combat money laundering rely heavily upon thereporting of transactions involving large amounts of cash. Toavoid these requirements, individuals have resorted to smugglingthe currency out of the country to spend or deposit it. The Customs Service is responding to the growing threat posedby currency smuggling by increasing national oversight of andemphasis on its outbound inspection programs. In general,however, any increase in outbound inspections reduces the levelof effort given inbound inspections. Determining the appropriatebalance between inbound and outbound interdiction efforts is anextremely difficult task. Moreover, the solution is unlikely toremain constant and will require periodic adjustments to reflectchanging circumstances. The Customs Service has demonstrated thatit is aware of the overall problem and the constraints it mustdeal with to address it. AGENCY COMMENTS ----------------------------------------------------------Chapter 3:7 We provided a draft of this report to the Customs Service toreview and asked for oral comments. On January 14, 1994, we metwith the Assistant Commissioner, Inspection and Control, and hisstaff, who told us that they agreed with the data and informationin the report. They also said that the report was an objectiveand balanced presentation of the problems Customs faced incombatting currency smuggling and accurately described theagency's plans to increase these efforts in the future. Theyoffered several editorial suggestions to clarify certaininformation, and we made these changes where appropriate. DISTRICTS AND PORTS VISITED BY GAO ===========================================================Appendix I Regions Districts Ports Type ------------ -------------- ------------------------ ---- Pacific Seattle, WA Seattle/Tacoma Air International Blaine Land Seattle Harbor Sea Los Angeles, Los Angeles Air CA International Los Angeles Seaport Sea Long Beach Sea San Diego, CA Brownfield Air San Diego International Air San Diego Sea San Ysidro Land Otay Mesa Land North Chicago, IL O'Hare International Air Central Detroit, MI Detroit Metropolitan Air Canadian Tunnel Land Ambassador Bridge Land Northeast St. Albans, VT St. Albans Rail Burlington Air Derby Line Land Norton Land Highgate Springs Land Alburg Land New York Newark, NJ Newark International Air New York, NY JFK International Air Southeast Washington, DC Dulles International Air Miami, FL Miami International Air Miami Seaport Sea Southwest Nogales, AZ Nogales Land Tucson International Air ============================================================ Totals 6 11 28 ------------------------------------------------------------ CUSTOMS OUTBOUND CURRENCY AND MONETARY INSTRUMENT SEIZURES BY REPORTING LOCATION FISCAL YEAR 1992 ==========================================================Appendix II Number of Domestic reporting District Reporting dollar Total by locations name location value district --------- ------------ ------------ ---------- --------- 01 JFK Airport, JFK $14,516,34 $14,516,3 NY 3 43 02 Newark, NJ Newark 9,062,944 9,062,944 03 Los Angeles, LAX 4,903,782 4,903,782 CA Internationa l Airport 04 Miami, FL Miami 385,748 2,153,462 05 Fort Pierce 45,595 Miami 06 Internationa 1,722,119 l Airport 07 San Diego, San Diego 88,430 1,898,889 08 CA Calexico 283,433 09 San Ysidro 604,272 10 Otay Mesa 922,754 11 Chicago, IL Chicago 1,757,477 1,757,477 12 Laredo, TX Brownsville 714,842 1,355,631 13 Laredo 209,550 14 Hidalgo 340,221 15 Rio Grande 79,900 16 City 11,118 Roma 17 Houston - Houston 1,293,033 1,293,033 Galveston, Internationa TX l Airport 18 Nogales, AZ Naco 51,600 933,456 19 Nogales 535,983 20 San Luis 20,000 21 Tucson 325,873 22 Detroit, MI Detroit 844,705 896,272 23 Sault St. 51,567 Marie 24 Seattle, WA Sea-Tac 538,481 538,481 Internationa l Airport 25 Honolulu, HI Honolulu 52,000 468,523 Honolulu 26 Internationa 416,523 l Airport 27 San San 390,885 390,885 Francisco, Francisco CA 28 Washington, Washington 314,687 314,687 DC 29 Ogdensburg, Massena 141,908 298,513 30 NY Alexandria 12,220 31 Bay 144,385 Champlain/ Rouses Pt. 32 Boston, MA Logan 281,337 281,337 Airport 33 San Juan, PR Mayaguez 19,432 257,150 San Juan Internationa 34 l 237,718 Airport 35 Portland, OR Portland 197,140 197,140 36 Dallas-Fort Dallas-Ft. 77,269 188,788 37 Worth, TX Worth 111,519 San Antonio 38 Tampa, FL Port 165,000 165,000 Canaveral 39 Baltimore, Baltimore, 133,676 133,676 MD MD 40 St. Albans, Highgate 116,000 116,000 VT Springs/ Alburg 41 Buffalo- Buffalo- 84,824 84,824 Niagara Niagara Falls, NY Falls, NY 42 Philadelphia Philadelphia 34,141 48,269 43 , PA Pittsburgh 14,128 44 El Paso, TX El Paso 47,694 47,694 45 New York, NY New York 26,915 26,915 Seaport 46 Anchorage, Anchorage 24,977 24,977 AK 47 Minneapolis Minneapolis 24,451 24,451 -St. Paul, -St. Paul MN 48 Great Falls, Salt Lake 12,752 12,752 MT City, UT 49 Pembina, ND Dunseith 12,592 12,592 50 Savannah, GA Atlanta, GA 12,475 12,475 51 Portland, ME Bangor $11,801 11,801 52 Cleveland, Louisville, 10,300 10,300 OH KY ============================================================ Total $42,438,5 19 ------------------------------------------------------------ Source: U.S. Customs Service. MAJOR CONTRIBUTORS TO THIS REPORT =========================================================Appendix III GENERAL GOVERNMENT DIVISION, WASHINGTON, D.C. -------------------------------------------------------Appendix III:1 Edward H. Stephenson, Assistant Director Michael L. Eid, Assignment Manager OFFICE OF GENERAL COUNSEL, WASHINGTON, D.C. -------------------------------------------------------Appendix III:2 Geoffrey R. Hamilton, Attorney/Advisor ATLANTA REGIONAL OFFICE -------------------------------------------------------Appendix III:3 Frankie Fulton, Regional Management Representative Clarence Tull, Evaluator-in-Charge Cheri White, Senior Evaluator Veronica Mayhand, Site Senior Bonnie Wrenn, Evaluator CliffSchaffer's Home Page WT01-B29-84IA086-000619-B002-116http://206.61.184.43:80/schaffer/GovPubs/peru1.htm 206.61.184.43 19970122032055 text/html 29195HTTP/1.0 200 OKDate: Wednesday, 22-Jan-97 03:20:48 GMTServer: WebSitePro/1.1f (S/N wpo-0deb)Allow-ranges: bytesContent-type: text/htmlLast-modified: Saturday, 28-Dec-96 06:13:14 GMTContent-length: 28977 U.S. Antidrug Efforts in Peru's Upper Huallaga Valley Drug Control: U.S. Antidrug Efforts in Peru's Upper Huallaga Valley (Letter Report, 12/07/94, GAO/NSIAD-95-11). Nearly two-thirds of the world's coca crop is grown in Peru.Most of that coca is processed into a cocaine base, which isflown to Colombia to make cocaine for shipment to the UnitedStates and Europe. Since the 1980s, the primary coca-growing anddrug-trafficking activities in Peru have been in the UpperHuallaga Valley. The United States has supported Peruvian effortsto eradicate coca seedbeds and conduct law enforcement operationsagainst drug traffickers. This report discusses (1) the rationalefor, and costs associated with, the construction, themaintenance, and the operations of the Santa Lucia base, anantidrug base in the Upper Huallaga Valley; (2) the subsequentrationale for discontinuing support of the Santa Lucia base; and(3) the current status of U.S. efforts to restructure antidrugprograms in Peru. --------------------------- Indexing Terms----------------------------- REPORTNUM: NSIAD-95-11 TITLE: Drug Control: U.S. Antidrug Efforts in Peru's Upper Huallaga Valley DATE: 12/07/94 * * * A printed copy of this report may be obtained from the GAODocument * * Distribution Facility by calling (202) 512-6000, by faxingyour * * request to (301) 258-4066, or by writing to P.O. Box 6015,* * Gaithersburg, MD 20884-6015. We are unable to acceptelectronic orders * * for printed documents at this time. * ************************************************************ Cover ================================================================COVER Report to Congressional Requesters December 1994 DRUG CONTROL - U.S. ANTIDRUG EFFORTS IN PERU'S UPPER HUALLAGA VALLEY GAO/NSIAD-95-11 Drug Control Abbreviations ===============================================================ABBREV CORAH - Coca Eradication in the Upper Huallaga Valley DEA - Drug Enforcement Administration NAS - Narcotics Affairs Section INM - International Narcotics Matters Letter ===============================================================LETTER B-258650 December 7, 1994 The Honorable John Conyers, Jr., Chairman The Honorable Alfred A. McCandless Ranking Minority Member Legislation and National Security Subcommittee Committee on Government Operations House of Representatives In response to your request, we are providing you informationon U.S. antidrug efforts in Peru. Specifically, we ascertained(1) the rationale for, and costs associated with, theconstruction, maintenance, and operations of the Santa Luciabase, an antidrug base in the Upper Huallaga Valley; (2) thesubsequent rationale for discontinuing support of the Santa Luciabase; (3) and the current status of U.S. efforts to restructureantidrug programs in Peru. BACKGROUND ------------------------------------------------------------Letter :1 Nearly two-thirds of the world's coca crop is grown in Peru.Most of that coca is processed into cocaine base, which is flownto Colombia to make cocaine for shipment to the United States andEurope. Since the 1980s, the primary coca-growing anddrug-trafficking activities in Peru have been in its UpperHuallaga Valley. During the early 1980s, the United States provided supportfor Peru to conduct manual eradication of mature coca leaf.However, because of security concerns for personnel conductingmanual eradication, these activities ceased in 1987. Gradually,the United States began to (1) support Peruvian efforts toeradicate coca seedbeds and (2) conduct law enforcementoperations against drug-trafficking activities. Before 1989, bothoperations were conducted by helicopter from Tingo Maria, about150 miles southeast of Santa Lucia, the center of illegal drugactivities. In 1989, the United States and Peru moved theiroperations to a base located near the town of Santa Lucia. Thebase, which became the center of U.S. and Peruvian eradicationand law enforcement operations, supported between 430 and 492personnel, including 32 U.S. personnel. The United Statescontinued to provide support to the base until late 1993. The mapon page 3 shows the locations of these bases. The Departments of State and Defense and the Drug EnforcementAdministration (DEA) coordinate antidrug activities with Peruvianlaw enforcement and military organizations. At the U.S. embassyin Peru, these functions are carried out by the Narcotics AffairsSection (NAS), the U.S. Military Assistance Advisory Group, andthe DEA Country Attache's Office. Other U.S. agencies alsoprovide support to Peruvian antidrug programs and operations. RESULTS IN BRIEF ------------------------------------------------------------Letter :2 The Santa Lucia base was constructed to serve as a securecenter to house and support antidrug forces responsible foreradicating coca and conducting law enforcement activities tostop the flow of illegal drugs from Peru through Colombia to theUnited States. Between fiscal years 1988 and 1993, the StateDepartment spent about $49.2 million to construct, maintain, andoperate the base. In fiscal year 1994, the Congress reduced theState Department's international Narcotics Control Program from$148 million to $100 million. In December 1993, the U.S. embassyrestructured its antidrug programs in Peru because it could notcontinue to support the base while also supporting other effortsrequired in the U.S. antidrug strategy. The restructuring effortsincluded (1) moving U.S. helicopter maintenance operations to aPeruvian naval base in Pucallpa (see fig. 1), (2) turning overthe operation and maintenance of the Santa Lucia base to Peru,and (3) returning the State Department's fixed-wing aircraft thatwere used to support the base to the United States. As part of the decision to stop supporting the Santa LuciaBase, the executive branch approved a formal mobile basingconcept to implement antidrug efforts, which includedestablishing an operational planning group within the U.S.embassy. The U.S. embassy has been slow in implementing themobile basing concept because of maintenance problems withhelicopters, internal differences within the U.S. embassy overhow the group actually would function to coordinate lawenforcement operations, and the May 1994 decision by the UnitedStates to stop sharing with the government of Peru informationthat could be used to shoot down civilian aircraft suspected ofdrug trafficking. Legislation was recently passed to allowinformation sharing to resume; however, the administration hasnot reached agreement with Peru on certain requiredpreconditions. Figure 1: Map of Peru (See figure in printed edition.) Note: Boundaries are not necessarily authoritative. RATIONALE FOR BUILDING THE SANTA LUCIA BASE ------------------------------------------------------------Letter :3 According to U.S. officials, the rationale for building theSanta Lucia base was to place U.S. personnel in the safestpossible environment from which to conduct antidrug activities.U.S. personnel flying into the heart of the drug-trafficking areawere increasingly at risk because in the mid-1980s, the SenderoLuminoso--a Maoist organization attempting to overthrow thePeruvian government--took control of the area. This groupprotected those trafficking in drugs in return for monetarysupport for the Sendero. In 1988, the United States began to build the Santa Luciabase, which included an airfield, a maintenance facility for 6 to10 U.S. UH-1H helicopters used for eradication and lawenforcement missions, and housing. Because the base was in ahighly dense, tropical area with no safe, accessible roads,fixed-wing aircraft (C-123s and C-130s) were supplied by theState Department's Bureau of International Narcotics Matters(INM)\1 to transport personnel, equipment, and supplies to thebase from Lima several times each week. In addition, DEA andPeruvian aircraft used the base for law enforcement operations. -------------------- \1 INM maintains an air wing of rotary and fixed-wingaircraft to assist host governments in conductingcounternarcotics operations in several Central and South Americancountries, including Peru. COSTS OF THE SANTA LUCIA BASE ------------------------------------------------------------Letter :4 According to INM and U.S. embassy records, about $49.2million was provided to construct, maintain, and operate theSanta Lucia base during fiscal years 1988-93. These funds wereincluded as part of the State Department's InternationalNarcotics Control Program, which is authorized under the ForeignAssistance Act of 1961, section 481, as amended. INM providedthese funds for five projects in Peru (see table 1). Table 1 Costs Associated With the Santa Lucia Base During FiscalYears 1988-93 (Dollars in millions) Project Cost -------------------------------------------------- -------- Construction of the base $ 9.8 Coca Eradication in the Upper Huallaga Valley 16.9 (CORAH) Law enforcement 6.4 Program development and support 4.6 Fixed-wing aircraft 11.5 ============================================================ Total $49.2 ------------------------------------------------------------ CONSTRUCTION COSTS ----------------------------------------------------------Letter :4.1 Included in the $9.8 million construction project are thecosts of daily laborers to construct the base and its relatedinfrastructure; installation of prefabricated housing; equipmentand commodities needed to construct and operate helicopter andfixed-wing aircraft facilities and an airstrip; recreationalequipment, food, and clothing; and miscellaneous items such aspayments to the Peruvian engineer in charge of constructing theairstrip and the rental of heavy equipment. CORAH COSTS ----------------------------------------------------------Letter :4.2 The $16.9 million for CORAH was provided for the direct andindirect costs of supporting between 200 and 250 Peruvian workersto help construct, maintain, and operate Santa Lucia base;provide support services; and perform limited antidrug duties.Direct costs were for activities on the base, including operatingequipment such as electrical generators, providing food service,cutting the grass, procuring supplies, and monitoringU.S.-provided equipment to ensure that it was used forcounternarcotics purposes. Indirect costs were for support provided from the CORAHheadquarters at Tingo Maria, including the purchase of food,construction equipment such as trucks and a bulldozer, suppliesand materials, and general supplies for Santa Lucia; andadministrative support functions for CORAH personnel at the base. Between March 1990 and November 1993, 10 CORAH workerseradicated coca seedbeds about 3 to 4 hours a day, 3 to 4 days aweek. This work was suspended in November 1993 because ofbudgetary constraints. In addition, up to 50 CORAH workersinstalled concrete obstacles to block 10 illegal airstrips in the Upper Huallaga Valley. The costsfor blocking the airstrips could not be readily determined, butthe embassy's Narcotics Affairs Section said they were includedin the direct and indirect costs discussed above. LAW ENFORCEMENT COSTS ----------------------------------------------------------Letter :4.3 About $6.4 million was spent for police support at SantaLucia, including (1) per diem for Peruvian police officersstationed at the base to provide security for the base and forworkers on eradication missions and (2) commodities used by thepolice to support the base. PROGRAM DEVELOPMENT AND SUPPORT COSTS ----------------------------------------------------------Letter :4.4 About $4.6 million was provided for salaries and expenses ofthe NAS staff and activities related to administrative support ofthe base as well as other antidrug programs in Peru. Such supportincluded processing procurement vouchers for goods and services. FIXED-WING AIRCRAFT COSTS ----------------------------------------------------------Letter :4.5 About $11.5 million was spent on operating and maintainingthe fixed-wing aircraft that transported personnel, supplies, andother items to and from Santa Lucia. Generally, two C-123 and twoC-130 aircraft were used for these missions. This was funded byINM's airwing account and not included in Peru's antidrug programbudget. RATIONALE FOR SUSPENDING U.S. SUPPORT FOR SANTA LUCIA BASE ------------------------------------------------------------Letter :5 The Congress reduced the State Department's annualInternational Narcotics Control Program request for fiscal year1994 from $148 million to $100 million. After coordinating withvarious U.S. agencies involved in antidrug activities regardingprogram options, the State Department decided that it could notadequately support maintenance and operations at the Santa Luciabase while supporting its antidrug programs in Peru and othercountries. Thus, in December 1993, the United States stoppedsupporting the base and the Peruvian government assumedresponsibility for the base's administrative and operationalcontrol. State Department officials reported that although traffickingactivities had moved outside of the immediate range ofU.S.-provided helicopters, they would have maintained the SantaLucia base had the budget not been reduced. U.S. embassyofficials stated that they had already begun to cover an expandedarea by conducting helicopter operations using forward operatinglocations outside of the Santa Lucia area. STATUS OF RESTRUCTURING COUNTERNARCOTICS OPERATIONS IN PERU ------------------------------------------------------------Letter :6 Some aspects of the restructured programs have been completedand are in place. Specifically, NAS has moved its helicoptermaintenance facilities from Santa Lucia to Pucallpa and thegovernment of Peru is now responsible for operating the SantaLucia base. In addition, INM-owned fixed-wing aircraft used tosupport U.S. antidrug operations have been returned to the UnitedStates and fixed-wing aircraft are now being rented from Peru.However, the U.S. embassy has faced a number of obstacles tofully implementing a mobile basing concept for conductingantidrug missions, including problems with helicoptermaintenance, internal conflicts over the responsibility forplanning and coordinating antidrug operations, and a U.S.decision not to share with Peru real-time information andassistance that could lead to the shoot down of civilian aircraftsuspected of drug trafficking. MOVE TO PUCALLPA ----------------------------------------------------------Letter :6.1 To stay within the budget, the State Department movedhelicopter maintenance facilities and associated U.S. andPeruvian police personnel from Santa Lucia to several differentsites in Pucallpa, where an international airport is located. Theairport serves as the center from which operations are conductedand for resupplying and supporting maintenance operations. Theairport also houses U.S. fixed-wing aircraft used by DEA andother agencies to support law enforcement operations. Themaintenance facilities, aviation ground support equipment, andspare parts for 10 UH-1H helicopters are located at a Peruviannaval base in Pucallpa. About 15 U.S. contractor personnel assistthe Peruvian police in maintaining and operating thehelicopters.\2 A total of about 30 U.S. and 30 to 35 Peruvianpersonnel live in a hotel about 10 minutes from the naval base. The United States spent about $450,000 for (1) securityimprovements to the hotel, (2) improvements to three warehousesbehind the hotel, (3) improvements to a refueling area, and (4)refurbishment of a warehouse and extension of the perimeter wallat the naval base. Planned projects include improvements to thehotel and naval base and construction of a small hangar and ramparea at the airport for fixed-wing aircraft. Cost estimates forthese projects were not available. U.S. embassy personnel stated that U.S. personnel are notallowed to leave the hotel unless they are transported inofficial vehicles to and from work because of security concerns.According to NAS personnel, morale at Santa Lucia was much betterbecause personnel were free to move around the base after workand tended to interact more readily. -------------------- \2 DynCorp Aerospace, Inc., a private contractor, providesmanagement, administrative, rotary-wing, and maintenanceservices. PERU'S SUPPORT OF SANTA LUCIA ----------------------------------------------------------Letter :6.2 With the loss of U.S. support to Santa Lucia, the governmentof Peru agreed to administer the base and maintain it as alocation from which antidrug operations could be conducted.According to the U.S. Embassy's NAS Director, U.S. officials wereconcerned that the government of Peru might be unable to providethe resources needed to maintain and operate the base adequately.At the time of our visit, the airstrip needed repair because ofholes in the runway and other maintenance problems. The NASDirector estimated that about $1.5 million is needed to repairthe airstrip. Nevertheless, DEA is continuing to conduct antidrugoperations from the base. ELIMINATING THE USE OF INM-OWNED FIXED-WING AIRCRAFT TOSUPPORT ANTIDRUG OPERATIONS ----------------------------------------------------------Letter :6.3 Because the State Department stopped supporting the SantaLucia base, INM-owned fixed-wing support was terminated. InDecember 1993, INM's fixed-wing aircraft--two C-123s and twoC-130s--and almost $10.1 million in aircraft spare parts wereshipped for storage to Davis Monthan Air Force Base in Tucson,Arizona. The 28 personnel responsible for maintaining theaircraft were returned to the United States. To support antidrugmissions at Pucallpa, the embassy now rents fixed-wing aircraftfrom the Peruvian air force and civilian companies. According tothe embassy, the monthly rental costs should be less than$20,000. MOBILE BASING CONCEPT ----------------------------------------------------------Letter :6.4 The embassy's implementation of the mobile basing concept hasbeen complicated by several problems. The concept included thefollowing assumptions: 8 to 10 helicopters and fixed-wing aircraft would beavailable for antidrug operations, and an operational planninggroup would be established in the embassy to plan law enforcementoperations. In early 1994, the Defense Department notified State that ithad to ground UH-1H helicopters that had certain engine numbers,which had to be overhauled because of mechanical problems. Thiscreated maintenance problems with the UH-1H helicopters thatlimited the embassy's ability to fully support the mobile basingconcept. Five of the 10 helicopters used in Peru were groundedfor 6 weeks because their engines required overhaul. A total of11 engines had to be overhauled at a cost of $1.65 million. Thefive remaining helicopters were used extensively during the6-week period, and thus, all subsequently needed maintenance atabout the same time. In June 1994, 3 of the 10 helicopters werein for scheduled maintenance, leaving the embassy with only 7 toconduct operations. Recent embassy reports say that high levelsof metal particles are being found in gear boxes and engines,indicating excessive wear and use. An embassy official indicatedthat this situation may cause future maintenance problems andaffect mobility of operations. According to DEA officials, helicopter maintenance problemshave limited their ability to plan and conduct operations. Forexample, a DEA official stated that of the 13 missions requiringhelicopter support during a recent 3-month period, thehelicopters experienced mechanical problems during 6 of them. Intwo cases, DEA teams were delayed in the jungle because of theproblems. In addition, DEA's CASA-212 fixed-wing transportaircraft was grounded for several months because of maintenanceproblems. Finally, an embassy official stated that Peruvianaircraft are frequently grounded because their mechanics have notbeen properly trained. To further complicate matters, the operational planning groupwas not formally established by the U.S. Ambassador until July1994, 7 months after the mobile basing concept was approved, andhas not yet been staffed. The delay was caused by internaldifferences within the U.S. embassy about the structure andstaffing of the group. The NAS Director believed that the groupshould be responsible for more than law enforcement operationsand include eradication operations, administrative and trainingsupport to the Peruvian police, and other operations that may beneeded. He also believed that, since the group would be under theDEA attache that it should be composed primarily with personshaving law enforcement backgrounds to ensure that DEA conductsoperations meeting U.S. antidrug objectives in Peru. DEA and U.S.military personnel, on the other hand, believed that the groupshould be primarily responsible for planning law enforcementoperations and be staffed with military personnel, who would bemore experienced in planning specific operations and identifyinglogistics support requirements for law enforcement operations inthe jungle and interacting with Peruvian military forces inplanning military-type operations. According to U.S. officials,the group will be staffed with DEA agents as well as militarypersonnel providing operational, communications, and logisticalexpertise. The group will be under the control of the DEA countryattache. According to a U.S. embassy official, no specificassignments of military personnel have been made to date. CUT-OFF OF REAL-TIME U.S. ANTIDRUG INFORMATION ----------------------------------------------------------Letter :6.5 Another factor affecting the mobile basing concept'simplementation is the May 1, 1994, decision to stop sharingcertain drug-trafficking information with the governments ofColombia and Peru, which we reported on in August 1994.\3 This step was taken because of legal concerns about theprobable criminal liability of U.S. personnel who provideinformation that could lead to the shooting down of a civilianaircraft suspected of transporting illegal drugs. According toU.S. officials, the sharing of real-time information is criticalto ensuring that they can take timely action againstdrug-trafficking activities to increase the risks associated withthese activities. The officials stated that the policy decisionhad impacted on their ability to conduct antidrug operations. Although the impact that the policy has had on the flow ofdrugs being shipped from Peru to Colombia is unclear, it is clearthat pilots flying between Peru and Colombia have changed theiroperations, since there is little fear of interception by U.S.and Peruvian forces as long as detection capabilities remainnegligible and there is no sharing of information. Various U.S. reports and officials have stated that, beforethe May decision, drug traffickers wanted to minimize theirexposure to the air interdiction threat. Thus, they (1) usedfewer flights with larger drug loads, (2) flew mainly in theearly evening hours, and (3) spent on an average only about 10 to12 minutes in loading and unloading their cargoes. U.S. officialsin Peru said that since the policy change, drug traffickers havechanged their operations and (1) have begun multiple flights withsmaller drug loads and (2) have begun flying during the day, andsome traffickers have doubled their time on the ground. Inaddition, U.S. officials stated that an analysis of flightpatterns indicates that traffickers are reverting to more directair routes from Peru into Colombia instead of the indirect andmore time-consuming routes they were taking before the cutoff ofinformation. DEA officials advised us that the policy to notshare real-time information has caused them to forego lawenforcement operations against illegal drug activities. Finally,a recent Defense Department report states that the policy of notsharing real-time information has reduced the risks associatedwith drug-trafficking activities in Peru. On October 5, 1994, the President signed legislation thatprovides official immunity for authorized U.S. personnel fromliability, notwithstanding any other provision of law, ifinformation they provide is used to shoot down civilian aircraftsuspected of drug trafficking. However, before sharing ofinformation can resume, the President must determine that (1)illicit drug trafficking poses a national security threat to Peruand (2) Peru has appropriate procedures in place to protectagainst the innocent loss of life. The executive branch isdiscussing this issue with the Peruvian government. As ofNovember 30, 1994, the sharing of information had not yetresumed. -------------------- \3 Drug Control in Peru (GAO/NSIAD-94-186R, Aug. 16, 1994). SCOPE AND METHODOLOGY ------------------------------------------------------------Letter :7 To obtain information for this report, we interviewedofficials and reviewed pertinent documents at the Departments ofState and Defense and the Drug Enforcement Administration inWashington, D.C.; the U.S. Southern Command in Panama; and theU.S. Embassy in Lima, Peru. We also interviewed Peruvian policeofficials responsible for counternarcotics programs. We did our review between April and July 1994 in accordancewith generally accepted government auditing standards. Asrequested, we did not obtain written agency comments on a draftof this report. However, we discussed the information in thisreport with agency officials and included their comments whereappropriate. ---------------------------------------------------------Letter :7.1 Unless you release its contents earlier, we plan no furtherdistribution of this report until 10 days after its issuance. Atthat time, we will send copies of the report to the Secretariesof Defense and State, the Administrator of the Drug EnforcementAdministration, and the Director of the Office of National DrugControl Policy. We will also provide copies to others on request. This report was prepared under the direction of Mr. BenjaminNelson, Associate Director, who may be reached on (202) 512-4128.Other major contributors are Mr. Andres Ramirez, AssistantDirector, and Mr. Ronald D. Hughes, Evaluator-in-Charge. Joseph E. Kelley Director-in-Charge International Affairs Issues CliffSchaffer's Home Page WT01-B29-85IA086-000619-B002-147http://206.61.184.43:80/schaffer/GovPubs/asset1.htm 206.61.184.43 19970122032140 text/html 41367HTTP/1.0 200 OKDate: Wednesday, 22-Jan-97 03:21:03 GMTServer: WebSitePro/1.1f (S/N wpo-0deb)Allow-ranges: bytesContent-type: text/htmlLast-modified: Saturday, 28-Dec-96 06:16:20 GMTContent-length: 41149 Asset Forfeiture Programs High Risk Series: Asset Forfeiture Programs (Letter Report, 02/95, GAO/HR-95-7). In 1990, GAO began a special effort to identify federalprograms at high risk of waste, fraud, abuse, and mismanagement. GAO issued aseries of reports in December 1992 on the fundamental causes of theproblems in the high-risk areas. This report on asset forfeiture programsis part of the second series that updates the status of thishigh-risk area. Readers have the following three options in ordering thehigh-risk series: (1) request any of the individual reports in theseries, including the Overview (HR-95-1), the Guide (HR-95-2), or anyof the 10 issue area reports; (2) request the Overview and the Guide asa package (HR-95-21SET); or (3) request the entire series as a package (HR-95-20SET). --------------------------- Indexing Terms----------------------------- REPORTNUM: HR-95-7 TITLE: High Risk Series: Asset Forfeiture Programs DATE: 02/01/95 SUBJECT: Assets Inventory control systems Customs administration Law enforcement Federal property management Interagency relations Search and seizure Surplus federal property Property disposal Law enforcement agencies IDENTIFIER: DOJ National Asset Seizure and Forfeiture Program Treasury Asset Forfeiture Fund DOJ Assets Forfeiture Fund Customs Forfeiture Fund National Performance Review DOJ/Treasury Consolidated Asset Tracking System Customs Service Seized Asset Program High Risk Series 1995 ************************************************************************** * This file contains an ASCII representation of the text of aGAO * * report. Delineations within the text indicating chaptertitles, * * headings, and bullets are preserved. Major divisions andsubdivisions * * of the text, such as Chapters, Sections, and Appendixes,are * * identified by double and single lines. The numbers on theright end * * of these lines indicate the position of each of thesubsections in the * * document outline. These numbers do NOT correspond with thepage * * numbers of the printed product. * * * * No attempt has been made to display graphic images,although figure * * captions are reproduced. Tables are included, but may notresemble * * those in the printed version. * * * * A printed copy of this report may be obtained from the GAODocument * * Distribution Facility by calling (202) 512-6000, by faxingyour * * request to (301) 258-4066, or by writing to P.O. Box 6015,* * Gaithersburg, MD 20884-6015. We are unable to acceptelectronic orders * * for printed documents at this time. * ************************************************************************** Cover ================================================================COVER High-Risk Series February 1995 ASSET FORFEITURE PROGRAMS GAO/HR-95-7 Asset Forfeiture Programs Abbreviations ===============================================================ABBREV Letter ===============================================================LETTER February 1995 The President of the Senate The Speaker of the House of Representatives In 1990, the General Accounting Office began a special effortto review and report on the federal program areas we consideredhigh risk because they were especially vulnerable to waste, fraud,abuse, and mismanagement. This effort, which has been stronglysupported by the Senate Committee on Governmental Affairs and the HouseCommittee on Government Reform and Oversight, brought much needed focusto problems that were costing the government billions ofdollars. In December 1992, we issued a series of reports on thefundamental causes of problems in designated high-risk areas. We areupdating the status of our high-risk program in this second series.Our Overview report (GAO/HR-95-1) discusses progress made in manyareas, stresses the need for further action to address remainingcritical problems, and introduces newly designated high-risk areas.This second series also includes a Quick Reference Guide(GAO/HR-95-2) that covers all 18 high-risk areas we have tracked over thepast few years, and separate reports that detail continuingsignificant problems and resolution actions needed in 10 areas. This report discusses the asset forfeiture programs of the Departments of Justice and the Treasury. It describes theprogress made in the management of seized and forfeited property sinceour December 1992 report. The value of seized propertyinventories has grown from a reported $33 million in 1979 to almost $2billion in 1994. Over the years, Justice and Treasury have transformedtheir problem-ridden seized property programs into morebusinesslike operations. However, some significant problems remain withseized property management. In recent years, interest in the asset forfeiture programs has extended beyond property managementto questioning whether forfeiture laws are applied appropriatelyand effectively and consideration of how forfeiture proceedsshould be used. This report focuses on the most recent program changesmade and highlights areas needing sustained management attention. Copies of this report series are being sent to the President,the Republican and Democratic leadership of the Congress,congressional committee chairs and ranking minority members, all othermembers of the Congress, the Director of the Office of Management andBudget, the Attorney General, and the Secretary of the Treasury. Charles A. Bowsher Comptroller General of the United States OVERVIEW ============================================================Chapter 0 For more than 200 years, the federal government has had theauthority to take property through forfeiture. Beginning about 1980,the number and value of seizures started growing dramatically aslaw enforcement agencies began relying more heavily on forfeitureto fight drug traffickers and other organized crime figures. The Comprehensive Crime Control Act of 1984 expanded thegovernment's seizure authority and established forfeiture funds within the departments of Justice and the Treasury.\1 Recently, assetforfeiture laws were expanded to cover crimes associated with moneylaundering and certain financial institutions-related offenses.Collectively, enforcement actions associated with these changes haveresulted in the value of Justice's and Treasury's seized propertyinventories growing from a reported $33 million in 1979 to almost $2billion in 1994. THE PROBLEM As asset forfeiture programs grew in the 1980s, our attentionwas focused primarily on the management of seized and forfeitedproperty. We found that property was not being properly cared for afterit was seized, resulting in lost revenue to the government when theproperty was sold. Much has been accomplished in this area since the1980s. However, some significant problems remain with seizedproperty management, and continued oversight is necessary. Also, the departments of Justice and the Treasury continue to operatetwo similar but separate seized asset management and disposalprograms without plans for consolidation, despite legislationrequiring them to develop a plan to consolidate postseizure administrationof certain properties.\2 In recent years, interest in the asset forfeiture programshas extended beyond asset management to questioning whetherforfeiture laws are applied appropriately and effectively andconsideration of how forfeiture proceeds should be used. PROGRESS In our December 1992 high-risk report on asset forfeitureprograms, we reported that major operational problems relating to the management and disposition of seized and forfeited propertyhad been identified and corrective actions were being initiated.However, although some management and systems changes have improvedprogram operations, our recent audits of the Customs Service's fiscalyear 1992 and 1993 financial statements revealed seriousweaknesses in key internal controls and systems, which affected Customs'ability to control, manage, and report the results of its seizureefforts, including accountability and stewardship over propertyseized. As a result, tons of illegal drugs and millions of dollars in cashand other property have been vulnerable to theft andmisappropriation. Customs recognizes the need for long-term and systematic improvements, and its Commissioner established a seniormanagement task force to review the seized property program in itsentirety. Actions are being taken to address the internal control andsystems problems; however, many of these efforts are in variousstages of development. Problems also persist with the Marshals Service's maintenanceand disposal of seized and forfeited property, according torecent Department of Justice Office of Inspector General auditreports. These audits show the need for continued emphasis on andvigilance over seized property management. We also reported in December 1992 that Justice and Treasurywere pursuing an initiative for consolidating postseizuremanagement of noncash seized property inventories. Legislation enacted in1988 required them to develop a plan to consolidate postseizure administration of certain properties. Furthermore, in June1991, we identified substantial savings that could be realized throughmerging postseizure noncash property management functions. Although asmall scale pilot project for consolidation was in effect fromOctober 1992 through September 1993, no significant progress has been madetoward consolidation. Since eliminating duplicate programs is one ofthe Vice President's National Performance Review goals, Justiceand Treasury should aggressively pursue options for efficiencygains through program consolidation. Our December 1992 high-risk report also highlighted growinginterest in the forfeiture programs regarding the appropriateapplication of the asset forfeiture laws. In 1993, the Supreme Court issuedthree decisions that more clearly define the appropriate use ofasset forfeiture authority. Also, several bills were proposed inthe last Congress to put tighter controls on forfeiture. Thedepartments of Justice and the Treasury have each taken several actions inan effort to strengthen the integrity of the asset forfeiture program, including implementing new policy guidance intended to ensurethat law enforcement agencies do not become overzealous in theiruse of the asset forfeiture laws or become too dependent on thefunds derived from seizures. OUTLOOK FOR THE FUTURE The two agencies with custodial responsibilities for seizedproperty, the Marshals Service for Justice and the Customs Service for Treasury, have made improvements in seized propertymanagement and disposition over the years. However, significant problemsremain and continued oversight is necessary to ensure policies andprocedures are followed and adequate safeguards are in place. Inaddition, Justice and Treasury should aggressively pursue options for efficiency gains through program consolidation. We willcontinue to monitor seized property management activities. Much attention has been focused on the appropriateapplication of the asset forfeiture laws. It is too soon to tell whether therecent actions taken by Justice and Treasury will provide sufficient safeguards against improper seizures. Ensuring that adequate safeguards are in place and adhered to will requireconsiderable forfeiture program management attention and oversight in thefuture. -------------------- \1 The funds were originally created within the Department ofJustice and U.S. Customs Service. The Congress established theDepartment of the Treasury Forfeiture Fund in October 1992 to supersedethe Customs Fund. \2 The Anti-Drug Abuse Act of 1988, Public Law No. 100-690,21 U.S.C. 887 (1988). BACKGROUND ============================================================Chapter 1 Asset forfeiture programs were intended to (1) punish anddeter criminal activity by depriving criminals of property used oracquired through illegal activities and (2) make seized propertyavailable as assets to strengthen law enforcement. Seized and forfeitedproperty can be cash, bank accounts, automobiles, boats, airplanes,jewelry, art objects, or real estate. Justice and Treasury also seize thousands of tons of illegal drugs and counterfeit items thathave no resale value to the federal government. These items aretypically held by the agencies until they are approved for destruction. Although the government has had forfeiture authority for over200 years, it was rarely utilized as a law enforcement tool untilthe 1980s. The Comprehensive Crime Control Act of 1984 expanded forfeiture authority and established asset forfeiture fundswithin the Department of Justice and the U.S. Customs Service tohold the proceeds of forfeitures and to finance program-relatedexpenses (for example, property management expenses) as well as certain law enforcement activities, such as the payment of rewards for information related to asset seizure and training directlyrelated to the asset forfeiture program. Until recently, Treasury law enforcement agencies other thanCustoms (the Bureau of Alcohol, Tobacco and Firearms; CriminalInvestigation Division of the Internal Revenue Service; and the U.S. Secret Service) participated in the Justice Fund. In October 1992,the Congress created the Treasury Forfeiture Fund to supersedethe Customs Fund.\3 The Treasury agencies that previouslyparticipated in the Justice Fund began making deposits into the Treasury Fundin October 1993. Figure 1 shows the two fund receipts for theyears they have been in operation. Figure 1: Forfeiture Fund Receipts, Fiscal Years 1985 Through 1994 (See figure in printed edition.) Sources: Department of Justice, Department of the Treasury,and U.S. Customs Service. These funds have always collected more than the allowableexpenses that could be charged against them.\4 Year-end surpluses inthe Justice Fund have historically been used for law enforcement purposes, such as building prisons, hiring U.S. Attorneyoffice personnel, or funding special activities through the Officeof National Drug Control Policy. Year-end surpluses in theCustoms Fund were transferred to the general fund of the Treasury.Beginning in fiscal year 1995, the year-end surpluses in the TreasuryForfeiture Fund will be available to the Secretary of the Treasury forany law enforcement activity of a federal agency. Asset forfeiture legislation authorizes Justice and Treasuryto share forfeiture proceeds with state and local law enforcementagencies and foreign governments that participate in law enforcementefforts leading to seizure and forfeiture. From fiscal years 1986through 1994, Justice and Treasury shared over $1.4 billion and $394million, respectively, in forfeited property and cash with over 3,000state and local law enforcement agencies. As the forfeiture programs grew in the 1980s, Justice andCustoms experienced significant problems with asset management and disposition. However, as the programs matured, the agenciesgained more control of them. Improvements made in the areas ofseized property management and management information systems werediscussed in our December 1992 high-risk report. For example, in 1987Justice and Customs established policies designed to minimize theunnecessary holding of seized cash. Also, legislation enacted in 1990subjects the funds to annual financial audits. These audits have beendone each year since 1990. However, problems remain with property management and, therefore, continual oversight is necessary.One issue that still has not been resolved is the consolidationof Justice's and Treasury's seized property managementfunctions. -------------------- \3 Treasury Forfeiture Fund Act of 1992, Public Law No.102-393, 31 U.S.C. 9703 (1992). \4 Allowable expenses exclude certain costs such as salariesand benefits of seizing agents which are borne by the seizingagency. PROGRESS AND CONTINUING CONCERNS ============================================================Chapter 2 In December 1992, we reported on the status of the assetforfeiture programs and progress made as well as emerging issues. Thefollowing examples describe the progress that has been made since thattime, and the key continuing concerns. SEIZED PROPERTY MANAGEMENT PROBLEMS REMAIN Our fiscal year 1992 and 1993 financial statement audits ofthe U.S. Customs Service revealed inadequate safeguards over, andincomplete and inaccurate accounting and reporting of, seized property.Customs is taking steps to address these problems; however, theseefforts are in various stages of development. Customs conducted its first nationwide physical inventory ofseized property, drugs, and currency in February 1994. As a resultof this inventory, Customs was able to identify and correct manysignificant errors in the recorded quantities and values of seizedproperty. This effort was also intended to establish an accuratebaseline for monitoring and reporting activity that results from Customs' enforcement efforts. However, some Customs locations did not effectively perform all of the inventory procedures. As aresult, reported seized property balances included erroneous values. Customs has also undertaken significant efforts to strengthen safeguards at its storage locations. Specifically, it hasperformed a study and evaluation of the adequacy of its physicalsafeguards over seized property and currency at 21 medium-to-high volumestorage facilities. In addition, Customs constructed new facilitiesin two districts and has plans for renovation at other facilities. While these efforts are commendable, Customs must establishand implement additional policies and procedures, such asperiodically summarizing and assessing the results of its seizure effortsfor a period of time, and make significant enhancements to itsseized property tracking system to ensure proper accountability forand stewardship over seized property. In addition, a significantand sustained effort by Customs management will be required toensure that established policies and procedures and plannedimprovements are properly implemented. Otherwise, Customs' ability to reportreliable financial information and effectively carry out its seizureprogram will continue to be diminished. Also, tons of illegal drugsand millions of dollars in currency and other property willremain vulnerable to theft and misappropriation. Problems also persist with the Marshals Service's maintenanceand disposal of seized and forfeited property, according torecent Justice Department Office of Inspector General reports. InMarch 1993, the Inspector General reported mismanagement bycontractors hired by the Marshals Service to maintain and dispose ofproperty, resulting in excessive costs and lost revenues of almost $2.8million in six districts. Two and a half million dollars of theexcessive costs and lost revenue resulted from a lack of effectiveMarshals Service oversight of real property management contracts. For example, the Marshals Service failed to detect improperpayments for property taxes, attorney fees, and title insurance. In March1994, the Inspector General reported that the Marshals Service wasnot disposing of forfeited property expeditiously, allowingproperty to deteriorate, thus resulting in lost revenue. The MarshalsService has initiated various actions to address these problems, suchas revising procurement policies, conducting contract managementreviews at certain districts, and providing additional training toseized assets management staff, according to the Inspector General. PROPERTY MANAGEMENT CONSOLIDATION EFFORTS UNSUCCESSFUL In an effort to address duplication of effort, one of theprovisions of the Anti-Drug Abuse Act of 1988 required the AttorneyGeneral and the Secretary of the Treasury to develop and maintain a jointplan to coordinate and consolidate postseizure administration ofproperty seized for drug-related offenses. In June 1991, werecommended consolidating the management and disposition of all noncashseized properties, designating the Marshals Service as thecustodian. We estimated program administration costs could be reduced 11percent annually if Justice and Customs consolidated the postseizure management and disposition of such items. We also reportedthat consolidation would likely result in lower contractor costsdue to economies of scale. Consolidation efforts to date have been unsuccessful. TheMarshals Service and Customs entered into a memorandum ofunderstanding in October 1992 for a 1-year small scale pilot consolidationproject whereby the Marshals Service managed and disposed of Customs'real property and Customs managed and disposed of vessels for theMarshals Service at four districts. A total of 52 properties wereinvolved in the pilot project, which dissolved at the end of the 1-yearperiod. No cost analysis or evaluation of the effectiveness of theproject was done. There are no future plans for consolidation ofasset management and disposition functions at this time. We still believe that consolidation of asset management and disposition functions makes sense. Both agencies seizesimilar types of property that is generally located in the same geographicareas. However, under the current operating structure, each agencymaintains a separate and distinct program for managing and disposing ofits property. Justice, through the Marshals Service, contractsdirectly with vendors that provide the service. Treasury, through theCustoms Service, has a nationwide contractor that provides custodialservices either directly or through subcontracts with other vendors. DUPLICATE ASSET FORFEITURE FUNDS AND PROGRAMS We see areas of possible duplication between the two fundsand programs that extend beyond property management anddisposition activities, to include forfeiture fund administration andmanagement. The Treasury Forfeiture Fund structure essentially mirrorsthat of the Justice Fund. Both funds have their own management,operations staff, custodial agencies (Marshals Service and Customs), and contractors to maintain and dispose of property. The fundswork closely together to develop policies that minimize variationsin forfeiture procedures and operations. Although the fundscoordinate closely, the existence of two separate funds has thepotential for unnecessary duplication. For example, each departmentrecently issued its own set of very similar program guidance. On the other hand, Justice and Treasury are pursuingconsolidation of asset tracking systems. Both departments have agreed todevelop, implement, manage, operate, enhance, and support aConsolidated Asset Tracking System (CATS). CATS is intended to be the primaryautomated system for asset tracking and management used by all agencies participating in both the Justice and Treasury assetforfeiture programs. CATS would make it possible to track the entire life cycle ofan asset from seizure, through forfeiture, to disposal. Thesystem would avoid the duplicate data entry that occurs due to thevarious participating components having incompatible systems. Withall participating agencies using the same system, any user ofCATS would have available the current status and processing details forany asset, regardless of which agency entered the information.CATS is being pilot tested, with participation from all Justice andTreasury agencies, except Customs. Customs plans to begin looking atthe feasibility of CATS participation in the near future. Thesuccess of a single automated tracking system is dependent on theparticipation of all agencies, including Customs. We encourage Justice and Treasury to continue to identify areas of duplication andpursue options for consolidation, such as their efforts with CATS. IMPROVED GUIDANCE FOR THE USE OF SHARED ASSETS Continuing this consolidation theme, in July 1992 weconcluded that because state and local law enforcement agencies often seethe Justice and Customs asset sharing programs as one, theprograms should have the same guidelines, with the sameinterpretations of appropriate asset use. Officials in some state and localagencies found the guidance vague and confusing, with Justice andCustoms allowing different uses of shared proceeds despite havingsimilar program policies. We recommended that Justice and Customsissue joint guidelines for asset sharing with clear, specificdefinitions for concepts such as "law enforcement purposes" and"supplanting of resources." Joint guidelines have not been issued. However, Treasury andJustice issued separate sets of revised and mutually agreeable assetsharing guidance in October 1993 and March 1994, respectively. Theclarified guidance is intended to significantly reduce state and locallaw enforcement agency confusion about appropriate uses of sharedassets and should lead to fewer improper uses of assets. EFFORTS TO STRENGTHEN SAFEGUARDS AGAINST IMPROPER SEIZURES As discussed in our 1992 high-risk report, increasingconcerns have been voiced by Members of Congress, the media, and lawenforcement officials about the potential for abuse of the propertyinterests of innocent owners and third parties in the assetseizure/forfeiture process. Because revenue generation is one of the clearly articulated goals of the forfeiture program, concerns havealso been expressed that law enforcement agencies may have a vestedinterest in receiving the proceeds of forfeitures and that this interestcould influence law enforcement priorities. Furthermore, in 1993 the Supreme Court issued three decisionsthat have more clearly defined the appropriate use of assetseizure and forfeiture authority. For example, in Austin v. UnitedStates, 113 S. Ct. 2801 (1993), the Court concluded that the challenged forfeiture constituted punishment and thus was subject to the limitations of the excessive fines clause of the EighthAmendment to the Constitution. The Eighth Amendment ban on excessive fines requires that there be a relationship between the seriousnessof an offense and the property that is taken. Several bills were proposed in the last Congress that wouldhave significantly affected the forfeiture programs. For example,one bill mandated that certain forfeiture proceedings beconducted only upon the conviction of the property owner for the relevantcrime. That bill also required that a portion of the forfeitureproceeds be used for community based crime control programs. The Department of Justice is also concerned about anyappearance of conflict of interest or overzealous use of seizure andforfeiture laws. Justice has taken several actions to address theseconcerns. To provide leadership to state and local law enforcementagencies, Justice issued a National Code of Professional Conduct forAsset Forfeiture officials. Justice also initiated a project tocoordinate and expand federal forfeiture training in an effort to ensurethat state and local law enforcement agencies are in fullcompliance with constitutional and statutory limitations on seizure andforfeiture. The departments of Justice and the Treasury have implementednew policy guidance to strengthen the integrity of the assetforfeiture program. For example, to minimize any adverse effects offorfeiture on innocent persons, Justice and Treasury issued new policiesand procedures that require expedited notice to owners of seizedproperty and payments to lienholders. Justice also proposedregulations in June 1994 that would clarify when innocent persons whoseproperty is used by others for criminal purposes are entitled to relief. FURTHER ACTION NEEDED ============================================================Chapter 3 The asset forfeiture programs continue to remain highlyvisible, as evidenced by the recent policy guidance and proposedregulations as well as numerous proposed changes to forfeiture legislation.Justice and Treasury have made many improvements to their assetforfeiture programs over the years. However, enhancements to seizedproperty tracking systems and development and implementation ofadditional policies and procedures are needed to help ensure adequate accountability and stewardship over seized property. Inaddition, continued oversight will be required to ensure that existingpolicies and procedures and planned improvement efforts are properly implemented. We will continue to monitor seized propertymanagement activities. Possible duplication of resources within the two forfeiturefunds and programs is of particular interest in light of budgetconstraints. Justice and Treasury should aggressively pursue options for efficiency gains through consolidation. Although significant problems remain with seized propertymanagement, some of the attention has shifted toward concerns about law enforcement agencies becoming overzealous in their use of theasset forfeiture laws or too dependent on the funds derived fromsuch seizures. It is too soon to judge the effectiveness of therecent efforts taken by Justice and Treasury to strengthensafeguards against improper seizures. Our future work will includekeeping abreast of these efforts and assessing any future legislative changes. RELATED GAO PRODUCTS ============================================================Chapter 4 Financial Audits: CFO Implementation at IRS and Customs (GAO/T-AIMD-94-164, July 28, 1994). Restitution, Fines, and Forfeiture: Issues for Further Reviewand Oversight (GAO/T-GGD-94-178, June 28, 1994). Financial Audit: Examination of Customs' Fiscal Year 1993Financial Statements (GAO/AIMD-94-119, June 15, 1994). Financial Management: Customs' Accountability for SeizedProperty and Special Operation Advances Was Weak (GAO/AIMD-94-6, Nov.22, 1993). Financial Management: First Financial Audits of IRS andCustoms Revealed Serious Problems (GAO/T-AIMD-93-3, August 4, 1993). Financial Audit: Examination of Customs' Fiscal Year 1992Financial Statements (GAO/AIMD-93-3, June 30, 1993). High-Risk Series: Asset Forfeiture Programs (GAO/HR-93-17,Dec. 6, 1992). Tax Administration: IRS's Management of Seized Assets (GAO/T-GGD-92-65, Sept. 24, 1992). Asset Forfeiture: Improved Guidance Needed for Use of SharedAssets (GAO/GGD-92-115, July 16, 1992). Asset Forfeiture: U.S. Marshals Service Internal ControlWeaknesses Over Cash Distributions (GAO/GGD-92-59, May 8, 1992). Asset Forfeiture: Customs Reports Improved Controls OverSales of Forfeited Property (GAO/GGD-91-127, Sept. 25, 1991). Asset Forfeiture: Noncash Property Should Be ConsolidatedUnder the Marshals Service (GAO/GGD-91-97, June 28, 1991). Asset Forfeiture: Need for Stronger Marshals ServiceOversight of Commercial Real Property (GAO/GGD-91-82, May 31, 1991). Asset Forfeiture: Opportunities for Savings Through Program Consolidation (GAO/T-GGD-91-22, Apr. 25, 1991). Asset Forfeiture: Opportunities to Improve ProgramAdministration (GAO/T-GGD-91-16, Mar. 13, 1991). Oversight Hearings on Asset Forfeiture Programs(GAO/T-GGD-90-56, July 24, 1990). Asset Forfeiture: Legislation Needed to Improve CashProcessing and Financial Reporting (GAO/GGD-90-94, June 19, 1990). Asset Forfeiture: Helping Finance the War on Drugs(GAO/GGD-90-01VR, Oct. 1989). Profitability of Customs Forfeiture Program Can Be Enhanced (GAO/T-GGD-90-1, Oct. 10, 1989). Asset Forfeiture: An Update (GAO/T-GGD-89-17, Apr. 24, 1989). Asset Forfeiture Programs: Progress and Problems(GAO/T-GGD-88-41, June 23, 1988). Asset Forfeiture Programs: Corrective Actions Underway But Additional Improvements Needed (GAO/T-GGD-88-16, Mar. 4,1988). Seized Conveyances: Justice and Customs Correction ofPrevious Conveyance Management Problems (GAO/GGD-88-30, Feb. 3, 1988). Real Property Seizure and Disposal Program ImprovementsNeeded (GAO/T-GGD-87-28, Sept. 25, 1987). Asset Forfeiture Funds: Changes Needed to EnhanceCongressional Oversight (GAO/T-GGD-87-27, Sept. 25, 1987). Millions of Dollars in Seized Cash Can Be Deposited Faster (GAO/T-GGD-87-7, Mar. 13, 1987). Drug Enforcement Administration's Use of Forfeited PersonalProperty (GAO/GGD-87-20, Dec. 10, 1986). Customs' Management of Seized and Forfeited Cars, Boats, andPlanes (Testimony, Apr. 3, 1986). Improved Management Processes Would Enhance Justice'sOperations (GAO/GGD-86-12, Mar. 14, 1986). Better Care and Disposal of Seized Cars, Boats, and PlanesShould Save Money and Benefit Law Enforcement (GAO/PLRD-83-94, July15, 1983). Asset Forfeiture: A Seldom Used Tool in Combatting DrugTrafficking (GAO/GGD-81-51, Apr. 10, 1981). 1995 HIGH-RISK SERIES ============================================================Chapter 5 An Overview (GAO/HR-95-1) Quick Reference Guide (GAO/HR-95-2) Defense Contract Management (GAO/HR-95-3) Defense Weapons Systems Acquisition (GAO/HR-95-4) Defense Inventory Management (GAO/HR-95-5) Internal Revenue Service Receivables (GAO/HR-95-6) Asset Forfeiture Programs (GAO/HR-95-7) Medicare Claims (GAO/HR-95-8) Farm Loan Programs (GAO/HR-95-9) Student Financial Aid (GAO/HR-95-10) Department of Housing and Urban Development (GAO/HR-95-11) Superfund Program Management (GAO/HR-95-12) The entire series of 12 high-risk reports can be ordered byusing the order number GAO/HR-95-20SET. CliffSchaffer's Home Page WT01-B29-86IA086-000619-B002-179http://206.61.184.43:80/schaffer/GovPubs/gao/gao1.htm 206.61.184.43 19970122032155 text/html 13368HTTP/1.0 200 OKDate: Wednesday, 22-Jan-97 03:21:49 GMTServer: WebSitePro/1.1f (S/N wpo-0deb)Allow-ranges: bytesContent-type: text/htmlLast-modified: Saturday, 28-Dec-96 06:24:21 GMTContent-length: 13150 Expanded Military Surveillance Not Justified by MeasurableGoals Expanded Military Surveillance NotJustified by Measurable Goals or Results Statement of Louis J. Rodrigues, Director, Systems Development and Production Issues, NationalSecurity and International Affairs Division GAO/T-NSIAD-94-14 October 5, 1993 United States General Accounting Office GAO Testimony Before the Legislation and National Security Subcommittee,Committee on Government Operations, House of Representatives Mr. Chairman and Members of the Subcommittee: I am pleased to be here today to discuss the military'ssurveillance of the drug-smuggling threat. My testimony today isbased on a series of reports concerning DOD's role in druginterdiction that we have issued to the House GovernmentOperations Committee over the past several years. RESULTS IN BRIEF The Department of Defense (DOD) has significantly expandedthe nation's capability to detect and monitor cocainesmugglers--the principal targets of the military's surveillanceefforts. However, we found that although this expanded capabilityhas become increasingly more costly, it has not led to anyreduction in the estimated flow of cocaine onto American streets. The fact is, Mr. Chairman, the budget increases that haveallowed DOD to expand its surveillance capabilities have not beenbased on measurable goals and results. Consequently,decision-makers have lacked critical information needed to assessthe costs and benefits of military surveillance. The nation's continuing failure to reduce the cocaine flow isnot an indictment of DOD's surveillance efforts. But in theabsence of measurable goals for DOD's mission, we believe it isthe best evidence available for objectively assessing thecontribution that military surveillance has made to the drug war.And that evidence strongly indicates that military surveillanceis not producing results commensurate with its costs. BACKGROUND The National Defense Authorization Act for fiscal year 1989made DOD the lead agency for detecting and monitoring air andmaritime shipments of illegal drugs to the United States. Themission is part of a multi-agency effort, under the Office ofNational Drug Control Policy (ONDCP), to deter smuggling andreduce drug supplies by interdicting shipments to the UnitedStates. Most interdiction efforts have been concentrated oncocaine from South America, which ONDCP has designated theprimary drug threat in the United States. Interdiction involves two broad functions: surveillance (thatis, detection and monitoring) and apprehension. DOD'ssurveillance mission supports the U.S. and foreign lawenforcement agencies that apprehend suspects and seize theircargo, both in the source countries where cocaine is produced andin the transit zones between South America and the United States.Law enforcement agencies participate in both the surveillance andapprehension phases. DOD is generally precluded from theapprehension phase (the so-called "end game") becauseof laws restricting military participation in law enforcementactivities. Funding for DOD's surveillance mission grew from about $212million in fiscal year 1989 to an estimated $844 million infiscal year 1993. DOD has requested $890 million for fiscal year1994. DOD HAS EXPANDED SURVEILLANCE CAPABILITIES BUT AT A COST Before 1989, the limited surveillance assets of civilian lawenforcement agencies allowed only intermittent and sporadiccoverage of key cocaine-smuggling zones in the Caribbean and theeastern Pacific. Since becoming the lead agency for detection andmonitoring, DOD has improved that coverage by providing theresources to conduct extensive surveillance of primary smugglingroutes. With this expanded coverage, DOD has contributed to drugseizures by detecting suspects early, monitoring themcontinually, and handing them off to law enforcement agenciesnear expected arrival zones. However, this increased capability has been expensive. DOD'sextensive surveillance requires a major commitment of aircraft,ships, and personnel. To put the costs of that commitment intoperspective, the commander of one joint task force testified in1992 that they are equivalent to what would be "expendedover a year on a Sixth Fleet deployment into the Mediterranean--asubstantial commitment." Some of those costs would have tobe incurred for training exercises even if DOD were not involvedin counterdrug operations--but some would not. Some aircraft andship crews engaged in counterdrug operations receive littletraining related to the military's traditional war-fightingmission. FUNDING INCREASES NOT BASED ON MEASURABLE GOALS OR RESULTS This substantial commitment has been made through a series offunding increases since DOD became the lead agency in 1989, eventhough drug-war planners have never established specific goals orvalid effectiveness measures for the surveillance mission. In theabsence of such measures: the success or failure of military surveillance cannot beassessed quantitatively, the resources required for military surveillance cannot beobjectively determined, and therefore Congress and the executive branch are denied the kinds ofobjective assessments needed to evaluate alternatives and makepolicy decisions. INCREASED SURVEILLANCE HAS NOT PRODUCED COMMENSURATERESULTS Despite the increased surveillance capabilities that DOD isproviding, interdiction success remains elusive and progresstoward national supply-reduction goals remains negligible. A key goal of the National Drug Control Strategy has been toreduce cocaine supplies on the streets of American cities.According to sources in the intelligence community, however, theestimated volume of cocaine entering the country has notappreciably declined since DOD was given its lead-agency mission.This failure to reduce the drug flow into America cannot beattributed to the efficiency of DOD's surveillance efforts or anysingle initiative in the national strategy, but the inability tointerdict shipments in decisive numbers is a contributing factor. Interdiction has had limited successes. Seizures haveincreased, and traffickers have been forced to adopt new, andpresumably more expensive, smuggling methods. But these successeshave not made a difference in terms of deterring smugglers andreducing the flow of cocaine. Interdiction assessments that havebeen made indicate that most smugglers are not apprehended. Andthe price, purity, and availability of cocaine on Americanstreets has remained relatively stable. The capability of military surv eillance to rectify thissituation is limited. The limitation is that surveillance ofsuspect ships and planes is not the weak link in the interdictionprocess. The weak link is the inability to apprehend suspectedsmugglers in transit countries and at our borders. INTERDICTION SUCCESS REQUIRES APPREHENSION CAPABILITIES Simply stated, the capability to detect and monitor drugsmugglers does not assure interdiction success--no matter howextensive that capability may be. Success ultimately depends onthe capability to apprehend smugglers--arresting people andseizing their cargo and equipment. However, DOD's surveillancecapabilities exceed the apprehension capabilities of lawenforcement agencies, especially in the countries that U.S.-boundcocaine transits. Cocaine traffickers have been able to remain relativelyimmune to apprehension by adopting new tactics. Instead of flyingcocaine directly into the United States, for example, they fly itinto Central America and Mexico--where U.S. law enforcementagencies lack jurisdiction and host-nation apprehensioncapabilities are limited. The traffickers then move the cocaineup near our Southwest border by various means and transport itinto the United States in cars, trucks, and other conveyances.Traffickers also transport cocaine in shipping containers and inthe numerous, difficult-to-find hiding places aboard largevessels. Without more law enforcement assistance in the transittingcountries and without improved search technology at U.S. portsand border crossings, traffickers can continue to ship cocainevia these methods with relative impunity. Sustaining orincreasing DOD's surveillance capabilities will not do the job. DRUG PROFITS MAKE INTERDICTION SUCCESSDOUBTFUL According to the National Drug Control Strategy, the realvalue of interdiction lies in the disruption of traffickingorganizations, thus raising their cost of doing business.However, this is difficult to achieve, even with the increasedsurveillance capability provided by DOD. Part of the problem isthat the enormous profits in cocaine trafficking makeinterdiction losses relatively inconsequential, especially inlight of the fact that production and smuggling costs account forsuch a small part of street prices. In 1988, for example, theRAND Corporation reported that only 10 percent of cocaine's finalprice is attributable to production and smuggling costs.' Most of the price growth occurs after cocaine crosses U.S.borders. Our 1991 report noted that the price for enough cocoaleaf to produce one kilogram (2.2 pounds) of cocaine was between$65 and $370. The finished product that entered the country wasvalued at $800 to $5,000 per kilogram. After being diluted, thestreet price equated to between $70,000 and $300,000 a kilogram.Therefore, the profit margin--after cocaine has passed beyondDOD's surveillance and the threat of interdiction in route or atour borders--could range from about 6,000 to 8,600 percent. Giventhis huge profit margin, it appears unlikely that interdictionwill be a significant cost deterrent to traffickers, regardlessof the surveillance support that DOD provides. CONCLUSIONS In summary, Mr. Chairman, military surveillance has notdemonstrated that it can make a contribution--to either druginterdiction or to the national goal of reduced drugsupplies--that is commensurate with its cost. The portion of thefederal drug budget allocated to military surveillance has nearlyquadrupled over the last 5 years, without measurable goals orresults to show that the increases were warranted. Moreover, theavailable evidence indicates that they were not warranted. Evenwith DOD's increased surveillance support to interdiction,cocaine remains affordable and readily available in the UnitedStates. The continuing failure to reduce the amount of cocaineentering the country can undoubtedly be attributed to manyfactors. But the fact is that adding military surveillance to thenation's interdiction efforts has not made a difference in ourability to reduce the flow of cocaine to American streets. 'Peter Reuter, Gordon Crawford, Jonathan Cave, et al., Sealingthe Borders: The Effects of Increased Military Participation inDrug Interdiction. The RAND Corporation (January 1988). The National Drug Control Strategy has noted thatinterdiction efforts should be viewed, not in isolation, but asmerely one of the fronts on which the drug war is being waged.The same can reasonably be said of DOD's part in the interdictionprocess. Some level of surveillance is an essential part of theinterdiction program called for in the National Drug ControlStrategy. However, the level of that effort should becommensurate with the relative contribution that it makes--andcan be expected to make--to the national war on drugs. We believethat contribution has not been demonstrated by expanded militarysurveillance. We also believe that continuing failures tointerdict decisive numbers of cocaine shipments and to reduce thecocaine flow into the U.S. indicate that the government is notgetting a reasonable return on the increased funding provided formilitary surveillance. Mr. Chairman, that concludes my statement. I will be happy toanswer any questions you or members of the Subcommittee may have. CliffSchaffer's Home Page WT01-B29-87IA086-000619-B002-214http://206.61.184.43:80/schaffer/GovPubs/gao/gao2.htm 206.61.184.43 19970122032209 text/html 14009HTTP/1.0 200 OKDate: Wednesday, 22-Jan-97 03:21:59 GMTServer: WebSitePro/1.1f (S/N wpo-0deb)Allow-ranges: bytesContent-type: text/htmlLast-modified: Saturday, 28-Dec-96 06:21:55 GMTContent-length: 13791 U.S. Counterdrug Activities in Central America U.S. Counterdrug Activities in Central America Statement of Benjamin F. Nelson, Associate Director, International Affairs Issues, National Security andInternational Affairs Division GAO/T-NSIAD-94-251 August 2, 1994 GAO Testimony Before the Subcommittee on Information, Justice,Transportation, and Agriculture, Committee on GovernmentOperations, House of Representatives Mr. Chairman and members of the Subcommittee: I am pleased to be here today to discuss the results of ourreview on drug trafficking in Central America.' Our work, whichwas conducted at the request of this Subcommittee, focusedprimarily on (1) U.S. efforts to curb the flow of cocaine to theUnited States and the obstacles to those efforts, and (2) thecapabilities of Central American countries to interdict cocaineshipments and their dependence on U.S. assistance. Strategically located between the United States and thecocaine producing countries of South America, Central America andits coastline are used by drug traffickers to facilitate cocainetransshipment to Mexico and onward to the United States. The U.S.Customs Service estimates that two-thirds of all cocaine enteringthe United States crosses the U.S.-Mexican land border whereconcealment in cargo is the preferred method of operation.Although the amount of cocaine that transits Central America isnot known, the Department of State estimates that as much as 70tons of cocaine annually transits Guatemala, the country which isthe focus of U.S. interdiction efforts in the region. The UnitedStates, in 1993, programmed about $56.5 million to curb the flowof drugs in the Central American region. Of this total, over $48million was for U.S. directed interdiction efforts. Drug Control Interdiction_Efforts in Central America HaveHad Little Impact on the Flow Of_Drugs (GAO/NSIAD-94-233,Aug. 2, 1994). Drug Control: Impact of DOD's Detection and Monitoringon Cocaine Flow (GAO/NSIAD-91-297, Sept. 19, 1991): DrugControl: Heavy Investment in Military Surveillance Is NotPaying Off (GAO/NSIAD-93-220. Sept. 1, 1993): and DrugControl: Expanded Military_Surveillance Not Justified byMeasured Goals or Results (GAO//T-NSIAD-94-14, Oct. 5,1993). RESULTS IN BRIEF Despite various U.S. government interdiction efforts, CentralAmerica continues to be a major transshipment point for cocaineshipments to the United States. Available evidence suggests thatthe supply of drugs enteringthe United States via Central Americaremains virtually uninterrupted. Drug traffickers have adjustedtheir modes of operations to evade U.S. air interdiction effortsand are increasingly using sea and land transportation to movedrugs through Central America and on to the United States. U.S. efforts to control the flow of narcotics have centeredon intercepting drug trafficking aircraft transiting the regionand seizing drugs destined for the United States. The primaryeffort has been Operation Cadence, a program combining theefforts of various U.S. government agencies with interdictionoperations conducted by Drug Enforcement Administration (DEA) andCentral American police personnel. Initiated in 1991, OperationCadence involves the deployment of specially trained U.S. lawenforcement agents to Guatemala who, working on information andintelligence developed by DEA, Department of Defense (DOD), andthe U.S. Customs Service, attempt to seize trafficking aircraftand their cargos. According to DEA, Operation Cadence has been responsible forseizing almost 29 metric tons of cocaine since its inception.However, annual Cadence cocaine seizures have declined. Thenumber of detected flights to the seven countries of CentralAmerica fell from 84 in 1992 to 25 in 1993. Suspected traffickingflights into Guatemala fell from 57 in 1992 to 13 in 1993. As aresult of Operation Cadence's ability to successfully seize agrowing percent of those aircraft choosing to land in Guatemalaand six consecutive successful interdiction operations during theJune to September 1993 period, traffickers have avoided Guatemalaand no suspected trafficking flights have been detected enteringthe country between October 1993 and March of this year. Operation Cadence achievements, however, have had littleimpact on the flow of drugs to the United States. This is becausetraffickers have changed to different modes of transportationthat are much more difficult to identify and stop. For example,traffickers are increasingly using over-land and oversea airdrops to deliver cocaine to Central America. Traffickers are alsosaid to be changing their routes to avoid radar assets on thenorthern coast of South America. A DEA official involved inOperation Cadence told us that traffickers are believed to beflying small aircraft into the jungle area that separatesColombia and Panama, trucking drug cargoes across Panama, andreloading the drugs on small aircraft that mix with legitimateair traffic in the region. In addition, DEA reports indicate thatmaritime vessels and air cargo containers are now responsible forthe bulk of the cocaine being moved into Central America and muchof the cocaine being smuggled into the United States. The use ofships and boats allows cocaine to be transported in greater bulkand more easily concealed--increasing the difficulty of detectionwhen commingled with legitimate cargo. The large volume of vehicular traffic crossing into Mexicofrom Central America also provides traffickers with amplesmuggling opportunities. Once into Mexico, whether by air, boat,or land, the drugs are usually destined for the United States.Almost 6,600 tractor trailer trucks and 21 1,000 passengervehicles cross the U.S.-Mexican border each day making drugshipments difficult to detect. The Central American nations through which these drugs travelhave neither the resources nor the institutional capability toaddress the new drug trafficking modes and are heavily dependenton U.S. assistance. Various U.S. government agencies are workingwith Central American countries on a number of small-scaleprojects to address new trafficking modes. However, the outcomeof these efforts is uncertain due to the limited host countrycapabilities and changes in U.S. program emphasis from druginterdiction in the transit countries of Central America tointercepting drugs in the source countries of South America. U.S. AGENCIES EFFORTS TO CONTROL DRUG TRAFFIC FACEOBSTACLES For fiscal year 1993, State, DEA, DOD, and the U.S. CustomsService programmed over $48 million to support Operation Cadenceand other interdiction activities in Central America. Thisexpenditure primarily represents the cost of U.S. personnel andservices and the operation of U.S.-owned radar and aircraft.Using various land-, sea-, and air-based radar, DOD programmed$24.7 million on detecting and monitoring drugtraffickingaircraft as they left South America and approached the CentralAmerican isthmus. The U.S. Customs Service spent at least $9million to monitor suspect trafficking aircraft and track them inCentral American airspace. The Department of State budgeted $6.1million to operate and maintain aircraft used to transportCadence personnel to aircraft landing sites and $1 million totrain and support Guatemalan police personnel involved ininterdiction operations. DEA spent $828,000 to support thedeployment of Operation Cadence teams to the region and $6.5million to operate its offices in six Central American countries. In addition to supporting Operation Cadence, the Departmentof State programmed almost $8 million to improve the druginterdiction capabilities of six Central American nations;support drug eradication efforts; and inform Central Americancitizens about the adverse impacts of drug production,trafficking, and abuse. Obstacles to Successful Interdiction Operations In addition to problems inherent in identifying andinterdicting drug traffickers, U.S. efforts in Central Americaface a number of other obstacles, some of which involve nationalsovereignty and jurisdictional issues. For example, OperationCadence activities in Belize were suspended for about a yearbecause the government of Belize prohibited the entrance ofCadence personnel armed with M-16 rifles. Belize, continuesto prohibit Department of State helicopters armed with M-60machine guns from flying over Belize. Similarly, the governmentof Honduras does not allow Guatemalan aircraft or personnel tofly over its territory. According to one State Departmentofficial, regional suspicions have also inhibited joint trainingand adversely affected joint drug interdiction operations. At a 1993 conference, Central American presidents discussedgreater antidrug cooperation and pledged their commitment todevelop specific regional counterdrug programs within 6 months.To date, however, none of the actions approved at the presidents'conference have been initiated. INTERDICTION CAPABILITIES OF CENTRAL AMERICAN COUNTRIESARE SEVERELY LIMITED AND HIGHLY DEPENDENT ON U.S. ASSISTANCE Although all of the Central American countries--Belize, CostaRica, El Salvador, Guatemala, Honduras, Nicaragua, andPanama--have drug control efforts underway, no country possessesthe technical, financial, or human resources necessary to run anefficient drug interdiction program. In addition, none of thecountries has an organization in place to effectively counter theoverland or maritime drug movement. The limited interdictionefforts that they do undertake face obstacles and are highlydependent on U.S. assistance. 3 Department of State helicopters used in Operation Cadenceare operated and maintained by a U.S. government contractor,which employs Guatemalan civilian pilots. Also, Cadenceinterdiction teams include a number of host nation lawenforcement personnel who are restricted to operations withintheir country. Limited Capabilities and Obstacles None of the Central American countries have the resourcesnecessary to purchase sophisticated equipment and developwell-trained personnel to combat the well-financed, creative, andhighly adaptable drug traffickers. No Central American nation hasa navy or coast guard capable of adequately patrolling all of itsterritorial waters. For example, four Honduran Navy ships areresponsible for patrolling that country's 400 mile Caribbeancoast. At the time of our field visit, three of these ships werein dry dock, and Honduras, for a long period of time, could notafford fuel for the fourth ship. Programs specifically dedicated to counternarcoticsactivities suffer from inadequate funding. In Honduras, forexample, anti-drug police officers earn as little as $60 a month. Corruption also limits the effectiveness of Central Americangovernments' narcotics control efforts. In its 1993 and 1994reports to Congress on the international narcotics controlstrategy, State reported concerns of narcotics related corruptionin all seven countries of Central America. Funding for U.S. Narcotics Control Activities Is Declining As a result of budgetary constraints and concern over theeffectiveness of State's narcotics control program, Congressreduced the funds available for this worldwide program from$147.8 million to $100 million in fiscal year 1994. During fiscalyear 1993, the United States provided a combined total of $6million in narcotics control assistance to six of the sevenCentral American countries. Current plans are to provide thesecountries with $3 Billion during fiscal year 1994. To accommodate reduced funding level in Central America,State Department terminated the deployment of aninterdiction/eradication helicopter to Belize, reduced the numberof helicopters it had deployed to Guatemala, and greatly reducedthe number of flying hours available to support Operation Cadenceinterdiction activities. This reduced level of aviation supporthas adversely affected interdiction efforts, since DEA has had toreduce the number of Operation Cadence teams in Guatemala. In February 1994, the White House released the new nationaldrug control strategy, which changed the focus from interdictingdrug shipments in the transit zone toward stopping the flow ofdrugs at their source. Along with the shift in emphasis, thestrategy clearly envisions a reduced role for DOD and itsdetecting and monitoring assets in the transit zones. The impactof this strategy shift is not yet clear. Mr. Chairman, that concludes my statement. I will be happy toanswer any questions you or members of the Subcommittee have. CliffSchaffer's Home Page WT01-B29-88IA086-000619-B002-240http://206.61.184.43:80/schaffer/GovPubs/gao/gao3.htm 206.61.184.43 19970122032225 text/html 24292HTTP/1.0 200 OKDate: Wednesday, 22-Jan-97 03:22:12 GMTServer: WebSitePro/1.1f (S/N wpo-0deb)Allow-ranges: bytesContent-type: text/htmlLast-modified: Saturday, 28-Dec-96 06:24:34 GMTContent-length: 24074 Drug War - Colombia Is Implementing Antidrug Efforts, butImpact Is Uncertain The DRUG WAR- Colombia Is Implementing Antidrug Efforts, butImpact Is Uncertain Statement of Joseph E. Kelley, Director-in-Charge,International Affairs Issues, National Security and InternationalAffairs Division GAO/T-NSIAD-94-53 October 5. 1993 GAO Testimony Before the Subcommittee on Legislation and National SecurityCommittee on Government Operations, U.S. House of Representatives Mr. Chairman and Members of the Subcommittee: I am pleased to be here today to discuss our recent report onthe progress and problems that U.S. and Colombian agencies haveexperienced in implementing U.S. antidrug programs in Colombiabetween fiscal years 1990 and 1992. This report is a follow-up toour initial report that was issued in September 1991.1 In August 1989, President Bush approved the Andean Strategy, amajor component of the U.S. national drug control strategy, whichis designed to help reduce the supply of illegal drugs beingshipped to the United States. RESULTS IN BRIEF In the 3 years since the Andean Strategy was announced,Colombia has demonstrated its commitment and political will bytaking action to support U.S. counternarcotics objectives. It hasapplied pressure against drug-trafficking activities through lawenforcement and military actions and has disrupteddrug-trafficking activities in Colombia and, as a result, U.S.officials believe these programs are effective. The effectivenessof Colombia's efforts and U.S. programs could not be determinedhowever, because U.S. officials lack the data needed to make suchan assessment-specifically the amount of cocaine being shippedfrom Colombia to the United States. My testimony point out that various obstacles have hinderedthe implementation and effectiveness of U.S. efforts in Colombia.These obstacles included the limited ability of some Colombianagencies to plan and implement effective programs, increasedinsurgency and narcoterrorist activities, the expansion of drugtrafficking activities into opium cultivation, corruption withinthe Colombian government, and the lack of effective antidrugprograms in other neighboring countries. Further my testimonydescribes certain U.S. management problems that have hindered theplanning and implementation of U.S. antidrug programs inColombia. -- The State Department reduced the funding for military andlaw enforcement programs because of budgetary constraints. Theseconstraints have impeded and will continue to impede programsthat U.S. Embassy officials believe are needed to enhanceColombia's antidrug capabilities. U.S. Embassy officials stated,however, that even if the enhancement programs were fully funded,they did not know whether these programs would fulfill U.S.antidrug objectives or whether more funds would be needed. Webelieve that it will be difficult to determine what fundinglevels are needed to fully meet U.S. antidrug objectives becausethe cartels are flexible and can easily adjust their operationsto elude law enforcement efforts, and are expanding theiractivities in Colombia and elsewhere. Drug War: Observations on U.S. Counternarcotics Aid toColombia (GAO/NSIAD-91-296, Sept. 30, 1991). We also note that poor coordination among U.S. agencies hasresulted in the inefficient use of resources, and weaknesses ininventory and financial management practices affecting Colombiannational police programs are hindering program effectiveness. Regarding the oversight of U.S. programs, U.S. militaryofficials have been slow to implement end-use monitoring plansand U.S. Embassy officials cannot provide assurance that U.S.policies regarding the use of aid and human rights are being met.Our recent report makes recommendations to the Director of theOffice of National Drug Control Policy regarding the need toreevaluate antidrug programs in Colombia and throughout theAndean region and to the Secretary of State to improve themanagement and oversight of U.S.-provided aid. BACKGROUND In August 1989, President Bush approved the Andean Strategy, amajor component of the U.S. national drug control strategy, whichis designed to help reduce the supply of illegal drugs, includingcocaine and heroin, being shipped to the United States. Underthat strategy, the United States provides increased levels ofmilitary, law enforcement, and economic aid to Bolivia, Colombia,and Peru to assist them to disrupt drug-trafficking activities.The United States places special emphasis on Colombia because itis the leading source country for processed cocaine. Furthermore,Colombia is the home of two major cartels, Medellin and Cali,that are responsible for most of the drug-related activity. Simply put, the goal of U.S. counternarcotics programs inColombia is to assist that government in its efforts to disruptand ultimately dismantle drug-trafficking activities within itsborders. Between fiscal years 1990 and 1992, the United Statesagreed to provide about $504.3 million worth of aid to assist theColombian government to achieve this goal. of this amount, theUnited States agreed to provide Colombia with $397.2 millionworth of military and law enforcement aid and guaranteed loansfrom the Export-Import Bank to improve the capabilities of lawenforcement and military organizations to disruptdrug-trafficking activities. The remaining $107.1 million waseconomic aid designed to improve Colombia's balance of payments,strengthen its judiciary and economy, and support poppyeradication operations of the police. PROGRAMS ARE BEING IMPLEMENTED, BUT IMPACT IS UNCERTAIN The United States and Colombia are undertaking a variety ofprograms and initiatives to meet U.S. counternarcotics objectivesfor Colombia. Colombia has increased efforts designed to disruptsome drug-related activities of the major cartels. Although U.S.officials admit that these efforts have not significantly reducedthe availability of cocaine in the United States, they believethat the efforts are effective and should be continued. However,we do not believe that the effectiveness of these efforts can beassessed because U.S. officials lack the data needed to make sucha determination. Furthermore, the potential impact that U.S.programs are having on drug-related activities are affected byvarious obstacles in and around Colombia. Antidrug Programs Are Being Implemented U.S. aid is being used to implement various programs designedto meet U.S. antidrug objectives in Colombia. For example: -- The first objective is to strengthen the institutional andpolitical will of the Colombian government to take action againstdrug-trafficking activities. Improving the judicial system is ahigh priority of this objective. In 1990, the U.S. Agency forInternational Development began developing a 6-year, $36 millionprogram designed to improve Colombia's judicial system. We foundthat progress is beginning to be made on improving that system. The second and third objectives relate to improving thecapabilities that are needed for the Colombian government toconduct counternarcotics operations against drug-relatedactivities. Most of the $397.2 million in military and lawenforcement aid and guaranteed loans have provided the Colombianlaw enforcement and military organizations with the equipment,training, and support needed to improve their capabilities. The fourth objective is to strengthen Colombia's economy. Asof April 1992, the United States had provided about $41 millionin Economic Support Funds to reduce Colombia's debt to the UnitedStates and multilateral lenders. This allowed Colombia to use itsown funds to soften the impact of reducing the role of illicitdrugs in the economy, financing alternative development projects,and supporting drug awareness programs. Colombia Is Taking Action to Disrupt Drug-TraffickingActivities Our review indicated that Colombia's actions are disruptingdrugtrafficking activities. Between calendar years 1990 and 1992,the Colombian government seized 177 metric tons of cocaine,destroyed 737 labs, and destroyed over 13,000 hectares of opiumpoppy. Both the United States and Colombia made law enforcementoperations against the Medellin cartel, headed by Pablo Escobar,their initial priority because of the cartel's dominant role incocaine production and terrorism. In March 1993, the DrugEnforcement Administration reported that these efforts haveresulted in disrupting many of the cartel's activities. Inaddition, Pablo Escobar turned himself into the government fortrial in 1991. Although he escaped from prison in mid-1992, U.S.officials believe that his power has substantially declined. The Colombian government has also begun to take lawenforcement action against the Cali cartel. One operationresulted in the seizure of more than $54 million from bankaccounts maintained in five countries. Despite Colombia's efforts to disrupt drug-traffickingactivities, U.S. officials admitted that cocaine remains readilyavailable to U.S. users. However, these officials believe thatU.S. programs in Colombia should continue to be funded becausethey are effective in disrupting drug-trafficking activities andin meeting U.S. counternarcotics goals. Data to Measure Program Impacts and Contributions AreLacking We do not believe that U.S. officials can determine the impactof efforts to disrupt drug-trafficking activities or theircontribution to reduce the supply of cocaine being shipped fromColombia to the United States because they lack the data to makethis assessment. U.S. officials recognize that problems existwith the data that is being used to measure effectiveness. Statistics such as seizures, labs destroyed, number ofarrests, or changes in the prices and availability of cocaine arefrequently used as measures of effectiveness. However, these databy themselves cannot be used to evaluate the effectiveness ofprograms. For example, while increased seizures are generallyviewed as an indicator of success, a decrease in seizures doesnot necessarily mean that a program is less effective than it waspreviously. Furthermore, estimates used to determine drugavailability and consumption are generally not designed tomeasure the effectiveness of individual U.S. interdictionprograms. To evaluate the impact of Colombia's antidrug efforts todisrupt drug-related activities or reduce the supply of cocainebeing shipped from Colombia to the United States, U.S. officialswould need information on the amount of cocaine being shippedinto the United States, the deterrent effect that these effortshave on drug-related activities, and the effectiveness ofinterdiction alternatives. This data is not available. Withoutthis data it is difficult to determine the impact andcontribution that programs in Colombia are making in meeting U.S.antidrug goals. For example, without knowing the amount ofcocaine being shipped out of Colombia into the United States,neither the percentage of cocaine being interdicted nor theeffectiveness of antidrug operations in reducing the amount ofcocaine can be easily determined. Long-Term Commitment Is Needed Even though U.S. officials recognize that they lack the dataneeded to determine program success, they believe that thenational drug strategy's goals of disrupting drug-traffickingactivities and reducing the supply of cocaine entering the UnitedStates will require a long-term commitment on the part of theUnited States and Colombia to continue law enforcement efforts. According to U.S. officials, Colombia's efforts against thecartels are similar to U.S. law enforcement efforts againstorganized crime, which has existed for many years. In fact, theseofficials stated that Colombia faces even more significantobstacles than the United States does because it has limitedresources and technologies available to fight the cartels and thecartels are as powerful or more powerful than many criminalorganizations in the United States. Obstacles Hinder U.S. Programs Various obstacles in and around Colombia are hindering theeffectiveness of U.S. programs in Colombia. They include thefollowing: Colombia's ability to plan and implement effectivecounternarcotics programs has weaknesses. Various U.S. reportsshow that some civilian agencies as well as the police have notbeen effective in planning or implementing programs. Increased active insurgency and narcoterrorism activities inlarge sections of Colombia hinder the government's efforts tomaintain the presence needed to sustain counternarcoticspressure. Two guerilla groups, the Revolutionary Armed Forces ofColombia and the National Liberation Army, are reportedlyinvolved in drug-trafficking activities in Colombia. The cartels are expanding their activities into heroin. U.S.estimates show that in less than 2 years, poppy cultivation inColombia has expanded from about 2,500 to about 32,700 hectares.In early 1992, the Colombian government formally approved anaerial eradication program to supplement its manual programbecause it was concerned about this expansion. Under the program,the police are using helicopters and fixed-wing aircraftoriginally provided by the United States for cocaine operationsfor aerial poppy eradication. As a result, cocaine operationshave declined, while poppy eradication operations have increased.Current plans show that increases in aid will be needed tocontinue operations against cocaine interdiction and poppyeradication. Various U.S. Embassy reports show that corruption existsthroughout the government. Corruption was a primary reason whyPablo Escobar, head of the Medellin cartel, escaped in mid-1992from prison to avoid prosecution. Colombian programs will not succeed unless other regionalantidrug programs are effective. We have reviewed programs inPeru, Brazil, Ecuador, Venezuela, Panama, and Mexico. Our reportsshow that significant obstacles have also impeded theeffectiveness of these programs. U.S. officials stated that evenif Colombia were successful in eliminating drugtraffickingactivities within its borders, the trafficking would spill overinto other countries, especially countries that were notaggressive in interdiction efforts. U.S. MANAGEMENT DIFFICULTIES HINDER IMPLEMENTATION OFCOUNTERNARCOTICS PROGRAMS Both the U.S. Embassy and the Defense Department reportednumerous problems in planning and implementing counternarcoticsprograms in Colombia. For example the U.S. Embassy had numerousproblems in procuring equipment for the police in a timely,efficient, and effective manner. We also found several problems that affected the ability ofthe United States to implement programs in a timely, efficient,and effective manner. These problems included the inability ofthe State Department to provide funding levels needed toimplement programs that U.S. officials believe are needed to meetU.S. antidrug objectives, the lack of effective coordinationbetween the Departments of State and Defense, and inventory andfinancial management. Budgetary Constraints Limit Available Funding to SupportPrograms To implement the counternarcotics strategy in Colombia, theUnited States has primarily relied on two funding sources--theForeign Military Financing Program (FMFP) and the InternationalNarcotics Control Program, both managed by the State Department.Since 1992, the State Department has not allocated the fundingneeded to support the programs that U.S. officials in Colombiabelieve are needed to meet U.S. counternarcotics objectives.  The Drug War: U.S. Programs in Peru Face SeriousObstacles (GAO/NSIAD-92-36, Oct. 21, 1991); The Drug War:Extent of Problems in Brazil, Ecuador, and Venezuela(GAO/NSIAD-92-226, June 5, 1992); The War on Drugs: NarcoticsControl in Panama (GAO/NSIAD-91-233, July 16, 1991) ; and DrugControl: Revised Drug Interdiction Approach Is Needed in Mexico(GAO/NSIAD-93-152, May 10, 1993). In fiscal years 1992 and 1993, U.S. officials in Colombiaestimated that $116 million worth of FMFP aid would be needed toimplement various programs to improve the capabilities of thepolice and military organizations involved in counternarcoticsoperations. However, because of budget constraints, the StateDepartment allocated only $73 million. As a result many of thecounternarcotics requirements for law enforcement and militaryorganizations could not be funded. In fiscal years 1992 and 1993, the U.S. Embassy estimated thatlaw enforcement programs funded under the International NarcoticsControl Program would need about $62.1 million worth of aid tosupport several existing projects. However, because of budgetaryconstraints, the State Department provided only about $45.4million, which was not considered to be adequate to fully supporteven one of the several projects. Budgetary constraints may continue to affect the U.S. abilityto provide the funds that may be needed to meet additionalrequirements that U.S. officials believe Colombia needs to fightdrug-related activities. In early 1992, the U.S. Embassyrecognized that additional requirements, not included in originalplans, would be needed to strengthen the counternarcoticscapabilities of both law enforcement and military organizations.In reviewing an enhancement plan developed by the U.S. Embassy,the executive branch decided that before any funding would beprovided, two criteria would have to be met. First, requirementshad to meet critical needs, and second, the Colombian governmenthad to be able to absorb the equipment. Based on its analysis,the executive branch identified about $12 million worth ofadditional aid to provide. According to the office of NationalDrug Control Policy, this aid was delivered in April and May1993. Even though the U.S. Embassy believes that additionalrequirements are needed, the executive branch has not includedmore funding for the plan in fiscal years 1993 and 1994. U.S. Embassy officials stated that these actions will affectimplementation of the enhanced programs in Colombia. However,they admitted that even if all the requirements identified in theenhancement plan were fully funded, they did not know whether thefunding would be adequate to fully meet U.S. antidrug objectivesor whether additional funds would be needed. We believe that it is difficult to determine what fundinglevels will be needed to achieve U.S. antidrug objectives inColombia because the cartels are flexible and can easily adjusttheir operations to elude law enforcement efforts. Also, they areexpanding their activities (i.e. relocating activities insections of Colombia where the government cannot maintain controland diversifying operations into opium-related drug-traffickingactivities) within Colombia and elsewhere. Coordination and Management of Inventory and FinanceDifficulties Our review also indicated that the Departments of State andDefense were not effectively coordinating some of their programs.This lack of coordination has led to an inefficient use ofresources. For example, reports indicated that the Colombian airforce could not use some U.S.-provided equipment because it waseither the wrong type or was missing parts. we also found thatvarious offices within the U.S. Embassy had not effectivelyimplemented a police helicopter training course. As a result, theprogram was charged a cancellation fee of $297,000 when thepolice did not send students to the course in January 1992. We also found that, because of ineffective inventory andfinancial management practices, the State Department could notprovide adequate logistics support in a timely manner. Theresulting lack of spare parts hindered U.S. ability to meet itsgoal of maintaining a 70-percent availability rate for policeaircraft. Various administrative financial management problemsalso exist. For example, contractors were not paid in a timelymanner for services performed, which has led to difficulties insupporting the antidrug programs and has had a detrimental effecton antidrug operations. OVERSIGHT OF U.S. PROGRAMS IS LACKING U.S. military officials have been slow to implement themonitoring plans that they believe are needed to provide adequateassurances that U.S. aid is being used as intended. Although U.S.officials informed us in 1991 that such plans were beingimplemented, they had not been fully implemented at the time ofour review. Furthermore, U.S. officials did not have proceduresor the data to determine whether units involved in human rightsabuses had received U.S. aid. We found two instances whereindividuals reportedly involved in human rights abuses belongedto particular units that had received U.S. aid. RECOMMENDATIONS Because (1) U.S. officials lack the data needed to evaluateprogram effectiveness, (2) various obstacles impede programimplementation, (3) additional resource requirements have beenidentified to meet the expanding drug trade, and (4) U.S.budgetary constraints will continue, we have recommended that theDirector of the office of National Drug Control Policy, inconjunction with other agencies, reevaluate U.S. antidrugprograms in Colombia and throughout the Andean region todetermine what the U.S. antidrug objectives should be for eachcountry. We also recommended that the Director evaluate whattypes of programs should be included, what funding would benecessary to support these programs, and whether this fundingwould ensure that the programs could significantly disruptdrug-trafficking activities and reduce the supply of cocainebeing shipped to the United States. As part of this reevaluation,a quantitative baseline should be established to evaluateprogress that U.S. antidrug programs in Colombia and the otherAndean countries are having on meeting established U.S. antidrugobjectives and goals. Our report also includes other recommendations to theSecretary of State that are designed to improve the managementand oversight of U.S.-provided aid to ensure that it is used inan efficient and effective manner and in accordance with U.S.policies. This concludes my testimony. I will be happy to answer anyquestions you or the Subcommittee may have regarding our review. WT01-B29-89IA086-000619-B002-267http://206.61.184.43:80/schaffer/GovPubs/gao/gao4.htm 206.61.184.43 19970122032235 text/html 76562HTTP/1.0 200 OKDate: Wednesday, 22-Jan-97 03:22:28 GMTServer: WebSitePro/1.1f (S/N wpo-0deb)Allow-ranges: bytesContent-type: text/htmlLast-modified: Saturday, 28-Dec-96 06:18:39 GMTContent-length: 76344 Interdiction Efforts in Central America Have Had LittleImpact o Interdiction Efforts in Central America Have Had LittleImpact on the Flow of Drugs United States General Accounting Office GAO Report to the Chairman, Subcommittee on Information,Justice, Transportation, and Agriculture, Committee on GovernmentOperations, House of Representatives August 1994 DRUG CONTROL GAONSLAD-94-233 United States GAO General Accounting Office Washington, D.C. 20548 National Security and International Affairs Division B-257824 August 2, 1994 The Honorable Gary A. Condit Chairman, Subcommittee on Information, Justice, Transportation, and Agriculture Committee onGovernment Operations House of Representatives Dear Mr. Chairman: In response to your request, we reviewed U.S.-assistednarcotics control efforts in Central America.' This reportdescribes (1) the drug trafficking situation in that region, (2)the efforts being made by various U.S. departments and agenciesto curb the flow of cocaine and the obstacles they face incarrying out these efforts, (3) the capabilities of CentralAmerican countries to interdict cocaine shipments and theirdependence on U.S. assistance, and (4) new U.S. counterdruginitiatives. Results in Brief: Despite various U.S. governmentinterdiction efforts, Central America continues to be a primarytransshipment point for cocaine shipments to the United States.Available evidence suggests that the supply of drugs entering theUnited States via Central America remains virtuallyuninterrupted. Law enforcement officials stated that drugtraffickers have adjusted their modes of operations to evade U.S.air interdiction efforts and are increasingly using sea and landtransportation to move drugs through Central America to theUnited States. Drugs moved by these new trafficking modes arevery difficult to detect and interdict. The Central Americannations have neither the resources nor the institutionalcapability to address the new drug trafficking modes and areheavily dependent on U.S. assistance. Various U.S. governmentagencies are working with some Central American countries on anumber of small-scale projects to address new trafficking modes.However, the outcome of these efforts is uncertain due to limitedhost country capabilities and shifts in U.S. program emphasisfrom drug interdiction in the transit countries of CentralAmerica toward intercepting drugs and disrupting drugorganizations in the source countries of South America. 'Central American countries are Belize, Costa Rica, ElSalvador, Guatemala, Honduras, Nicaragua, and Panama. 'Drug Control: Expanded Military Surveillance Not Justifiedby Measured Goals or Results (GAO/T-NSIAD-94-14,Oct. 5,1993); Drug Control: Heavy Investment in MilitarySurveillance Is Not Paying Off (GAO/NSIAD-93-220, Sept. 1,1993); and Drug Control: Impact of DOD's Detection and Monitoringon Cocaine Flow (GAO/NSIAD-91-297, Sept. 19,1991). Background: By the late 1980s, most cocaine enteringthe United States was flown directly from the producing countriesof South America into northern Mexico, where the cargo was thentransported by truck across the border. However, in response tojoint U.S. -Meexican drug interdiction efforts in northernMexico, traffickers began to adjust their routes and moved theiroperations and staging areas to southern Mexico and neighboringCentral American countries.' Strategically located between the United States and thecocaine producing countries of South America, Central America andits coastline are used as a bridge by drug traffickers tofacilitate cocaine transshipment to the United States. The twoprimary air routes used to move cocaine from Colombia to CentralAmerica and Mexico are the western Caribbean corridor and themore frequently used eastern Pacific corridor.' (See fig. 1.)From various points along these corridors, traffickers eitherland and offload their drugs or airdrop their drug cargoes. Drugsare then stockpiled for shipment to Mexico and then the UnitedStates. 3Drug Control: Revised Drug Inter-diction Approach IsNeeded in Mexico (GAO/NSIAD-93-152, May 10, 1993). 'In a limited number of cases, traffickers in producingcountries have been known to fly their drug cargoes directly tothe United States or Canada. Figure 1: Primary Cocaine Trafficking Routes FromColombia to Central America and the United States Drugs Continue to Transit Central America In recent years, the major thrust of the U.S. drug strategyin Central America has been to intercept drug traffickingaircraft as they move drug cargoes along established traffickingroutes. This strategy appears to have been successful inGuatemala, the primary transhipment country of the region, buthas had little impact on the flow of drugs to the United States. According to law enforcement officials, the strategy has notbeen effective because traffickers have adjusted their methods ofoperation and destinations to evade U.S. detection andinterdiction efforts. In addition, the U.S. government andCentral American countries face numerous obstacles to developingeffective counterdrug programs. Although the amount of cocainethat transits Central America is not known, the Department ofState estimates that as much as 70 tons of cocaine transitsGuatemala annually, the country at the focus of U.S. interdictionefforts in the region. As the United States has increased its ability to detect,monitor, and interdict drug trafficking aircraft moving fromSouth America to Central America and the United States,traffickers have turned to more complex and evasive means of airdelivery and to less detectable highway and sea transportation.Some U.S. officials believe that, in a limited number ofinstances, drug traffickers have changed their air shipmentmethods to avoid detection by Department of Defense (DOD) radar.For example, one drug enforcement official told us thattraffickers are flying small aircraft into the jungle area thatspans the border between Colombia and Panama, trucking drugcargoes across Panama, and reloading the drugs on small aircraftthat mix with legitimate air traffic in the region. Ms techniqueavoids the radar assets that DOD has focused on the northerncoast of South America. According to the Drug Enforcement Administration (DEA),maritime vessels and air cargo conveyances are now responsiblefor the bulk of the cocaine being moved into Central America andmuch of the cocaine being smuggled into the United States. Theuse of ships and boats allows cocaine to be transported ingreater bulk so that it can be more easily concealed andincreases the difficulty of detecting drugs that are commingledwith legitimate cargo. The National Narcotics IntelligenceConsumers Committee reports that cocaine has been hidden in thewalls of cargo containers, in bulk cargo such as coffee, andattached to the vessels themselves. The U.S. Customs Servicefaces an enormous challenge as it attempts to examine allcontainers entering U.S. ports. For example, over 44,000 seacontainers arrived at U.S. seaports from cocaine source andtransit countries during fiscal year 1992. Of this total, Customsexamined 13 percent of the full containers and 25 percent of theempty ones. The large volume of vehicular traffic crossing into Mexicofrom Central America also provides traffickers with amplesmuggling opportunities. Once into Mexico, whether by air, boat,or land, the drugs are usually destined for the United States.Almost 6,600 tractor trailer trucks and 21 1,000 passengervehicles cross the U. S.-Mexico border each day. Customsestimates that two-thirds of all cocaine entering the UnitedStates crosses the U. S.-Mexico land border concealed in cargo.Appendix I contains detailed information on drug trafficking inCentral America. Numerous Agencies U.S. narcotics control efforts in CentralAmerica have centered on intercepting drug trafficking aircrafttransiting the region and seizing drugs Involved in U.S. destinedfor the United States. The primary focus has been OperationInterdiction and Cadence, a program combining the effortsof various U.S. government Control Efforts agencies withinterdiction operations conducted by DEA and Central Americanpolice personnel. Initiated in 1991, Operation Cadence involvesthe deployment of specially trained U.S. law enforcement agentsto Guatemala who work with information and intelligence developedby DEA, DOD, and Customs to seize trafficking aircraft and theircargoes. Available data indicates that State, DEA, DOD, and Customsprogrammed over $48 million to support Operation Cadence andother interdiction activities in Central America during fiscalyear 1993. These expenditures primarily represented the cost ofU.S. personnel and services and the operation of U.S.-owned radarand aviation assets. With the use of various land-, sea-, andair-based radar assets, DOD spent an estimated $24.7 minion ondetecting and monitoring drug trafficking aircraft as they leftSouth America and approached the Central American isthmus.Customs spent at least $9 million to monitor suspect traffickingaircraft and track them once they entered a particular country'sairspace. The Department of State spent $6.1 million to operateand maintain aircraft used to transport Cadence personnel toaircraft landing sites and $1 million to train and supportGuatemalan police personnel involved in interdiction operations. DEA spent $828,000 to support the deployment of Cadence teamsto the region. DEA also spent about $6.5 million to conductroutine investigative activities not related to Operation Cadenceand operate offices in six Central American countries. 1The National Narcotics Intelligence Consumers Committee is amultiagency U.S. government panel that was established in1978 to coordinate foreign and domestic collection, analysis,dissemination, and evaluation of drug-related intelligence. According to DEA, Operation Cadence has been responsible forseizing almost 29 metric tons of cocaine since its inception inMay 1991.6 However, annual Cadence cocaine seizures havedeclined. The number of detected flights to the seven CentralAmerican countries fell from 84 in 1992 to 25 in 1993. The numberof suspected trafficking flights into Guatemala fell from 57 in1992 to 13 in 1993. As a result of Operation Cadence's ability tosuccessfully seize a growing percent of those aircraft landing inGuatemala and six consecutive successful interdiction operationsfrom June to September 1993, traffickers have avoided Guatemala.No suspected trafficking flights were detected entering Guatemalafrom October 1993 to March 1994, the last month for which data isavailable. Operation Cadence has also provided some interdictionand training assistance to Belize, El Salvador, and Hondurasthrough the short-term deployment Of DEA personnel. In addition to supporting Operation Cadence, the Departmentof State spent almost $4 million to improve the drug interdictioncapabilities of six Central American nations; support drugeradication efforts; and inform Central American citizens aboutthe adverse impacts of drug production, trafficking, and abuse.It also spent $4 million to operate and maintain State-ownederadication aircraft in Guatemala and Belize. The U.S. CoastGuard spent $400,000 to train regional maritime forces in vesselboarding and inspection procedures. Appendix 11 further discussesU.S. anti-narcotics activities in Central America. In addition to problems inherent in identifying andinterdicting drug traffickers, U.S. efforts in the CentralAmerican transit zone have been limited by national sovereigntyand jurisdiction issues. For example, Cadence activities inBelize were suspended for about 1 year because the government ofBelize prohibited the entrance of Cadence personnel armed withM-16 rifles. The government of Belize currently prohibitsDepartment of State helicopters armed with M-60 machine guns fromflying over that country. Similarly, the government of Hondurasdoes not allow Guatemalan aircraft or personnel to fly over itsterritory. In Honduras, flight plans for U.S. interdictionaircraft must be filed 48 hours in advance. One State Departmentofficial said that regional suspicions have also inhibited jointtraining and adversely affected joint drug interdictionoperations. 'One metric ton equals 1,000 kilograms or 2,205 pounds. Central American presidents discussed greater anti-drugcooperation at a conference in February 1993 and issued adeclaration stating their commitment to develop specific regionalcounterdrug programs within 6 months. As part of their agreement,the presidents also committed to establishing a new CentralAmerican counterdrug commission. To date, none of the actionsapproved at the conference have been initiated. Central American Although all of the Central Americancountries have drug control efforts underway, no countrypossesses the technical, financial, or human Drug Interdictionresources necessary to run an efficient drug interdictionprogram. In Capabilities Axe addition, none of the countries hasan organization in place to effectively Limited and counter theoverland or maritime drug movement. The limited interdictionefforts that they do undertake are highly dependent on U.S.assistance. Dependent on Assistance A U.S. senior Guatemalan narcotics control officialtold us that air and land interdiction rates in Guatemala wouldfall by at least 80 percent without U.S. assistance. In Honduras,a Department of State representative said that the druginterdiction effort would quickly wither away without thecontinued insistence and assistance from the United States. Limited Capabilities and Obstacles None of the Central American countries has the resourcesnecessary to purchase sophisticated equipment and developwell-trained personnel to combat the well-financed, creative, andhighly adaptable drug traffickers. No Central American nation has a navy or coast guard capableof completely controlling its territorial waters. For example,four Honduran Navy ships are responsible for patrolling thatcountry's extensive Caribbean coast. Three of these ships havebeen in dry dock, and Honduras could not afford fuel for thefourth ship for a long period of time. In addition, Honduras isthe only Central American country with the radar capability tomonitor its airspace. 'Department of State helicopters used in Cadence operationsare operated and maintained by a U.S. contractor, which employsGuatemalan civilian pilots. Also, Cadence interdiction teamsinclude a number of host nation law enforcement personnelwho are restricted to operations within their specific country. Corruption also limits the effectiveness of Central Americangovernments' narcotics control efforts. In its 1994 InternationalNarcotics Control Strategy Report to Congress, Statereported concerns of narcotics-related corruption in all sevenCentral American countries. Instances cited by State ranged fromthe premature release of people arrested and convicted on drugcharges to the alleged involvement of prominent individuals indrug trafficking. In another country, DEA has reported that thehost nation organization responsible for conducting itssurveillance and undercover operations is the least professionallaw enforcement agency in the country and the one mostsusceptible to corruption. Funding for U.S. Narcotics Budgetary constraints and concernover the effectiveness of State's Control Activities narcoticscontrol program resulted in Congress reducing the funds availablefor this worldwide program from $147.8 million in fiscal year1993 to $100 million in fiscal year 1994. Both host countryassistance and U.S. direct interdiction efforts are being reducedto accommodate the lower level of funding. The United States, through the Department of State, providedabout $5 million in narcotics control assistance to six of theseven Central American countries during fiscal year 1993 andplans to provide about $3 million in similar aid during fiscalyear 1994. This assistance provides training and logistics andmaintenance support to counternarcotics police in Belize, CostaRica, El Salvador, Guatemala, Honduras, and Panama. Narcoticscontrol training provided by the Department of State focused or,strengthening the capabilities of drug law enforcement units.Some of this training is provided by the U.S. Customs Service,which instructs Central American personnel on interdictiontechniques and detector dog operations; the U.S. Coast Guard,which provides training on vessel boarding techniques; and DEA,which provides training in investigatory techniques. Within Central America, the Department of State has focusedits efforts in Guatemala and Panama, where it establishednarcotics affairs sections to manage in-country programs andoversee much smaller projects in neighboring countries. Statehelped the government of Guatemala to organize an interdictionunit, develop a narcotics-related intelligence and informationclearinghouse, and establish a unit to coordinate interdictionoperations. State also supports Guatemalan efforts to eradicateopium poppy and marijuana cultivations by providing equipment,commodities, and aviation support. To accommodate reduced funding for counterdrug programs inCentral America, State terminated the deployment of aninterdictionleradication helicopter to Belize, reduced the numberof helicopters it had deployed to Guatemala, and greatly reducedthe number of flying hours available for support of OperationCadence interdiction activities. Ms reduced level of aviationsupport has adversely affected interdiction efforts and DEA hasreduced the number of Operation Cadence teams deployed inGuatemala. U.S. Plans to Combat Overland Drug Trafficking In recognition of the limited usefulness of existingprograms, U.S. anti-drug agencies, along with some CentralAmerican governments, are Maritime and developing new small-scaleapproaches to address the growing threat of maritime and overlandtrafficking through the region. However, it is not clear whetherthese initiatives will develop into viable programs because oflimited host country capabilities and changing emphasis andprogram priorities in the U.S. drug control strategy. DEA has developed a proposal for a maritime force to patrolthe coast of Honduras. Funding constraints, however, have causedState to reject DEA'S proposal. In Guatemala, the Department ofState has approached Guatemalan shipping interests and proposed aport inspection project that would tighten controls and safeguardthe integrity of goods shipped via Guatemalan ports. Start-upcosts for this project would be provided by State, and subsequentcosts would be the responsibility of the port authority, whichwould impose a fee on those who use the port and its facilities. In the meantime, in February 1994, the White House releasedthe new National Drug Control Strategy, which shifted the focusfrom interdicting drug shipments in the transit countries ofCentral America to intercepting drugs and disrupting drugorganizations in the source countries of South America. Thestrategy clearly envisions a reduced role for DOD and itsdetecting and monitoring assets in Central America and makes lessmoney available for U.S. assistance to Central Americancountries. The full impact of this strategy shift on transit zoneefforts is not yet clear. Scope and In conducting this review, we interviewed programofficers and reviewed planning documents, field reports, studies,and cables at the Department Methodology Of State, DEA, DOD, the Defense IntelligenceAgency, and the Office of National Drug Control Policy,Washington, D.C. We also met with program and operationalofficers at DEA's El Paso Intelligence Center in Texas and withofficials in Guatemala, Honduras, and Panama. We conducted ourwork between June 1993 and April 1994 in accordance withgenerally accepted government auditing standards. Additionalinformation on our scope and methodology is discussed in appendix111. We did not obtain written agency comments on this report.However, we discussed the information in a draft of this reportwith officials from the Departments of State and Defense and theDrug Enforcement Administration and incorporated their commentswhere appropriate. As agreed with your office, unless you publicly announce itscontents earlier, we plan no further distribution of this reportuntil 7 days from the issue date. At that time, we will sendcopies to appropriate congressional committees, the Secretariesof State and Defense, the Attorney General, the Administrator ofthe Drug Enforcement Administration, and the Directors of theOffice of National Drug Control Policy and the Office ofManagement and Budget. We will also provide copies to others onrequest. Please contact me on (202) 5124128 if you or your staff haveany questions on this report. Major contributors to this reportare listed in appendix IV. Sincerely yours, Joseph E. Kelley Director-in-Charge International Affairs Issues Contents Letter Appendix 1 14 Efforts to Control Drug Trafficking in Guatemala 14 Drug Trafficking in Honduras 17 Drug Trafficking Narcotics Trafficking in Other CentralAmerican Countries 21 Through Central America Appendix 11 26 DEA 27 U.S. Narcotics Control The Department of State 29 Activities in Central DOD 31 America The U.S. Customs Service 32 The U.S. Coast Guard 32 Appendix III 33 Scope and Methodology Appendix IV 34 Major Contributors to This Report Related GAO Products 36 Tables Table 1. 1: Cocaine Seizures in Guatemala 17 Table 1.2: Cocaine Seizures in Honduras 20 Table 11. 1: Roles of U.S. Organizations Involved inSupporting 26 Operation Cadence Table 11.2: U.S. Assistance to Narcotics Control Activitiesin 27 Central America Figure Figure 1: Primary Cocaine Trafficking Routes FromColombia to 3 Central America and the United States Page 12 GAO/NSIAD-94-233 Drug Control Contents Letter Appendix 1 14 Efforts to Control Drug Trafficking in Guatemala 14 Drug Trafficking in Honduras 17 Drug Trafficking Narcotics Trafficking in Other CentralAmerican Countries 21 Through Central America Appendix II 26 DEA 27 U.S. Narcotics Control The Department of State 29 Activities in Central DOD 31 America The U.S. Customs Service 32 The U.S. Coast Guard 32 Appendix III 33 Scope and Methodology Appendix IV 34 Major Contributors to This Report Related GAO Products 36 Tables Table 1. 1: Cocaine Seizures in Guatemala 17 Table I.2: Cocaine Seizures in Honduras 20 Table 11. 1: Roles of U.S. Organizations Involved inSupporting 26 Operation Cadence Table 11.2: U.S. Assistance to Narcotics Control Activitiesin 27 Central America Figure Figure 1: Primary Cocaine Traffickidng Routes FromColombia to 3 Central America and the United States Page 12 GAO/NSIAD-94-233 Drug Control Appendix I Efforts to Control Drug Trafficking Through Central America To reduce the use of Central America as a staging area for U.S.-bound drug shipments, the United States has created and fundeda number of programs that assist countries as they combatnarcotics trafficking. All seven Central American countries havereceived U.S. narcotics control assistance and have narcoticscontrol efforts in place. Although U.S. Narcotics controlinitiatives vary among the Central American countries, theoverall U.S. strategy aims to increase their ability to curb drugtrafficking and eventually take responsibility for drug controloperations within their respective countries. Drug Trafficking in Guatemala In 1990, drug traffickers began to alter their establishedair transit routes through Mexico and expand their operationsinto Guatemala. The Department of State estimates that as much as70 tons of cocaine annually transit Guatemala. The number ofconfirmed drug trafficking flights entering the country increasedfrom 4 in 1989 to 36 in 1990. Guatemala is an attractive transitlocation for drug trafficking because it is situated halfwaybetween the United States and Colombia, has hundreds ofunmonitored landing strips, and has no radar capability. Drugtrafficking aircraft have concentrated their activities in threeregions of the country: the coastal Pacific plains ofsouthwestern Guatemala, the river valleys and isolated jungleflatlands of the northern Peten region, and the area around LakeIzabal in eastern Guatemala. Air delivery techniques involve thetraditional landing and offloading drug cargoes and theincreasing practice of airdropping drug cargoes over land and seato waiting confederates. Seaborne drug transshipment is centered in-the easternGuatemualan port of Puerto Santo Tomas. Once in Guatemala,traffickers use a variety of smuggling methods to forward drugcargoes to the United States. These range from traditional airtransportation to the use of cargo containers, tractor trailers,automobiles, boats, and air cargo. According to the DrugEnforcement Administration (DEA), the transportation of cocaineaboard air cargo shipments departing Guatemala and the overlandshipment of cocaine by tractor trailer through Mexico are the twomost serious problems being encountered in Guatemala. Appendix I Efforts to Control Drug Trafficking Through Central America Narcotics Control Three organizations in the Guatemalangovernment have anti-narcotics Organizations responsibilities:the Treasury Police, the National Police, and the military'sintelligence unit. The Guatemalan Treasury The Guatemalan Treasury Police hasprimary responsibility for drug Police enforcement anderadication and is the principal beneficiary in Guatemala of U.S.narcotics control assistance. About 350 Treasury Police agentsare involved in different aspects of the drug war. A20-manTreasury Police unit known as the "Tiburones"patrols Guatemala's coast and inland waterways and is responsiblefor monitoring the entry and exit of contraband at Guatemala'slargest seaport. Another unit known as the "Halcones"focuses on road blocks and is involved in overland interdictionoperations. A 15-man rapid reaction airmobile platoon accompaniesDEA agents during drug seizure operations. A unit of helicopterdoor gunners protects U.S. helicopters involved in eradicationand interdiction operations. In addition, manual eradication unitsaddress the problem of opium poppy and marijuana cultivation.The Treasury Police also has a drug detector dog unit. The Guatemalan National Police At the request Of DEA, a Narcotics Task Force consisting of15 National Police investigators was formed in 1989 to conductundercover and surveillance operations. DEA, however, reported in1992 that the National Police was the law enforcement agencybelieved to be most susceptible to corruption and leastprofessional in Guatemala. Guatemalan Military Intelligence All drug enforcement activities must be coordinated with theGuatemalan military intelligence unit, currently the sole sourceof narcotics-related intelligence. U.S. officials prefer that theGuatemalan military not be involved in the drug war because ofits poor human rights record. AU forms of U.S. militaryassistance, except for military education and training, have beensuspended. Narcotics Control Efforts In addition to participating in Operation Cadence, thegovernment of Guatemala is undertaking several other narcoticscontrol activities that are supported by the Department of State.The government of Guatemala has established a clearinghouse fornarcotics-related information and intelligence, a drug detectordog program, a port inspection and policing unit, and acounternarcotics intelligence unit and has participated with theUnited States in counternarcotics exercises. The Guatemala City Joint Information Coordination Center is acounternarcotics information clearinghouse staffed withGuatemalan personnel and supported by the Department of State.The center has several computer terminals that are used to trackprivate aircraft, vessels, and people suspected of drugtrafficking. A drug detector dog program at the Guatemala Cityinternational airport was established in 1990. The programconsists of Treasury Police dog handlers and eight dogs that havebeen trained to detect illegal drugs. Under this program, allbaggage, both private and commercial, and air cargo is to beinspected. Although the program has not resulted in any majorseizures, DEA believes the level of security awareness at theairport has been raised and the presence of the dogs and handlersposes a deterrent to drug smugglers. The program is funded byairline, cargo, and export association organizations that use theairport. The U.S. Embassy in Guatemala City is working with Guatemalanshippers and port authorities to establish aself-inspection/policing unit. This unit will inspect ships andcargo for drugs prior to their departure from the port. Accordingto U.S. officials in Guatemala, State win provide the fundsnecessary to initiate the unit, and subsequent costs are expectedto be met by a tax levied on shippers and vessels usingGuatemalan ports. During 1993, the U.S. Navy and Marine Corps conducted a smalljoint exercise with Guatemalan Naval Forces that focused oncoastal and river counternarcotics operations on Guatemala'sPacific and Caribbean coasts. Cocaine Seizures As shown in table 1. 1, the amount ofcocaine seized in Guatemala has declined since jointU.S.-Guatemalan interdiction operations began in 1991. U.S.officials view this decline as an indicator of the success of theprogram, since fewer trafficking aircraft are now choosing toland in Guatemala. These officials also note that a higherpercentage of those aircraft that choose to land are being seizedthan before Operation Cadence began. For example, from May 1993,when interdiction helicopters and personnel began using nightvision equipment, to the end of 1993, Operation Cadence teamsinterdicted all six trafficking aircraft detected by the U.S.Southern Command. Although some U.S. officials noted thataircraft have apparently evaded U.S. radar assets and continue toland in Guatemala, Operation Cadence is viewed as the mostsuccessful interdiction program anywhere. 'Me Department of Statebelieves the operation's success can be corroborated by thenumber of landings reported by ground intelligence sources.According to State, these reports have historically paralleledthe number of flights detected by the U.S. Southern Command andhave revealed no undetected landings. Table 1.11: Cocaine Seizures in Guatemala (1989-93) Figures in metric tons Year Cocaine seizures 1989 3.2 1990 15.5 1991 15.4 1992 9.5 1993 7.6 Source: Department of State. Drug Trafficking in According to the Department of State andDEA, Honduras is a transit route for cocaine destined for theUnited States and, to a lesser extent, Europe. Honduras The government of Honduras maintains a radar systemthat covers a majority of the country. Furthermore, the HonduranAir Force has shot down suspected traffickers three times since1986. Although Honduras possesses the capability to effectivelydeter air trafficking, its capability to deter other methods oftrafficking are limited. Drug trafficking via land and sea routesremains essentially unhindered, according to State. Honduras is attractive for maritime drug trafficking becauseof its poorly guarded coastline, Bay Islands region with a longhistory of smuggling, active fishing industry, and containerizedexport of seafood products to the United States. U.S. officialsview maritime transportation as the primary shipping method usedby organizations operating in Honduras. According to DEA and Department of Defense (DOD) officials,several Honduran families residing in the Bay Islands haveextensive family and business ties throughout Central America andare believed to be transporting cocaine throughout the region andinto the southeastern United States. The close-knit islandsociety, their mistrust of outsiders, and the islanders distinctappearance have prevented DEA from developing informants withknowledge of island drug trafficking or cur-rent information onthe activities of the island families. 'Me government of Hondurashas a minimal presence on the Bay Islands, and, according to U.S.officials, law enforcement personnel assigned to the islands havebeen quickly corrupted and all drug interdiction efforts to datehave been compromised. Although few roads are paved in Honduras, the country is atransit country for the overland shipment of drugs. TheInter-American Highway passes through a small portion ofsouthwestern Honduras and is viewed as the major route fordrug-laden trucks bound for the United States. According toofficials in Honduras, traffic on the highway is heavy andvehicle monitoring and inspection is minimal. Narcotics Control As of March 1994, four organizations in theHonduran government had Organizations anti-narcotics responsibilities: the NationalPolice, the Air Force, the Navy, and the military's intelligenceunit. The Honduran National Police Narcotics control efforts inHonduras are to be carried out by three strike units of theNational Police, which is an arm of the Ministry of Defense.These units receive equipment and support from the Department ofState and are located in the capital of Tegucigalpa, thenorthwestern city of San Pedro Sula, and the Caribbean port of LaCeiba. The Honduran Air Force The Honduran Air Force plays a majorrole in deterring the air movement of drugs through Honduras. 'MeHonduran Air Force has three radar facilities that provide almostcomplete radar coverage of the country. State reports thatairborne traffickers generally avoid Honduras because on threeoccasions most recently in 1992-the Honduran Air Force shot downdrug smuggling aircraft. The Honduran Navy The Honduran Navy is responsible fordeterring maritime trafficking. However, the Honduran Navy issmall and has four ships available to patrol its extensiveCaribbean coast. One U.S. official found that three of the shipswere in dry dock awaiting funds to finance repair and the fourthhad been tied to a pier for a long period of time becauseHonduras cannot afford fuel. In 1994, DEA proposed establishing amaritime anti-narcotics strike force in Honduras. The lack ofavailable funds to purchase the necessary boats and equipmentcaused State to reject this proposal. Honduran Military Intelligence During the mid-1980s, theHonduran military's intelligence unit assumed border inspectionduties that had previously been the responsibility of theHonduran customs and border patrol agencies because of the threatposed by Contra rebels. According to U.S. officials, the Honduranmilitary intelligence unit has also assumed increasedresponsibility for investigating drug trafficking activities. Narcotics Control Efforts The government of Honduras has attempted to strengthen itscounternarcotics capabilities. However, it lacks the technicaland financial resources necessary to combat drug trafficking andfaces a number of serious organizational problems. In April 1994, the Department of State reported that largecocaine shipments were continuing to transit Honduras, in partbecause of several institutional weaknesses. In addition to thedifficulties involved in detecting maritime drug shipments, Statereported that Honduran enforcement efforts were hindered by anunderpaid and insufficiently trained police force, an inadequate judicial-system, and Widespread corruption. Law enforcement personnel inHonduras are paid as little as $60 per month. Officials at the U.S. Embassy in Tegucigalpa were equally asskeptical about Honduras' capabilities and willingness tointerdict drugs. For example, one U.S. Embassy official believesthe Honduran military, which is in charge of the police, haslittle or no knowledge of day-to-day police investigativeactivities. Another U.S. Embassy official believes that theHonduran drug interdiction effort would wither away without U.S.prodding. Until recently, law enforcement activities in Honduras hadcome under the purview of the military, and, as a result, theHonduran National Police was an arm of the Ministry of Defense.Ms action blurred the line between civilian law enforcementactivities and military operations, which had a negative impacton drug enforcement. According to U.S. officials in Tegucigalpa,military officials with little or no police training orexperience were traditionally placed in senior positions withinthe National Police. U.S. officials are optimistic that thissituation will eventually change as graduates of a 4-yearNational Police academy gain seniority and assume positions ofgreater responsibility. According to these officials, thenarcotics control units of the National Police are now beingstaffed with academy graduates. In March 1994, Honduras created an independent PublicMinistry, which is to have authority over criminal investigationsand prosecutions. According to State, the ministry will recruitand train new personnel who win be independent of the military. A major State Department program in Honduras has been theestablishment of a Joint Information Coordination Center. Thecenter became operational in 1993 and is staffed by 14 Honduranswho can query a number of databases (e.g., telephone companyrecords and vehicle registrations) to investigatenarcotics-related crimes. A State official in Honduras views thecenter as a success and said the government of Honduras has madea commitment to the center's operation. This commitment has beendemonstrated through a fourfold increase in the Hondurancontribution to this State-sponsored project and the government'sdecision to staff the center with qualified personnel who arepaid professional salaries. Conversely, despite U.S. support and training, Honduras'detector drug dog program has not met expectations and is viewedby one Embassy official as the weakest link in the U.S. programin Honduras. According to DEA officials in Honduras,trained dog handlers have been transferred, and dogs have notbeen cared for properly. One U.S. official in Honduras said thatthe dogs were confined to small cages for long periods oftime and were generally malnourished and mistreated. Thisofficial uses Ws personal funds to purchase dog food for theanimals. DEA officials believe any future narcotics dogprogram in Honduras depends entirely on U.S. willingness to fundthe program on a continuing basis. Cocaine Seizures Table 1.2 summarizes cocaine seizures inHonduras since 1989. Table 1.2: Cocaine Seizures in Honduras (I 989-93) Figures in metrictons Year Cocaine seizures 1989 0.041 1990 0.254 1991 0.491 1992 1.460 1993 2.610 Source: Department of State. Page 20 GAOINSLAD-94-233 Drug Control Appendix I Efforts to Control Drug Trafficking Through Central America Narcotics Trafficking in Other Central American Countries All Central American countries have organizations andprograms in place to address illegal narcotics trafficking. Thesecontrol mechanisms are modest in scope and have achieved onlylimited results. The following provides a brief description ofthe drug trafficking problems confronting Belize, Costa Rica, ElSalvador, Nicaragua, and Panama; efforts by these countries toaddress these problems; and U.S. narcotics control assistance tothese countries. Belize Belize is a transshipment staging area for cocaine andmarijuana, which is grown in the northern Guatemala province thatborders Belize. The Department of State reports that Belize'sproximity to Guatemala and Mexico, its dense unpopulated jungle,extensive seacoast, and unsophisticated infrastructure forcombating drug problems make it a potentially significanttransshipment point for illicit drugs. U.S. financial support for training, transportation, andequipment have been instrumental in increasing drug seizures anddrug-related arrests in Belize during recent years. The BelizePolice Force, with U.S. assistance, has formed an investigativeunit that targets drug traffickers who have amassed significantassets. State reported in April 1994 that Belize customs, workingwith the Belize police force, had begun a maritime and landcontainer search and review program. The Department of Stateprovided $298,000 in narcotics control assistance to Belize infiscal year 1993 and plans to provide $1 1 0,000 in assistance infiscal year 1994. During 1993, Belize officials participated in aState-sponsored training program to strengthen basic lawenforcement skills. The Belize police also conducted a marijuanaeradication program and arrested suspected drug traffickers. Adrug detector dog program was also in place at the BelizeInternational Airport. Costa Rica Costa Rica has long been a transit point forcocaine, and recent seizures indicated that heroin is also beingmoved through the country. DEA attributes Costa Rica's extensivecoastline, large number of uncontrolled airstrips, and limitedgovernment resources as factors contributing to the country'sgrowing use as a drug transshipment Site. DEA estimates thatsignificant quantities of cocaine transits Costa Rica annually.In addition to the air movement of cocaine, increased quantitiesof the drug are believed to be entering Costa Rica from theisland of San Andres (a possession of Colombia, located off theeastern coast of Nicaragua) and from the Nicaraguan coast.According to DEA, both coasts of Costa Rica are used by smugglingaircraft and vessels, and overland shipments of cocaine areentering from Panama. In its April 1994 report to Congress, Statereported that 611 kilograms of cocaine had been seized during thefirst 1 1 months of 1993 and concluded that Costa Rican lawenforcement agencies could not effectively safeguard the countryagainst traffickers. According to DEA officials, drugs aresmuggled out of Costa Rica by land along the Inter-AmericanHighway and by sea in containerized cargoes. These drugs aredestined for the United States. State's April 1994 report further noted that the Costa Ricangovernment had modernized its counternarcotics laws, streamlinednarcotics control enforcement, and encouraged demand reductionactivities. The State report stated that effective drug controlefforts in Costa Rica were hampered by a scarcity of resources,the lack of a fully professional police force, and bottlenecks inthe judicial system. 'Mere is also corruption within the CostaRican government. Since Costa Rica has no military force, theunderequipped air and maritime sections of the Ministry of PublicSecurity conduct limited counternarcotics patrols, but they arehindered by a lack of ships, aircraft, fuel, and trainedpersonnel. In fiscal year 1993, the Department of State provided$272,000 in narcotics control assistance that focused on trainingand supporting Costa Rican drug interdiction forces andcontinuing support for a counternarcotics intelligence center,which has been operational since 1988. An estimated $86,000 innarcotics control assistance is planned for Costa Rica in fiscalyear l994. El Salvador The Department of State reported that traffickers are usingthe Inter-American Highway, which passes through El Salvador, tomove significant quantities of cocaine and smaller quantities ofheroin. Salvadoran government officials are concerned thattrafficking aircraft increasingly use their territory to evadeU.S.-supported counternarcotics forces in Guatemala and Mexico.DOD officials believe the large number of landing strips along ElSalvador's Pacific coast and the lack of radar to monitor airtraffic will attract drug traffickers if interdiction efforts inGuatemala continue to be successful. In June 1993, nearly 6metric tons of cocaine were seized in San Salvador-the largestseizure in El Salvador's history. In 1990, the government of El Salvador created the ExecutiveAnti-Narcotics Unit, which, according to the Department of State,has proven to be effective despite its small size. Theanti-narcotics unit relies on the military for air and maritimecapability. The Executive Anti-Narcotics Unit was incorporatedinto the civilian national police in September 1993 and grantedwider investigative authority than was previously authorized. The United States has provided telecommunications equipmentand vehicles to the anti-narcotics unit, without which it wouldhave been incapable of operating effectively, according to oneSalvadoran official. In addition, a U.S.-supported canine teamallows Salvadorans to monitor airports, ports, andborder-crossing points for illegal drugs. State's narcoticsassistance program provided El Salvador with $205,000 inassistance in fiscal year 1993 and plans to provide an estimated$129,000 in assistance during fiscal year 1994. Nicaragua Nicaragua plays a relatively minor role in the transshipmentof cocaine to the United States and Europe. However, asenforcement efforts intensify elsewhere in the region, drugsmuggling organizations have increased their activities inNicaragua. Nicaragua's remote and sparsely populated Caribbeancoastline, access to the Inter-American Highway, and limitedgovernment resources also contribute to the nation's potentialuse as a drug transshipment site. According to DEA, cocainetransiting Nicaragua moves by fishing vessel, cargo vessel,private and commercial aircraft, and land vehicles. A frequentmethod of transshipment along the Caribbean coastline has beenairdrops from low-flying aircraft to waiting speed boats. Anadditional trafficking method has been coast hopping, a practicein which cocaine-laden vessels and aircraft mix with legitimatetraffic and slowly move up the Caribbean coast, stopping torefuel or buy supplies. The government has created a part-time civilian coordinatorfor narcotics affairs, who may also head a government widenarcotics commission. In March 1993, the government of Nicaraguaimplemented a national police reformation project, which createdthree anti-narcotics units designed to combat all forms of drugtrafficking. The anti-narcotics units are divided into airportactivity, national trafficking matters, and internationaltrafficking matters. According to State, the anti-narcotics unitsare severely lacking in resources and have captured small andmedium-size shipments of cocaine transiting the country. In recent years, State has offered to provide $100,000 innarcotics control assistance if Nicaragua would establish ananti-drug force that was not under the control of theSandinista-influenced military or police. The government agreedto create such a force; however, personnel assigned to the newunit were believed to be tied to the Nicaraguan military, and theU.S. assistance was withheld. 'Me United States and Nicaraguaagreed in 1994 to reprogram these funds to support a demandreduction project. At present, there is neither a DEA office nor a Department ofState narcotics control program in Nicaragua. During the earlymonths of 1994, the government of Nicaragua made a number of drugseizures, both on its own and with information provided by DEA.These seizures and the government of Nicaragua's assumption of aleadership role in regional drug enforcement conferences hascaused U.S. officials to reconsider their opinion of narcoticscontrol efforts in Nicaragua. During informal discussions in May1994, Nicaraguan officials informed U.S. representatives thatthey planned to request that the United States establish a DEAoffice at the U. S. Embassy in Managua. Due to a lack of fundsand absence of an official request, action on establishing a DEAoffice in Managua has been postponed. Panama Panama plays a role in international drug trafficking bybeing a financial center for laundering drug profits and a majortransshipment point for cocaine, according to DEA. AlthoughOperation Just Cause disrupted money laundering activities inDecember 1989, DEA reports that the disruption was only temporaryand money laundering has resumed. DEA officials in Washingtontold us that the continued use of Panama as a money launderingcenter and the government of Panama's inability or unwillingnessto curb these operations was the biggest problem currentlyconfronting international law enforcement officials dealing withthis country. Panamanian agencies responsible for moneylaundering control are viewed by State as weak. They do notcoordinate with one another, and their resources are small. One of Panama's greatest attractions for drug traffickers isthe Colon Free Trade Zone. According to a U.S. official inPanama, legitimate commercial goods entering the Free Zone areoften disassembled, repackaged, and/or transferred to othershipping containers. These activities, along with the traffickersability to forge shipping documents, makes it all but impossiblefor law enforcement officials to monitor the movement of drugsonce they enter the area. According to one U.S. official inPanama, drug traffickers are sophisticated, and many legitimatebusinessmen do not know their operations are being used to movedrugs. Most of the large drug seizures have occurred in the FreeZone or in port facilities serviced by the Free Zone. During 1993, drug seizures by the Panamanian JudicialTechnical Police and Customs increased, several combinedU.S./Panamanian maritime interdiction campaigns were staged, anda new drug detector dog -program was established in the FreeZone. Overall, seizures of cocaine (5.7 metric tons) decreasedfrom the record 10 metric tons seized in 1992. According to DEA, although the government of Panama hasprovided limited funding for law enforcement efforts against drugactivities, the national police organizations lack the necessarytraining, appropriate salaries and equipment to conduct effectiveanti-drug operations.' During fiscal year 1993, the Department ofState provided $1.5 million in narcotics control assistance toPanama and had budgeted $500,000 for fiscal year 1994. In April1994, the President was unable to certify that. Panama wascooperating fully with the United States, or was taking adequatesteps on its own, to achieve full compliance with the goals andobjectives of the 1988 United Nations Convention Against IllicitTraffic in Narcotic Drugs and Psychotropic Substances.' In anexplanation that accompanied the discussion, the Presidentindicated that even though the government of Panama hadcooperated with many U.S. drug control efforts, it had not madesignificant progress on its own to deter money laundering. Thislack of action made Panama a haven for drug launders and hinderedefforts to bring narcotics traffickers to justice. AlthoughPanama's law enforcement performance showed improvement, itremained weak. Citing the need to preserve a cooperativerelationship necessary to operate the Panama Canal and permit theorderly withdrawal of U.S. military forces from Panama, thePresident determined that it was in the "vital nationalinterest' of the United States to continue assistance to Panama. 'The needs of Panama's law enforcement agencies for resourcesand training to combat drug trafficking and money laundering arealso discussed in an earlier report, The War on Drugs:Narcotics Control Efforts in Panama (GAO/NSLAD-91-233, July16, 199 1). 'Section 490 of the Foreign Assistance Act of 196 1, asamended, sets out requirements for withholding of bilateralforeign assistance and opposition to multilateral developmentassistance to major illicit drug-producing countries and majordrug transit countries. These provisions will not apply incases in which, under section 490(b), the President determinesand certifies to Congress that either (1) the country hascooperated fully during the previous year with the United Statesor has taken adequate steps on its own to achieve compliance withthe goals and objectives established by the United NationsConvention Against Illicit Traffic in Narcotic Drugs andPsychotropic Substances or (2) vital national interests of theUnited States require support for such assistance. To curb the increased use of Central America as a stagingarea for South American cocaine shipments, the United Statesinitiated Operation Cadence, a DEA-led interdiction effort, inMay 199 1. Mve U.S. government agencies participate in OperationCadence: DEA, DOD, the Department of State, the U.S. CustomsService, and the U.S. Border Patrol. Operation Cadence involves(1) developing human intelligence on possible traffickingflights, (2) using U.S. radar assets to detect and monitorsuspect aircraft leaving South American countries, (3) trackingthose suspect aircraft using specially equipped Customs aircraftfrom the time they enter Central American airspace until theyland, (4) arresting traffickers and seizing their cargoes, and(5) conducting follow-up investigations. The specific roles ofthese agencies are listed in table H. 1. Table IIA: Roles of U.S. Organizations Involvedin Supporting Operation Cadence Organization Role DEA Provides interdiction personnel, program leadership, andoversight for U.S. participants. Assists and trains host nationinterdiction and investigative personnel. Department of State Provides diplomatic, logistics,financial, and aircraft support and training assistance. DOD Detects and monitors suspect aircraft leaving SouthAmerica until they enter Central American airspace. Providescommunication assistance, intelligence resources, equipment,and personnel to coordinate operations. U.S. Customs Service Tracks suspect aircraft entering CentralAmerican airspace until they land. Provides four U.S. trackingaircraft and crews deployed in Honduras and Panama. U.S. Border Patrol Instructs host country personnel in roadinterdiction techniques and methods for controlling the overlandmovement of narcotics. In addition to its support of Operation Cadence, theDepartment of State funds bilateral narcotics control programswith all of the Central American countries, except Nicaragua, andmaintains an interregional aviation service. Although it is not aparticipant in Operation Cadence, the U.S. Coast Guard helps bydeploying training teams to improve the law enforcement skills ofCentral American maritime police forces. Table 11.2 summarizesthe Central American narcotics control assistance provided by theUnited States during fiscal year 1993. Appendix 11 U.S. Narcotics Control Activities in Central America Table 11.2: U.S. Assistance to Narcotics ControlActivities in Central America Fiscal year 1993 dollars in thousands Department of U.S. Customs U.S. Coast Country State DEA 000 Service GuardTotal Belize -$298 $500 0 0 0 $798 Costa Rica 272 908 0 0 0 $1,180 El Salvador 205 796 0 0 0 $1,001 Guatemala 2,500 2,420 0 0 0 $4,920 Honduras 198 637 0 0 0 $835 Nicaragua 0 0 0 0 0 0 Panama 1,500 1,288 0 0 $399 $3,187 Noncountry specific assistance 10,100a 828b $24,700 $8,981 c 0 $44,609 Total $15,073 $7,376 $24,700 $8,981$399 $56,530 Regional aviation support was provided to Operation Cadenceinterdiction efforts and Department of State eradicationoperations. b This amount was for Operation Cadence. cThis figure includes operation and maintenance of P-3 Oriondetection aircraft and Citation tracking aircraft and does notinclude U.S. Customs Service personnel costs. DEA DEA supports drug interdiction efforts in the region byhaving DEA offices in the Central American countries, exceptNicaragua, and deploying specially trained Operation Cadenceteams. Within the six countries, DEA activities are designed tohelp host nations to reduce the supply and flow of drugs anddevelop intelligence that will lead to the arrest of traffickerswithin the host country and the United States. To supplement the traditional drug enforcement activities ofDEA agents permanently assigned to the U.S. embassies in CentralAmerica, teams of specially trained interdiction personnel aredeployed to Guatemala for 90-day periods. The multiagency Cadenceteams are composed of approximately 10 DEA special agents as wellas communications specialists, medics, and U.S. Border Patrolpersonnel who have received U.S. Army training in suchspecialties as air mobile techniques, land navigation, fieldmedicine, and communications. According to DEA, Operation Cadencehas resulted in the seizure of 28.8 metric tons of cocaine and 16aircraft since its inception. Under the Operation Cadence concept, DEA agents andGuatemalan Treasury Police personnel are dispersed to forwardoperation bases located in four geographic regions used by drugtrafficking aircraft and await notification by the U.S. SouthernCommand in Panama that an aircraft believed to be carryingnarcotics is en route. Using intelligence data and traffickingprofiles developed through hundreds of such tracks, the U.S.Southern Command identifies potential trafficking aircraft andmonitors their movement along the Central American isthmus. Asthe trafficking aircraft enters Central American airspace,responsibility for tracking the suspect is passed to speciallyequipped tracking aircraft of the U.S. Customs Service, whichdirects the Cadence team to the anticipated landing site. Theinterdiction teams are transported to the landing sites byhelicopters funded by the Department of State. Operation Cadenceis primarily based in Guatemala, but Cadence teams have assistedin interdiction operations in Belize, El Salvador, and Honduras. When Operation Cadence began in 1991, the majority oftrafficking flights transited the Pacific and landed alongGuatemala's Southwestern Pacific coast region. Operation Cadenceinitially focused on this area, established its first forwardoperating base in the Southwestern town of Retalhuleu, anddeployed two Department of State helicopters and interdictionpersonnel to the base. After some initial seizures, U.S.officials observed that the traffickers began to use differentroutes into Guatemala that evaded the sole forward operatinglocation. One State official in Guatemala told us that it took 6months to establish a forward operating base but that -it -tookthe traffickers only 6 days to get around it. Three additionalforward operating bases have been established, and the responseteams are now able to cover most of Guatemala. Another change in tactics occurred shortly after the programwas initiated when traffickers changed from delivering drugsduring the daytime to delivering at dusk or night. This changeproved to be effective because (1) the interdiction helicopterslacked night vision equipment and could not be flown at night and(2) the interdiction teams would land only if the operation couldbe completed and the helicopters returned to the secure forwardoperating bases during daylight hours. Night vision equipment wasinstalled in the Department of State helicopters, and by May1993, the flight crews and interdiction teams had completedtraining in the use of the equipment and night assaulttechniques. The first night interdiction operation occurred onJune 2, 1993, and resulted in the seizure of 1.7 metric tons of cocaine. According to DEA officials,Operation Cadence has successfully interdicted all sixtrafficking aircraft that landed in Guatemala from June 2, 1993,through March 30, 1994. Some law enforcement officials believe drug traffickers haveagain changed their tactics and are bypassing DOD detection andmonitoring assets that surround the traditionaltrafficking-routes out of Colombia and northern South AmericaAccording to one U.S. official, a few aircraft that wereundetected by DOD have crashed and, when the crash site wasinvestigated, the planes were found to be loaded with cocaine.This official believes that traffickers are now flying smalleraircraft into the Darian jungle that spans Panama and Colombia.The drug cargoes are then moved across Panama and either loadedon tractor trailer trucks, transferred to ocean-going vessels, orreloaded onto small aircraft and flown northward. These aircraftfly at low altitudes to avoid radar and are designed to mix withlegitimate air traffic. This technique allows the trafficker toavoid the air- and sea-based radars that are positioned along thenorthern tier of South America. The Department of The Department of State, through its Bureauof International Narcotics Matters, has primary responsibilityfor developing, implementing, and State monitoring the U.S. international narcotics controlpolicy. As part of its drug control effort, State funds programsin six of the seven Central American countries and maintains aninter-regional aviation program. At the U.S. embassies inGuatemala and Panama, State has established Narcotics AffairsSections to administer the in-country programs and providegeneral oversight for the much smaller programs in Belize, CostaRica, El Salvador, and Honduras. Assistance to Guatemala U.S. narcotics control objectives inGuatemala are to (1) reduce narcotics trafficking from andthrough Guatemala to the United States, (2) reduce opiumproduction, (3) develop an effective civilian narcotics lawenforcement agency, and (4) improve Guatemalan public awarenessof the dangers of drug production and use. To achieve theseobjectives, State funds four narcotics control projects andprovides aviation support for eradication and drug interdictionoperations. State's efforts to develop an effective civilian narcoticslaw enforcement agency in Guatemala involve the organization,training, and equipping of several drug interdiction anderadication control units within the Guatemalan Treasury Police.The Department has supported the establishment of ananti-narcotics directorate, a narcotics investigative unit,manual eradication units, a rapid reaction unit that supportsOperation Cadence, an interdiction force that patrols Guatemala'sinland waterways, two drug canine units, and a Joint IntelligenceCoordinating Center. In addition to being a major transit country for cocaine,Guatemala is a producing country for opium and marijuana. Toaddress this problem, the Department of State supports an aerialand manual eradication project that eliminated almost 95 percentof the opium poppy crop and about 500 acres of marijuana in 1993.The State Department provides herbicides for Department of Stateeradication aircraft, ground support equipment, communicationsand photographic equipment, and field rations. Similar assistanceis also provided for manual eradication operations. Another Department of State project in Guatemala is designedto increase public awareness of the harm caused by drugproduction, trafficking, and abuse. The Department of Stateprogram in Guatemala also included $295,000 in fiscal year 1993to support U.S. and foreign national personnel involved inprogram planning, development, monitoring, and evaluation at theNarcotics Affairs Section in Guatemala City. State also maintains an aviation unit in Guatemala,consisting of five aircraft to conduct aerial eradication andassist in law enforcement efforts; one aircraft to transportinterdiction personnel between field locations; and threehelicopters to conduct aerial eradication, surveillance, andtransport interdiction personnel. Five helicopters had beenassigned to Guatemala before November 1993. Assistance to Honduras U.S. drug control efforts in Hondurasare aimed at (1) increasing Honduran drug enforcement activities,(2) promoting government efforts to combat narcotics-relatedcorruption, (3) urging the government of Honduras to strengthenlaws on asset seizure and money laundering, and (4) pursuingdemand reduction programs. In recent years, State efforts inHonduras have focused on establishing and outfitting three counternarcotics task forces, establishing a JointIntelligence Coordinating Center, and improving the effectivenessof the drug dog program. Drug program oversight and reporting is the responsibility ofa U.S. Embassy officer. General program oversight for State'sprograms in Honduras is provided by the Narcotics Affairs Sectionin Guatemala City. DOD DOD supports Operation Cadence and narcotics controlefforts in Central America by detecting and monitoring suspectaircraft and maritime shipments as they approach and transit theregion, providing equipment and expertise to Operation Cadenceoperations, developing targeting packages for interdictionoperations, and assisting the countries of the region in drugawareness and drug abuse prevention programs. DOD's surveillancemission supports the U.S. and foreign law enforcement agenciesthat apprehend suspects and seize their cargo, both in the sourcecountries where cocaine is produced and in the transit countriesbetween South America and the United States. DOD operates a network of airborne, ground-, and sea-basedradar systems to detect and monitor potential drug traffickingaircraft as they move from South America through the transitzones of Central America and the Caribbean. Information fromthese radars is passed to U.S. law enforcement officials and usedto support the interdiction operations of U.S. and foreignagencies. DOD supports in-country interdiction efforts by deployingvarious specialists and equipment to the countries of CentralAmerica to assist U.S. law enforcement officials and train hostcountry counternarcotics personnel. To support U.S. embassyintelligence needs, DOD has deployed tactical analysis teams toseveral embassies in the major drug-producing and transitcountries of Guatemala and Honduras. These teams analyze andproduce intelligence on narcotics traffickers using reports fromagencies such as the Defense Intelligence Agency, DOD, DEA, andother sources and provide this information to in-countrycounternarcotics personnel. They use a sophisticatedcommunications system that can securely transmit and receiveclassified documents, photographs, text, or radar images on areal-time basis to and from U.S. counternarcotics personnel inthe Western Hemisphere. DOD has also deployed military teams toGuatemala, Panama, and five South American countries to work withU.S. Embassy personnel and coordinate and assist in thedevelopment and counternarcotics plans. Finally, the Defense Intelligence Agency develops targetingpackages for potential interdiction operations and providesintelligence studies and information on traffickingorganizations. For example, it has developed targeting packageson many of the numerous landing strips along Guatemala'ssouthwest coast and written reports on the organization andinterrelationships of trafficking families operating in the BayIslands of Honduras. The U.S. Customs The U.S. Customs Service supports OperationCadence and narcotics interdiction efforts in Central America bydeploying detection, monitoring, Service and tracking aircraftand personnel to the region. Customs also provides some trainingto Central American interdiction and inspection personnel. Customs deploys three Cessna Citation aircraft to tracksuspect aircraft once they enter Central American airspace. Theplanes, crews, and mechanics are assigned on a temporaryrotational duty basis and are deployed to Panama and Soto CanoAir Base in Honduras. To supplement the detection and monitoringactivities of the U.S. Southern Command -in Panama, Customsstations up to three surveillance aircraft on a 90-day basis inPanama to track suspect aircraft as they leave Colombia. Surveillance aircraft from Corpus Christi, Texas, also flyroutine sorties over the Gulf of Mexico as they perform theirnormal Customs functions. During 1993, Customs conducted severalState-funded training programs for Central American narcoticscontrol personnel. Examples of this training include detector dogtraining and a forthcoming regional interdiction course in ElSalvador, a contraband enforcement course being provided toGuatemalan personnel, and a course in narcotics securitytechniques provided to managers and employees of private carriercompanies in Belize, Costa Rica, El Salvador, Guatemala,Honduras, and Nicaragua. The U.S. Coast Guard The U.S. Coast Guard supports narcoticscontrol efforts in Central America by providing training toimprove the law enforcement skills of indigenous maritime policeforces and by establishing a liaison office to coordinatemaritime and river narcotics control activities. Appendix III Scope and Methodology At the U.S. Embassy in Guatemala City, Guatemala, weinterviewed the Ambassador and Deputy Chief of Mission andresponsible officials from the Narcotics Affairs, Political andEconomic Sections, Military Assistance Group, Defense AttacheOffice, Tactical Analysis Team, DEA, and DEA'S Operation Cadenceinterdiction team. We attended meetings of the Embassy's CountryTeam and the Narcotics Affairs Committee. To examine and evaluatenarcotics trafficking and interdiction efforts, we revieweddocuments prepared by U.S. Embassy personnel and supplemented theinformation in interviews with U.S. officials. We also visitedthe Department of State's aviation facility in Guatemala City andOperation Cadence's forward operating base in Flores, Guatemala.To obtain the views of the Guatemalan government, we met with theDirector of Guatemala's Anti-Narcotics Operations Department. At the U.S. Embassy in Tegucigalpa, Honduras, we interviewedthe Ambassador and Deputy Chief of Mission and responsibleofficials from the Political Section, Military Assistance Group,Defense Attache Office, Tactical Analysis Team, DEA, and membersOf DEA'S Operation Cadence interdiction team who were deployed toHonduras at the time of our visit. To examine and evaluatenarcotics trafficking and interdiction efforts, we revieweddocuments prepared by U.S. Embassy personnel. We also visitedSoto Cano Air Base and met with representatives of the U.S.Southern Command. We were not permitted to meet with the pilotsand crews of the U.S. Customs Service interdiction aircraftstationed at Soto Cano. To obtain the views of the Hondurangovernment, we met with the Director of the Honduran NationalPolice's Joint Information Collection Center. In Panama, we were briefed by officials of the U.S. SouthernCommand. We also met with civilian liaison officers attached tothe Southern Command from the Central Intelligence Agency,Defense Intelligence Agency, National Security Agency, U.S. CoastGuard, U.S. Customs Service, and DEA. At the U.S. Embassy inPanama City, Panama, we interviewed the Deputy Chief of Missionand responsible officials from the Narcotics Affairs Section,U.S. Customs Service, and DEA. Returnto Cliff Schaffer's Main Page WT01-B29-90IA086-000619-B002-290http://206.61.184.43:80/schaffer/GovPubs/gao/gao5.htm 206.61.184.43 19970122032247 text/html 26761HTTP/1.0 200 OKDate: Wednesday, 22-Jan-97 03:22:39 GMTServer: WebSitePro/1.1f (S/N wpo-0deb)Allow-ranges: bytesContent-type: text/htmlLast-modified: Saturday, 28-Dec-96 06:18:23 GMTContent-length: 26543 Drug Use Measurement Drug Use Measurement Strengths, Limitations, and Recommendations for Improvement Statement of Frederick Mulhauser, Assistant Director,Program Evaluation and Methodology Division GAO/T-PEMD-94-4 October 5, 1993 United States General Accounting Office GAO Testimony Before the Subcommittee on Legislation and National Security,Committee on Government Operations, House of Representatives Mr. Chairman and Members of the Subcommittee: I am pleased to respond to your invitation to testify aboutthe work GAO has conducted for the committee in the area of druguse measurement.' We examined three nationally prominent drug usestudies: the National Household Survey on Drug Abuse (NHSDA), theHigh School Senior Survey (HSSS), and the Drug Use Forecasting(DUF) study of booked arrestees, each cited in the President'sNational Drug Control Strategy. Let me discuss our findings from three perspectives: what thestudies have found, what confidence we should have in thosefindings, and how drug use measurement studies could be improved,with a particular focus on high-risk populations. In brief, allthree studies show a decreasing trend in the overall rate ofmarijuana use. Since 1985, NHSDA and HSSS have also estimated adecreasing trend in the overall use of cocaine. DUF data, on theother hand, have described an overall stable, high rate ofcocaine use among booked arrestees during the first 4 years ofthe study (1987-90). The use patterns for heroin and otheropiates are less clearly identified, due to the problemsexperienced in obtaining access to users of these drugs. Thus,the three studies produce information regularly on marijuana andcocaine use, but we still do not have adequate prevalencemeasures of heroin usage in the United States. This is a seriousproblem in light of recent increases in heroin availability andpurity, and decreases in the price charged for this drug. What confidence can we have in the studies' estimates? Webelieve that both NHSDA and HSSS have been important in thedevelopment of national drug control strategies, since theyrepresent our most highly sophisticated drug prevalence studiesto date. We did, however, find a number of limitations. ForNHSDA, we found exclusion of groups at high risk for drug use,problematic measurement of heroin and cocaine use, and relianceon subject self-reports. We found that HSSS excludes dropouts andabsentees, yields questionable estimates of the drug use patternsof nonwhite populations, does not adequately measure heroin use,and also relies on subject self-reports. Finally, although DUFemploys an objective drug use detection technique-urinalysis--inaddition to self-reports, the study's results cannot begeneralized either to the booking facilities studied or thegeographic areas specified in DUF publications. DUF also lacksstandardization across study sites, which minimizes comparabilityacross these sites. In summary, we judge NHSDA and HSSS nationalprevalence estimates to be conservative measures of actual druguse patterns. In addition, our confidence in DUF results islimited since we cannot determine the extent to which DUF druguse findings actually characterize the population of bookedarrestees housed in each locality. What recommendations can we make for improving drugprevalence measurement? We focused our efforts along two lines ofwork: (1) enhancing the NHSDA, HSSS, and DUF studies; and (2)developing new methods for studying high-risk groups. Promisingmethodologies, such as hair analysis, deserve exploration as lessintrusive means than urinalysis to validate self-reports. Hairanalysis can also determine drug use over a more extended periodof time, while urinalysis detection is typically restricted tothe initial 12 to 96 hours following use. Expanding thesubsamples of current surveys and conducting new studies aimed athard-to-reach groups should improve the coverage ofunderrepresented, high-risk target populations. Let me now give you the details of our findings andrecommendations, as well as highlight specific implications forthe development of a national drug control strategy. DRUG USE PATTERNS OF TARGETED GROUPS IN NHSDA, HSSS, ANDDUF As already noted, each of these surveys reported a decline inthe overall rate of marijuana use. Between 1979 and 1990, theNHSDA past year rate decreased from 18 to 10 percent, while theHSSS yearly rate decreased from 51 to 27 percent. During 1987-90,the DUF booked-arrestee marijuana rate declined from 36 to 19percent, based on urinalysis test results. NHSDA and HSSS have demonstrated declines in the overall rateof cocaine use between 1985 and 1990. The NHSDA yearly ratedecreased from 6 to 3 percent, and the HSSS yearly rate decreasedfrom 13 to 5 percent. Cocaine use among booked arresteesparticipating in the DUF study, however, remained high during theperiod 1987 to 1990. In 1987, 46 percent of all those tested byurinalysis procedures were found to be positive. Three yearslater, the rate was still above 40 percent (43 percent). Thispoints up the need to develop appropriate cocaine treatmentstrategies for specific target populations in our national drugcontrol strategies. NHSDA has not been a useful tool for tracking heroin use, norwas it expected to be given that heroin users frequently do notlive in typical household settings. Through 1990, the NationalInstitute on Drug Abuse (NIDA) judged both the pastmonth andpast-year use estimates to be too imprecise to publish. HSSSpublishes separate heroin and other opiate use rates on anongoing basis. For 1979-90, the high school senior rate ofpastyear heroin use remained stable at less than 1 percent; therate for other opiate use varied around the 5-percent level. DUFprovides a combined score for heroin and other opiate use, basedon urinalysis testing. During the period of study, 1987-90,the DUF heroin and other opiate use rate dropped from 14 to 10percent. STRENGTHS AND LIMITATIONS OF THE THREE STUDIES National Household Survey on Drug Abuse Six particular strengths are emphasized in our report: (1)project management skills; (2) national population coverage;(3) high screening and interview completion rates; (4) inclusionof all major illicit drug types, as well as alcohol and tobacco;(5) statistical determination of drug use patterns and trends;and (6) use of cognitive laboratory procedures to assess moreeffective, user-friendly ways of acquiring drug use data. Four selected limitations are discussed here in greaterdetail because of their implications for drug use measurement andthe development of a national drug control policy. The Accuracy of Subject Self-Reports NHSDA findings rely entirely on the honesty of subject selfreports. Recent studies (1985-91) provide mixed evidenceregarding the accuracy of drug use self-reports. Some studieshave confirmed the validity of the self-report method. Othersfound particular groups providing inaccurate responses (forexample, arrestees, pregnant females, and discharged clients).Underreporting of the more socially disapproved drugs has alsobeen noted. The accuracy of self-reported responses for householdrespondents in NHSDA has never been effectively evaluated,despite the high price tag associated with the study(approximately $12 million in 1991). We therefore cannot be sureof the veracity of subject responses, particularly as related tothe more stigmatized, or socially disapproved, drugs (forexample, heroin and cocaine). Problems In Heroin Measurement NHSDA includes few subjects who have indicated use of heroineither during the past month or during the past year. In part,this reflects the relatively low prevalence rate of heroin use inthis country. But it is also a function of the fact that heroinusers are frequently not situated in the household environment orare excluded from the sample because they are transients. In1990, only 1 Hispanic male, 7 black males, and 13 white malesindicated using heroin in the past year. During the same timeperiod, there were only 4 Hispanic females, 3 black females, and4 white females who indicated heroin use. The generalization ofNHSDA results to various subgroups of the population is thereforeimpractical given these limited numbers. Nevertheless, in 1991, 142,000 heroin users were nationallyestimated based on projections from one 79-year-old womanparticipating in the survey, and 32 percent of the annual heroinusers were judged to be older than age 60 based on projectionsfrom just seven heroin-using subjects. Given national concerns about a potential increase in theheroin use rate, it is imperative that additional data sets beintegrated to track the prevalence and incidence rates of thisdrug. Policy planners cannot rely on NHSDA for good documentationof heroin use. Problems in Cocaine Measurement In the 1990 NHSDA, the number of individuals said to be usingcocaine "once a week" or more was estimated at 662,000.In 1991, this estimate increased to 855,000, indicating a jump ofalmost 200,000 weekly cocaine users within a single year. Thissharp increase has been taken as one indicator of the need tofight a "two-front drug war": one with casual,recreational users; the other with more hard-core, frequentusers. However, the 855,000 estimate was subsequently shown to beincorrect. Due to imputation problems, the National Institute onDrug Abuse (NIDA) revised the 1991 user population estimate,first from 855,000 down to 654,000 and then to 625,000, implyingthat the frequency of weekly cocaine users in NHSDA had, in fact,not risen between 1990 and 1991. obviously, greater qualitycontrol procedures need to be in place to catch errors of suchsignificant policy relevance. Questions have also been raised about the validity ofnational estimates of "frequent" cocaine users. In1990, 41 percent of the survey's past-month cocaine users did notinitially indicate use of the drug during this time period. Thecontractor subsequently modified their responses to eliminatecontradictory results. However, the procedures for modifying asubject's response pattern are not believed to be entirelyjustifiable. Frequency of NHSDA Survey Administration The Anti-Drug Abuse Act of 1988 requires that the extent ofalcohol and drug abuse among the general population be assessedannually. (NIDA had been conducting the NHSDA every 2 to 3 yearsprevious to 1990.) A yearly data collection strategy isquestionable for three reasons: (1) the 1991 total costallocation was sizable, at $11.5 million; (2) prevalence ratechanges have been minimal between survey administrations; and (3)hard-core, frequent drug users are often not found in thehousehold environment. The High School Senior Survey Five particular strengths are highlighted in our report: (1) HSSS is managed by a distinguished group of socialscientists at the University of Michigan who have guided theproject since its inception in 1975; (2) a sophisticated designis utilized to obtain between 15,000 and 19,000 participatingseniors each year, drawn from between 120 and 140 public andprivate schools; (3) the refusal rate among available studentshas consistently been less than 1 percent; (4) all illicit drugtypes, as well as alcohol, tobacco, and steroids, are considered;and (5), as in NHSDA, statistical tests have been used todetermine whether there have been significant score changesbetween survey administrations. Five limitations potentially affecting the validity of HSSS,and thereby the development of national drug policy, arehighlighted in our report. The Accuracy of Subject Self-Reports Like NHSDA, HSSS has not assessed the accuracy ofselfreported drug use against objective criteria. While the studyinvestigators provide reasonable self-report correlative evidencethat the findings may be valid, an "honesty" surveyquestion shows that high school senior lifetime drug useestimates for marijuana, heroin, and the amphetamines may beunderstated. As in the case of NHSDA, objective confirmation ofthe accuracy of HSSS is needed. Exclusion of High School Dropouts By design, dropouts have not been included in the samplingframe of HSSS since the inception of the study in 1975. Sincethey are thought to have higher rates of drug use than studentsin school, this implies some underestimation of drug use ratesamong the age cohort of high school seniors. Correction factorsintroduced by project officials have not been universallyaccepted. In fiscal year 1992, NIDA awarded a 5-year grant toHSSS investigators to study drug use among dropouts. Exclusion of School Absentees The HSSS field staff does not engage in follow-up schoolvisits because of costs and logistics. As a result, studentsabsent on the day of the survey administration are excluded fromparticipation. According to the coprincipal investigators,absentees constitute approximately 17 to 23 percent of enrolledstudents. HSS is therefore missing about one in five studentsbecause of absenteeism. Drug correction factors have been basedon the assumption that absenteeism is a fairly random event andthus the absentee patterns of those present (at the time of thesurvey) represent those who are absent. This assumption, whileplausible, has not been confirmed. School Nonparticipation and Replacement The school nonparticipation rate has tended to be between 20and 40 percent. Since school officials do not indicate schooldrug problems as a reason for nonparticipation, the assumptionhas been made that no drug bias occurs in the school replacementprocess. This conclusion too has never been empirically proven. Minority Drug Use Estimates Drug use estimates for nonwhite seniors have traditionallynot been reported on a yearly basis in HSSS press releases andpublications. Nor have safeguard procedures been adopted toensure the representativeness of minority groups in the HSSSsurvey sample. As a result, annual nonwhite drug use patternsamong high school seniors over the years have remained unclear. Drug Use Forecasting Four strengths of DUF are highlighted in our report: (1)establishment of a much needed drug use data base at the locallevel; (2) resort to an objective drug use criteria, rather thanreliance on subject self-reports; (3) high urinalysisparticipation rates; and (4) use of a centralized laboratory tominimize potential specimen test biases. I will discuss three of the principal DUF limitations in mytestimony today. The full range of significant limitations aredetailed in our report. Geographic Site Variations DUF collects self-report interviews and urinalysis specimensfrom booked arrestees at central booking facilities. Theseparticipating facilities, however, often serve very differentgeographical areas. Some facilities serve an entire city; otherspart of a city, a central city plus additional cities, an entirecounty, or parts of a county. These differences are not madeclear in DUF publications. Based on annual reports, theimpression is created that drug use findings are generated forentire cities, when in fact this is not always the case. Criminaljustice planners and decision makers must therefore exercisecaution in using these data for the development of overall cityand county drug policies. Subject Sampling Procedure DUF has not been able to demonstrate a representative sampleof booked arrestees either at the central booking facility levelor in the geographic locales highlighted in DUF reports. Thesampling procedures, as described in the DUF procedures manual,are not being followed closely by all sites. Privacy in the Interview Situation Not all facilities use a private office for arresteeinterviews. Subjects have been interviewed in hallways traversedregularly by police department personnel; in small alcoves, witha police officer standing guard at the entrance; or through thebars of a holding cell, in close proximity to other arrestees.Under such conditions, there is a potential for underreportingdrug use, particularly since arrestees are awaiting arraignmentbefore a judge. (Though pledges of confidentiality are given,arrestees may not fully believe them.) Urinalysis rates, however,should not be affected. RECOMMENDATIONS FOR THE IMPROVEMENT OF DRUG PREVALENCEESTIMATES Enhancing the NHSDA, HSSS, and DUF Studies In our report, we recommend to the Congress: -- That part A of title V of the Public Health Service Act beamended to provide that the Secretary of Health and HumanServices collect survey data only biennially, rather than eachyear, on the national prevalence of the various forms ofsubstance abuse among high school students and among the generalpopulation. But if local or regional indicators portend anincrease in drug use, then the Secretary should have theauthority to initiate new or augment current studies to determinethe nature and degree of the problem. Implementation of this recommendation can result in an NHSDAsavings of approximately $13 million per year, based on 1993 costestimates, if the current methodology is maintained. A portion ofthis cost-savings could be usefully applied toward studying thedrug use patterns of those high-risk groups disproportionatelyimpacting criminal justice and health system resources,field-testing new methodologies, and validating our currentmeasures and findings. We also recommended that the Secretary of Health and HumanServices: -- Give high priority to validating self-reports of the useof illicit drugs, particularly focusing on objective techniquessuch as hair testing. Hair testing has received publicity both inthe United States and abroad because of its potential todistinguish the use of illicit drugs in hair specimens forextended periods of time. At present, we conclude that hairanalysis has sufficient scientific merit to justify its use inself-report validation field trials. (This should not beconstrued to mean that we also support hair analysis inemployment testing and court testimony, for which maximalprecision would be required.) A hair validation study of fourdrug types, involving 2,000 subjects, using both a hair screenand a confirmatory test, would cost approximately $150,000(including subject payment incentives), a relatively smallallocation compared to the $13 million cost of conducting justone round of NHSDA. -- Develop or improve supplementary data sources to moreappropriately determine heroin and cocaine prevalence patternsand trends. In 1991, NHSDA was expanded beyond just a household survey toinclude the sheltered homeless, civilians on military bases, andresidents of college dormitories. These target populations,however, do not encompass the totality of heroin and cocaineusers. If we are to more accurately judge the prevalence ofheroin and cocaine use in this country, we must come up withingenious ways of identifying and accessing the relevantpopulation groups (that is, those living in institutional andnoninstitutional quarters and on the streets), as well as deviseways to prevent double counting (for example, of a homelessperson formerly living in public housing). -- Incorporate methodological design changes into HSSS sothat nonwhite individuals are adequately sampled. Nonwhite annual drug use rates have typically not beendiscussed in HSSS reports because of methodological studyconcerns. We therefore know little about minority drug use ratesat the high school level and their contribution to overallnational drug prevalence patterns. If we are to plan preventionand treatment strategies aimed at this diverse subgroup, we mustcertainly ascertain the nature and extent of their drug use on amore timely basis. -- Retain the current design of NHSDA to provide nationalestimates only (and not expand the design to provide state-levelestimates of drug use). Expanding NHSDA to the state level would be too costly, givenother drug area priorities. The Department of Health and HumanServices and NIDA have estimated a cost of about $110 million forstate-level survey expansion. Such an effort would also duplicateother already existing studies being conducted in multiplestates. Further, we recommended that the Director of the NationalInstitute of Justice review the practicality of improving the DUFdesign, such as by using a standardized methodology across sites;and give priority to creating a DUF arrestee data base that canbe generalized to booked arrestees in the geographic areassurveyed. The development of generalizable findings requires severalstages of decision making. First, the geographic unit of studymust be clarified. (For example, if cities are the relevant unit,then county data from outside city boundaries must be excluded.)Second, central booking facilities must be chosen that adequatelyrepresent a cross section of arrestees being detained in thatgeographic unit. (This may involve the selection of one or morebooking facilities.) Third, a sample of arrestees must beobtained from each booking facility to yield an appropriate crosssection of that facility's arrestees. Developing New Methods for Studying High-Risk Groups Since NHSDA and HSSS do not sufficiently measure drug useamong high-risk target groups, supplementary methods must beconceptualized, field-tested, and implemented if we are to betterunderstand drug prevalence rates and trends among these groups. Until recently, only modest efforts were being made in thisarea. But momentum is building. We have already discussed NIJ'spioneering work with booked arrestees. Particularly over the past3 years, NIDA has been active in sponsoring studies aimed atidentifying, gaining access to, and interviewing individuals athigh risk for substance abuse. The Washington, D.C., MetropolitanArea Drug Study (DC*MADS) was designed to develop prototypemethodologies in the Washington, D.C., area for replication inother metropolitan areas. High-risk groups in the study includethe homeless and transient populations, school dropouts, juvenileand adult offenders, and the institutionalized. NIDA intends topublish methodological, substantive reports in 1993 describingthe procedures adopted in the field experiments, success levelsachieved, and resultant drug use findings. It is premature atthis time for us to comment on the utility of the variousmethodologies for obtaining drug use data from these high-riskgroups. However, transference to other metropolitan areas iscertainly going to be a function of study costs. Budgetsubmissions in September 1990 to the Office of Management andBudget for initial study were quite high (for example, for thehomeless and transient study, $883,628; for the school dropoutstudy, $576,033; and for the adult offender study, $577,550). NIDA funded a 5-year grant award to the University ofMichigan's HSSS investigators aimed at following up a nationalcohort of 8th and 10th graders every 2 years to learn more aboutthe drug use of school dropouts. It is also too soon to commenton the effectiveness of this study, given that the award was madein fiscal year 1992. The direct costs of this study range from$319,000 in the first year of the grant to $619,000 in the fifthyear. The Senate Committee on the Judiciary and the Office ofNational Drug Control Policy have sought to estimate the numberof hard-core and heavy cocaine users through secondary analysesof existing data bases. Ethnographic street studies have beenincorporated in high-risk group prevalence estimation efforts, ashave nominative techniques and a wide range of traditionaloperations research procedures. These types of studies are stillin their early stages of development with respect to drug use,requiring much more elaboration and specificity, but arecertainly worthy of continued attention and funding. To undertake such work on high-risk groups in an orderly,scientific manner, we recommended that the Secretary of Healthand Human Services -- conduct a systematic program for the study of drugprevalence rates among underrepresented, high-risk groups. It is not sufficient for agencies to engage ad hoc insingular studies of specific high-risk groups. Given theimpingement of these groups on the health care delivery system,policymakers and health officials must have comprehensive databases from which to plan needed prevention and interventionstrategies. Mr. Chairman, this concludes my remarks. I would be happy toanswer any questions you or Members of the Subcommittee may have. CliffSchaffer's Home Page WT01-B29-91IA086-000619-B002-322http://206.61.184.43:80/schaffer/GovPubs/gao/gao6.htm 206.61.184.43 19970122032307 text/html 72993HTTP/1.0 200 OKDate: Wednesday, 22-Jan-97 03:22:49 GMTServer: WebSitePro/1.1f (S/N wpo-0deb)Allow-ranges: bytesContent-type: text/htmlLast-modified: Saturday, 28-Dec-96 06:18:16 GMTContent-length: 72775 Drug Courts: Information on a New Approach to AddressDrug-Relat Drug Courts: Information on a New Approach to AddressDrug-Related Crime (Briefing Report, 05/22/95, GAO/GGD-95-159BR) GAO provided information on drug courts, a new approach usedto monitor defendants' drug use, treatment, and behavior GAO found that: in exchange for reduced charges, drug usingdefendants can be diverted to drug courts where judges monitortheir progress through frequent status hearings; drug courtprograms vary in length, participant eligibility, funding, andother practices; as of March 1995, there were at least 37 drugcourts operating nationwide; 33 drug courts have accepted over20,000 defendants; most drug courts do not accept violentoffenders; drug courts have not been operating long enough todetermine their overall effectiveness; and although the 1994Crime Act authorized $1 billion to support drug court programsfrom fiscal year (FY) 1995 through FY 2000, Congress has proposedrepealing the drug court grant program LETTER B-260301 May 22, 1995 The Honorable Orrin G. HatchChairman The Honorable Joseph R. Biden, Jr Ranking Minority Member Committee on the Judiciary UnitedStates Senate The Honorable Henry J. Hyde Chairman The HonorableJohn Conyers, Jr Ranking Minority Member Committee on the Judiciary House ofRepresentatives This briefing report provides information on drugcourts,\1 a new approach used by state and local governments toaddress drug-related crime. These courts monitor the treatmentand behavior of drug-using defendants Title V of the Violent Crime Control and Law Enforcement Actof 1994 (the 1994 Crime Act) authorizes the award of federalgrants for drug courts. The act requires that we assess theeffectiveness and impact of these grants and report to Congressby January 1, 1997. To assist Congress in its deliberations onwhether to fund drug courts, we developed this preliminaryreport. Specifically, we gathered information on drug courts inexistence prior to the awarding of grants under the 1994 CrimeAct, assessed evaluations of these courts, and reviewed theDepartment of Justice's (DOJ) responsibilities and plans forimplementing the federal drug court grant program During April and on May 11, 1995, we briefed the Committeeson the results of our work -------------------- \1 Throughout this briefing report, we use the terms drugcourts and drug court programs interchangeably RESULTS ------------------------------------------------------------ Letter :1 In response to the deluge of drug cases since the late 1980sand the cycle of recidivism (rearrest rates) common to drugoffenders, some state and local jurisdictions created drugcourts, the majority of which have been operating since 1993. Themain purpose of drug courts is to use the authority of the courtto reduce crime by changing defendants' drug-using behavior. Inexchange for the possibility of dismissed charges or reducedsentences, defendants are diverted to drug courts. Judges presideover drug court proceedings, monitor the progress of defendantsthrough frequent status hearings, and prescribe sanctions andrewards as appropriate in collaboration with prosecutors, defenseattorneys, treatment providers, and others. Although there arebasic elements common to many drug court programs, they vary interms of participant eligibility, length of the program,penalties and rewards, and other practices. The courts aresupported by a variety of local, state, federal, and privatefunds and participant fees, according to the Drug Court ResourceCenter.\2 As of March 1995, there were at least 37 drug courtsoperating nationwide, most of which had been fully operationalfor at least 9 months. Thirty-three drug courts responding to ourquestionnaire reported having accepted over 20,000 defendants, ofwhom a third had completed their programs. According to theProject Director of the Drug Court Resource Center, none of thedrug courts accept defendants currently charged with a violentoffense, and most do not accept defendants with prior violentconvictions. However, at least one drug court accepts defendantsregardless of prior offenses. (See sect. I for more generalinformation on drug courts.) We assessed six evaluations of fivedrug courts completed as of March 1995. Although some evaluationresults indicated that drug courts may have some beneficialeffects, limitations in their designs and methodologies, as wellas the relative newness of drug courts, precluded firmconclusions about the overall impact of these programs. Theevaluations showed mixed results in recidivism and otherdefendant outcomes. For example, two evaluations showed lessrecidivism by drug court defendants. However, three otherevaluations showed no significant differences in recidivism.Additionally, two evaluations of the same drug court showedcontrasting recidivism results. (See sect. II and app. III formore information on the evaluations we assessed.) The 1994 CrimeAct authorized the Attorney General to award and administerdiscretionary grants for drug court programs. A key requirementof the act is that violent offenders are prohibited as drug courtparticipants. The act authorized $1 billion from fiscal years1995 through 2000 to support drug court programs. For fiscal year1995, $29 million was appropriated. However, Congress hasproposed fiscal year 1995 budget cuts in a pending rescissionbill In addition, the House has passed legislation repealing thedrug court grant program authorized in the 1994 Crime Act DOJ expects to award grants beginning in the summer of 1995.The 1994 Crime Act also authorizes the Attorney General toprovide for a national evaluation of drug courts supported byfederal grants. DOJ expects to complete the evaluation to assessthe impact and effectiveness of drug court grants in about 2years. (See sect. III for more information.) -------------------- \2 The Bureau of Justice Assistance funds the Drug CourtResource Center. The Resource Center began operating October 1,1994, under the direction of The American University inpartnership with the National Center for State Courts and theNational Consortium of Treatment Alternatives to Street CrimePrograms. The Resource Center assists state and local justicesystem officials in planning, implementing, managing, andevaluating drug courts. It also acts as a clearinghouse andprovides technical assistance and other services to jurisdictionsinterested in developing or expanding drug courts OBJECTIVES, SCOPE, AND METHODOLOGY ------------------------------------------------------------ Letter : 2 In preparation for our 1997 mandated study, we initiated apreliminary review of drug court programs. Our objectives were todetermine the number, location, and key elements of drug courts;the results and validity of evaluations of drug courts; and DOJ'sresponsibilities and plans for implementing statutoryrequirements for the federal drug court grant program The Drug Court Resource Center, which is based at TheAmerican University, Washington, D.C., provided us with generalinformation on drug courts. To obtain more current information,we sent a questionnaire to 37 drug courts. We received responsesfrom 33 drug courts as of March 31, 1995. We did not verify theaccuracy of the data provided to us by the Drug Court ResourceCenter and drug courts. In addition, we attended a January 1995national training conference for drug court professionals in LasVegas, NV, and visited drug courts in Las Vegas and Washington,D.C To determine the results and assess the validity ofevaluations of drug courts, we obtained 11 drug court evaluationscompleted as of March 1, 1995, from the Drug Court ResourceCenter. These evaluations were done by a variety of sources,including independent researchers, county officials, and courtrepresentatives. We reviewed them and assessed the evaluativemethodology used and the validity of reported findings. We didnot analyze the reported results of three of them because theyreported outcome data for drug court defendants without anyreference to comparison or control groups. We were unable toassess the validity of one because it did not include adescription of the methodology used. Two dealt with one drugcourt and were assessed as one evaluation because one was afollow-up to the other and contained the same methodology andfindings To determine DOJ's responsibilities and plans forimplementing the federal grant program, we met withrepresentatives of the Office of Justice Programs, DOJ. We helddiscussions and reviewed documents regarding theirresponsibilities and plans for implementing the federallysupported drug court program. We also obtained drug court fundinginformation from the Department of Health and Human Services'Center for Substance Abuse Treatment Our review was done from January 1995 to April 1995 inaccordance with generally accepted government auditing standards AGENCY COMMENTS------------------------------------------------------------ Letter :3 In April 1995, we provided a draft of this report for commentto the Attorney General and the Project Director of the DrugCourt Resource Center On April 21, 1995, we discussed the report with the ProjectDirector of the Drug Court Resource Center. On May 5, 1995, wealso discussed the report with the Deputy Assistant AttorneyGeneral and other officials from DOJ's Office of JusticePrograms. These officials generally agreed with the informationpresented in the report and provided comments that weincorporated as appropriate DOJ officials said the report was positive, informative, andwill be helpful to drug court professionals. They explained thatthere is no universal model for drug courts, and as a result,each drug court operates differently due to local needs andconditions. Similarly, the Project Director of the Drug CourtResource Center said that the information presented in the reportwas comprehensive, accurate, and objective ---------------------------------------------------------- Letter :3.1 We are sending copies of this briefing report toother interested congressional committees and Members and theAttorney General Copies will also be made available to others upon request The major contributors to this briefing report are listed inappendix IV. If you have any questions about this report, pleasecall me on (202) 512-8777 Norman J. Rabkin Director, Administration of Justice IssuesBriefing Section I DRUG COURTS==============================================================Letter TYPES OF DRUG COURTS------------------------------------------------------------Letter :4 (See figure in printed edition.) In the late 1980s, state and local criminal courts wereinundated with drug cases. One response to this challenge was thecreation of drug courts, a relatively recent grassroots movementto deal with drug-related crime and drug-using defendants According to DOJ, two main types of drug courts have evolved,those that (1) expedite the processing of drug cases and (2) usecourt-monitored drug treatment to attempt to achieve changes indefendants' drug-using behavior. In addition, some drug courtscombine these two types The 1994 Crime Act authorizes grants for those drug courtsthat have programs offering court supervised drug treatment. Theact does not authorize grants for courts designed solely toexpedite the processing of drug cases. This briefing reportprovides information on drug treatment courts Courts offering court-monitored drug treatment are referredto as "drug treatment courts" or simply "drugcourts." Although there is no standard definition applicableto drug treatment courts, the National Association of Drug CourtProfessionals\3 defines them as follows: "A Drug Court is aspecial court given the responsibility to handle cases involvingless serious drug using-offenders through a supervision andtreatment program. These programs include frequent drug testing,judicial and probation supervision, drug counseling, treatment,educational opportunities, and the use of sanctions andincentives." One of the first drug courts to employ drugtreatment as an integral part of the processing of drug feloniesis located in Dade County (Miami), FL, and began operations inJune 1989. This court became a model for other jurisdictions thatimplemented drug courts Although drug courts share certain common elements such ascourt-monitored treatment, the courts are uniquely designed tomeet local needs and can vary considerably in the way theyoperate Organizationally, drug courts generally are distinct parts oftrial courts -------------------- \3 This is the principal organization of professionals involvedin the development of treatment-oriented drug courts. Its membersinclude judges, prosecutors, defense attorneys, treatment serviceproviders, educators, researchers, and community leaders DRUG COURT APPROACHES------------------------------------------------------------Letter :5 (See figure in printed edition.) DRUG COURT APPROACHES ---------------------------------------------------------- Letter :5.1 According to a report provided by the Drug Court ResourceCenter, drug courts have generally taken two approaches toprocessing cases: (1) deferred prosecution and (2)postadjudication. In the deferred prosecution approach, shortlyafter being charged, defendants waive their right to a speedytrial and enter a treatment program Defendants who fail to complete the treatment program havetheir charges adjudicated. Defendants who complete the treatmentprogram are not prosecuted further or have their chargesdismissed. This approach is intended to capitalize on the traumaof arrest and offers defendants the opportunity to obtaintreatment and avoid the possibility of a felony conviction In the postadjudication approach, defendants are tried andconvicted, but their sentences are deferred or pronounced andincarceration is suspended until they complete or withdraw fromthe treatment program This approach provides an incentive for the defendant torehabilitate because progress toward rehabilitation is factoredinto the sentencing determination Appendix I presents examples of how cases are processed underthe two drug court approaches PARTICIPANT ELIGIBILITY CRITERIA ------------------------------------------------------------ Letter :6 (See figure in printed edition.) PARTICIPANT ELIGIBILITY CRITERIA---------------------------------------------------------- Letter:6. 1 According to the Drug Court Resource Center, drug courtsgenerally accept defendants with substance abuse problems who arecurrently charged with drug possession and/or other nonviolentoffenses such as property crimes. Some drug courts acceptdefendants who have prior convictions, and others do not The Project Director of the Drug Court Resource Center alsopointed out that drug courts do not accept defendants currentlycharged with a violent offense. The Project Director furthercommented that most drug courts do not accept defendants withprior violent offenses However, at least one drug court accepts defendantsregardless of prior offenses possibly including defendants withprior convictions for violent crimes. Under the 1994 Crime Act,federal grants cannot be awarded to any drug court that allowseither current or past violent offenders to participate in itsprogram DRUG COURT PLAYERS ------------------------------------------------------------ Letter :7 (See figure in printed edition.) DRUG COURT PLAYERS ---------------------------------------------------------- Letter :7.1 According to a DOJ-funded report on the first national drugcourt conference,\4 judicial leadership is the foundation onwhich the overall drug court approach is most often built. Ajurisdiction's trial court provides the leadership, authority,and management capacity to enable the drug court to operate. Thedrug court is headed by a judge whose role is generally expandedbeyond normal court duties to include active involvement inmonitoring the status of defendants in the treatment program. Thejudge's duties may include conducting hearings, reviewingtreatment progress reports, issuing bench warrants, and decidingwho may enter the program and who should be terminatedconsidering recommendations of prosecutors, public defenders, andtreatment providers The judiciary alone, however, cannot successfully implementand operate a drug court, according to the conference report.Rather, a drug court requires a special collaborative effortamong judges, prosecutors, defense attorneys, and relatedcriminal justice agencies along with treatment providers andother social services and community organizations. Thiscollaborative effort is based on local needs and the targetedpopulation being served and may differ considerably among drugcourts Specifically, drug courts create new and different roles forprosecutors and defense attorneys. In most drug courts theseplayers are not adversaries in the traditional sense but ratherare to work in concert with the court for the sole purpose ofhelping defendants become drug free. This nonadversarial role issignificant because the court does not arbitrate in the usualfashion and has the opportunity to address addiction-relatedissues. Further, drug courts place the defendant in the uniquerole of being held publicly accountable for his or her actions -------------------- \4 Justice and Treatment Innovation: The Drug Court Movement,A Working Paper of the First National Drug Court Conference,December 1993, John S. Goldkamp, October 1994 COMMON ELEMENTS OF DRUG COURT PROGRAMS ------------------------------------------------------------ Letter :8 (See figure in printed edition.) COMMON ELEMENTS OF DRUG COURT PROGRAMS ---------------------------------------------------------- Letter :8. 1 According to the Drug Court Resource Center, in most drugcourts, treatment is designed to usually last at least 1 year andis administered on an outpatient basis with limited inpatienttreatment as needed to address special detoxification or relapsesituations.\5 These courts operate with the philosophy thatbecause drug addiction is a disease relapses can occur, and thatthe court must respond with progressive sanctions and/or enhancetreatment rather than immediately terminate a participant The central element of all drug court programs is attendanceat the regularly scheduled status hearings at which the drugcourt judge monitors the progress of participants. Monitoring isbased on treatment provider reports on urine test results thatdetect drug use, attendance at counseling, etc. The judgereinforces progress and addresses noncompliance with programrequirements. The primary objective of the status hearing is tokeep the defendant in treatment -------------------- \5 These programs recognize that some individuals willrequire a longer period to complete the program PROGRAM REQUIREMENTS ------------------------------------------------------------ Letter :9 (See figure in printed edition.) PROGRAM REQUIREMENTS ---------------------------------------------------------- Letter :9. 1 Overall, according to the Drug Court Resource Center,treatment program requirements are more demanding than theapplicable sanction received through traditional adjudication.Most drug court programs require that defendants attend statushearings, participate in counseling sessions, and submit to urinetests with the goal of becoming drug free. Some programs focus onspecial classes of defendants such as women. Many programs alsoprovide support services such as public health services;assistance with housing, food, and child care; vocationaltraining; and job placement TREATMENT PHASES ----------------------------------------------------------- Letter :10 (See figure in printed edition.) TREATMENT PHASES --------------------------------------------------------- Letter :10. 1 Treatment services are generally divided into three phases:(1) detoxification, (2) stabilization, and (3) aftercare. First,the defendant's physical dependence on drugs is eliminatedthrough detoxification. Acupuncture is sometimes used as anadjunct to treatment in the detoxification phase. According tothe Project Director of the Drug Court Resource Center, 9 of 20drug courts responding to the Center's 1994 survey indicated thatthey used acupuncture. Second, the defendant's psychologicalcraving for the drugs is treated during stabilization. Frequentgroup and/or individual counseling sessions are employed duringthis phase. And third, aftercare focuses on helping the defendantobtain education or job training, find a job, and remain drugfree PROGRAM SANCTIONS ----------------------------------------------------------- Letter :11 (See figure in printed edition.) PROGRAM SANCTIONS --------------------------------------------------------- Letter :11. 1 Sanctions for failing to abide by program rules can include(1) verbal admonition from the judge; (2) demotion to an earlierstage of the program; (3) incarceration for several days orweeks, increasing with the number and severity of the violations;and (4) more frequent status hearings, treatment sessions, orurine tests. Many programs also use graduated sanctions,increasing the severity of the sanction with subsequentviolations of program rules DOJ also pointed out that most drug courts use sanctions notto simply punish inappropriate behavior but to augment thetreatment process. For example, many drug courts will place adefendant in residential treatment if he or she is unable toachieve satisfactory progress in an outpatient setting. Inaddition, many drug courts incarcerate defendants for the purposeof detoxification rather than detain them for inappropriatebehavior REASONS FOR TERMINATING DEFENDANTS FROM THE PROGRAM ----------------------------------------------------------- Letter :12 (See figure in printed edition.) REASONS FORTERMINATING DEFENDANTS FROM THE PROGRAM --------------------------------------------------------- Letter :12. 1 Drug courts use various criteria for ending a defendant'sparticipation in the program before completion. These may includea new felony offense; multiple failures to comply with programrequirements, such as not attending status hearings or treatmentsessions; and a pattern of positive urine tests. According toDOJ, many drug courts do not terminate defendants for a new drugpossession offense Before terminating a defendant for continuing to use drugs,drug courts will use an array of treatment services and availablesanctions. There are no uniform standards for the number offailed urine tests and failures to attend treatment sessions thatresult in a participant being terminated that apply to allprograms. Each drug court sets its own standards. Relapses areexpected and the extent to which noncompliance results interminations varies from program to program Generally, the drug court judge makes the decision toterminate, but the prosecutor or treatment provider can recommendthe termination Once a defendant is terminated, he or she will be referredfor adjudication or sentencing PROGRAM GRADUATION REQUIREMENTS ----------------------------------------------------------- Letter :13 (See figure in printed edition.) PROGRAM GRADUATION REQUIREMENTS --------------------------------------------------------- Letter :13. 1 Drug courts typically require defendants to complete atreatment program in order to graduate. Some impose otherconditions defendants must meet after treatment. These couldinclude remaining drug free and not being arrested for aspecified period of time, paying restitution, being employedfull-time, or performing community service For example, the Seattle, WA, drug court requires that adefendant complete all phases of the program to graduate.However, the Beaumont, TX, drug court requires that, in additionto completing the treatment program, the defendant maintainsobriety for a specified time and participate in education andvocational training and/or be working full-time EFFECTS OF PROGRAM GRADUATION ON CASE OUTCOME ----------------------------------------------------------- Letter :14 (See figure in printed edition.) EFFECTS OF PROGRAM GRADUATION ON CASE OUTCOME --------------------------------------------------------- Letter :14. 1 In many jurisdictions, completion of the drug court programleads to a dismissal of charges or cessation of prosecution. Inothers, the guilty plea can be stricken, the defendant can besentenced to probation in lieu of incarceration, or thedefendant's probation can be shortened DOJ pointed out that some drug courts will seal all caserecords, including arrests, when defendants complete the program.The sealing of records is particularly significant whenattempting to measure the impact of drug court programs at alater date NUMBER OF DRUG COURTS STARTED, 1989-1994 ----------------------------------------------------------- Letter :15 (See figure in printed edition.) Note: One drugcourt was started in March 1995 (See figure in printed edition.) Source: GAO and Drug CourtResource Center data (See figure in printed edition.) NUMBER OF DRUG COURTS STARTED, 1989-1994 --------------------------------------------------------- Letter :15. 1 According to the Drug Court Resource Center, as of March1995, there were at least 37 drug courts operating across thecountry.\6 Of these drug courts, 29 had been fully operationalfor at least 9 months, and 8 others had been operating for alesser period The number of drug courts steadily increased from 1991 to1994, with substantial increases since 1993. As of March 1995, 24jurisdictions were developing drug courts. Another eightjurisdictions had exhibited interest in starting drug courts byinitiating feasibility studies Appendix II lists the number of drug courts in operation andbeing developed -------------------- \6 Because of the absence of anyofficial requirement to report their existence to a centralorganization, additional drug courts may exist DRUG COURT LOCATIONS AS OF MARCH 1995 ----------------------------------------------------------- Letter :16 (See figure in printed edition.) Source: DrugCourt Resource Center data (See figure in printed edition.) DRUG COURT LOCATIONS AS OFMARCH 1995 --------------------------------------------------------- Letter :16. 1 According to the Drug Court Resource Center, the 37 drugcourts in operation as of March 1995 are located in 15 states andthe District of Columbia. The largest number of drug courts arelocated in Florida, with 10, followed by California, with 6.There are two drug courts in each of six states, and there is onedrug court in each of the remaining eight states and the Districtof Columbia. The specific location of each drug court is shown inappendix II DRUG COURT PARTICIPANTS' STATUS AS OF MARCH 1995 ----------------------------------------------------------- Letter :17 (See figure in printed edition.) N = 20,421 (Seefigure in printed edition.) Note 1: Based on responses from 33drug courts (See figure in printed edition.) Note 2: Percentages do notadd to 100 percent due to rounding (See figure in printed edition.) Source: GAO questionnaires (See figure in printed edition.) DRUG COURT PARTICIPANTS' STATUS AS OF MARCH 1995 --------------------------------------------------------- Letter :17. 1 Data obtained from 33 of 37 drug courts responding to ourquestionnaire showed that since inception of the first drug courtin 1989, 20,421 persons have participated in drug courts. Ofthese, 7,235 participants have graduated, and 7,595 are currentlyin the programs. The remaining participants did not complete theprograms Generally, when participants do not complete drug courtprograms it is because they were terminated, voluntarilywithdrew, or died Based on the data received, these totaled 5,591.\7 The numberof participants currently in each of these drug court programsvaried widely, ranging from a low of 1 participant in Santa Ana,CA, a new drug court,\8 to a high of 1,200 participants in Miami,FL, one of the oldest drug courts. The median number ofparticipants in these drug court programs is 105 It should be noted that many of the drug courts have beenoperating for less than a year and would not yet have graduates.As shown, more than one-third of the total participants arecurrently enrolled in drug court programs -------------------- \7 We calculated the number (5,591) of participants notcompleting the programs by subtracting the number (7,235) ofgraduates and the number (7,595) of participants currently in theprograms from the total number (20,421) of participants in theprograms since their inception \8 At the time of our review, Orange County, CA, had filedfor bankruptcy and curtailed resources for its drug court FUNDING SOURCES-----------------------------------------------------------Letter :18 (See figure in printed edition.) According to the DrugCourt Resource Center Project Director, drug courts generallypiece together funding from a variety of sources Information reported to the Drug Court Resource Center by 15drug courts showed that these sources included local taxes andsurcharges, state alcohol and drug agency funds, privatefoundation monies, participant fees, and federal grants Some drug courts have developed innovative fundingapproaches. For example, a drug court judge from Orange County,CA, told us that when the county filed for bankruptcy, it cutback services necessary for the drug court operation. The judgesaid that he was forming a nonprofit corporation to try toprovide funding for the drug court outside of the bankruptcyproceedings Until the 1994 Crime Act, there was no federal grant programspecifically designed for drug courts. However, some drug courtshave received federal grants and technical assistance from theDepartment of Health and Human Services' Center for SubstanceAbuse Treatment (CSAT) and DOJ's Bureau of Justice Assistance(BJA) According to CSAT, it has provided or plans to provide anestimated $15 million in assistance to some drug courts. Of the$15 million, about $6 million is for a drug court demonstrationproject for the District of Columbia Superior Court BJA could not provide us with complete information on DOJgrants used in support of drug courts. According to a BJAofficial, "drug courts" was not a specific grantcategory that grantees could designate for funding. However, thisofficial commented that BJA is aware that DOJ grant fundsprovided under other grant categories such as "correctionsoptions" have been used in support of drug courts, and thatthree drug courts had received $2.5 million from the CorrectionsOptions program. \9 -------------------- \9 The Corrections Options programassists states with design, development, and implementation ofinnovative alternatives to traditional modes of incarceration PARTICIPANT FEES ----------------------------------------------------------- Letter :19 (See figure in printed edition.) PARTICIPANT FEES --------------------------------------------------------- Letter :19. 1 We obtained data (based on our questionnaire andinformation provided by the Drug Court Resource Center) from 34drug courts on fees charged to participants in drug courtprograms. Twenty-three of the 34 drug courts reported that theycharged fees, and 11 reported that they did not. Insufficientdata on fee amounts actually collected precluded us fromdetermining the extent to which drug courts relied on participantfees as a funding source Of the 23 drug courts charging participant fees, the amountscharged for the total cost of treatment ranged from $20 to$2,500. One drug court reported charging fees on a sliding scalefrom $60 to $300 for treatment based on a defendant's ability topay, while another reported charging on a sliding scale from $500to $2,500. At least nine courts responded that they charged feesranging from $200 to $350 Several drug courts reported applying participant fees tocounseling and treatment costs, drug testing costs, and otherprogram expenses In addition, DOJ commented that many treatment providersbelieve participant fees are a useful therapeutic tool and shouldbe charged regardless of the extent to which fees are needed tocover program costs COST SAVINGS ----------------------------------------------------------- Letter :20 (See figure in printed edition.) COST SAVINGS --------------------------------------------------------- Letter :20. 1 Drug courts have reported information to the Drug CourtResource Center on savings that they believe their programs haveachieved in the costs of court and other criminal justice systemoperations One of the larger categories of savings reported by drugcourts was jail costs avoided, i.e., the estimated costs ofincarcerating a typical drug court defendant that would beexpected to incur if he/she were not participating in a drugcourt program. One court estimated savings of $5,400 per drugcourt participant, and another estimated savings of $2,566 to$5,185 Another drug court claimed a savings of $2 million over a3-year period resulting from drug court participants spendingfewer days in custody and the consequent ability of the county torent unused jail cells to other law enforcement agencies. Stillanother drug court estimated it had saved about $875,500 in jailcosts for its program but did not specify the time frame The National Association of Drug Court Professionals notedthat drug court programs are much less costly than theincarceration of drug-using offenders. The Association reportedthat incarceration of drug-using offenders ranges from $20,000 to$50,000 annually, and the cost to build a prison cell is $80,000to $90,000. It also said that drug courts cost less than $1,500annually for each offender Some drug courts identified savings such as reduced caseloadsof other trial judges not in the drug court program. In addition,some drug courts claimed savings in court-appointed attorneyfees, reduced probation office caseloads, and costs ofprosecution, arrests, and police overtime We did not verify this information, and further analysis ofall drug court costs is essential to fully understanding thebenefits of these programs Briefing Section II EVALUATIONS OF DRUG COURTS ==============================================================Letter DO DRUG COURTS MAKE A DIFFERENCE? ----------------------------------------------------------- Letter :21 (See figure in printed edition.) In evaluating the effectiveness of drug courts, the basicquestion is: Do drug courts make a difference? Specifically, dodefendants who successfully complete drug court programs exhibitreduced recidivism, decreased drug use, and other sociallybeneficial effects as a result of participating in drug courtprograms when compared to their counterparts, i.e., controlgroups who were not exposed to the same drug court treatment?Based on evaluations we reviewed, drug courts generally may havesome beneficial effects. However, because of the nature of thestudy designs and the short periods of time elapsed betweentreatment and measurement of outcomes (drug courts are relativelynew), firm conclusions cannot be drawn about the effects of drugcourts It is both difficult and costly to conduct programevaluations that can measure program effects. Although thestrongest design involves assembling and randomly assigningdefendants to control groups (comparing drug courts versustraditional courts, for example), such studies raise seriouslogistical and ethical issues. Additionally, according to theProject Director of the Drug Court Resource Center, controlgroups cannot be used properly unless a drug court is originallydesigned to define such groups An alternative approach is to design studies allowing theresearcher to create comparable groups from existing programs,through the use of various analytical techniques. However, evensuch studies are often made more difficult by the fact thatexisting programs change over time, resulting in individuals atthe end of the study period being exposed to different treatmentsthan those at the beginning Also, different locations of the same program may have verydifferent implementation needs, making it more difficult tocompare such programs GAO ASSESSED DRUG COURT EVALUATIONS ----------------------------------------------------------- Letter :22 (See figure in printed edition.) We assessed six evaluations that compared performanceoutcomes for drug court defendants to the experiences of otherdefendants, i.e., previous divertees or unsuccessful drug courtdefendants or defendants who had never been in a drug court. Inorder to determine whether a drug court has an impact on itsparticipants, an evaluation should compare outcomes of drug courtdefendants to those of other groups of similar defendants who arenot in drug courts The six evaluations covered five drug courts and variedconsiderably in terms of the study designs, types of outcomesmeasured, and scope of analyses performed on the availableinformation. Our assessment indicates that the evaluationsdiffered particularly in terms of the validity of the designs,which determine the extent to which the reader is able to drawconclusions from any findings. Of the six studies: two studieshad fairly strong designs; of these, one provided some evidenceof an effect of the drug court program, and the other study'sresults were too preliminary to draw any conclusions; two studieshad designs with more serious problems; of these, one suggestedpossible effects of the program, and the other was inconclusive;and two studies had design weaknesses that prevented anyconclusions about the effects of the program The major outcome measure used, in five of the sixevaluations, was recidivism (rearrest rates). To a lesser degree,recidivism-related measures were also used, such as length oftime before rearrest and days spent in custody for felonyoffenses. We focused on these measures in this report becausethey provided the strongest evidence for the long-term effect ofthe drug court programs, even though other measures were used inthese studies EVALUATION OUTCOMES ----------------------------------------------------------- Letter :23 (See figure in printed edition.) Two of the six evaluations were well-designed. However, theresults in terms of recidivism outcomes were mixed. One of theevaluations showed that drug court defendants had significantlylower rearrest rates than defendants not in drug court, and thatthey spent fewer days in custody for felony offenses (app. III,evaluation 1). This evaluation also showed that drug courtdefendants had a lower rate of failures-to-appear for requiredcourt hearings than did other defendants. However, the otherevaluation, with preliminary information only, showed nosignificant difference so far in rearrest rates between drugcourt defendants and defendants who were not in the drug court(app. III, evaluation 2) Although these evaluations have strong study designs and oneindicates some beneficial effects on defendants resulting fromthe drug court programs, the evidence does not permit firmconclusions about the effects of the drug courts studied.Additionally, for one of the evaluations, insufficient time hadelapsed to provide firmer evidence of program effect Of the next two evaluations, both of the same drug court, oneprovided some suggestive evidence of program effect. It showedlower recidivism by drug court defendants and longer time beforerearrest (app. III, evaluation 3). The other generally showed nodifference in recidivism rates (app. III, evaluation 4). Designproblems made it difficult to attribute these findings to theprograms. There are too many potential differences between thedrug court participants and the groups to which they werecompared to develop strong conclusions The final two evaluations did not provide reliable evidenceconcerning the effects of the programs. One showed no substantialdifference in recidivism between drug court defendants anddefendants who left the drug court (app. III, evaluation 5). Theother evaluation measured defendants' drug abstinence andfailure-to-appear rates and showed positive results for drugcourt defendants as compared to defendants terminated from thedrug court (app. III, evaluation 6). Because the study design didnot control for a number of factors, such as motivation andsusceptibility to treatment, these evaluations do not permitconclusions to be drawn about the effects of the programs Appendix III contains further information on each of theseevaluations Briefing Section III FEDERAL DRUG COURT GRANT PROGRAM ============================================================== Letter THE 1994 CRIME ACT ----------------------------------------------------------- Letter :24 (See figure in printed edition.) THE 1994 CRIME ACT --------------------------------------------------------- Letter :24. 1 Beginning in fiscal year 1995, DOJ may providejurisdictions with drug court grants. Title V of the ViolentCrime Control and Law Enforcement Act of 1994 (Public Law103-322) authorizes the Attorney General to award discretionarydrug court grants to states, units of local government, Indiantribal governments, and state and local courts. Grants may beawarded to drug court programs when a judge continuouslysupervises the progress of nonviolent offenders with substanceabuse problems The act requires the Attorney General to issue regulations toensure that jurisdictions receiving drug court grants to supporttheir programs do not allow violent offenders to participate. Itdefines a violent offender as a person who is charged with orconvicted of an offense involving a firearm, dangerous weapon,death, serious bodily injury, or force; or who has one or moreprior convictions for a violent felony crime Drug court programs must also integrate a number of judicialsanctions and treatment services. Specifically, the act requiresprograms to include (1) mandatory periodic testing for the use ofaddictive substances; (2) substance abuse treatment; (3)diversion, probation, or other supervised releases with thepossibility of prosecution, confinement, or incarceration whenparticipants do not comply with program requirements or fail toshow satisfactory progress; and (4) program and aftercareservices, such as relapse prevention, health care, education,vocational training, job placement, housing placement, and childcare FEDERAL FUNDING FOR DRUG COURTS ----------------------------------------------------------- Letter :25 (See figure in printed edition.) FEDERAL FUNDING FOR DRUG COURTS --------------------------------------------------------- Letter :25.1 The 1994 Crime Act authorized a total of $1 billion forfiscal years 1995 through 2000 to support drug court programs.Although the act authorized $100 million for fiscal year 1995,DOJ's fiscal year 1995 Appropriations Act (Public Law 103-317)included only $29 million for the drug court program. However,Congress has proposed fiscal year 1995 budget cuts for the drugcourt program. On March 16, 1995, the House passed H.R. 1158, theEmergency Supplemental Appropriations Act of 1995, which rescinds$27.75 million for the drug court program. During itsconsideration of H.R. 1158, the Senate reduced the rescission to$17.1 million. On April 6, 1995, the Senate passed its version ofthe bill and requested a conference with the House The House and Senate conferees began May 3, 1995, to try toreconcile the separate provisions of the bill The President's fiscal year 1996 budget requests $150 millionfor drug court grants. However, H.R. 667 (The Violent CrimeIncarceration Act of 1995) passed by the House of Representativeson February 10, 1995, would amend Title V of the 1994 Crime Actand in doing so would repeal the 1994 Crime Act's drug courtdiscretionary grant provisions. On February 22, 1995, H.R. 667was referred to the Senate Committee on the Judiciary DOJ'S RESPONSIBILITIES FOR DRUG COURTS ----------------------------------------------------------- Letter :26 (See figure in printed edition.) DOJ recognizes that no single model exists for an effectivedrug court. Consequently, DOJ plans to maintain flexibility inawarding grants to programs that use a variety of approaches tocoordinate drug treatment and persuade offenders to abstain fromdrugs with the goal of becoming drug free. In addition, given thegreat diversity in the structure and operation of state and localcourts and criminal justice systems, DOJ plans to allowjurisdictions to tailor local initiatives to best suit theirneeds and local conditions DOJ's Office of Justice Programs (OJP) has overallresponsibility for the new federal drug court program, includingpolicy setting. To carry out this responsibility, OJP has hiredan acting director and policy analyst to staff its Drug CourtProgram Office. In addition, BJA, an office of OJP, recentlyestablished a Drug Court Program Office to manage and monitordrug court program grants, according to an OJP official. BJA hashired four people to staff this office Since November 1994, OJP and BJA staffs have worked togetherto develop program guidelines and application materials.\10Currently, these staffs are considering the most appropriate andeffective ways of providing technical assistance to federallysupported drug courts, operating drug courts, and related federalprojects to be funded with other fiscal year 1995 resources. Thelevel and source of funding to support this technical assistanceis also under review OJP's National Institute of Justice (NIJ) is responsible forfunding a national evaluation of drug court program impacts. Thisevaluation will assess whether federally supported drug courtprograms have helped their participants to break the cycle ofsubstance abuse and crime. It will also assess thecost-effectiveness of these programs NIJ is also responsible for ensuring that drug court programsuse part of their grants to conduct process evaluations. Theseare aimed at determining, among other things, if the drug courtis achieving its objectives, if it was implemented as originallyintended, and whether major changes are appropriate. They willalso examine how drug courts affect the rest of the court systemand other elements of the criminal justice system -------------------- \10 In March 1995, DOJ published Drug Court Grant ProgramGuidelines and Application Information FISCAL YEAR 1995 DRUG COURT GRANT PROGRAM ----------------------------------------------------------- Letter :27 (See figure in printed edition.) FISCAL YEAR 1995 DRUG COURT GRANT PROGRAM --------------------------------------------------------- Letter :27. 1 If Congress does not rescind the fiscal year 1995appropriation, DOJ plans to award grants for planning,implementing, and improving or enhancing drug court programs.Eligible applicants may apply only for one type of grant.Assuming no rescission is enacted, of the $29 millionappropriated for fiscal year 1995, DOJ plans to award up to 100planning grants for not more than $35,000 each to jurisdictionsinterested in establishing drug courts, 10 implementation grantsfor not more than $1 million each to jurisdictions that haveidentified their target populations and case processingprocedures, 3 additional implementation grants for not more than$2 million to larger jurisdictions with populations exceeding 1million, and 20 improvement and enhancement grants for not morethan $1 million to jurisdictions that have already establisheddrug courts Federal grants for each drug court program will be 75 percentof program costs. The grantees will be required to provide cashto fund the remaining 25 percent Applications are due by May 23, 1995. Then, OJP and BJAstaffs will focus on screening and processing qualifiedapplications for potential grant awards, pending finalcongressional action on the fiscal year 1995 budget rescission.If the current deadline for filing drug court applications doesnot change, the first grants are expected to be awarded in thesummer of 1995 EVALUATION REQUIREMENTS FOR FEDERALLY FUNDED DRUG COURTS ----------------------------------------------------------- Letter :28 (See figure in printed edition.) Evaluating effectiveness is a critical element of the federaldrug court program. The 1994 Crime Act authorizes the AttorneyGeneral to carry out or make arrangements for evaluations ofprograms that receive discretionary program grants. The act alsomandates us to study and assess the effectiveness and impact ofthese discretionary grants and report to the Congress by January1, 1997 OJP program guidelines require recipients of drug courtgrants to cooperate with a national evaluation team. Theevaluation will be aimed at measuring program impact primarilythrough the use of the following criteria: reduction inrecidivism rates of program participants, maintenance ofacceptable treatment completion rates, decreased participant druguse, and maintenance of a cost-effective program NIJ is responsible for overseeing the national evaluation.The evaluation will focus on treatment and its impact and isexpected to take at least 2 years to complete. At the time of ourreview, NIJ was developing the solicitation for proposals toconduct the evaluation Program guidelines also require each drug court grantrecipient to conduct process evaluations of their programs. Forthese evaluations, grantees are expected to collect descriptiveinformation on the role of drug court players, potential eligiblepopulation, and participant program characteristics. Granteeswill also be asked to collect information on program proceduresused to identify and screen eligible offenders, accept and assessoffenders, respond to relapses, manage and monitor cases, anddischarge and refer participants FLOWCHART OF TWO DRUG COURT APPROACHES =========================================================== Appendix I (See figure in printed edition.) \a Judges mayreward progress and impose sanctions for noncompliance withprogram requirements Source: Drug Court Resource Center and GAO analysis ofselected drug court program descriptions (See figure in printed edition.) NUMBER AND LOCATION OF DRUGCOURTS IN OPERATION AND BEING DEVELOPED AS OF MARCH 1995 ========================================================== Appendix II In About to Location operation start Planned ------------------------ ---------- ---------- ---------- Alabama Mobile 1 Arizona Phoenix 1 Arkansas Little Rock 1 California Bakersfield 1 East Bay Corridor 1 El Monte 1\a Los Angeles 1 Oakland 1 Riverside 1 Sacramento 1 Santa Ana 1\a San Bernardino 1\a 1 San Francisco 1 Connecticut Hartford 1 Colorado Denver 1 Delaware Wilmington 1 District of Columbia Washington 1 Florida Bartow 1\a Crestview 1 Ft. Lauderdale 1 Gainesville 1 Jacksonville 1\a Key West 1 Miami 1 Orlando 1 Panama City 1 Pensacola 1 1 Tallahassee 1 Tampa 1 Georgia Atlanta 1 Hawaii Honolulu 1 Illinois Chicago 1 Indiana Gary 1 Kansas Wichita 1 Kentucky Louisville 1 Maryland Baltimore 2\a Massachusetts Dorchester 1 Michigan Kalamazoo 1 St. Joseph 1 Missouri Kansas City 1 Nevada Las Vegas 1 Reno 1\a New Mexico Las Cruces 1 New York Rochester 1\b Ohio Akron 1 Cincinnati 1 Cleveland 1 Sandusky 1 Oregon Eugene 1 Portland 1 South Carolina Columbia 1 Texas Austin 1 Beaumont 1 Fort Worth 1 Utah Salt Lake City 1 Washington Seattle 1 Tacoma 1\a Spokane 1 ============================================================ Total 37 5 19 ------------------------------------------------------------ \a Drug courts in operation less than 9 months. Includes oneof the two Baltimore drug courts \b In commenting on a draft of this report, the ProjectDirector of the Drug Court Resource Center told us that a drugcourt in Rochester began operating on a pilot basis in early 1995 Source: Drug Court Resource Center data OUTCOMES REPORTED IN AND GAO'S ASSESSMENT OF EVALUATIONS OFFIVE DRUG COURTS ========================================================= Appendix III EVALUATION 1: F.I.R.S.T OAKLAND ------------------------------------------------------- Appendix III:1 TREATMENT GROUP --------------------------------------------------- Appendix III:1.0.1 Drug use defendants granted admission to adiversion program Admission requirements changed during the course of the study STUDY DESIGN \ --------------------------------------------------- Appendix III:1.0.2 Comparison of 110 defendants in a program with a similargroup of 110 defendants in a different program a year earlier TIME OF STUDY --------------------------------------------------- Appendix III:1.0.3 Drug court participants referred in January and February of1991; earlier group referred in January 1990 through March of1990. The report contained a 3-year follow-up study KEY MEASURES --------------------------------------------------- Appendix III:1.0.4 (1)Felony rearrests: Drug court defendants had a loweraverage rate of felony rearrests per defendants (0.75) than hadprevious divertees (1.33) (2)Days in custody for felony offenses: Drug courtdefendants, on average, spent fewer days in custody per defendant(44) than had previous divertees (78) (3)Bench warrants: Drug court defendants, on average, hadfewer bench warrants issued for failures to appear at courthearings (0.67) than had previous divertees (1.1) ASSESSMENT --------------------------------------------------- Appendix III:1.0.5 There were some questions concerning the comparability of thetwo groups, as well as the eligibility requirements for the twoprograms (The report stated that eligibility requirements were relaxedfor the drug court program participants in order to obtain abroader group for comparative purposes.) In spite of theseconcerns, the evaluation suggested some fairly strong evidence ofprogram success after 3 years EVALUATION 2: MARICOPA COUNTY ------------------------------------------------------- Appendix III:2 TREATMENT GROUP --------------------------------------------------- Appendix III:2.0.1 Offenders sentenced to probation for first-time drugpossession convictions STUDY DESIGN --------------------------------------------------- Appendix III:2.0.2 Random assignment to four groups: (1)No drug testing,frequent visits (n=approximately 154) (2)Monthly random drug testing, occasional visits(n=approximately 154) (3)Biweekly scheduled drug testing, limited visits(n=approximately 154) (4)Drug court, with testing and treatment supervised by aprobation officer (n=177) TIME OF STUDY --------------------------------------------------- Appendix III:2.0.3 Participants in program between March 1992 and April 1993.Current data reported only preliminary findings after 6 months KEY MEASURES --------------------------------------------------- Appendix III:2.0.4 (1)Rearrest rates: No statistically significant differences(16.95 percent for the drug court group vs. 15.37 percent forothers) (2)Rates of technical probation violations: Drug court grouphad lower rates than those of others (7.9 percent vs. 11.9percent) ASSESSMENT --------------------------------------------------- Appendix III:2.0.5 Although the evaluation design was quite strong, the resultswere preliminary; insufficient time had elapsed to provide a firmindication of program effect. Future comparisons may becomplicated by the fact that the drug court sample had lowerrates of reported history of prior marijuana use. Otherwise, thecontrol groups (groups 1-3) were quite similar to the drug courtgroup (group 4) EVALUATION 3: DADE COUNTY (GOLDKAMP AND WEILAND) ------------------------------------------------------- Appendix III:3 TREATMENT GROUP --------------------------------------------------- Appendix III:3.0.1 Persons arrested for 2nd and 3rd degree drug-related felonies STUDY DESIGN --------------------------------------------------- Appendix III:3.0.2 Five key groups:\11 (1)Persons admitted to drug court program(n=326) (2)Sample of felony drug defendants in same period noteligible because of more serious drug-related offenses (n=199) (3)Sample of nondrug felony defendants in same period (n=185) (4)Sample of felony drug defendants in period several yearsearlier (n=302) (5)Sample of felony nondrug defendants in period severalyears earlier (n=536) In addition, the evaluation compared persons completing thedrug court program with those failing to complete -------------------- \11 An additional sample of offenders could not reliably beused as a control group because they were exposed to the drugcourt program TIME OF STUDY --------------------------------------------------- Appendix III:3.0.3 Participants in groups 1-3 had charges filed in August 1990and September 1990. Charges for groups 4-5 were filed in thesummer of 1987. Data report results after 18 month follow-up KEY MEASURES --------------------------------------------------- Appendix III:3.0.4 (1)Rearrest rates: Drug court defendants were rearrested at astatistically significant lower rate (33 percent, vs. 40 percentto 53 percent for other groups) (2)Time before rearrest: Drug court defendants hadstatistically significant longer time before rearrest (median of235 days, vs. 52 to 115 days for other groups) (3)Rearrests and treatment completion: Rearrest rates wereassociated with failure to complete the treatment program ASSESSMENT --------------------------------------------------- Appendix III:3.0.5 The results suggested an effect of the program. However, thestudy design was unable to make the comparison with offenders inthe same situation with similarly serious drug offenses;therefore, the results must be interpreted cautiously. Inparticular, the drug court sample had fewer prior arrests thanhad the other comparison groups, and the key group of felony drugdefendants used for comparative purposes were not eligible forthe drug court program because of the seriousness of theircharges or prior records The comparisons between those completing and failing tocomplete the program must also be viewed with caution, due topossible motivational and other differences between the groups In commenting on a draft of this report, DOJ officials notedthat this study had a strong design with carefully drawncomparison groups. We agree that the study's design was generallystrong However, as we state in this report, there were somepotentially important differences in prior arrest rates betweenthe groups, and the study was not able to compare similarlysituated drug defendants in a roughly similar time period.Therefore, as we noted, the study's results should be interpretedcautiously EVALUATION 4: DADE COUNTY (SMITH, DAVIS AND GORETSKY) ------------------------------------------------------- Appendix III:4 TREATMENT GROUP --------------------------------------------------- Appendix III:4.0.1 Defendants with no prior convictions charged with a drugpossession offense, admitting to a drug problem for which theywanted treatment STUDY DESIGN --------------------------------------------------- Appendix III:4.0.2 Comparison of 318 defendants assigned to the drug court witha sample of 99 narcotics cases in early 1988. In addition, agroup of drug court defendants who were accepted into the drugcourt program were compared on rearrest rates TIME OF STUDY --------------------------------------------------- Appendix III:4.0.3 Participants were assigned to the drug court in January 1990through March 1990. The comparison group was charged betweenJanuary 1988 and March 1988 KEY MEASURES --------------------------------------------------- Appendix III:4.0.4 (1) Rearrest rates: There was no statistically significantdifference in the rate of felony rearrests after 1 year betweenthose assigned to drug court (32 percent) and the comparisongroup of defendants charged 2 years earlier (33 percent). Thosedefendants accepted by the drug court did have lower rates ofrearrest (15 percent), but the authors noted that theseindividuals constituted "a highly select group . . . leastdisposed to commit new crimes." The rearrest results in thisevaluation differed from those in the other evaluation of DadeCounty (evaluation 3) (2)Sentencing dispositions: There were statisticallysignificant differences in dispositions between those assigned todrug court and the comparison group of earlier defendants. Thoseassigned to drug court were more likely not to face furtherprosecution and less likely to serve probation or short jailterms ASSESSMENT --------------------------------------------------- Appendix III:4.0.5 There were concerns about the comparability of theparticipants in the various groups. In particular, the finding oflower rearrest rates for program participants should be viewedcautiously in light of the selectivity of admission to theprogram. As a result, there were strong reservations about theresults reported DOJ officials, in commenting on a draft of this report,indicated that this study had several flaws. They pointed outthat the study was done when this drug court was less than 10months old. They further noted that information on successfuldrug court participants was not available for evaluation becausethe participants' records were sealed. We concur with thesecomments EVALUATION 5: BROWARD COUNTY (TERRY) ------------------------------------------------------- Appendix III:5 TREATMENT GROUP --------------------------------------------------- Appendix III:5.0.1 First-time offenders arrested for possession or purchase ofcocaine STUDY DESIGN --------------------------------------------------- Appendix III:5.0.2 Comparison of 392 defendants completing or remaining in thedrug court program with 241 defendants not completing the drugcourt program TIME OF STUDY --------------------------------------------------- Appendix III:5.0.3 Participants entered the program from July1991 through June 1992 Study results were reported for October 1993 KEY MEASURES --------------------------------------------------- Appendix III:5.0.4 Rearrests: Persons remaining in the program committedfelonies at a slightly lower rate than did those leaving theprogram (7.7 percent vs. 12.0 percent). (Cases dismissed were notincluded in these comparisons.) No differences occurred incomparing the proportions having committed misdemeanors (4.1percent for persons remaining in the program vs. 5.0 percent forthose leaving the program) ASSESSMENT --------------------------------------------------- Appendix III:5.0.5 There was no adequate comparison group in this study fromwhich to draw any conclusions about the effect of the program EVALUATION 6: MULTNOMAH COUNTY ------------------------------------------------------- Appendix III:6 TREATMENT GROUP --------------------------------------------------- Appendix III:6.0.1 Defendants arrested for possession of any illegal substancefor personal use STUDY DESIGN --------------------------------------------------- Appendix III:6.0.2 Comparison of 105 defendants graduating from the drug courtprogram with 78 defendants who terminated unsuccessfully TIME OF STUDY --------------------------------------------------- Appendix III:6.0.3 Participants entered the program on or before August 1, 1992,and graduated or terminated unsuccessfully on or before April 1,1994 KEY MEASURES --------------------------------------------------- Appendix III:6.0.4 Graduates had lower rates of bench warrants for failure toappear, went slightly longer before the first bench warrant wasissued, and had a lower percentage of positive urine tests thanthose who terminated unsuccessfully. However, the report did notindicate whether these figures referred to prior histories orfollow-up information after program completion ASSESSMENT --------------------------------------------------- Appendix III:6.0.5 There was no adequate comparison group in this study fromwhich to draw any conclusions about the effect of the program MAJOR CONTRIBUTORS TO THIS BRIEFING REPORT ========================================================== Appendix IV GENERAL GOVERNMENT DIVISION, WASHINGTON, D.C Weldon McPhail, Assistant Director, Administration of JusticeIssues Samuel A. Caldrone, Senior Evaluator Deborah A. Knorr,Senior Evaluator Patricia J. Scanlon, Staff Evaluator Barry J.Seltser, Assistant Director, Design, Methodology and TechnicalAssistance Group Douglas M. Sloane, Assistant Director David P.Alexander, Senior Social Science Analyst Arthur J. Kendall,Senior Mathematical Statistician Katherine M. Wheeler, PublishingAdvisor Pamela V. Williams, Communications Analyst BOSTON/NEWYORK FIELD OFFICE Brenda R. James Towe, Evaluator-in-ChargeRudolf F. Plessing, Core Group Manager Michael Savino, SeniorEvaluator OFFICE OF THE GENERAL COUNSEL, WASHINGTON, D.C Ann H. Finley, Senior Attorney CliffSchaffer's Home Page