WT01-B31-1IA031-000653-B004-242http://206.61.184.43:80/schaffer/GOVPUBS/amhab/amhabc9.htm 206.61.184.43 19970122134208 text/html 75714HTTP/1.0 200 OKDate: Wednesday, 22-Jan-97 13:41:54 GMTServer: WebSitePro/1.1f (S/N wpo-0deb)Allow-ranges: bytesContent-type: text/htmlLast-modified: Saturday, 28-Dec-96 06:26:24 GMTContent-length: 75496 Requirements for Policy Toward Drug Enforcement andOrganized Cr Contents | Feedback | Search DRCNet Library | Schaffer Library | Government Publications | America's Habits America's Habit Drug Abuse, Drug Trafficking, & Organized Crime President's Commission on Organized Crime, 1986 Consultant Paper: Data and Analysis Requirements for PolicyToward Drug Enforcement and Organized Crime By Mark Kleiman. Submitted: November 1985. Mark Kleiman is aResearch Fellow in the Program in Criminal Justice Policy andManagement at the John F. Kennedy School of Government of HarvardUniversity, Senior Lecturer in Political Science at theUniversity of Rochester, and President of BOTEC AnalysisCorporation. Executive Summary Organized crime control and drug enforcement need to beconsidered together insofar as drug trafficking contributes tothe organized crime problem or organized crime contributes to thedrug problem. In making policy it would be useful to know about(1) the role of drug trafficking in supporting organized crimegroups; (2) the role of organized crime groups in supplyingdrugs; and (3) the effects on each problem of changingenforcement practices in the other. Drug trafficking is almost certainly the largest source ofillegally-earned income in the United States. Both "traditionally" organized crime groups (Mafiafamilies) and "emerging" organized crime groupsparticipate in some aspects of the illicit drug traffickingindustry. In addition, some drug trafficking organizations havesome of the characteristics of organized crime groups, such asthe capacity and reputation for the use of violence andcorruption to frustrate enforcement. Organized crime can participate in drug markets either"productively," using its lawbreaking skills tocontribute to the supply of illicit drugs, or"parasitically," using violence and the threat ofviolence to extort drug merchants or organize cartels. Only theproductive activity of organized crime contributes to the drugsupply problem, which is the main target of drug enforcement.Parasitic organized crime activity, in illicit markets as inlegitimate markets, tends to raise prices and reduce consumption. Controlling organized crime and controlling drug abuse (anddrug-abuse-related crime) are two distinct objectives. Someagencies of government - the Drug Enforcement Administration(DEA) and the National Institute on Drug Abuse (NIDA), forexample - have primary responsibility for drug abuse control.Others, like the Organized Crime Strike Forces, are concernedprimarily with organized crime control. The two sets of agenciesmay or may not promote each other's objectives. Drug enforcement actions may affect the drug markets inseveral ways. They may: (1) help or hurt the efforts of organizedcrime to participate in and profit from drug dealing; (2)encourage or retard the development of organized-crime-likecharacteristics among drug trafficking groups; and (3) lead tomore or fewer convictions of organized criminals. Unless it isdeliberately focused on organized crime groups, high-level drugenforcement may tend to foster organized crime by keeping priceshigh and driving out less well-organized competitors. Organized crime enforcement actions may make the task of drugenforcement harder or easier, depending on whether the roles ofthose groups in the drug markets are primarily parasitic orprimarily productive. Aside from heroin importation into NewYork, traditional organized crime is largely a parasite on thedrug markets; thus, as long as the organized crime effortconcentrates on the Mafia, it has little to contribute to drugsupply reduction. Data about drug trafficking and drug enforcement, and aboutthe relationships between the drug trade and organized crime, canserve three purposes: describing the current dimensions of theproblem, reasoning about how changes in enforcement activitymight make matters better or worse, and measuring the actualeffects of such changes after they are made. From the perspective of organized crime policy, essentialfacts about the drug markets are prices and quantities, and, mostimportant, the relationship between changes in retail price andchanges in the quantity purchased: the price-elasticity ofdemand. Driving up the price of an inelastically-demanded drugwill increase the total revenues of traffickers of that drug, andthus tend to promote organized crime. Data about the drug markets and drug enforcement come fromthree sources: (1) survey research; (2) observations of theconsequences of drug abuse (deaths, injuries, and demand fortreatment); and (3) enforcement statistics and reports. Current large survey efforts, among households and high-schoolseniors, do not gather much price and quantity data. We need aseparate national survey with a sample designed to overrepresentheavy drug-users, that ask very detailed questions about price,quantity, and conditions of drug purchase. In addition, local andregional surveys should be conducted to evaluate the effect ofenforcement initiatives on market conditions and drugconsumption. Two techniques not now in use - "panel" surveys ofdrug users and surveys of convicted dealers - should beundertaken, if the difficult operational and ethical issues canbe resolved. Neither abuse-consequence data now gathered (medical examinerand emergency-room reports through the Drug Abuse Warning Network(DAWN), drug abuse treatment data through the remnants of theClient-Oriented Data Acquisition Process (CODAP), opinions oftreatment professionals through the Community Epidemiology WorkGroup (CEWG)) nor alternative ways of reaching the same facts arevery useful in making organized crime/drug enforcement policychoices. These programs serve other purposes and should not bedisturbed, except for adding bioassay capability to some DAWNsites. Pilot programs to test jail admittees for heroin use areworth pursuing. More could be done with enforcement agency data, which couldtell us about the enforcement effort itself (agency activities,targets, measured results) and on its effects (prices atdifferent levels of the drug trade). The new management of theDrug Enforcement Administration has put less effort intoestimating prices and quantities in the drug markets. That changeshould be reversed, and DEA should again publish price-chainestimates. Enforcement agencies can also make and analyze retail-leveldrug purchases, unrelated to specific cases, to measure the stateof the drug markets. Such "monitor" programs should beincreased in frequency, systematized, and applied to marijuanaand cocaine as well as heroin. Recent revisions in the methods used by the National NarcoticsIntelligence Consumers Committee (NNICC) in preparing the annualNarcotics Intelligence Estimate (NIE) appear to have somewhatreduced that document's inconsistencies with observable fact.However, the NNICC still seems to practice analysis bynegotiation rather than basing its estimates on evidence. The NIEwould be more useful if its assumptions, data, and computationswere explicit. There might be value in allowing a group ofexperts outside the government access to NNICC documents andsources, from which they could develop an independent set ofestimates. Questions to be Answered: Drug trafficking and organized crime are linked problems.Policy making and evaluation for each is complicated by thepresence of the other. My objective is to outline a set of datacollection and analysis activities that would answer questionsunder four headings: 1. What effects do organized crime have on drug traffickingand enforcement? 2. What effects do drug trafficking and enforcement have onorganized crime? 3. How should federal agencies engaged in organized crimeenforcement adjust their policies to contribute to the objectivesof drug policy? 4. How should federal agencies engaged in drug enforcementadjust their policies to contribute to the objective of organizedcrime control? Data collection and analysis are never free; in the drug area,they are likely to be quite expensive. It is therefore importantto identify in advance what is relatively certain on the basis ofinformation and analysis now in hand; it doesn't take aspectroscopic analysis to discover that the sky is blue. Thefollowing section will therefore attempt to describe what we nowknow and to identify the key analytic points. Introduction: Drug Enforcement and Organized Crime Control How Two Objectives and Two Sets of Institutions Intersect The objective of drug enforcement is to keep drugs away fromconsumers. The objective of organized crime enforcement is tocontrol the wealth and power of major criminal organizations andto frustrate their goal of being able to defy the law. These objectives interact where the illicit drug business is amajor source of power or revenue to organized crime groups (or amajor source of their vulnerability to enforcement), and wherethe capabilities of organized crime groups make drugs moreavailable than they would otherwise be: in other words, where thedrug trade contributes to the organized crime problem or whereorganized crime contributes to the drug problem. Defining Organized Crime The term organized crime can be used in one of two ways. Itmay be merely an ethnically neutral euphemism for "theMafia" or "La Cosa Nostra" (LCN); or it maydescribe a class of criminal organizations whose characteristicsmake them particularly worthy of law enforcement attention. Size,wealth, political power, participation in a variety of criminalactivities, and continuity over time have all been suggested assuch characteristics. One way to bridge the gap between the two definitionalapproaches is to refer to the Mafia as "traditional"organized crime, while acknowledging the existence of other,"emerging," organized crime groups. Defining organized crime in terms of its characteristics,rather than ostensibly, complicates the analysis. Not only doesthis approach treat the set of "organized crime" groupsas variable rather than fixed; it also implies a many-valuedrather than two-valued classification. Criminal groups, ratherthan simply being organized crime or non-organized crime (i.e.,Mafia families or other), will fall along a spectrum of beingmore or less "organized-crime-like." This suggests thepossibility that drug enforcement activity can increase ordecrease the number of drug-dealing organizations with manyorganized crime characteristics. It also suggests that it canmake existing organized-crime-like drug dealers more or lessorganized-crime-like and give such groups a greater or lessershare of the drug market. This paper will attempt to distinguish between traditional andemerging organized crime groups, but will think of organizedcrime as primarily a set of organizational characteristics ratherthan a predefined set of organizations. The relevantcharacteristics are organizational continuity and organizationalinvestment in the capability and reputation for violent orcorrupt interference with law enforcement activity. Organized Crime as a Drug Supply Problem "Traditional" organized crime - La Cosa Nostra -does not now contribute substantially to the drug problem, withthe exception of the major roles of two of the five New York LCN"families" in heroin importation. This is not to saythat LCN members and associates do not participate in drugdealing on many levels, but only that they make no distinctivecontribution to the supply of illicit drugs. Indeed, as ThomasSchelling has pointed out, the activity of organized crime incartel formation and extortion from illicit entrepreneurs may onbalance reduce the supply and increase the price of illicitgoods, as is true in licit markets. As a consequence, organized crime enforcement institutions -the Strike Forces and the investigators who work with them - haverelatively little to contribute to solving the problem of illicitdrug supply, as long as they continue their concentration on"traditional" organized crime groups. Thisconcentration has been so successful, both in terms of successfulcases and in terms of creating and maintaining productive,high-morale enforcement and prosecution institutions, that itseems both unlikely (as a matter of prediction) to be changed andunwise (as a matter of policy analysis) to consider changing. It may be the case that some "emerging" organizedcrime groups make distinctive contributions to various parts ofdrug supply, so that their disruption would contribute to drugsupply control (over and above the general effect of enforcementin raising prices by raising the costs and risks of drugtrafficking). Outlaw motorcycle gangs - the Hell's Angels in theWest, the Outlaws in the Mid-Atlantic region - may be"least-cost suppliers" in the distribution of cocaine,amphetamines, and phencyclidine (PCP). Similarly, someethnic-based organizations among Asian-Americans may besignificant contributors to the heroin supply, as the Herreraorganization certainly was at least until the recent arrests. Bycontrast, neither the importation nor the distribution ofmarijuana appears to offer the economies of organization thatwould make breaking up particular trafficking groups a majormarijuana enforcement objective. The marijuana trade may be atits most efficient as a decentralized set of independent buyersand sellers. To develop a set of institutions to appropriately address therole of emerging organized crime groups in the drug markets willrequire devising organizational incentives and career patternsthat support extremely long-term investigations and investmentsin intelligence (broadly defined), while maintaining asupply-control orientation among agents and prosecutors. Thiswill not be an easy task. There may be lessons to be learned fromthe Federal Bureau of Narcotics in its approach to LCN heroindealing. The Drug Markets as an Organized Crime Problem The illicit drug traffic contributes to the organized crimeproblem because of the enormous amounts of money at stake. Thesepotential revenues will both attract (and help to sustain)existing organized crime groups and call into existence newgroups with organized crime characteristics. LCN families, other ethnically-based organizations long inexistence, and outlaw motorcycle gangs may engage in drug dealingas a way to support themselves financially and to take advantageof their organizational abilities in illicit transactions. Theopportunities in the drug trade may also allow the development oforganizations whose origin is in drug dealing, and which mayremain specialized in drug dealing, while taking on organizedcrime characteristics, in particular, organizational continuityand organizational investments in the abilities to use violenceand corruption to resist enforcement efforts while remainingprominent in illicit markets. Drug trafficking is almost certainly the largest source ofillegally-earned income in the United States, far outstrippingthe market for illegal gambling or prostitution. Estimates oftotal revenues from drug sales vary widely and are highlyunreliable. It seems unlikely that total annual revenues are muchless than $25-30 billion. Virtually all of this represents rewards for lawbreaking; thepayments forlicit goods and services (rental or purchase ofvehicles and buildings; lawyers' fees) are negligible. On theother hand, relatively little represents revenue to largecriminal organizations, because so much of the final retail priceof illegal drugs consists of the markups of retail dealers andlow-level wholesalers. For heroin and cocaine less than one-tenthof the final retail price is collected by the dealer who sellskilogram units. Marijuana, by contrast, with much less vigorousenforcement at lower levels, undergoes only about a four-to-oneprice markup between first domestic distribution and final retailsale. Therefore, while all three markets have total values on theorder of $10 billion per year, more than $2 billion of themarijuana market represents the revenues of high-levelorganizations, while the heroin and cocaine markets at that levelrepresent about $1 billion each. On the other hand, the tighterdistribution channels for heroin and cocaine make it possible forlarge and highly disciplined organizations to exist at thewholesale-retail level, so that organizations with many of thecharacteristics of organized crime may exist at lower levels ofthose trades (e.g., the Barnes organization in the Harlem heroinmarket). Making Strategy Drug enforcement actions change the drug markets in ways thatmay: (1) help or hurt the efforts of existing organized crimeenterprises, whether traditional or emerging, to participate inand profit from them; (2) encourage or retard the development oforganized crime characteristics in existing or new enterpriseswithin the drug markets; (3) be more or less helpful in securingconvictions against members of already-identified organized crimegroups and the identification of new groups meeting thosecriteria. The more effectively drug enforcement is directed towardorganized crime control, the less hospitable organized crimegroups will find the drug markets. On the other hand, an increasein the overall level of drug enforcement not aimed specificallyat organized crime groups may tend to frustrate organized crimecontrol by helping existing organized crime groups profit fromthe drug trade and by encouraging existing drug enterprises totake on more organized crime characteristics. The ability of organized crime groups to profit from the drugtrade - and the tendency of the drug trade to spawn new organizedcrime groups - depends both on the amount of money to be made inthat trade and on whether the environment rewards or punishestight control and a reputation for violence. Under someconditions, tightened enforcement can both boost the total moneyavailable to be made and confer competitive advantage on moreviolent groups at the expense of less violent ones. Tighter enforcement can increase the money to be made in anyblack market, if it succeeds in raising the price of thecommodity involved and if consumption decreases less, inpercentage terms, than prices rise. (A 50 percent price increasethat causes only a 20 percent decrease in volume will create anew market with total revenues 1.5 x 0.8 = 1.2 times as large asthe revenues in the old market, and thus increase the money to bemade by 0.2 or 20 percent.) Thus the sensitivity of consumerdemand to retail price - what economists call theprice-elasticity of demand - becomes an essential number to know. If the price-elasticity of demand is (in absolute value)greater than one - if a given percentage increase in price willcause a larger percentage decrease in volume - then priceincreases will decrease total revenues. (Such goods are said tobe "relatively elastically demanded.") On the otherhand, if the price-elasticity of demand is (in absolute value)less than one - if a given percentage change in price will causea smaller percentage change in volume, as in the example above -then price increases will increase total revenues. (Such goodsare said to be "relatively inelastically demanded.") In markets where demand is relatively elastic - whereconsumers will respond to price increases by cutting backconsumption sharply - increased enforcement will reduce the moneyat stake and thus tend to make the markets less lucrative fororganized crime. Where demand is inelastic, increasingenforcement will increase the money at stake and thus make themarkets more able to support organized crime. Much of theempirical work recommended below centers on measuring theprice-elasticity of demand for various drugs. Unfortunately, it appears that the demand for marijuana andcocaine is relatively inelastic. (The argument with respect tomarijuana is on much firmer ground than the argument with respectto cocaine.) In any case, tightened general drug enforcement - asopposed to drug enforcement targeted at organized crime - willtend to give organized crime groups and organized crime-likegroups relative competitive advantage, because their capacity forviolence and corruption helps protect then against ordinaryenforcement actions. This is the central tension in organizedcrime/drug enforcement policy: good drug enforcement may be badorganized crime control. Observations to be Made The observations to be made fall into three broad classes:retail purchasing and consumption, lower-level dealing, andenforcement activity. (Of course, observations on high-leveldealing are also of great importance, but they are almostimpossible to distinguish from enforcement intelligence. Datacollection here means talking to agents, enforcement-agencyanalysts, and prosecutors, and the information to be collected israrely in quantitative form.) Three Objectives of Data Collection and Analysis Data collection and analysis about drug markets can servethree distinct functions: - Descriptive: measuring the current dimensions of the problemand identifying trends. Sample questions: How much cocaine wassold to end users last year? What prices do they pay? How werethose revenues distributed among individuals and groups in theillicit cocaine industry? What were the relationships betweenidentified organized crime groups and cocaine trafficking? Howhave the volumes and prices in the cocaine market changed overtime? What organized crime groups are active in the cocainemarket? What role does it play in their other activities? Whatroles do they play - productive or parasitic - in the market? - Theoretical: generating and testing hypotheses aboutrelationships among variables, and in particular about the likelyeffects of changes in enforcement. Sample questions: Are there"barriers to entry" at some levels of the cocaine tradethat allow traffickers to collect "pure" profits("economic rents")? How would the average size andlongevity of cocaine-trafficking organizations change ifenforcement were substantially tightened? - Evaluative: measuring the actual effects of enforcementinitiatives. Sample question: How did the South Florida TaskForce change prices and volumes in the cocaine market? Three Sources of Data Illicit activities are by their nature hard to observe andmeasure, because participants attempt to conceal them fromauthorities. Excise tax data, which provide the most convenientmeasures of alcohol and tobacco consumption, are unavailable forillicit drug markets. The same is true of the reports routinelyprepared by licit enterprises reports to state and federal taxcollectors, to trade associations and government statisticalcollectors, to trade associations and government statisticalagencies, and to stockholders - from which estimates of licitmarkets are derived. The remaining potential sources of information about illicitdrug markets are: (1) Surveys of drug users and potential drug users; (2) Observations of the consequences of drug - abuse healtheffects, intoxicated behavior, and demand for treatment - and theopinions of professionals who deal with those consequences; and (3) Enforcement data and the opinions of agents andprosecutors. Note that while surveys and observations of consequences tellus almost exclusively about the behavior of drug consumers anddrug dealers, enforcement data and the opinions of enforcementprofessionals can also tell us about the other half of theequation: the governmental response. Several current programs now attempt to tap these threesources of information. None is without major flaws from theperspective of organized crime policy. A major problem common tomany is that they are more concerned with numbers of users andfrequency of use consumed than with quantities consumed and flowsof revenues. Survey Research Survey research is potentially the most powerful toolavailable for studying the markets for illicit drugs. Unlike datafrom enforcement activity or abuse consequences, survey researchcan attempt to measure prices and quantities directly rather thanthrough complicated chains of inference. Performing surveys aboutconsumption activities - market research supports a ratherprosperous industry, including both for-profit enterprises andprestigious universities and nonprofit research centers. Theseinstitutions have developed a repertoire of establishedtechniques. The fact that consumer-goods firms continue to use itheavily testifies to the ability of market research to measureand predict consumer behavior. The National Institute on Drug Abuse funds two series ofsurvey research projects on illicit drug consumption. The SocialResearch Group of George Washington University does a surveyevery two years of more than 5,000 persons 12 years or olderliving in households [Miller et al. 1983]. This series isreferred to among students of drug abuse as "the householdsurvey." Every year, the Institute of Social Research of the Universityof Michigan questions about 17,000 seniors in high school. TheMichigan reports are referred to as "the high-school seniorsurvey." These two surveys are believed to cost NIDAsomething less than one-half a million dollars for each two-yearcycle. The concept of survey research is simple. Draw a sample sodesigned that every member of the population under study has anequal probability of being chosen. (This is what statisticiansmean by the term "random sample." A variant on simplerandomization is to divide the population under study intosubgroups, called "strata," and to draw the sample sothat each stratum is represented in proportion to itsrepresentation in the population, and each member of a givenstratum has the same chance of being drawn as any other member.This procedure, called "stratified random sampling," isthe most commonly used.) Having drawn the sample, ask questionsand record the answers. Then use the percentage answers from thesample as estimates of the behavior of the population from whichthe sample was drawn: that is, make population projections basedon sample results. Surveys can be inaccurate for three reasons: random error,sample bias, and response bias. Random error (or "sampling error") occurs becausethe law of averages only works on average. If 30 percent of thepopulation uses Crest Toothpaste, then in a sample of 100 personsdrawn at random about 30 will say they use Crest. But theoperative word is "about:" one time it will be 28,another 33. The larger the sample, the smaller the randomsampling error, in accord with well-known statistical formulas.This does not depend on the size of the population to bemeasured: a sample of 1,000 is subject to the same sampling errorin estimating a population of 100,000 as in estimating apopulation of 10 million. The rule of thumb is that the samplingerror is inversely proportional to the square root of the samplesize: a sample four times as big gives estimates one half asuncertain. For many purposes - predicting the outcome of aPresidential election, for example - a sample size of a fewhundred is ample. The smaller the percentage of a population that has sometrait, the larger the sample needed to measure that traitaccurately, because a sampling error of 2 percent looms larger ifthe underlying figure is 5 percent than if it is 50 percent.Thus, attempts to measure rare phenomena - heroin use, forexample - take bigger samples than attempts to measure commonphenomena such as alcohol use. The other factor that drives upneeded sample sizes is the desire to study how subgroups of apopulation differ. In a study of the effect of income on cocaineuse, the relevant sample size is the number of respondents withineach income class. To study whether recent increases in marijuanaenforcement by the Boston DEA office succeeded in reducingmarijuana consumption, one would need a sample including at leasta few hundred marijuana consumers from New England, and a similarsample from another area to serve as a control. Other than the expensive expedient of using very large samplesizes - such as the 50,000 households interviewed each month bythe Bureau of Labor Statistics - the only way to reducesampling-error problems in estimating rare traits is to deviatefrom stratified random sampling. Areas under special study orsubpopulations among which the trait in question is less rare canbe deliberately overrepresented. For example, if cocaine use isconcentrated among upper-income urban males in the 20-45 agebracket, a study of cocaine use might deliberately seek out asample including more such people; this is called oversampling.The results of a survey using oversampling need to be adjusted toproject them back on the population. Those adjustments introducegreat complexity into the statistical analysis of survey data.Subtle errors can easily creep in. In consequence, surveyresearchers try to avoid using oversamples. Random error, just because it is random, does not tend to biasresults. The luck of the draw produces overestimates andunderestimates impartially. It does, however, introduceuncertainty. This is more of a problem when trying to measuretrends (where small changes from one survey to the next mattergreatly) than in measuring absolute levels. By contrast, bothsample bias and response bias can create systematic divergencesbetween survey results and actual phenomena. Sample bias comes from a failure to draw a representativesample. If the sampling technique makes persons with a giventrait under study more or less likely than average to beselected, the sample results will consistently overestimate orunderestimate the trait in question. For example, the householdsurvey omits persons with no fixed address and those living indormitories, barracks, and prisons. If very heavy drug users aremore likely than the general population to be drifting, away atschool, in the service, or in prison, then the household surveywill underestimate the number of very heavy drug users.Similarly, the high-school senior survey may underrepresent drugabuse among persons in that age range for two reasons. Bychoosing to study high-school seniors, it omits dropouts, who maybe more likely than average to be heavy drug users. In addition,the actual sampling technique may tend to underrepresent frequentabsentees, and frequent absenteeism seems to be associated withheavy drug use. If the only statistics of interest are population proportions(e.g., the proportion of the voters who think the President isdoing a good job), sample bias is a controllable problem. Whenfrequency or quantity is at issue (e.g., how frequently theaverage high-school senior smokes marijuana, how much cocaine wasconsumed last year, the total amount paid for heroin) sample biascan be a major worry. A small proportion of any population caneasily account for a very large fraction of any activity, frombaseball games attended to books purchased. In the case ofalcohol, for example, 5 percent of the population accounts for 50percent of the consumption. By one estimate, 10 percent of themarijuana-using population smokes two-thirds of the marijuana.Cocaine consumption may be even more skewed, with the additionalproblem that the total number of cocaine users is itself muchsmaller than the totals for marijuana and alcohol; two-thirds ormore of the cocaine consumption may be accounted for by one-halfa million users. Sampling procedures to guard against underrepresenting suchvery small populations are hard to devise, particularly when thebehavior under study tends to make them furtive or to reducetheir participation in various normal activities. Oversamplingcan help; so can what are called "snowball" techniques,where respondents who fit some profile are asked for the names ofother respondents. The illicit nature of drug abuse can make"snowball" sampling very difficult, however. Response bias comes from the systematic failure of respondentsto answer accurately. Any survey will gather some inaccurateresponses, due to misunderstanding the questions, lapses ofmemory, or deliberate deception by respondents resulting fromfear of breach of confidentiality, embarrassment, or a simpledesire to tell the interviewer what the respondent thinks he orshe wants to be told. As long as those errors cancel out, theypose no problem. The problem comes if the inaccuracies are tiltedto one side or the other. A survey that asks questions aboutactivities that are both illegal and socially disapproved runs agreater-than-normal risk of encountering response bias. A clue to how serious response bias can be, even with legalbehavior, comes from surveys where people are asked how muchalcohol they drink. Only two-thirds of the alcohol on whichexcise tax is paid (which may be an undercount of alcohol sold ifdistillers cheat the Treasury) is accounted for by surveyresponses; the survey data thus underestimate consumption by atleast 50 percent. It has been suggested that psychological"denial" by a small population of extremely heavydrinkers may account for most of the difference. Here again, aswith sample bias, problems with a very small portion of thesample can cause the results to be seriously wrong. On the otherhand, a compilation of studies in which survey responses toquestions about illegal drug use were compared with urine-testresults showed no tendency to underreport. A special kind of response-bias problem comes when survey dataare used to estimate trends. If the level or social disapprovalas perceived by recipients changes, then response bias may changetoo. For example, increasingly negative attitudes about marijuanause might lead adolescent respondents to the high-school seniorssurvey to be less likely to tell adult interviewers that theysmoked marijuana every day, even if their actual behavior did notchange. The result would be an apparent, but spurious, decline inheavy marijuana use among adolescents. (This is not to say thatchanging attitudes might not also change behavior, only that thesurvey evidence is subject to error from this source). There are no easy answers to the problem of response bias.Sometimes, as in the studies cited by K. H. Marquis, it ispossible to collect independent data as a check on a sample ofresponses, and then adjust the sample results for the measuredbias. Another strategy is to vary the circumstances of response,for example, by using "secret ballot" answer sheetsinstead of face-to-face questioning or by changing thecharacteristics of the interviewers. Just as pollsters long agodiscovered that black respondents answered many questionsdifferently when the interviewers were black, it may be the casethat some adolescents would respond differently to questionsabout drug use put by another adolescent - particularly onedressed and groomed in ways consistent with drug use - than tothe same questions put by an adult. Changes and Supplements to Current Surveys Both the household survey and the high-school seniors survey,conducted by experienced researchers at institutions withreputations for producing high-quality survey research, arewell-designed for their intended purposes: primarily themeasurement of the number of drug users, secondarily themeasurement of frequency of drug use. But from the perspective ofmaking drug enforcement policy, and particularly policy tocontrol organized crime, they do not gather the right data, orgather it from the right people, or gather it frequently enough.The most important things surveys can tell us are the quantity ofeach drug purchased and consumed; the prices at which thosepurchases are made; the identities and relationships of buyersand sellers; the effects of enforcement on market conditions; andthe effects of market conditions on consumption. In order tolearn these things, surveys would have to: 1. Find More of the Heavy Drug-Users. So much of total drugconsumption is concentrated among a relatively few very heavyusers that no practical increase in sample size for a stratifiedrandom sample among the general population will yield an adequatesample. For example, the 5,000-person household survey couldexpect to get by chance about a dozen of the one half-millionheaviest cocaine users. There are two ways to get a meaningfulsample of heavy users: either use oversampling in drawingrespondents for the household and high-school senior surveys, orrun separate studies of heavy use. The "Young Men andDrugs" studies show both the feasibility of finding samplesrich in serious drug abusers and the value of the results thatfinding such samples can yield. 2. Ask about Prices and Quantities purchased. We would like toknow when the user's last purchase of a given drug took place;what quantity was involved, plus whatever the purchaser knows orwas told about purity/potency/ quality; and how much moneychanged hands; this information is essential to making anyserious estimate of the dollar volume of the market. 3. Ask about the Conditions of the Transaction. Where did thepurchase take place? (The purchaser's residence, the seller's, aschool building, an office building, an apartment corridor, apark, a street corner?) Were there other people present? Had thetransaction been prenegotiated? Was the pricetake-it-or-leave-it, or was there negotiation? Was thepurchaser's previous transaction with the same seller or adifferent seller? Is the seller a relative, a close friend, andacquaintance, or a stranger? These questions can help answerquestions about the possible effectiveness of retail-levelenforcement as a way to cut down on the volume of drugs consumed. 4. Ask about Price Increases, Shortages, Sharing, and ConsumerInventories. Was the price of the most recent transaction higheror lower than the respondent's previous transaction? Than therespondent expected? If the price of the drug were to increase by25 percent, what would the respondent do? (Use about the sameamount, use less, quit altogether, switch to another drug?) Hasthe respondent ever been unable to find a supply of the drug inquestion at any price? Does the respondent now have a supply ofthe drug? If so, how long would it last at his normal consumptionrate? How frequently has the respondent used drugs purchased byanother? Given drugs to another? These questions will helpdetermine the effect of price increases and temporary shortageson consumption behavior. Unfortunately, experience from marketresearch on legitimate products suggests that the answers to thewhat-if questions are likely to be unreliable. 5. Give Information about Local Markets. Federal and localenforcement efforts vary widely across the country in theirintensity and success, but there are almost no studies of whatthe effects are on retail purchases and consumption. Nationwidesamples need to be supplemented with local ones. 6. Provide a Steady Stream of Data in Addition to Annual orOnce-Every-Two-Years Snapshots. This is particularly valuable incombination with local data as a way of measuring the differenceenforcement makes (or fails to make). Is the availability ofdrugs fairly constant, or does it vary? How do consumers respond?Estimating the price-elasticity of demand requires frequentmeasurements of both price and quantity, both to generate anadequate number of data points and to avoid confounding priceeffects with long-term trends or cohort effects on the demandside. One alternative to random sampling often used in marketresearch is a panel survey, where questions are asked repeatedlyof the same group of respondents. Panel data would be enormouslyuseful in understanding the effects of market conditions on druguse, and the individual patterns of drug consumption. Forexample, when drug supplies are short, how are consumptiondecreases distributed among new users and existing users, poorusers and affluent users, heavy users and light users? What drugsare used as substitutes when marijuana is scarce or expensive?How many users, who cease use when supplies are tight, neverstart up again, or start up at lower levels of use? An obviousproblem is assuring respondent confidentiality, and convincingrespondents that it is assured. Perhaps more worrisome, beingmembers of such a panel might make respondents moredrug-conscious, which raises serious ethical questions, as wellas threatening the validity of such studies. Obstacles Naturally, proposing such studies for someone else to fund andcarry out is much easier than doing the work. Aside from theproblems of expense and the mass of legal, ethical, andoperational issues raised by asking detailed questions aboutillegal transactions, such studies would face several obstacles: First, they would have to be cleared by the Office ofManagement and Budget, which views any expansion of surveyresearch by the government with a jaundiced eye. The complexityof the questions to be asked strongly argues for the value ofpaying respondents a small fee to encourage them to complete theinterview, but this makes OMB reviewers even more nervous. (The1981 household survey didn't get into the field until 1982because of a dispute with OMB about forms and payments torespondents.) Second, modifying the existing surveys in terms of content orsample selection will interfere with the ability of researchersto compare results from one survey to the next to determinetrends. The preference of survey researchers for asking the samequestions in the same words to the same samples is not mindlessconservatism, but a well-founded belief in the virtues ofrepeating measurements exactly, rather than changing surveyseries represents a big investment of money and talent. Finally, it is worth noting that neither the NationalInstitute on Drug Abuse, which funds the current surveys, nor theresearches who conduct them, share the policy and researchperspective urged here. NIDA is far more interested in thepatterns of drug abuse than in the size and functioning of thedrug markets. Nor is there any demand for this sort of researchfrom the enforcement and prosecution agencies. Surveys of Dealers The discussion above concerns only surveys of drug users. Itis also possible to survey drug dealers, asking both about theirown dealings - transactions, strategies for dealing withcustomers, suppliers, and enforcement agencies, incomes,expenses, encounters, if any, with organized crime, opinions ofenforcement risk, pricing policy, recruitment into the trade,career patterns and goals - and about their knowledge of how thedrug markets work. There is probably no better way to start onserious estimates of, for example, bow many marijuana or cocaineto deliver drugs to the market - is more plausible the fewer theparticipants, and the more stable the organizational structure,of any given market. Finding and interviewing a sample of dealers poses bothproblems and risks for the researcher. However, we do have accessto a sample of drug dealers with nothing better to do than answerquestions: they are in federal and state prisons. Of course, theymay be unrepresentative of the overall dealer population,particularly in terms of their success in avoiding enforcement,and may also be unwilling to be interviewed, or to speakcandidly. Still, if systematic interviews could be conducted with asample of convicted drug dealers, the results could not fail tobe informative. The Rand Corporation is now conducting a pilotstudy along those lines funded by the National Institute ofJustice. Consequence Data One alternative to asking people about their consumption ofillicit substances is to observe the consequences of drug abuse.These consequences include coming into contact with both thepolice (arrests, automobile accidents) and the health caresystem: hospital emergency rooms, medical examiners' offices, anddrug treatment facilities. There is now no systematic attempt torecord drug intoxication at arrest or at accident scenes of drugusers, but the National Institute of Drug Abuse maintains threecollection activities to gather medical data: the Drug AbuseWarning Network (DAWN), the Client-Oriented Data AcquisitionProcess (CODAP) and the Community Epidemiology Work Group (CEWG). The Drug Abuse Warning Network (DAWN) The National Institute on Drug Abuse collects and publishes[National Institute on Drug Abuse Statistical Series I)information from about one-sixth of the nation's emergency rooms,with a heavy concentration on 26 metropolitan areas (SMSA's), andfrom about two-thirds of the medical examiners in those 26 SMSA'sonly. The emergency rooms report on patients who come in as aresult of acute ill experiences with the non-medical use ofdrugs; the medical examiners report on persons who, in theirjudgment, died as the direct result of drug use. In 1981, themost recent year for which the data have been published, the DAWNsystem recorded 121,268 emergency room visits and 2,825 deaths,as a result of drugs. (The deaths exclude New York City, whichdid not report to DAWN in 1981; in previous years, New York hadaccounted for about one-quarter of DAWN medical examinerreports.) DAWN records all drugs used incidents of multiple drug abuse:thus 121,268 emergency room "episodes" yielded 199,400"mentions," and 2,825 deaths involved 5,640 mentions.Heroin is the third most frequently-mentioned drug in emergencyrooms, after alcohol-in-combination (alcohol alone is now countedin DAWN) and diazepam (Valium). Cocaine is sixth, marijuanaseventh. Others in the top ten are aspirin, methaqualone,acetaminophen (Tylenol), flurezapam (another tranquilizer) andPCP. Heroin, marijuana, and cocaine, the three largest drugmarkets in dollar terms, account for fewer than 20,000 totalmentions among them. This is such a tiny proportion of the usersof these drugs (about 1 in 50 heroin users, about 1 in 1,000cocaine users, about 1 in 5,000 marijuana users) as to make anyinferences from the DAWN sample to the general populationextremely questionable. In any case, other than personaldemographic data, no questions are asked of DAWN subjects otherthan "what did you take?" For some drugs, even theanswer to this question may be open to doubt, since illicit drugsellers frequently misrepresent their wares, and DAWN sites arenot equipped to assay blood or urine to determine the chemicalcomposition of the "speed" or "ludes" thatsubjects report they have taken. Attempts to base estimates of patterns and trends in drugavailability on DAWN data, but they have not been convincing.DAWN is valuable as an early warning network about both streetdrugs and pharmaceuticals causing injury and death; but it doesnot, and almost certainly cannot, contribute much to ourunderstanding of the kind of drug trafficking that contributes toorganized crime. The Client Oriented Data Acquisition Process (CODAP) Through 1981 NIDA gathered data from all federally-funded drugtreatment clinics and programs and published them as NIDAStatistical Series E. Incentive to participate was provided bymaking participation a condition of funding under the NIDAcategorical grant program that paid for drug treatment. Theabolition of that categorical grant program and the inclusion ofdrug treatment in the Community Development Block Grant programof direct fiscal assistance to the states both reduced the totalnumber of drug treatment facilities and eliminated any directrelationship between the clinics and NIDA. As a result, NIDA canmo longer compel participation in CODAP. Approximately 15 stateshave voluntarily continued to submit CODAP data, and NIDAcollects the information and prepares am unofficial series ofannual reports. In 1981 there were 249,206 admissions to CODAPfacilities, more than three-fourths for outpatient treatment.(Persons admitted more than once during the year weredouble-counted, so the number of individuals admitted wassomewhat smaller). At any one time there were an average of126,000 persons under treatment, almost 85 percent asoutpatients. While CODAP collected demographic data and information aboutthe drugs for which its clients sought or were assigned totreatment, it did not collect data about individual purchase andconsumption patterns. Variations in CODAP counts over time mightindicate either increases in abuser populations brought about byincreased availability, growing numbers of addicts withoutconnections brought about by decreased availability, or merelyincreased availability of treatment. CODAP data were of greatinterest to treatment professionals and produced interestingtime-series data on such indicators as age at first use (whichallowed some inferences about "cohort effects").However, CODAP had even less direct relevance to enforcementplanning than did DAWN. While local studies of enforcementeffectiveness may wish to gather data on treatment demand, thiscan probably be done as effectively on an ad hoc basis as througha process like CODAP. Reviving that process would not seem to bea high priority from the viewpoint of organized-crimepolicymaking. The Community Epidemiology Work Group (CEWG) The Community Epidemiology Work Group, also supported by NIDA,collects reports from drug abuse prevention and treatment expertsand officials around the country about patterns and trends asthey perceive them in their own areas, and summarizes andpublishes those reports in volumes of "Proceedings".The local reports are not in standard format, and CEWG does notgenerate statistical series. Prices are occasionally mentioned;quantities rarely, if ever. It is conceivable that CEWGparticipants night be encouraged and funded to develop informal"panel studies" among drug users in their own areas.But this would represent a substantial move away from CEWG'scurrent informality. Changes and Other Studies As suggested above, drug abuse consequence data have littlepromise of contributing much to making or evaluating strategyagainst organized crime. The one source not now tapped is arrestdata. Arrests of users - particularly heroin users - for propertycrimes and prostitution may be quite sensitive indicators ofshort-run changes in availability. To develop such data, it wouldbe necessary to test arrestees' urine for the presence of opiatemetabolites and quinine. The National Institute of Justice isfunding a few pilot programs along these lines. Assuming theyturn out to be operationally feasible, they probably represent awise investment of funds. Enforcement Data From the agencies that arrest, prosecute, try, and imprisondrug traffickers and seize their drugs and other assets, we cangather valuable data both about the enforcement activity andabout the underlying illegitimate market. Some of thisinformation exists, or can readily be obtained, in statisticalform; the rest is buried in case reports, informant interviews,and intelligence analyses. The one governmentally-publishedseries estimating the revenues in the drug markets, the annualNarcotics Intelligence Estimate, is prepared primarily byenforcement agencies (particularly DEA) and apparently in largepart from enforcement sources. Information About Enforcement Activity Three things about enforcement activity are of interest: (1) Inputs. What resources - measured in dollars, agent-hours,prosecutor-hours, cell-years, ship-days, wiretap orders underTitle III - are spent on drug enforcement, and how are thoseresources divided among agencies, geographically, by target drug,by enforcement technique, and by the trafficking activity underinvestigation (high-seas smuggling, port smuggling, firstdomestic distribution, wholesaling and middleman activity, retaildealing, money laundering)? Even at the Federal level alone, something as relativelysimple as a comprehensive dollar budget broken down by agency andby drug is not available. An attempt has been made to estimatethe share of marijuana in total Federal enforcement; itillustrates both what is and what is not available. Assemblingsuch data is best done within the government, by an agency withthe authority to demand the relevant documents, than byoutsiders; the Drug policy Board, the Office of Management andBudget, the White House Drug Abuse policy Office, any one of thecognizant Congressional subcommittees, the General AccountingOffice, or the President's Commission on Organized Crime could,by collating budget submissions from the agencies involved,assemble crude but adequate estimates of dollars spent by agencyand drug rather easily. Assembling meaningful information about inputs in non-monetaryforms (e.g., work-hours) would be a tedious process, requiringboth access to internal agency reporting systems and anunderstanding of how those systems represent or misrepresentreality. However, assuming that something resembling the DEA'sannual statistical report is available from the Coast Guard,Customs Service, IRS, and FBI, it might be possible to assemble afair picture of Federal enforcement activity. Federal prosecutionagencies do not now have the ability to generate statisticalprofiles of their work that would be useful here. Thecase-management software system (PROMIS) being installed in theU.S. Attorneys' offices may be able to produce estimates ofprosecutive work-hours by case type, although the system may notcode enough of the case data (e.g., G-DEP rank of case anddefendants) to allow useful analysis. The Administrative Office of U.S. Courts can producecases-pending counts by offense, although this overestimates drugcases as a proportion of total cases to the extent that drugdefendants are more likely than others to default on bail andthus remain as active cases for long periods of time; noestimates are made of the use of judge-days or grand jury daysfor various kinds of cases. Moreover, since the statute names andnumbers attached to a given drug charge (manufacture,distribution, conspiracy, continuing criminal enterprise, etc.)do not vary with drug involved, it is almost impossible toseparate the conviction data by drug. It is possible to make verycrude estimates of Federal prison-cell utilization by convicteddrug dealers from the court data. The attempt to work directlyfrom DEA data is frustrated by the fact that the DEA statisticalreport lists total convictions, rather than convictions inFederal courts. The lack of a unified set of file numbers for thefederal criminal-justice agencies, or a set of links from onefile system to the next (what is called an "Offender-BasedTracking system," or OBTS) makes it nearly impossible totrace a sample of DEA defendants through prosecution andincarceration. The primary problem with assembling such data is nottechnical, but organizational: its collection and disseminationare not in the perceived interests of the agencies involved orthe key individuals within them. While that remains, littleprogress is to be expected. Below the Federal level, thesituation is much worse; there are simply no published figures ondrug enforcement spending or activities by state and local policeagencies, most of which do not have separate drug enforcementunits. The current paucity of data on enforcement activities wouldfrustrate any attempt to study the effects of changes inenforcement resources on the drug markets, even if adequate priceand quantity data were in hand. This problem is not easy to fix;unless the agencies involved have their own reasons forcollecting the data, it will be difficult either for"outsiders" - even from within the government - to dothe job or to persuade the agencies to do it instead. Thesituation is similar for state and local enforcement; in theabsence of any convenient ways of getting nationwide data, a fewstudies of individual cities and states might be useful. (2) Outputs. How do those inputs translate into enforcementactions felt by traffickers: arrests, convictions, sentences,time actually served in prison, drug seizures, asset seizures?How are those outputs distributed geographically, by drug, bylevel of the traffic? These figures are less nebulous than resource and workloaddata; a man-hour is "the stuff that dreams are madeon," but an arrest actually happens. Nonetheless, althoughDEA reports its arrests broken down by almost every possiblevariable, there is no government-wide collation of all arrestreports. Convictions and prison time, as noted above, are simplynot available in useful formats. Even drug seizure data are complicated by the multiplicity ofagencies involved; simply adding together agency totals runs therisk of double-counting. The first annual report of the OrganizedCrime Drug Trafficking Task Force program gives government-widenumbers that may be reliable. Data on asset seizures are complicated both by interagency(and Federal/ State/local) cooperation and by the complexity ofseizure cases: appraised value is one thing, realized value lesslienholders' equity something very different. The lags inforfeiture actions against seized items, plus the growth in theoverall level of seizures, make it difficult to computeseizure-to-forfeiture ratios, because 1984 forfeitures do notcorrespond to 1984 seizures. Some central responsibility for thisarea was assigned to the U.S. Marshal Service and the AssetForfeiture Office of the Criminal Division of the JusticeDepartment; those agencies may now be in a position to provideunified statistics. Arrests, convictions, seizures, and prison time are basicmeasures of risk imposed on the illicit drug industry, and it isvery hard to plan or evaluate policy in their absence. Unlikemost of the input numbers, good output measures can be assembledwith only minimal cooperation from the agencies themselves, ifsomeone with authority insists on it. Below the Federal level the situation is more dismal. Otherthan the uninformative counts of total drug arrests in theUniform Crime Reports, no national data are available. It hasbeen almost ten years since the last national study of stateprisoners by offense category, and even that study combined alldrug offenses into one category. Here again, the best that can behoped for is a few well-done local studies. (3) Effects. Enforcement actions impose costs and risks onillicit entrepreneurs and thus tend to increase prices andperhaps to make supplies less reliable. To some extent thecost-imposition value of a given enforcement action - theimprisonment of a major marijuana importer for an effective termof six years, the seizure of one kilogram of 90 percent pureheroin from a New York City wholesaler - can be calculated, andthose costs can be added together to estimate the effects ofenforcement on the market. Such calculations could contributesubstantially to policy analysis and evaluation. They could formthe basis for comparisons of alternative enforcement techniquesin terms of the costs imposed on a given drug market pergovernment dollar spent. However, to make then accurately oneneeds the right kind of tabulation of enforcement outputs. The value of any illicit drug grows enormously as it movesdown the distribution chain toward the final consumer. A kilogramof heroin that sells for $200,000 is the raw material for streetbags of heroin worth more than $2 million. Adding togetherphysical volumes seized at different stages of the traffic isadding apples and oranges. Each seizure should be evaluated atthe point where it is seized, and then the values added together.The "street value" calculations, so beloved byreporters, resemble calculations of the value of stolen cattlebased on the price of a steak dinner in a restaurant. Givenestimates of the "price chains" (of which more below),simple rules of thumb, based on quantity and location, will givereasonable estimates of the coast imposed on the illicit marketby drug seizures. Imprisonment data also need to bequality-weighted. The higher in the trade a trafficker is, themore dollars he would spend to avoid a year in prison, bothbecause he has more dollars and because any given period inprison costs him more in lost earnings. That willingness-to-payper prison-year-willingness-to-pay of traffickers at differentlevels. But unless the data on imprisonment are collected by drugand G-DEP violator class, there are no figures to use incalculation. Information about Drug Trafficking and Organized Crime Enforcement activity yields two kinds of information aboutdrug trafficking: (1) that which can be inferred from theenforcement statistics, and (2) that known to (and sometimespublished by) agents, prosecutors, and enforcement-agencyintelligence analysts. (1) Inferences from Enforcement Statistics. Lost in theorganizational history of the Federal Bureau of Narcotics is theunsung hero who first proposed the rule of thumb that enforcementagencies capture about 10 percent of the drug supply on its wayto market. That rule of thumb allows (once the problems with theseizure data are straightened away) a simple calculation of thephysical size of the drug markets: take seizures and add a zero.More of the official drug market estimation than anyone wouldlike to admit is still based on some variant of that methodology. There are two problems with this calculation. First, there wasnever a period when we had a good measure of the total markettraffickers will tend to lower it. In fact, if the change inenforcement is great enough to cause shifts in basic smugglingpatterns, the result may be a lower overall seizure rate despitea higher level of enforcement. This seems to have been the casefor the South Florida Task Force, which succeeded both in drivingdrug smugglers away from its territory and in causing many ofthem to switch from large vessels to smaller, faster vessels;total seizures actually fell. The same is true of using other enforcement measures asestimates of market size. The enforcement success count dependson the size of the market, the vigor and tactics of enforcement,and the countermeasures of traffickers. Without an independentbasis for estimating the effect of countermeasures, the successcount tells us little even about trends in the size of themarket. (2) Facts and Analysis From Agents and Agencies. Drugenforcement agencies are not in business to collect data or doanalysis; they are in business to put drug dealers in jail andseize their drugs. Like other agencies, they tend to collect andpublish data that will help them do their job better, willpersuade someone else to help them do their job better, or willmake them look good. Traditionally, the Drug Enforcement Agency and itspredecessors defined their mission as controlling the supply ofdrugs. Thus, for example, the estimates of the price and purityof heroin at retail were published as part of the"Performance Measurement System," implying that drugavailability was an important measure of agency effectiveness.This mission definition encouraged the development within DEA ofan extensive "strategic intelligence" capability,devoted to understanding the drug markets. By contrast, theFederal Bureau of Investigation has always defined its mission assecuring the conviction of lawbreakers. It regarded the number ofbank robbers it caught, rather than the number of bank robberies,as its central performance measure. Since the 1981 reorganizationthat placed DEA under the administrative authority of theDirector of the FBI, DEA's mission definition has moved closer tothe FBI's. At least in part, this reflected a belief thatenforcement outputs were more subject to organizational control,and thus more likely to consistently reflect organizationalsuccess, than drug market outcomes. This new mission definitionmay have advantages from the perspective of organized crimecontrol. The supply-control approach tended to stress quantitiesof drugs rather than trafficking organizations as targets.However, the new mission definition is much less hospitable tostrategic, as opposed to operational, intelligence. (a) Price Chains. In the past DEA devoted considerable energyto estimating "price chains" for drugs, based onundercover buys and data from informants. That information,insofar as it was accurate, told a great deal about the structureof the markets, and in particular about where the money was beingmade. It was never formally published, but it was estimated on aquarterly basis and available to the rest of the government. Itappears that such "price chain" estimates are no longermade, or no longer made available. If true, that should berectified. There is no other source for that information, and itis essential. There is an enormous amount of relevant informationin DEA case files. Undercover transactions, interceptedcommunications, and conversations with informants all containprice data. The problem is maintaining a staff to collate andanalyze what is there. One improvement that could easily be madein publishing all statistics on drug prices is to adjust pastprices for the effects of inflation, using the Consumer PriceIndex or GNP deflator. Otherwise, anyone trying to determineprice trends has to keep looking up the rate of inflation since1976, or whatever appropriate date. (b) "Monitor" Programs. DEA has never had asubstantial number of retail-level cases, but the PerformanceMeasurement System required data about retail price and puritiesfor heroin across the country. These were accordingly collectedby the simple expedient of sending agents out to make undercoverretail purchases and collecting retail samples from local policeto seek good quality at low prices? More seriously,"retail" included samples as large as 2 grams and up to14 percent pure, while the typical actual retail transaction isfor 100 milligrams (one-tenth of a gram) less than 5 percentpure. Now that price-purity data are no longer publicly released,there seems to be somewhat less monitoring activity than in thepast. It may well be true that a program run by local policeunits (perhaps with funding from DEA or NIJ) would be moreeffective than DEA-run monitoring efforts. (Unofficialresearchers might develop even more accurate results, but thelegal and ethical problems seem insurmountable). But whether runby DEA or outside, there is no substitute for actual street buysas an index of market conditions, and not only for heroin. Enforcement-based Analysis: NNICC The National Narcotics Intelligence Consumers Committee(NNICC, pronounced "nick") is the official custodian ofestimates regarding the drug markets. It was originallyestablished to help control the embarrassing flow of mutuallycontradictory estimates that used to emerge from various Federalagencies. Although staffed primarily from DEA, it includes abroad variety of agencies as members, and its reports arenegotiated products. At one time, the NNICC annual report, called the NarcoticsIntelligence Estimate, provided sources, physical volumes, anddollar revenues for each of the four major drug categories:opiates, cannabis, cocaine, and the "dangerous drugs."Subsequently, criticism of the dollar-volume estimates, both fromoutsiders and from within the NNICC staff, led to a decision tocease publication of dollar-volume estimates. At the same timethe marijuana estimates for previous years were restated downwardby approximately one-third. As the NNICC methodology review makesclear, the NIE figures are largely derived from estimates offarm-level production in foreign source countries, because thedata sources on the consumption side are so inadequate. However,that same report shows how weakly grounded the production-basedestimates are. The crop figures themselves are hard todistinguish from guesswork, and the fraction of each country'scrop reaching the U.S. market is fundamentally unknown. Still more serious is a problem not considered in themethodology review: that a large fraction of the total crop inthe average year may go unsold. But a peasant marijuana-grower,for example, deciding how many plants to grow under uncertaintyboth about crop yields and about demand from exporters, will, ifhe is rational, overplant on average. Marijuana is so lucrative,compared with other crops, that it makes sense to grow an extraplant, even if there is only one chance in five of selling it forexport. Of course, if there were a smoothly functioningcompetitive market over wide geographic areas, the result wouldbe lower prices rather than unsold crops, but the market inmarijuana for export may be highly localized, with exportersbuying from nearby farmers even if prices elsewhere are muchlower. In general, then, it is hard to place much confidence in theNIE numbers, particularly because they are presented as a justset of conclusions, without any detailed presentation of theunderlying data or the calculations performed on that data. Oneway to improve this situation would be to gather better data,particularly about consumption, as discussed above. On the purely analytic side, two things might be done: (1)NNICC might publish more of its underlying data and some of thedetails about the calculations performed on them, or (2) a teamof outside scholars might be allowed full access to NNICCmaterials and asked to prepare an independent estimate. But whether one considers improving the data with which NNICChas to work or changing the analytic approach, the fundamentalproblem remains one of organizational incentives. The currentlack of adequate data or convincing analysis is not a problemfrom the perspective of DEA or other enforcement agencies. If theinformation were available, there is no reason to expect that itwould be used to reshape what agents and prosecutors do. In fact,by providing outsiders with a basis on which to criticize, dataand analysis might seem to threaten agency autonomy. Nor have theWhite House or Congressional staffs concerned with these problemsdisplayed any anxiety over the absence of information. The firststep in solving a problem is getting it identified as a problemby someone with the resources to bring about a solution. In thisarea, that step remains to be taken. Contents | Feedback | Search DRCNet Library | Schaffer Library | Government Publications | America's Habits WT01-B31-2IA031-000653-B004-269http://206.61.184.43:80/schaffer/GOVPUBS/amhab/amhabc9a.htm 206.61.184.43 19970122134234 text/html 28237HTTP/1.0 200 OKDate: Wednesday, 22-Jan-97 13:42:14 GMTServer: WebSitePro/1.1f (S/N wpo-0deb)Allow-ranges: bytesContent-type: text/htmlLast-modified: Saturday, 28-Dec-96 06:26:08 GMTContent-length: 28019 Recommendations for the Regulation of Selected Chemicalsand Con Contents | Feedback | Search DRCNet Library | Schaffer Library | Government Publications | America's Habits America's Habit Drug Abuse, Drug Trafficking, & Organized Crime President's Commission on Organized Crime, 1986 Consultant Paper: Recommendations for the Regulation ofSelected Chemicals and Controlled Substance Analogs By Frank Monastero. Submitted: September 1985. Frank Monasteroretired in 1985, having served as the Chief of Operations of theDrug Enforcement Administration. As we can see from media reports, cocaine has fast become thenation's number one drug abuse problem. The supply of cocainecoming from South America has reached overwhelming proportions.In 1985 alone the Drug Enforcement Administration (DEA) estimatesseizures will reach 50,000 pounds, and this, of course, does notaccount for that part of the supply that ultimately reaches themore than 20 million regular users. Another facet of the drug abuse problem, which could grow asrapidly if not addressed promptly, is that of controlledsubstance analogs, known as "designer drugs." These areclandestinely produced substances not covered by the ControlledSubstances Act because of their chemical structure. Most drugs, including those manufactured illicitly, areproduced at least in part from commercially available chemicals.The purpose of this paper is to examine the feasibility anddesirability of regulating certain of these chemicals. It willalso analyze how to curtail illicit production and examine whatlegal mechanism would be effective to control the manufacture ofsynthetic analogs (designer drugs), produced for illicitpurposes. Cocaine abused in the United States has its origin from thecoca bush, a very hardy plant, grown in certain areas of Southand Central America. As in the case with almost all drugs,whether produced from plants or totally synthetic, one or moreprecursors, reagents or solvents is used in the process. Thesechemicals are defined as follows: a precursor is a raw materialused in the production of a controlled substance that becomespart of the finished product; a reagent reacts chemically withone or more precursors but does not become part of the finishedproduct; a solvent, which does not react chemically with aprecursor or reagent and does not become part of the finishedproduct, is used to dissolve solid precursors or reagents, todilute reaction mixtures, and to separate and purify otherchemicals. For example, a precursor for cocaine is coca leaves, areagent is sulfuric acid, and a solvent used in the manufacturingprocess is acetone. With respect to methamphetamine, a precursoris phenyl-2-propanone, a reagent is sulfuric acid, and a solventis methanol. It is important to understand that, in the case ofthese and other controlled substances, there are many otherprecursors, reagents and solvents, which can easily besubstituted to produce the same final product. With some exceptions only the final product drug itself, is acontrolled substance. Many of the chemicals used to produce orrefine illicit drugs are needed in industry to produce a myriadof items and are produced in tremendous quantities. Controllingtheir distribution would, in most cases, be impossible andprobably undesirable because of the cost alone. Acetone, forinstance, which is used as a solvent in processing opium and cocaleaves, is used to make paints, lubricants, pharmaceuticals,cosmetics and agricultural products. Although controlling all precursors, reagents and solventsused to manufacture illicit drugs is neither desirable norfeasible, the idea of controlling certain chemicals has merit. Infact, some chemicals are now subject to regulation. Piperidine isa precursor to the controlled substance phencyclidine, commonlyknown as PCP, which can have serious physical and psychologicalconsequences when abused. Piperidine is subject to reportingrequirements under the Controlled Substances Act, although itspossession and distribution are not subject to penalties, as isthe case with the possession and distribution of PCP. Formsrecording the sale of piperidine and the purchaser's name must bemaintained for two years. Anyone who sells piperidine must reportthe sale. This reporting procedure allows DEA to monitor sales ofpiperidine and to investigate those sales recognized assuspicious by either DEA or the seller. As a result of concertedefforts begun in late 1984, DEA has seized four clandestine PCPlaboratories and has located at least ten operations thatreceived chemicals from legitimate channels by posing aslegitimate businesses. In one case a manufacturer shipped asubstantial amount of piperidine to a "chemicalcompany" over an extended period, all in good faith based onthe company's name. A check of the address by DEA showed it to bean auto repair shop. Precursors, reagents and solvents are used to manufacture manydrugs, including synthetic analogs, drugs so close in structureto controlled substances that they create virtually the sameeffect for the user. These are not covered under the ControlledSubstances Act because of minor differences in molecularstructure. Synthetic analogs, commonly known as "designerdrugs," pose particular health threats. The production of controlled substance analogs,pharmacologically active, chemically related substances, to avoidthe laws regulating controlled substances, was first observed inthe mid-1960's with the synthesis of amphetamine analogs ofmescaline, such as MDA and others. Some of this group ofhallucinogenic amphetamines sold on the illicit market werebrought under the Drug Abuse Control Amendments, a predecessor tothe Controlled Substances Act. Others in the group weresubsequently controlled under the Controlled Substances Act afterits passage in 1970. Later three PCP analogs were controlled. The process of designing analogs is, therefore, not new, andthe formulas are not primarily a phenomenon of clandestinelaboratories. Most of these drugs were developed by legitimatepharmaceutical chemists in search of better medicinal agentsthrough the testing of numerous analogs of a parent compound. Itis not surprising, therefore, that some of their precursors havenames such as N-(1-phenethyl-4-piperidinyl)-aniline (forfentanyl) or N-[1-(2-phenylisopropyl)]-4-piperidinone-4-one (foralpha-methylfentanyl). These analogs, in many cases, mimic thequalitative actions of the original compound but may vary inpotency or duration of action. Thus, there is a need to deal bothwith the problem of chemicals used in the production of illicitdrugs and with the problem of controlled substance analogs. Factors Affecting the Regulation of Chemicals There are in excess of 200 precursors, reagents and solventsused in the production of the 37 most commonly abused substances.Among these are amphetamines, barbiturates, cocaine, Diazepam,hash oil, heroin, LSD, MDA, PCP and methaqualone. In consideringwhat should be regulated two factors are most significant: (1)How common is the chemical interest? (2) How great is theworkload to track the needed information? Each situation must beexamined individually, if the objective is to reach an ultimatesolution for each drug. It is quickly apparent that there is no ultimate, universalsolution to absolute chemical control for all drugs. Acetone andether, although widely used, are subject to tracing. Piperidine,less available commercially, is easily synthesized. The firstconclusion might well be that if the source of the chemical isknown and that source will identify and report suspicious sales,the investigator will be able to pursue the investigation.Obviously, this will not help when all chemicals can be obtainedfrom illicit sources. But when the source will provide assistanceor at least when sales information is available for review,tracing can be attempted. The problem then becomes one of resources. How muchinformation can be reviewed and how many people are available topursue leads. These are very significant factors to consider. If,indeed, all chemicals used in the production of controlledsubstances were reported it is unlikely the responsible agencycould cull the most suspicious orders, let alone investigatethem. The computer input itself would be substantial.Furthermore, the drug abuse situation is constantly changing, anda chemical, not of interest today, might be a prime target as anew drug emerges. Case Study: Ether Because cocaine abuse is a serious problem in the UnitedStates at this time and because an increasing number of cocainelaboratories are being seized, it is important to examine thechemical control of cocaine. To refine coca, dried leaves aremoistened with an alkaline solution, such as lime water, sodiumor potassium carbonate. The moistened leaves are soaked inkerosene, which extracts cocaine and similar compounds. Thekerosene is extracted with aqueous sulfuric acid, and the acidneutralized with limestone or lime. After the cocaineprecipitates and is removed by filtering, it becomes coca paste.To become cocaine base, the paste is dissolved in a solution ofsulfuric acid, and a solution of potassium permanganate is addedto aridize impurities. The solution is filtered to removeimpurities and manganese oxides. Anmoniun hydroxide is added tothe filtrate, and the precipitate is collected and dried, formingthe base. The base is dissolved in acetone or ether and filteredto remove insoluble material. Concentrated hydrochloric acid isadded in acetone along with ether. Cocaine hydrochloride willcrystallize from this solution and is collected by filtration anddried. The ratio of base to cocaine hydrochloride is one to one. Because ether and acetone are readily available in the UnitedStates, traffickers recognized the advantage of processing here,and the number of base to hydrochloride laboratories seizedincreased steadily from 3 in 1980 to 21 in 1984; as of mid-1985,there were already 25. Six reagents are used to refine cocaine: ammonia, hydrochloricacid, lime, limestone, potassium carbonate, potassiumpermanganate and sulfuric acid. The four solvents used areacetone, ethanol, ether and kerosene. These could be targets formonitoring or control. However, after considering theavailability and usage of each chemical, the possible targets canbe narrowed to acetone and ether. As mentioned earlier, acetonehas a number of legitimate uses. An estimated 2.5 billion poundsis produced each year in the United States, a commercial value ofabout $400 million. There are 12 major U.S. producers and over 40 foreign sources.Although usually produced from petroleum or synthesized frombenzene, there are other processes to produce it. Nonetheless,acetone, in fact, was selected as a target, and the targeting didproduce results. Ether, likewise, has broad use, with a U.S.production estimate of over 60 million pounds, but with only fiveU.S. producers and seven major foreign sources. Ether, therefore,represents, and did turn out to be, an even better target. Early in 1982 a project was undertaken to determine how muchether was being shipped to Colombia and to what, if any,legitimate uses it was put. Colombia was selected because,although most of the coca is grown in Bolivia and Peru, most ofthe cocaine processing laboratories were known to be in Colombia.The Colombian government determined that thousands of gallons ofether were being imported annually, but that there was virtuallyno legitimate need for it. Most of the ether was imported fromthe Federal Republic of Germany and the United States. Throughliaison with those ether manufacturers and distributors who wouldcooperate, hundreds of barrels of the chemical were tracked toclandestine laboratories deep in the Amazon jungles of Colombia.Many of these labs were destroyed and thousands of pounds ofcocaine were seized. In the celebrated Tranquilandia raid inMarch 1984, 10,000 kilograms of cocaine paste and base wereseized and destroyed, along with thousands of barrels ofchemicals. Through court testimony and media attention, cocaineproducers have, no doubt, become aware of the detectiontechniques used to locate laboratories, and they are or will takeaction to avoid detection. Opportunities for a continuing supplyof ether exist through unscrupulous manufacturers anddistributors and through clandestine production from ethanol.However, the program has been useful and demonstrates theeffectiveness of the monitoring approach. Case Study: P2P In addition to tracking chemicals, such as ether, anotherapproach is to bring certain chemicals under the ControlledSubstances Act. For experience with this approach, it isimportant to examine methamphetamine and one of its precursors,phenyl-2-propanone (P2P). Domestic methamphetamine production issignificant. In fact, during a 45 month period beginning inSeptember 1981, more than 50 percent of the 751 clandestinelaboratories seized by DEA were methamphetamine labs. In order tocontrol clandestine methamphetamine production, P2P was placed inSchedule II of the Controlled Substance Act on February 11, 1980.P2P is an immediate precursor (used in the step just prior tocompletion) in the most desirable synthesis and was, therefore, agood choice for targeting. Furthermore, with the exception of itsuse as a cleaning solution, most of its uses are in connectionwith pharmaceutical manufacturing. Annual production in the U.S.is estimated to be about 10,000 pounds, with only two principaldomestic producers and nine foreign sources. Full control of P2Punder the Control Substances Act resulted in a significantincrease in the number of clandestine methamphetamine laboratoryoperators synthesizing P2P. More than 75 percent of thelaboratories seized after passage were refluxing phenylaceticacid and acetic anhydride with sodium acetate or pyridine. Inaddition, one laboratory was synthesizing phenylacetic acid aswell. Recommendations for Action (1) That legislation be enacted requiring the reporting of allsales of selected chemicals used in the production of controlledsubstances, subject to public notice by the Administrator of DEAthat a particular chemical was selected for such control. Thiswould create a requirement similar to that affecting piperidine;however, reporting would only be required for those chemicalsspecified for a particular period of time. The requirement shouldapply to the importing and exporting of the specified chemicals. (2) That legislation be enacted to empower the Administratorof DEA or some other appropriate authority to identify and addnew chemicals to the list of those requiring reporting, as itbecomes known they are being used for the production ofcontrolled substances. (3) That DEA identify the resources needed for thecomputerization, analysis and follow up on reporting and thatthose resources be acquired through the budget process. Controlled Substance Analogs As previously stated, the controlled substance analog problemis not new. However, their wider illicit use and the greaterrecognition of their use has heightened concern. There have beenthree major types of analogs available in the United States:analogs of PCP, analogs of amphetamine and methamphetamine havinghallucinogenic properties, and the newer trend, analogs offentanyl and meperidine. There are, of course, hazards common toall three groups. They are likely to contain toxic impurities.Dosage is not consistent, i.e., one dose of a substance is likelyto contain a different amount of the active ingredient thananother. As a result, a single dose could contain a lethal amountof the drug in question. Because they are analogs, they may wellproduce toxic effects not caused by their parent drug. Anothercritical consideration associated with designer drugs is thedifficulty of identifying them in the body. Recent testimony at aSenate hearing indicated there are now only two laboratories inthe country, capable of identifying certain "designerdrugs" in body fluids, because standards for identifying thedrugs are not widely available. This creates two seriousproblems: (1) Without the ability to detect and determine whatdrugs are being used on the street it is impossible to evenidentify that a problem exists let alone judge its magnitude; and(2) without being able to determine positively what drugs hasbeen ingested, it is impossible to identify the correct antidote,which in many cases could be a matter of life and death. The Situation in More Detail PCP was originally developed in the early 1950's as ananesthetic for humans, but it was soon limited to veterinary usebecause of its adverse side effects. Licit production ceased in1978, and PCP is controlled in Schedule I of the ControlledSubstances Act, as are three of its analogs. They now arerecognized as having no medical use. The National Institute onDrug Abuse has identified 35 other analogs, but none haspresented an abuse problem as far as is known. Many analogs of amphetamine and methamphetamine are known tohave hallucinogenic affects. One receiving considerable mediaattention recently, known on the street as "Ecstasy,"is MDMA or 3,4-methylene dioxymethamphetamine from the parentcompound MDA. Its psychopharmacological effects are similar tothose of MDA, altered consciousness, increased acoustic, visualand tactile sensory perceptions and mild intoxication. There isconsiderable concern among some experts that MDMA is likely tocause damage to the serotonergic system, which has to do withregulating sleep, mood, sexual activity and sensitivity toaversive stimuli. The conclusion is based on research indicatingthat MDA can selectively destroy serotonergic nerve terminals inthe rat brain. First recognized in the illicit traffic by DEA in1970, MDMA was proposed for control under the ControlledSubstances Act in July 1984 because of increasing incidents ofdiscovery. However, because of rapidly mounting evidence of abusesince then and possible serious neurological damage, theemergency provisions contained in the Comprehensive Crime ControlAct of 1984 were used, and the drug was controlled as of July 1,1985. Fentanyl is widely used by the medical community as ananalgesic and anesthetic. It was first marketed in the UnitedStates for this purpose in 1968 and is the most popular analgesicused in surgical procedures in this country. There are likelyseveral hundred fentanyl analogs, many with pharmacologicalproperties similar to heroin or morphine but far more powerful.The alpha-methyl analog was the first synthetic analog drugrecognized in the illicit traffic and was associated withoverdose deaths in California in 1979. Sold on the streets assynthetic heroin, or "China White," it was placed inSchedule I of the Controlled Substances Act in September 1981,substantially eliminating its appearance in the illicit traffic.DEA has identified seven additional fentanyl analogs in theillicit traffic since then, however. Interestingly, two analogshave not been recognized in the scientific literature. There are two dramatic concerns related to the fentanylanalogs: (1) their potency; and (2) their production/profitmargin. This second element will be of obvious importance totraditional organized crime elements. Three methyl-fentanyl, thelatest analog to appear in the illicit market, is 3,000 times aspotent as morphine and has already been responsible for over adozen overdose deaths in the San Francisco Bay area alone. Thisis the highest rate of fentanyl related deaths to date. Dosagesfor fentanyl analogs are measured in micrograms and are likely tobe less than 1 percent of the dosage unit sold to the user. TheDrug Enforcement Administration has estimated that one kilogramof fentanyl analog could be manufactured for under $2,000 andthat this amount might equal as many as 50 million dosage units,with a street value exceeding one billion dollars. Meperidine, a synthetic narcotic used to control pain, isfrequently used by heroin users when the street supply of heroinis low. Meperidine, known more commonly by its trade name"Demerol," is in the Controlled Substances Act,Schedule II. Two analogs of meperidine have been found in currentuse. The first apparent MPPP (1-Methyl-4-Propionoxy piperidine)abuse came to light in 1976 when a young man synthesized what hethought was the analog for his own use. He soon sought treatmentfor symptoms of Parkinson's disease. In revealing his drug use heprovided the formula and procedures he had used. Subsequentanalysis revealed he had, in fact, created MPTP. Additionalresearch by a National Institute of Health grantee showed thatMPTP had produced the Parkinson's type symptoms. MPPP was firstidentified by a DEA laboratory in 1982; and samples of MPPP havebeen discovered to contain the neurotoxic byproduct MPTP, formedduring the synthesis of MPPP. The neurological damage produced byMPTP is irreversible and apparently worsens with time. The Stateof California has identified more than 500 people who have usedMPTP; many users thought it was a new synthetic heroin. Twenty ofthose involved have been permanently crippled. A group of sevenyoung addicts, who appeared at a California medical centerseveral years ago with symptoms resembling advanced Parkinson'sdisease, were unable to move or talk. Treatment withanti-Parkinson's therapy was, according to Californiaauthorities, probably life saving, yet the patients continued tobe severely handicapped, requiring medication every one to threehours just to be able to eat and drink. The other meperidine analog with effects similar to heroin isPePAP (l-(2-Phenylethyl)-4-Acetyloxpiperidine). The analgesicpotency of PePAP, measured in rodents, is described as from 12 to72 times the potency of meperidine itself. This analog has so farbeen discovered in California, although a clandestine laboratoryoperation in Texas may have been attempting the process but didnot succeed. Proposed Legislation As mentioned at the outset of this discussion, unless thespecific chemical makeup of the substance being abused can bedetermined by all laboratories regularly engaged in the analysisof substances being abuse, serious problems could go unrecognizedfor long periods, even years. Those who examine for and recordoverdose deaths and injuries must likewise be able to determinethe abused substance involved. Further, that information must becollected and analyzed at a central point. There is currentlyonly a limited mechanism for this collection (the NIDA DAWNsystem). When a situation needing attention is discovered,enforcement authorities must be empowered to act quickly. Thismeans that a mechanism must exist by which these "designerdrugs" can be controlled under the Controlled Substances Actand appropriate State laws. The Comprehensive Crime Control Actof 1984 does contain such a provision. Under that statute theAdministrator of DEA can bring a drug under Schedule I for up toone year, with a six month extension where justified, and onemergency basis, while the normal control mechanism is inprogress. The Administrator must decide that such scheduling isnecessary to avoid an imminent hazard to public safety. Controlof the substances occurs 30 days after public notice. Theefficacy of this legislation is yet undetermined, since it wasonly first used in the Spring of 1985. On July 16, 1985, a bill was introduced in the U.S. Senate, S.1437, known as the "Designer Drug Enforcement Act of1985." This proposed legislation would make it a felony tomanufacture or distribute a designer drug for human consumption.The proposed act, which would amend the Controlled Substance Act,reads in part "(31) The term 'designer drug' as used insection 403A means a substance other than a controlled substancethat has a chemical structure substantially similar to that of acontrolled substance in Schedule I or II." During a Senatehearing on the legislation by the Subcommittee on Children,Family and Drugs and Alcoholism, July 25, 1985, both the DEAAdministrator and the Administrator of the Alcohol, Drug Abuseand Mental Health Administration, supported the bill. Recommended Actions (1) That DEA provide assistance to the States in acquiringlaboratory standards for use in identifying "designerdrugs." (2) That legislation be enacted requiring the reporting byanyone authorized to sign a death certificate, to an appropriateFederal authority (perhaps the Public Health Service) of deathscaused wholly or in part from the ingestion of any substance. (3) That legislation be enacted requiring the reporting to anappropriate Federal authority (DEA) by all laboratoriesperforming drug analysis for law enforcement purposes: (a) thetotal amount of each controlled substance as defined in theControlled Substances Act, received for analysis each calendaryear, and (b) immediate notice of the receipt of samples of anysubstance suspected of being or found to be a "designerdrug" as defined in the proposed bill. That DEA formulate model "designer drug" legislation for the States as has been done for other aspects of the drug abuse problem. Contents | Feedback | Search DRCNet Library | Schaffer Library | Government Publications | America's Habits WT01-B31-3IA031-000653-B004-296http://206.61.184.43:80/schaffer/GOVPUBS/amhab/amhabc9b.htm 206.61.184.43 19970122134249 text/html 63914HTTP/1.0 200 OKDate: Wednesday, 22-Jan-97 13:42:35 GMTServer: WebSitePro/1.1f (S/N wpo-0deb)Allow-ranges: bytesContent-type: text/htmlLast-modified: Saturday, 28-Dec-96 06:26:00 GMTContent-length: 63696 Drug Policy and Organized Crime Contents | Feedback | Search DRCNet Library | Schaffer Library | Government Publications | America's Habits America's Habit Drug Abuse, Drug Trafficking, & Organized Crime President's Commission on Organized Crime, 1986 Consultant Paper: Part 1: Drug Policy and Organized Crime Drug Policy and Organized Crime By Professor Mark H. Moore. Submitted: January 3, 1986. Dr.Mark H. Moore is Daniel and Guggenheim Professor of CriminalJustice Policy and Management at the John F. Kennedy School ofGovernment, Harvard University, Cambridge, Massachusetts. He isformer Special Assistant to the Administrator of the DrugEnforcement Administration. Introduction: Drug Policy, Law Enforcement and Organized Crime Criminal laws prohibiting the production, distribution, andpossession of narcotics and dangerous drugs are the basis of drugpolicy in the United States. These laws target the drugs thathave no recognized legitimate medical uses: heroin, cocaine,marihuana, and hallucinogens. Enforcement efforts against thesedrugs can be uncompromising, for there are no legitimate uses orusers to be protected. Other drugs, however, pose similar threats to public healthand welfare, but they do have recognized legitimate uses. Thesedrugs include morphine, methadone, barbiturates, amphetamines,and tranquilizers. With respect to these drugs the aim of thelegal regime and associated enforcement strategies is morecomplex. It is not simply to eliminate the drugs but to preservea legitimate sector in which the benefits of these drugs may beenjoyed, while minimizing illicit use. Towards this end the lawslicense a limited number of people to produce, import, sell,distribute and use them. To prevent the drugs from leaking fromand to illicit distributors and users, licensees have to securetheir inventories, and deal only with other licensees. To makesure that the licensees meet these responsibilities, they mustkeep records and make them available to investigators forinspection. Failures to meet their responsibilities expose thelicensees to both civil and criminal penalties. To make sure thatno one can operate outside the boundaries of the legitimatesystem, the unlicensed production, distribution or use of theselegitimate drugs is prohibited. Drug Laws as a Comprehensive Drug Policy It has become customary to think of the drug laws as operatingprincipally on the "supply side" of illegal drugmarkets. For most practical purposes this is appropriate, forthese laws are the principal policy instruments directed at thesupply of illicit drugs. It is also generally true that theprincipal targets of enforcement are suppliers rather than users.However, these laws impose criminal liability on the illicitpossession and use of drugs, as well as to illicit production anddistribution. And indeed, each year more than 500,000 drug usersare arrested for possession. Therefore, criminal enforcement isdirected at the "demand side" of illicit drug use aswell as the "supply side." To the extent that theselaws attack both the supply and the demand for illicit drugs,they can be understood as a comprehensive drug policy, designedto distinguish legitimate and useful drug use from illicit useand to minimize illicit use in the society. To produce this result, three different mechanisms are reliedon. One is the moral force of the law itself. To the extent thatindividual citizens are guided in their decisions about drug useby the explicit instruction provided by the law, or to the extentthat the existence of the law mobilizes widespread informalinterventions by parents, friends and relatives, the existence oflaws that define illicit use may succeed in reducing overalllevels of illicit use without any public enforcement activities. A second, more widely understood mechanism is generaldeterrence: the notion that citizens might be discouraged fromillicitly selling or using drugs by the fear that they will bearrested and punished. This notion differs from the first in thatit depends on citizens' fears of punishment to motivatecompliance with the laws, rather than their desires to conform orseek virtue. The more severe the penalties, and the higher theprobability of being caught, the more compliance will result. A third mechanism is incapacitation: the notion thatimprisonment may physically prevent drug dealers and users fromcontinuing their activities. This concept differs from the secondin that it operates only on those dealers and users who arecaught, and only for as long as they remain under legalsupervision. If enough drug dealers and drug users are locked up,then the problem of illicit drug dealing and drug use willdisappear. Limitations of Drug Laws as a Drug Abuse Policy To describe these mechanisms is to reveal the limitations ofthe drug laws as a comprehensive drug abuse policy. The problemis not that they are directed only at the "supply side"of illegal drug abuse. Nor is it that they fail to producereductions in the level of illicit drug use. The problem is thatthe drug laws are imperfectly effective. They leave behind aresidual market, composed of drug dealers and users, who failedto get the message that they should abandon their drugactivities. Moreover, while the levels of drug distribution anduse that remain are undoubtedly lower than they would be in aworld of legalized drugs, the character of the market on both thesupply and the demand side are fundamentally altered andgenerally worsened as a result of their illegality. On the demand side the users who are not dissuaded from usingdrugs discover that they confront high prices and low quality inthe drugs they buy. In addition, they are exposed to socialstigmatization and criminal prosecution. These circumstancesproduce disastrous results for their economic status, physicalhealth, and social well-being. Of course, to the extent thatthese consequences are unpleasant to the users, they provide acontinuing incentive for users to abandon their drug use. And, tothe extent that the users do so, an important social objective isachieved. But to the extent they do not respond, their lives aremade miserable with little corresponding social benefit. Thesociety is left with drug users who are more dependent, dangerousand unhealthy than they would otherwise be. On the supply side the residual capacity takes the form of anillicit industry. Some of that industry operates outside theboundaries of the United States, and therefore to some degreebeyond the reach of its law. Another portion operates under thecover of predominantly legal drug production and distribution -within reach of the law, but a morally and legally ambiguoustarget. The vast majority of the illicit industry, however,consists of wholly illicit traffickers in the United States. The Illicit Drug Industry: A Problem for Drug and OrganizedCrime Policy The existence of this illicit industry creates two differentkinds of problems. Viewed from the vantage point of drug abusepolicy, the principal problem created by the illicit industry isthat it continues to supply drugs to illicit markets. To theextent that this continues, old drug users nay continue theirharmful activities, and new users may be recruited into dangerouspatterns of drug use. Thus, to achieve the objectives of drugpolicy, the society must find ways to constrict the supplycapacities of the illicit industry. Viewed from the vantage point of those concerned with thecontrol of organized crime, the existence of the illicit industrycreates a different kind of problem. To a degree, the illicitdrug industry engages in the sort of activities that makeorganized crime a specially important social problem. Not only dothe illegal dealers frustrate the aims of drug policy bycontinuing to supply drugs, but they grow rich in the process andtaunt the society with their financial success. Moreover, theindustry seems to spawn violence. Sometimes the violence spillsout into the general population. But even when the violenceremains confined to participants in the industry, its sheerviciousness creates a general sense of lawlessness and brutalitythat is threatening to the community. The illicit dealers alsoseem to become heavily involved in corrupting governmentagencies. Such activities undermine community security, and theintegrity of its basic institutions. Finally, the illicit drugindustry may gives birth to unusually large and powerful criminalorganizations, or nourish those that already exist. From thevantage point of organized crime policy, then, the drug lawscreate a major problem to be solved. Drug Policy as a Portfolio of Policy Instruments To deal with these side effects and residual problems, thedrug laws must be complemented by other policy instruments. Todeal with the limitations of drug laws in suppressing the demandfor drugs, a comprehensive drug policy necessarily includes drugtreatment and preventive education programs. Treatment programsmust be provided to help users make the transition to non-use andto save lives that would otherwise be lost. Preventive educationprograms must be operated to give more detailed explanations toindividuals of why illicit drug use is undesirable. Indeed, giventhe focus of drug enforcement on the supply side of the marketand the obvious limitations of the drug laws in discouraging useamong those who are already dependent, it is generallyappropriate to think of drug treatment and education programs asthe principal instruments focused on the "demand side"of the illicit drug markets. To deal with the limitations of the laws in suppressing thesupply of illicit drugs and preventing the appearance oforganized criminal activity, traditional enforcement methods mustbe supplemented by some special policy instruments. Diplomacy andforeign aid must be joined to enforcement and regulation to reachthe pieces of the illicit supply system that operate outside theUnited States. An effective regulatory enforcement system must becreated to prevent the diversion of narcotics and dangerous drugsfrom legitimate to illicit markets in the United States. Andperhaps some special enforcement strategies that are effective inconstricting the capacity of the supply system to move drugs toillicit markets or in dispersing well organized drug traffickersmust be designed and used. The Objectives of the Paper The purpose of this paper is not to design an effectiveoverall drug policy. Nor is it to consider the wisdom of relyingon criminal laws against drug distribution and use to the degreewe do now. My opinion is that our current drug policy is a wiseone, and that the balance of risks favors the continuation ofcriminal laws directed against the distribution and use ofnarcotics and dangerous drugs. The aim of this paper is to take the existence of the currentdrug laws and policies as a starting point and to design astrategy to reduce supply consistent with the aims of our currentdrugs abuse policy. In designing such a policy, special attentionwill be given to the relationship between the strategy to reducesupply that is necessary to achieve the goals of our current drugabuse policy and organized crime policy. As we have seen, there is some tension between these policies.Making drug distribution illegal establishes fertile soil fromwhich existing organized crime groups might take sustenance ornew groups might arise. Thus, the continuing prohibitions of drugdistribution may exacerbate the organized crime problem. On theother hand, to the extent that organized crime groups are nowactive in producing or distributing drugs, and to the extent thatour organized crime policy makes available resources andtechniques that are effective in immobilizing such groups,organized crime policy may make an important contribution to drugpolicy. In balancing these concerns the dominant emphasis will begiven to designing a supply reduction strategy that can achievethe purpose of drug abuse policy. This perspective will beadopted not because it is obvious that an effective drug controlpolicy is more important than an effective organized crimepolicy, but simply because, if it were true that it was moreimportant to combat organized crime than to keep drugs fromillicit users, the simple solution would be to legalize the drugsso that no illegal firms could arise. Since the society does notchoose this option, it must be that we are willing to pay a pricein terms of the objectives of organized crime policy to achievethe objectives of drug control policy. The only interestingquestions, then, are how to minimize that price, and how best todeploy the special resources and capabilities or organized crimecontrol policies to further the objectives of drug policy. Thatis what we will try to discover. The Analytic Framework As we have seen, the character of the illicit drug industry isimportant to the ultimate success of both drug abuse policy, andorganized crime control policy. To define objectives, setreasonable expectations for success, and guide strategic choicesin targeting supply reduction efforts, an analysis of the illicitdrug industry is essential. The Crucial Distinction Between the "Industry" andthe "Firms" In carrying out this analysis, it is important to distinguishthe concept of the industry from the concept of individual firmswithin the industry. The industry includes everyone who isengaged in producing, importing, or distributing narcotics anddangerous drugs to illicit markets in the United States. A firmwithin that industry is nothing more than a collection of assetswhose specific uses are determined by the authoritative decisionsof an identifiable organizational unit. Obviously, the firms that make up the industry could take avariety of forms. They could represent different productioncapacities, such as a boat, a person who knows the chemistry toproduce psychoactive drugs, or $50,000 in cash. They could beinvolved in all aspects of the deal from financing throughproduction, transportation, and distribution, or they couldspecialize in only one of these functions. For any given functionthe firm may be more or less dominant in more or less localgeographic markets. They could consist of a single entrepreneurlinked to others only through the fragile ties of economicinterest, or they could include many people linked to one anotherby family or cultural ties. They could be relative newcomers orhave a long history in the industry. They could enter theindustry with hopes for a single, big score, or they could planto become or remain a permanent fixture. Often, the distinction between the industry and the firms thatcomprise it is blurred, and the industry is viewed as a singlefirm. This casual assumption is justified on one of two differentgrounds. One is that the observed performance of the illicitmarket is so impressive in terms of its operations andadaptability that it is hard to believe that it is not guided bya single intelligence. Nothing short of a single coherententerprise could accomplish the enormously complicated tasks ofcollecting raw materials, processing then, and transporting thefinished product through the mine fields created by enforcementagencies. Nor could anything other than an enterprise guided by asingle intelligence adapt successfully to the frequent changes insupply reduction strategies. The problem with this argument is that legitimate industriesaccomplish similar feats of production, distribution andadaptation all the time without a single intelligence guidingthem. The reason legitimate industries are successful is thatthere are many guiding intelligences, but none predominant. Theaggregate result of the individual choices made by individualeconomic actors may look organized in the sense that the industrygradually moves from places where enforcement has become heavy toareas where it is weaker, or it shifts from one drug to anotherdepending on consumer demand. But this orderly response need notbe the result of a wise choice by a single, powerful firm. Itcould be the natural result of the firms in the heavily enforcedareas being wiped out, and the firms in the less heavily enforcedareas growing to meet the demand. In short, the adaptations aremade at the expense of individual firms, not under their control- nor, necessarily, to their advantage. The second line of argument supporting the notion that theindustry should be viewed as a single firm is somewhat moresophisticated. It is based on the hypothesis that some illicitfirms will develop crucial specialized capabilities, and thatthese will give the firm important advantages in producing anddistributing illegal drugs, or effective control over others whodo. These special capabilities could be access to capital,connections with foreign sources of raw materials, knowledge ofhow to produce the drugs, a special tie to corrupt officials, ora general capacity for disciplined violence that could be broughtto bear on anyone who produced or distributed drugs without theirpermission. This argument depends essentially on the idea thatthere are some natural economies of scale in the illicitindustry, and that these will tend to produce a concentratedindustry. This is a more powerful kind of argument than thefirst, but it is only an assertion. It needs to be examined withboth logic and evidence. The Analysis of Industrial Organization The form of analysis that is appropriate is an analysis ofindustrial organization. An analysis of this kind rigorouslymaintains the distinction between the industry and the firms thatcomprise it. Indeed, the principal objective of an analysis ofindustrial organization is to understand the relationships amongthe structure of the industry, the conduct of the firms withinthe industry, and the long run performance of the industry. The Definition of Industry Structure. The concept of industry"structure" explicitly captures the distinction betweenthe industry and the firms that comprise it. It focuses attentionon how the activities of the overall industry are divided amongdifferent organizational units called Firms. One key concern inexamining structure is the degree of concentration in theindustry. The fewer the firms, the more concentrated theindustry. A second is the extent of horizontal and verticalintegration. Integration refers to the proportion of activitiesessential to creating a product and delivering it to a marketthat are contained within a single firm. Vertical integration ismeasured by the extent to which a firm includes all the stepsfrom extraction of raw materials to final sales to ordinaryconsumers. Horizontal integration is measured by the proportionof a given step in the production and distribution of a productthat is controlled by a single firm. The Definition of Industry Conduct. "Conduct" refersto the distinctive ways that the firms within the industry goabout their business. Specific questions might focus on theproduction technologies now commonly utilized, major factorsinfluencing costs within the industry, levels of investment inresearch and development, the rate at which new products areintroduced, or the geographic organization of the industry'smarkets. Conduct might also be concerned with institutionalrelationships in the industry; e.g., the competitive strategiesbeing pursued by firms within the industry, the relationshipswith governmental regulators, and even patters of collectivebargaining and labor relations. The Definition of Industry Performance."Performance" focuses on the question of how successfulthe industry is over the long run in delivering a product at lowcost, expanding the market, and adapting to changingcircumstances. Performance is ultimately what an industry analystis trying to understand. Indeed, the observations about structureand conduct are made principally to explain and predictperformance. The more decentralized and competitive the industry,and the lower the costs of bringing new products or newproduction technologies on line, the more adaptable and dynamicthe industry. The larger the economies of scale in operating,marketing, or bringing new products or production technologies online, the more concentrated the industry is likely to be. Themore concentrated the industry, the higher the prices and theslower the rate of innovation. Propositions such as these linkobservations of structure and conduct to explanations andpredictions of performance. Objectives in Attacking the Illicit Drug Industry To a great extent this framework of analysis can be carriedover and used in examining the character of the illicit drugindustry. But some crucial differences are worth noting. By farthe most important is that the implicit evaluative perspectivereverses when we are analyzing illicit industries. An Evaluative Perspective. In standard industry analyses onegenerally hopes for high performance from the industry. The moresuccessful it is in delivering products at low prices, expandingits market to new areas, adapting to changing economiccircumstances, and maintaining high rates of innovation, thebetter the result for the society. In the case of the illicit drug industry, of course, thesociety's hopes run in the opposite direction. High performancefrom the illicit drug industry means that it adapts well togovernment efforts to eliminate it and continues to supply drugsat low cost to illicit markets. Over the long run, this meanshigher levels of illicit drug use. In analyzing the illicit drugmarket, then, what one hopes for is a failing industry: one thatcannot overcome the hurdles set by the government in trying toget its products to market. These hopes are generally frustratedby the sheer inventiveness and adaptability of illicitentrepreneurs in pursuit of money. Nonetheless, one keeps hopingthat this industry will stumble rather than flourish. Indeed,making it fail is an explicit purpose of public policy. A second important difference is that in the analysis of theillegal drug industry, the structure and conduct of the industryhave an elevated importance. As noted above, in traditionalanalyses of industrial organization, structure and conduct haveimportance primarily as factors that influence the performance ofthe industry. In the analysis of the illegal drug industry, theyretain that importance: to the extent that structure and conductenhance or hinder the industry's long-run performance indelivering drugs to illicit markets at low prices, they are asource of interest, and a possible target of enforcement actions. What increases the importance of structure and conduct in theanalysis of illegal drug markets, however, is that they arevalued by the society independently of their impact on theperformance of the industry. Crucial questions about the conductof the firms within the illegal drug industry include the extentto which they rely on violence to maintain internal discipline oreliminate competition, and the extent to which they rely oncorruption to ward off the threat of enforcement. To the extentthat they do rely on violence and corruption as essentialelements of their business, their conduct has importance to thesociety quite apart from how these practices affect their abilityto supply drugs. Similarly, the society seems to be deeply concerned about thestructure of the illicit drug industry. Specifically, the societyseems to regard the problem as worse if the industry is highlyconcentrated and composed of a few large, durable firms than ifit were less concentrated and populated by smaller and moretransient firms. No doubt, this view derives primarily from adominant concern about the performance of the industry, and anassumption that an illicit industry, composed of a few large anddurable firms, would be more effective over the long run insupplying drugs at low cost to consumers. It is important to keepin mind, however, that a highly concentrated industry mightperform less well over the long run in delivering drugs toillicit markets than a more atomistic market. Economic theorytells us that prices would be higher in a concentrated market,and it is quite possible that innovativeness and adaptability toattacks would be less. The firms might represent more formidableenforcement targets, but the result of dismantling them might belarger and more durable than would be true in an atomisticmarket. Even if this were true, however, it seems likely that thesociety would still regard an illicit industry, composed of a fewlarge, durable firms, as worse than one composed of many smalltransient firms. The reason is that large, durable firmsconstitute a social problem independent of their ability tosupply drugs. Large, durable criminal organizations can bringmuch more powerful pressures to bear on their employees,competitors, the government officials who are pledged to attackthem, and even the communities in which they operate than couldsmaller or more transient firms. It is partly that the large,durable firms become very wealthy; partly that they can maintaintruly frightening capacities for disciplined violence; butperhaps most fundamentally that they will be around for a longtime and therefore able to reward cooperation and punishopposition that makes them so powerful. Thus, the concepts of structure, conduct and performance helpto clarify the society's objectives in dealing with the illicitdrug industry. The concerns of drug abuse policy are capturedprincipally by questions about the performance of the industry,since it is the long run performance of the industry that willdecisively shape overall levels of drug abuse. The concerns oforganized crime policy are captured principally by questionsabout conduct and structure. The concept of conduct captures theconcern about levels of violence and corruption associated withan illegal industry. The concept of structure captures thespecial concerns that are raised for organized crime policy bythe existence of very large, durable organizations, whose wealth,disciplined use of violence, and long memories make themespecially powerful. A successful supply reduction strategy,then, would leave an illicit drug industry, which is high cost,ineffective in supplying drugs to illicit markets, not veryadaptable, reluctant to rely on bribery and violence, andcomposed of small, transient firms. Competition among Objectives. We are accustomed to thinkingthat any supply reduction strategy will move us towards improvedperformance on all of these objectives, and therefore there areno trade-offs between the objectives of drug abuse policy andorganized crime control policy. We have already seen that thereis a certain tension between the aims of these two differentpolicies insofar as the criminal laws against drug distributionand use create the basic conditions under which an illicitindustry night arise. But now it is possible to see a new tensionas well, one that is not only between drug abuse policy andorganized crime control objectives, but also between differentobjectives of organized crime control policy. Ironically, a supply reduction strategy that increased thedegree of concentration in the illicit industry might achievesome important objectives of a supply reduction strategy.Economic theory predicts, for example, that the actual supply ofdrugs will be less in a concentrated industry than in a moredecentralized competitive industry. It is also likely that theviolence would be less, or at least more disciplined and focusedon those who were actually involved in the industry in a tightlyorganized, concentrated industry. Thus, a supply reductionstrategy might succeed in reducing the overall performance of theindustry and even changing its conduct to reliance on threats andbribery rather than overt violence, but do so only at the priceof increasing the size, power, and durability of criminalorganizations. Whether this would be preferred to a strategy thatreduced the concentration in the industry, but enhanced itsperformance and shifted its conduct to more random patterns ofviolence depends on how the society values these competingobjectives, and how much improved performance and violence itwould have to accept as the price of reduced concentration. Thatwould be a difficult choice. The Definition of Improvements. At any rate, the directions inwhich improvement lie, are clear, and so are the objectives of asupply reduction strategy. The first and most important objectiveis to frustrate the performance of the illicit industry - toconstrict its capacity to supply drugs to illicit markets. Thesecond is to shape the conduct of the residual industry so thatit is less violent and less corrupting. The third is to dispersethe industry so that the firms that comprise it are small andtransient rather than large and durable. How are one can go inachieving these objectives, and how sharp the trade-offs amongthem can only be answered by a close look at the factors thatshape the structure, conduct and performance of the industry. Major Factors Shaping the Industry As in any industry performance is determined at least partlyby engineering or mechanical factors: e.g., the physicalrequirements of production and distribution. To get drugs toillegal markets, firms must have access to raw materials, havethe knowledge and the equipment required to transform the rawmaterials into finished products, be able to maintain and protectinventories, and be able to transport finished products toindividual markets. In addition, the performance of the industry will be shaped byeconomic factors: i.e., the perceptions of opportunities andrisks. Those who make investments of the time and energy inproducing or diverting raw materials, in learning the techniquesand acquiring the equipment for producing illegal drugs, instoring and transporting the drugs, and so on, must have someassurance that they will make money from their investments. Theymust have some capital to give them the time and the capacity toarrange the deals that will ultimately produce satisfactoryreturns. They must also have a certain tolerance for risk - notonly the risk that they might be imprisoned for their activities,but also that they might take economic losses as a result ofsuccessful enforcement actions against them, betrayals by theirassociates, or more common economic disasters, such asshipwrecks, plane crashes, spoiled production runs, or suddenchanges in exchange rates. Unless there is a reasonable chance intheir minds that they can make enough money from illicit drugdeals to compensate them for their time and their risks, thedeals will not be made. A third factor influencing performance is the structure ofcriminal liability that surrounds the industry, for it is thelaws and the way that they are enforced that determines many ofthe opportunities and risks facing illicit drug dealers. A simpleway to think about how this factor operates is to think of thecriminal laws and the specific methods of enforcement as a kindof tax confronting the illegal dealers. To maximize their return,they seek to avoid as much of the tax as possible. They do thisby avoiding activities that are heavily taxed, by takingadvantage of loopholes in the tax laws or weakness inenforcement, by concealing as much of their operation from thetax collectors as possible, or by corrupting the tax collectors.Such activities affect both the scale and the character of theillicit industry. The Apparent Influence of Geography Geography looks like a factor that plays an important role indetermining the conduct and performance of the illicit industry.Indeed, much of our thinking about supply reduction strategies isguided by the notion that there are important "sourcecountries" that become the targets of diplomatic andenforcement initiatives. Thus, for many years, Turkey and Francewere regarded as the principal sources of heroin, although theyhave now been replaced by Mexico and Southeast Asia. Similarly,Colombia is now considered the principal source of cocaine, andJamaica a primary source of marijuana. The reason that geography seems important is that differentcountries represent different clusters of conditions that givethem a comparative advantage as a supplier of drugs to illicitmarkets in the United States. Sometimes a country becomes animportant source country because of agricultural conditions thatmake it an especially attractive (perhaps even unique) place inwhich to produce raw materials. Thus, for a while, we imaginethat opium poppies could be successfully grown in only a fewcountries in the world, and we now hope this is true of cocaleaves. In short, a country may become an importance source ofsupply due to a physical advantage. Other times it seems that a country has become a major sourceas the result of a long tradition of producing the relevant rawmaterials, or a large domestic industry that is based on them. Ineffect, the country has a unique institutional and economicadvantage because it has a large infrastructure already investedin the cultivation of the opium, coca leaves, or marijuana. Still other times, it seems that the country's advantage comesfrom week laws governing the legitimate or illicit drugindustries, or weak governmental commitment and capacity forcontrolling the illicit drug industry. Just as Las Vegas canbecome the center of gambling simply by establishing a legalregime that tolerates it, Jamaica may become a principal sourceof marijuana by being particularly lax with respect to thesuppression of illicit cultivation. Thus, while geography looks like it plays an importantindependent role in determining the character of the illicit drugmarkets, this apparent influence actually derives from the morebasic causes already noted: the physical relations governingproduction and distribution, the economic/ institutionalrelations that give economic actors reasonable assurances thatinvestments in particular activities will be rewarded, and thelegal regime that has an independent effect on the risks andopportunities confronting illicit dealers. Thus, geography maydrop out of any close analysis of the factors shaping theperformance of the illicit supply system, and be replaced by aseparate consideration of how certain countries seem to representunusually favorably combinations of the underlying causalfactors, and which ones seem particularly important. The Irrelevance of Physical Requirements While it is tempting to search for the explanation of thestructure, conduct and performance of the illicit industry in thephysical mechanics of producing and distributing drugs, there isvery little in these relationships that is unusual, or that couldconstrain or shape the performance of the industry. Many of theraw materials necessary to produce narcotics and dangerous drugsare widely available. This is true primarily because they havemany legitimate uses, but also simply because they can be grownor artificially produced in many different locations. Of course,and occasional local shortage in basic raw materials may sometimeappear. But, given the alternative sources of supply, it is hardto imagine that the shortage would last. Indeed, it is hard toimagine long run shortages in the availability of opium poppies,marijuana, coca leaves, or even chemicals used to producedsynthetic opiates, hallucinogens, and other psychoactive drugs. It is equally difficult to imagine that either the knowledgeor the equipment necessary for manufacturing illicit drugs couldbe in long run short supply. The chemical structure of theillicit drugs are well known. Indeed, they are so well known thatillicit labs are now experimenting with small manipulations ofthe chemical structure of existing drugs to determine if thenewly created drugs will produce similar or superior psychoactiveeffects. These so-called "designer drugs" challenge thelegal regime regulating drugs because they may be legal toproduce and distribute until enough experience has accumulated todeclare them a significant abuse threat. The equipment required for the production of the drugs is alsocommonplace. Indeed, heroin "labs" in Mexico oftenconsisted of little more than wash-tubs and rubber hoses. And thedrugs can be made in many different quantities with fewimplications for the costs of production. So, there seems to belittle in the technology of production that would have a decisiveimpact on the structure, conduct or performance of the industry. The Impact of Illicitness on Industry Conduct My strong conviction is that the dominant factor shaping theillicit drug industry is the simple fact that it is illicit. Thisfact has broad and significant implications for its structure,conduct and performance. The immediate consequences ofillicitness register in the conduct of the illicit firms, but thechanges in conduct have important implications for structure andperformance. The Risk of Arrest. The most obvious consequence ofillicitness is that those who produce, import, distribute or usedrugs illegally are exposed to the threat of arrest, prosecutionand imprisonment. Moreover, in some countries, they arethreatened by the seizure of any property or assets used in theirillegal drug dealing - a threat whose significance may dwarf notonly any fine they may receive, but also some jail terms. The obvious effect of threatening illicit producers,distributors and users with jail is that the dealers who remainin the business will take steps to reduce their risks, or tocompensate themselves for the risks of being is the business. Theprincipal devices for reducing risks are to keep operationssecret so that enforcement agencies cannot discover them, or tocorrupt the agencies so that even if their operations arediscovered, they are not punished. The principal devices used tokeep their operations secret are to deal with a small number ofpeople, to conceal the traces of their activities, and to screenand discipline their employees, associates and customers to makesure they are not undercover agents, and do not become policeinformants. The principal ways of corrupting enforcement agenciesare to offer money to be allowed to continue to operate, and toinform on their competitors and associates so that the police canmake arrests without harming their operations. Such efforts can only be partially effective in eliminatingthe risk of punishment. To deal in large quantities of drugs andmake money from the enterprise, one must inevitably deal with alarge number of people, only some of whom are trusted andeffectively disciplined. Thus, the risk of informants andundercover agents among one's employees, associates or customersis always present. Similarly, drug dealing always involvesleaving traces of one's activities that cannot be entirelyconcealed: physical inventories of raw materials or drugs,records of financial transactions, even records of phone callsamong the conspirators. These, too, are vulnerable to discoveryby enforcement agencies. Also, there are so many agencies andagents involved in drug enforcement activities that one can neverbe sure whether all those who pose a threat have been corrupted.Since the risk can never be quite eliminated, the dealer'sresponse is to demand additional compensation for the risks intrafficking drugs. He demands higher prices for drugs than hewould if there was no risk of going to jail. The Risk of Rip-Offs. A less obvious but by no means lessimportant consequences of the illicit status of drug production,importation and distribution is that illegal dealers areconfronted by threats from other criminals as well as byenforcement agencies. Indeed, associates, competitors andordinary armed robbers probably create greater risks for illicitdrug dealers than enforcement agencies. Partly this is becausedealers are very tempting targets. They are likely to have largeamounts of cash, or large quantities of drugs that can beconverted to cash. Also, they are unlikely to turn to enforcementagencies to help protect their operations. They have to supplyprotection against armed attack or stealing. Those in thecriminal milieu may know more than enforcement agencies about whois "holding" or currently doing business, and theseother criminals may be less constrained by the niceties of dueprocess than the enforcement agencies. Thus, other criminals maybe more strongly motivated and better positioned to attackillegal drug dealers than the enforcement agencies, and thereforepose a graver threat to the illicit dealers. The implications of this fact are that the dealers must makespecial provisions to protect themselves from this threat. To adegree, the same methods of secrecy and discipline may be ashelpful against other crooks as against the police. But it seemslikely that the threat from other crooks is more apt to be met bycapacities for violence. In general, if an armed confrontationbetween the dealers and enforcement agencies occurs, the dealersknow they will lose. They may win a local fire-fight, but thereis no way they can compete over the long run with enforcementagencies in violent confrontations. Consequently, they rely mostheavily on secrecy and corruption to deal with the threat ofenforcement. With other criminals, however, the balance of armed power isless clear. Thus, it is tempting to build capacities for violenceto protect oneself and one's business from "take-off"artists, and to establish credible threats effective againstbetrayals by associates. This capacity for violence can also beused externally to drive out competitors. But the vulnerabilityto other criminals associated with illicitness provides the mostimmediate and compelling justification for developing a capacityfor violence, as well as for secrecy and corruption. Theexistence of these capacities for violence among dealers andthose who would steal from them produces the bulk of the violencewithin the illegal drug industry. Thus, the conduct of the firms within the illicit industry isprofoundly influenced by the fact of their illicitness. They areforced to maintain secrecy, and to prevent the infiltration ofpolice agents. They must develop capacities to bribe, suborn, ormislead government agents. Also they must develop capacities forviolence to enforce contracts with associates, protect theirproperty from armed robbers, and to discipline employees.Finally, because the risks of arrest or rip-offs cannot everwholly be eliminated, they must price their products not only tocover costs, but also to compensate themselves for the risk ofarrest or financial loss they are taking by engaging in such arisky business. These effects on the conduct of firms haveimplications for structure and performance. The Impact of Illicitness on Structure The consequences of illicit status for the structure of theillicit industry are hard to estimate, for they will bedetermined by a balance of conflicting influences. On one hand,the desire to prevent the police and other criminals fromlearning about their operation will motivate illicitentrepreneurs to keep their small firms, transient, and neithervertically nor horizontally integrated. The Virtues of Small Firms and Decentralization. Smallness hasthe virtues of involving only a small number of people and asmall number of transactions. This implies both that theintrinsic vulnerability of the operations is less, and that thecontributions of any special efforts to discipline or secure theoperation will go further because there are fewer associates,employees or transactions over which to spread these efforts. Transience has similar advantages to smallness. If theproblems for illicit dealers is to avoid others knowing they arein business, they can accomplish this by getting into thebusiness and out of it before anyone knows who they are. Indeed,from the perspective of avoiding detection, the best operation isone that is both small and transient. But that firm is not worthdisrupting, also, for it could never amount to much in terms ofits ability to supply drugs, its contribution to violence andcorruption, or to become a powerful institution to the community. Vertical and horizontal disintegration also have importantadvantages in avoiding detection. A vertically integrated firmwould require some system of information-gathering andrecord-keeping to exploit the advantages of explicit coordinationacross the different phases of the operation. But these recordswould become an important source of evidence against the dealers.Similarly, almost by definition, vertically integrated firm wouldbe large and involve many transactions, and each element of thefirm would know what other elements were doing. Thus, avertically integrated firm would present more possible points ofpenetration and would be much more vulnerable to any givenpenetration, than a firm organized as a set of largely separatecells that operated relatively autonomously. Similarly, a horizontally integrated firm would also have tobe large and would have to be in contact with all firms engagedin the activities at other stages of the production process.Thus, a horizontally integrated firm in the business ofoff-loading mother ships would come to know the principalimporting firms that arranged for the mother ships to appear offthe coast, and the principal firms engaged in storage anddistribution. This would make such a firm vulnerable to betrayalby the others, compared with a firm that handled less of theoverall off-loading business. Thus, to escape detection, firms in the illicit drug industrywould choose to be small, transient and disintegrated. This, inturn, would lead to a highly fragmented - even atomistic -structure in the industry. The Virtues of Scale and Concentration. On the other hand, itis possible there are some economies of scale in the productionand distribution of illicit drugs, or some opportunities forcontrolling competition that would lead to relatively large,durable firms, and a relatively high degree of concentration inthe industry. Ironically, the principal potential for economiesof scale do not seem to lie in the areas of production ormarketing. Instead they lie in the development of capacities forcorruption and violence that will give some firms specialopportunities to operate safely and efficiently in the dangerousillicit markets. The capacity for disciplined, irresistible violence may be aparticularly important factor of production in illicit supplysystems, and may be an area where there are natural economies ofscale. As we have seen, a capacity for violence is terriblyimportant in disciplining employees to keep then from becominginformants. It is also important in being able to enforcecontracts with business associates and in protecting life andproperty from other criminals in a world where one cannot rely onthe ordinary courts and police to perform this function.Moreover, once developed for these purposes, the capacity forviolence can become important in eliminating competition, orforcing it to be small and transient rather than large anddurable. For all these reasons, a firm had a substantial capacityfor violence would have an obvious competitive advantage insupply drugs to illicit markets. To argue that violent firms would have a competitive advantageis not quite the same as saying that the obvious value of acapacity for violence will tend to produce large, durable firms,and a concentrated structure in the industry. That argument restson an additional assertion that there are economies of scale inthe development of this special capacity for violence. Thisassertion, in turn, rests on the ideal that a useful capacity forviolence consists not in the production of actual violence, butinstead in a reputation for irresistible violence that canoverwhelm (in force, viciousness, sustainability or all three)any degree of violence that another illegal entrepreneur canimagine mounting. This is important, for it is quite obvious thatreal violence can be produced quite easily and inexpensively.What is valuable violence, however, is violence that need not beused but will still intimidate and discourage others because itis there to be used and cannot be successfully resisted. To havethis capacity, a firm must have available not only a largequantity of violence and demonstrate its willingness to use it,but also be a sufficiently permanent and relentless institutionso that the possibility of an opponent challenging it andescaping without retaliation seems remote. This capacity seems to have some natural monopolisticfeatures. One can easily imagine how a single organization couldgradually corner the market for irresistible violence and createa fairly impregnable local monopoly. One can less easily butstill plausibly imagine a small number of firms with suchcapabilities co-existing in an uneasy truce, and ignoring acertain number of violations of their tacit understandings, aswell as a small amount of minor competition from transientoutsiders. What is hard to imagine as a stable equilibrium is aworld in which there are large numbers of closely matched firmsvying for the position of a recognized dominant capacity forviolence. In that world the factor of production that has value -namely, a dominating capacity for violence that is sufficient todiscipline employees, enforce contracts, and protect reliablyagainst take-offs - is not available to any firm. Each firm istherefore vulnerable to all threats that a solid reputation forirresistible violence would guard against. If the reputation for irresistible violence is valuable, ittakes substantial investment to build the capabilities, and if itonly has value when it is greater than any other competingfirm's, the importance of this factor of production will tend toproduce high degrees of concentration in the industry. This willlead to the development of a few large, durable firms in anylocal market. This is true at least in part because thisreputation for violence can substitute for a small scale inpreventing the detection of the operation. If employees,associates, competitors and customers are all afraid to giveinformation about the operations of a firm to the police or othercriminals, then it can operate at any given scale with less riskthan another firm that is similar in all respects other than itscapacity and reputation for violence. The capacity for corrupting government officials may also bean important factor of production and distribution. This mightalso be an important factor of production and distribution thatmight also tend to create larger more durable firms and higherdegrees of concentration than one might hypothesize, if one werethinking only of how the illicit firms might escape detection.The easiest way to think about the problem of corruption is toimagine that the various government officials and agencies,responsible for enforcing laws against illegal production anddistribution, have a de facto power to grant a license to illegalentrepreneurs to operate legally - or at least with no treat fromthem. Obviously, the value of this license to the illicit dealersdepends on the extent to which a given official or agencymonopolizes the legal threat to them. If a given official oragency is the only official threat against an illicit dealer, thevalue of his protection will obviously be higher than if theofficial threat against an illicit dealer, the value of hisprotection will obviously be higher than if the official or agentis only one of many potential threats against the dealer. Thus, the question of whether corruption will tend toconcentrate in the industry depends crucially on the organizationof the enforcement agencies. If the enforcement agencies wereorganized in a single agency, and if the hierarchical controlwithin the agencies was very powerful, and if the illicit firmcould corrupt that agency, it would be able to gain and hold amonopoly in the area principally by using the enforcement agencyto help it eliminate competition, while keeping it safe. If, onthe other hand, the enforcement agencies had fragmentedjurisdictions, and quite imperfect control over their agents,then they might be more vulnerable to some degree of corruption,but the significance of the corruption would be much less.Essentially, the enforcement agency could not sell an exclusiveright to operate safely. It could only sell little pieces ofinsurance against threats from specific agents or agencies. Eventhis would produce some higher degree of concentration in theindustry than if corruption were not part of the operatingstrategies of the illicit firms, since it would establish somebarriers to entry and protect the position of some firms. But itwould by no means guarantee a monopoly. The Net Result of Conflicting Pressures. Therefore, there arepressures that push the drug industry towards small firms and anatomistic structure, and others that are consistent with thedevelopment of local monopolies and relatively concentratedstructures. My strong hunch is that the net result of this willbe to produce an illicit industry that includes a heterogeneousdistribution of firms. There will be a few firms that are instrong position to exploit the economies of scale that come froma reputation for trustworthiness, and for irresistible violencein the case of betrayal. Such firms may come to account for arelatively large fraction of the drugs reaching illicit markets,but they will be a small fraction of the total number of firmsoperating. This will be true partly because it is unlikely thatthese firms will become either horizontally or verticallyintegrated. The risks of long chains of command in the case ofvertical integration, or a wide network of contacts in the caseof horizontal integration are apt to be much greater than thepotential benefits. It is also true because these firms will notbe able to prevent (and will not find it worth preventing)occasional competition from transient or small operations whichhave their own sources of supply, and their own local markets.Therefore, there will be a great many firms of different sizes inthe industry. If one were thinking about analogies from legitimateindustries, my hunch is that the best analogy might be somethinglike the real estate industry, rather than the auto industry oreven the fast-food industry. Many developers put together large,uncertain deals, rather than producing or distribution a product.Moreover, the deals are likely to involve several differentpartners, and the partnerships and roles may change from deal todeal. Those in the industry who have a reputation fortrustworthiness, "deep-pockets," strong politicalconnections, and effective lawyers are likely to account for alarge fraction of the total dollar value of the deals made. Butthere will be a great many others in the industry who do smallerdeals. The Impact of Illicitness on Performance Because illicitness affects conduct and structure, it also hasan enormously importantly impact on industry performance. Thecrucial result is that drug prices are much higher than theyotherwise would be. This is partly because the defensivestrategies mounted by dealers against enforcement agencies andother criminals translate into higher operating costs per unit ofdrug delivered, and partly because dealers demand additionalcompensation for their risks. This is shown by the fact that theprice of drugs in illicit markets is higher than the price ofequivalent drugs in legal markets by factors of 20 or 30. Almost as important is that the drugs are less convenientlyavailable than they otherwise would be. Dealers have an incentiveto conceal their activities rather than advertise then. Growth inthe market tends to happen within intimate networks of friends,rather than through public advertising and widespreadavailability. In all likelihood, these are slower and lesseffective methods of market development than the same mechanismsjoined with a legitimate distribution system. We can combine the effect on price and the effect onavailability in a single concept called the "effectiveprice" of drugs in illicit markets. That would include notonly the monetary cost, but also the amount of time a customerwould have to spend looking for the drug, and the chance that hemight fail to find the drug, or be cheated by an unscrupulousdealer. In these terms, illicitness results in much highereffective prices for illicit drugs than if they were legal. Notethat this is probably true even if publicly supported enforcementactivities were relatively ineffective. For, even if the threatfrom the enforcement agencies were removed, the threat from othercriminals would remain, and that by itself would be enough byitself to increase dramatically the effective prices of illicitdrugs. So illicitness has a profound impact on the performance ofthe industry. The fact that the price of drugs is increased by the illicitstatus of the industry is evaluated in different ways fromdifferent vantage points. Viewed from the perspective of drugabuse policy, this is desireable because it will reduce overalllevels of drug use in the population by discouraging new usersfrom continuing their drug use, and motivating older users toseek treatment and abandon their use. Viewed from the perspectiveof organized crime policy, the increased prices mean a largerflow of revenues to illicit dealers and criminal organizations.This is damaging to the objectives of organized crime policy, forit creates the impression that crime pays, and provides thenecessary financial means to enlarge illegal operations, or toconsolidate a position vis-a-vis other criminal organizations orthe enforcement agencies. Regardless of whether the economicproceeds are used by illegal dealers for consumption orinvestment, the higher revenues become a problem for organizedcrime policy. It is also possible that over the long run, the higherrevenues become a problem for drug abuse policy. This would betrue, for example, if the conspicuous consumption of wealthy drugdealers attracted more people into the industry, or if theinvestments made by more disciplined dealers allowed them notonly to dominate the supply system, but to increase its overallcapacity to supply drugs. In each case, the revenues from theindustry would be operating to increase the overall supplycapacity of the system, just as excess profits in a legitimateindustry would attract new investment into that industry. It is important to keep in mind, however, that the reasonsthat prices are high in the drug industry is precisely becausedealers are confronted by risks of violence and financial lossfrom both the government and other criminals. This fact remainstrue and continues to discourage many from entering the business.Indeed, the greater the risks, the greater the profits must be toattract any one into the business. That is the explicit purposeof making the drug business illegal and attacking itaggressively. As long as that threat remains substantial, theoverall supply capacity of the industry will be much smaller thanotherwise, even though people in the industry are making money.People do not flock to the industry, even with high prices andhigh revenues, because the risks are also high. Contents | Feedback | Search DRCNet Library | Schaffer Library | Government Publications | America's Habits WT01-B31-4IA031-000653-B005-14http://206.61.184.43:80/schaffer/GOVPUBS/amhab/amhabc9c.htm 206.61.184.43 19970122134305 text/html 60910HTTP/1.0 200 OKDate: Wednesday, 22-Jan-97 13:42:52 GMTServer: WebSitePro/1.1f (S/N wpo-0deb)Allow-ranges: bytesContent-type: text/htmlLast-modified: Saturday, 28-Dec-96 06:25:46 GMTContent-length: 60692 The Impact of the Legitimate Drug System Contents | Feedback | Search DRCNet Library | Schaffer Library | Government Publications | America's Habits America's Habit Drug Abuse, Drug Trafficking, & Organized Crime President's Commission on Organized Crime, 1986 Consultant Paper: Part 2: The Impact of the Legitimate DrugSystem The last important factor shaping the structure, conduct andperformance of the illicit drug industry is the character of thelegitimate drug system that operates alongside it. Thesignificance of the legitimate drug system is most obvious fordrugs such as methadone, amphetamines and barbiturates, whichhave important medical uses, and very large legitimate productionand distribution systems. Even those drugs that do not havelegitimate medical uses often have some contact with a legitimatemarket system. Some illicit heroin, for example, comes fromlegitimate opium crops grown to produce morphine. Hallucinogensand methamphetamine are often manufactured from chemicalprecursors that have significant legitimate uses. And evenmarijuana has a legitimate sector composed of researchers who areexperimenting with its pharmacological characteristics andpotential medical applications for the control of glaucoma anddepression. The existence of a legitimate sector in which raw materials,precursors, or finished goods are produced, stored, distributedand consumed has a potentially significant impact on thecharacter of the illicit industry. The reason is that diversionfrom the legitimate market becomes an alternative to whollyillicit production and distribution as a source of supply toillicit markets. Exactly what influence will be exerted dependson the size of the legitimate market, the strength of theregulatory regime that surrounds it, and whether the legitimatesystem includes the production and distribution of finished goodsor stops some place short of this goal. For drugs which have a large, loosely regulated legitimatesupply system that includes the distribution of finished goods,diversion from legitimate sources is likely to become thedominant source of supply to illicit users. For drugs that haveonly a small legitimate sector that is limited to raw materialsor precursors, the illicit supply will be dominated by whollyillicit production and distribution. Thus, the illicit demand fortranquilizers is likely to be supplied principally by diversion.The illicit demand for hallucinogens and marijuana will beprincipally supplied by wholly illicit production anddistribution. Also, the illicit demand for amphetamines andopiate analgesics, such as heroin, morphine and methadone, willbe supplied partly by diverted legitimate drugs, and partly bywholly illicit production and distribution. The existence of a legitimate sector from which drugs may bediverted to illegal use will generally improve the performance ofthe illicit market in that drugs will be cheaper and more readilyavailable than they would be if no legitimate sector existed.This is true simply because some portion of the activitiesnecessary to produce and distribute the drug will not be hamperedby the difficulties created by illicitness. Raw materials can beacquired, transformed into finished products, stored, anddistributed with fewer worries about theft and betrayal byassociates, or disruption by enforcement officials. True,operating costs will be increased by the requirements of theregulatory regime. And true, also, someone must absorb the costsand risks of diverting the drugs to illicit markets. But in alllikelihood, these costs will be much smaller than the costsimposed on the firms, if they had to assume all of the burden ofprotecting their property and enforcing contracts as they have toin wholly illicit industry. To the extent that only a portion ofthe supply system must pay these costs, operating costs andtherefore prices should be lower in illicit markets. The existence of the legitimate industry should also make theillicit markets much more flexible. If an illicit amphetaminelaboratory finds that it cannot obtain precursors from thelegitimate market, it can always go into the business of stealingthem from the legitimate sector. Once it has the capacity tosteal precursors, the illicit firm might find it easier to stealfinished products. In short, the existence of the legitimatemarket allows illicit dealers the options of relying on theft orfraud with or without the collusion of people within thelegitimate industry to meet market demands - options that wouldnot be available if there were no legitimate market. The impact of the legitimate market on the structure of theillicit industry is also quite important. The crucial variablesare the places where leaks occur in the process of production anddistribution and the size and regularity of leaked quantities. Obviously, if only raw materials and precursors leak from thelegitimate system, the illicit system will have to developillicit production capabilities to transform the raw materialsinto finished goods. This will exert a slight centralizing trend,for the knowledge and the equipment necessary to produce thedrugs constitute a form of capital that must be amortized andthat means those who possess these will stay in business longenough and produce enough drugs to achieve this goal. Thebreak-even point may not require a very large or very durablefirm. The point is that the diversion of raw materials will beassociated with larger more durable firms than the diversion offinished goods. When finished goods are stolen, the firm may have no capitalto amortize, and may stay in business only long enough to disposeof an existing quantity. Of course, a large theft, such as atruck hijacking, can make a firm look like a major trafficker. Ifthe firm arranges to continue hijacking drug shipments, it maybecome a major drug dealer with an unusual source of supply. Inthe more likely case, however, a large theft of legitimate drugswill produce a large, but transient firm. It will go out ofbusiness shortly. The other possibilities are that small quantities of finishedgoods are diverted either continuously or irregularly from thelegitimate supply system. This form of diversion will producesmall firms that are either durable or transient depending on howfrequently they go back to the well. Thus, the supply of drugs that have legitimate uses to illicitmarkets will be decisively influenced by the size and characterof the leaks from the legitimate system. The earlier in theprocess of production and distribution the leaks occur, thelarger and more continuous they are, the more the illicit supplysystem will be composed of large durable firms. The later in theprocess of distribution, and the smaller and more erratic theleaks, the more the industry will be atomized. Thus, one mightexpect the illicit market in tranquilizers and methadone to becomposed primarily of small, transient firms fueled by smallscale thefts. The illicit markets in amphetamines andhallucinogens are likely to somewhat more concentrated with moreof the illicit supply in the hands of larger, more of the illicitsupply in the hands of larger, more durable firms. Different Drugs, Different Industries So far, our analysis of the illicit drug industry hasabstracted from the particular features of the principal drugs ofabuse in the United States. We have treated heroin, cocaine,marijuana, hallucinogens, amphetamines, barbiturates andtranquilizers in a similar analytic framework. But to analyze thesupply systems for these drugs from the same analytic perspectiveis not the same as assuming that the supply systems will besimilar. It is only to assume that they will be pushed in similardirections by the factors we have considered. Exactly how farthey will be pushed in one direction or another strongly dependson all the factors we have considered, including how zealouslythe illegal supply systems are controlled by regulatory andcriminal enforcement. Heroin Heroin, for example, seems to be primarily a problem of whollyillicit production and distribution. The fields in which theopium poppies are grown are generally illicit fields in countriesthat cannot adequately enforce existing laws prohibiting thecultivation of opium. Similarly, the processing of the raw opiuminto heroin occurs principally in foreign countries - probably toreduce the bulk of the material to facilitate internationalsmuggling. Because the volume of heroin is so small, it comesinto the United States through many different devices - in thecarry-on luggage of pilots, hidden in small cans of tomatoes andolive oil, concealed in secret compartments built into cars, andso on. In the United States the distribution systems seemmoderately tightly concentrated with significant localmonopolies, but little vertical integration. There is probablysome degree of horizontal integration at the importing stage, andit is at this stage that the concentration of the distributionsystem is probably the greatest. Perhaps the few largest firms inany given city control more than two-thirds of the total volumeof heroin in the city, with some cities in the U.S. serving astransshipment points for other cities. This relatively tight andconcentrated structure is the result of the fact that theenforcement pressures are probably still the heaviest againstheroin dealers. Cocaine The cocaine supply system seems quite similar to the one forheroin. It is principally a problem of wholly illicit productionand distribution. The sources of raw materials and finishedproducts are primarily foreign. The physical volumes to behandled are small enough to make concealment of the drugs arelatively trivial matter and to allow smugglers to use a varietyof different methods for bringing the drugs into the country. Theaverage size of the deals measured in terms of financialrequirements seem to be approximately the same as those thatoccur in the heroin market. The major difference between the heroin and the cocaine supplysystems seems to be that the cocaine system is less concentrated,and more violent than the heroin market. There seem to be manymore entrepreneurs who enter the cocaine business on a short termbasis. Moreover, none of the groups operating on a more permanentbasis seems to have established predominance in the industry.Thus, it is not surprising that this market is more violent thanthe heroin market, for there are cash, drugs and market positionup for grabs in a way unlike the heroin market. Marijuana Marijuana is similar to heroin and cocaine in that it is awholly illicit system with predominantly foreign sources of rawmaterials. Three principal differences seem to make the marijuanasupply system quite different, however. One crucial difference isthat the bulk of marijuana per dollar of value is so much greaterthan that of heroin and cocaine that the smuggling problem isenormously exacerbated. A hundred thousand dollars of heroin orcocaine can easily be held in a suitcase, but to carry a hundredthousand dollars worth of marijuana, one needs a small truck,boat or plane. Because marijuana is so much more visible thanheroin or cocaine, the primary mode of smuggling is in largeloads landed between ports of entry rather than infiltratedthrough ports of entry in the huge volume of cargo and peoplethat daily cross the U.S. borders. This also implies that manyspecialized firms might grow up to cope with the special problemsof smuggling marijuana. A second difference between heroin and cocaine on the one handand marijuana on the other is that the pressures in the illicitindustry seem less. It is not that marijuana dealers do not facesubstantial financial risks. Indeed, it seems that quite theopposite is true. The best current estimates indicate thatmarijuana dealers lose from a quarter to a third of theirshipments to enforcement agencies. Instead it seems that thelosses are primarily financial, and primarily inflicted by thegovernment. Other criminals do not seem to prey on marijuanatraffickers in the same way that they attack heroin and cocainedealers. Moreover, even if the government seizes property andarrests the dealers, the prison terms meted out to marijuanatraffickers seem less severe than for those who traffick in otherdrugs. Since the marijuana dealers face smaller and less drasticthreats from both the government and other criminals, themarijuana market seems less preoccupied by the problems ofsecrecy, discipline and security than the heroin and cocainemarkets. The net result of this is an industry that is probablyless concentrated then either the heroin and cocaine market, andalmost certainly less violent. The third important difference shaping the marijuana industryis the existence of small scale domestic production anddistribution as well as foreign. Indeed, the potential for smallscale domestic cultivation of marijuana makes the marijuanamarket more like the market for barbiturates and tranquilizersthan for heroin, because some portion of the overall illicitdemand will be met by those who grow their own. It is this factthat guarantees the overall industry cannot become veryconcentrated, just as it is the widespread availability ofbarbiturates and tranquilizers through small scale diversion fromlegitimate sources that prevents a concentrated illicit industryin these drugs from developing. Hallucinogens, Barbiturates and Amphetamines The supply system for hallucinogens seems to be primarilydomestic illicit production, although it is possible that somedrugs come from Mexico or Canada. There is a degree ofconcentration in this industry as a result of specializedknowledge, and the creation of brand names to which consumersbecome loyal. It seems to operate with relatively little relianceon either violence or bribery, probably because the industry issufficiently small to not be worth the time of enforcementofficials or other criminals. The industry that supplies barbiturates to illicit marketsseems to depend primarily on diversion from the legitimatemarket. Thus, its structure mirrors the character of the leaksfrom the legitimate system. This seems to produce a highlyatomistic market composed of small or transient firms. Again,there is little reliance on either violence or corruption becausethe economic stakes seem too small to warrant such risky conduct. The amphetamine industry seems to be a combination of thesupply system for hallucinogens and barbiturates. There seems tobe small scale illicit production and distribution that isprimarily domestic, but also from our near neighbors. There isalso diversion from the large legitimate supply system. The netresult is an industry that is high in performing, relativeatomistic in structure, and relies little on either violence orcorruption. Designing a Strategy to Attack the Illegal Drug Industry From the perspective of drug abuse policy the primaryobjective of a strategy to attack the illegal drug industry is toincrease the effective prices of drugs in illicit markets. Givenour analysis of the factors shaping the structure, conduct andperformance of the industry, it is reasonable to suppose thatmaking the production and distribution of drugs illegal will tendto make drugs more expensive and less available than they wouldbe if they were legal. The important policy question is how theresources of the government - its diplomatic initiatives, itsinterdiction efforts, and its criminal investigations - might bedeployed to maximize the impact of supply reduction efforts onthe effective prices of illicit drugs. Priorities in Attacking the Illegal Drug Industries One way to establish priorities is to determine whichparticular drugs seem to be causing the greatest social problems,and which present opportunities that would give supply reductionefforts relatively powerful leverage. The worse the drug, and themore powerful the leverage that can be exerted, the higher thepriority. Of course, the question of which drugs pose the greatestthreat to the society is much debated. One way to resolve theissue is to gauge the number of chronic users of each drug, andto weight that number by the seriousness of the health, economicand social problems that the chronic users of each drug suffer.By this reckoning, heroin, amphetamines and barbiturates tend tocome out on top as the worst drugs. A second standard would be to consider which drugs are mostwidely used, and therefore operate as the principal transmitterof an illicit drug culture and the most common introduction todrug use for young children. By this standard, marijuana andtranquilizers would probably come out on top. A third standard would be to determine which drugs seem to beassociated with the most money, violence and corruption, andattack that drug as the principal threat to the society. Thislast standard would probably make cocaine and heroin the dominanttargets of drug policy. In thinking about which of these standards night beappropriate to use in deciding which drugs caused the greatestsocial problems, it is worth trying to keep the separateobjectives of drug abuse policy and organized crime policy inmind. The principal objective of drug use abuse policy is tominimize the social problems associated with drug use. A keyinstrument of that policy are criminal laws controlling thesupply of drugs. These policies succeed when there are few peopleusing drugs in patterns that create grave threats to their healthand economic welfare. In effect, we use criminal laws andcriminal enforcement to achieve a social welfare objective. The principal objectives of organized crime policy are tosuppress the provision of illegal goods and services thatconstitute the core of organized crime, to prevent the violenceand corruption that is more characteristic of organized crimegroups than other kinds of criminal activity, and to prevent theemergence of very large, durable organizations with welldeveloped capacities for violence and corruption. There is a substantial overlap in the goals of organized crimepolicy and supply reduction efforts insofar as organized crimepolicy takes the control of the supply of drugs as an importantobjective, and insofar as the illicit supply systems includedviolence, corruption and large firms. But to the extent that thecore of organized crime policy is really concerned with thedisruption of major criminal organizations, there is an overlapbetween the core of drug abuse policy and organized crime policyonly insofar as the drugs are supplied by rich, violent andpowerful criminal organizations. As we have seen, that is true ofonly a certain number of drugs, and not necessarily the drugsthat pose the greatest threats in terms of widespread anddangerous consumption. In fact, the third standard described above is closer to adescription of the core objectives of organized crime policy thanto the core objectives of drug abuse policy. In essence, thesociety has to decide whether it means to go after the drugs thatcause it the most problem in illicit use, or whether it shouldattack the drugs that are supplied by the nastiest and toughestdealers. These are not necessarily the same. The Instruments of a Strategy Against Illicit Drug Industries Once the society has implicitly or explicitly established itsobjectives, it must then look to the available instruments of asupply reduction strategy. Again, there are many different waysone can think about the available instruments. Attacking Different Drugs. One way is to think about them interms of the particular drugs they attack. Thus, one candistinguish the instruments of heroin policy (which include theeffective control of legitimate opium in Turkey, the suppressionof illicit crops in Mexico and Afghanistan, the encouragement ofcrop substitution in Thailand, the creation of specialized heroindetecting devices at U.S. ports of entry, and the targeting ofheroin importing and distributing organizations, and even theoccasional attacks on street level dealing in notorious areas ofa city) from the instruments of a marijuana control policy (whichincludes diplomatic initiatives and foreign aid to Mexico andJamaica, the eradication of illicit fields, the training ofmarijuana sniffing dogs to stand guard at the border, themobilization of the Navy and Coast Guard to aid in theidentification of ships engaged in large scale smuggling, and soon). The point is that many policy initiatives are specific to,or have their maximum impact on, one drug rather than another,and it is a useful exercise to see how our efforts are deployedagainst particular drugs. Operating in Different Locations. A second dimension in whichstrategies against the illegal drug industry can be described andevaluated is geography. One can talk about the division betweenthe international drug control effort and the domesticactivities. Among the international efforts, one can talk aboutpolicy towards Southeast Asia (which would be principallydirected at heroin), or towards Colombia (which would beprincipally directed against cocaine), or towards Mexico (whichwould embrace heroin, marijuana and amphetamines). Within thedomain of domestic supply reduction efforts, one can discuss theallocation of enforcement efforts across major cities in theUnited States, and this, too, has implications for the differentdrugs attacked. Enforcement efforts in New York and Los Angeleswill probably give more emphasis to heroin and cocaine thanefforts in Kansas City or St. Louis. Targeting Factors of Production. A third dimension incharacterizing and analyzing supply reduction policy instrumentsis the factor of production and distribution that is theprincipal target. Thus, one can distinguish eradication and cropsubstitution programs, which are directed at raw materials; fromfinancial investigations, which attack the capital of illicitdealers; from interdiction programs which attack goods intransit, from conspiracy investigations, which are designed toimmobilize trafficking network; from street level enforcementwhich is designed to discourage advertising and the developmentof new markets. Of course, many instruments allow one to reachother targets as well as its principal target. Indeed, conspiracyinvestigations are often built from the discoveries made ininterdiction and street enforcement programs. The point is thatthese different policy instruments have different factors ofproduction as their proximate targets. To the extent that somefactors of production and distribution are scarcer than others,the relative importance of the different supply reductioninstruments in constricting the supply of drugs may be gauged andappropriate adjustments made in the supply reduction strategy. Relying on Different Agencies. A fourth way of thinking aboutsupply reduction policy instruments, and probably the mostcommon, is in terms of the agencies that are principallyresponsible for carrying out different activities within theoverall supply reduction effort. Thus, one thinks in terms of theinternational supply reduction program as the principalresponsibility of the State Department; the interdiction effortas the primary responsibility of the U.S. Customs, Border Patrol,and Coast Guard with occasional assistance from the U.S. ArmedForces; the domestic investigation program as the primaryresponsibility of DEA and the FBI; and the street levelenforcement effort as the primary responsibility of the nation'sthousands of local police departments. Thinking about the supplyreduction effort in these terms has the advantage of bringingimmediately to mind which agencies are available for supplyreduction efforts, and of suggesting approximately where they canmake a contribution both geographically and in terms of squeezingparticular factors of production and distribution. It has thedisadvantage, however, of not sharply distinguishing among thedifferent efforts in terms of either drugs or specific factors ofproduction and distribution. The Strengths and Limitations of Alternative Instruments For purposes of a broad brush strategic analysis, we will usethis last set of categories, since they are the terms in whichmost of the policy discussions at the federal level are now beingcarried out. Our task will be to determine the potential of eacharea in minimizing the supply of drugs to illicit markets in theU.S. That, in turn, depends on our ability to see how each ofthese programs affects the factors of production and distributionfor the major drugs of abuse. The International Program. The international drug controlprogram has two principal liabilities as an instrument of supplyreduction efforts. The first is that this program is inevitablyhostage to the interests and capabilities of foreign governments:the U.S. can do no more in this area than other governments willallow it to do. Of course, there are numerous ways in which theU.S. government can increase the motivation and capacities offoreign governments to control drugs that reach U.S. markets. TheU.S. can indicate the importance it attaches to drug controlamong other interests it is pursuing within a given country; orit can appeal to obligations a country has under internationaltreaties; or it can appeal to the country's self interest bydocumenting the extent of the country's domestic drug problem. Onthe capacity side, the U.S. can contribute money, or particularkinds of equipment, or technical assistance in the forms ofspecific on-site advice, or more generalized training of drugcontrol officials. These specific measures constitute the dailyactivities of the international program. In the end, though, theyrun up against more or less unmovable barriers, such as thelimited control of central governments over out-lying areas of acountry, or the inefficiency and corruption of governmentagencies. Against these obstacles there is often little that theU.S. government can do. The second limitation is that the bulk of this program seemstoo targeted on the raw materials for heroin, cocaine andmarijuana. Arguably, this is not particularly effective, sincethere is not particular reason to believe that the raw materialsfor these drugs are in long run short supply. Indeed, all ourexperience and intelligence suggests that potential growing areasfor these drugs are widespread, and that the elimination offields in one place will fairly soon be replaced by cultivationelsewhere. These limitations are sufficiently severe that it wouldprobably be a mistake to rely on the international program as theprimary instrument in a supply reduction strategy. It simplycannot do enough work reliably enough to merit that position.Having said this, however, there are some very important thingsthe international program can do that will make an importantcontribution to the overall effectiveness of supply reductionefforts. The first is that it will occasionally occur that the standardefforts of the international program suddenly become effective.This usually occurs when a country important in supplying drugsto the United States suddenly becomes highly motivated to controldrugs. When this happens, support from the United States canoften result in a significant shortage of the drug. Typically,the shortage lasts no longer than a year or two as the illicitindustry adjusts to the new conditions. But even so, thatshortage is worth producing. That is particularly true for drugsthat are unusually dependence producing, for the shortage meansthat a cohort of children in the ages of maximum vulnerabilitysquirts through that period of relative shortages with much lowerprobabilities of dependence or addiction. Indeed, this is what happened in the early part of the 1970's,when Turkey suddenly shut down its legitimate production of opiumand helped to produce a two to three year shortage in the supplyof heroin. The effect of this success was high effective pricesin the United States, reduced incidence of heroin use, and ashift to Mexico and Southeast Asia as the principal sources ofsupply, although for a while at lesser volumes than had been truewhen Turkey was also a supplier. Keeping open such opportunities, and being in a position toexploit them when they come along, are the principalcontributions of the international drug program. Hut one cannotalways count on such successes. It is important, then, that theinternational program continue, trying to increase the likelihoodthat it can occasionally produce such successes, but no oneshould rely on it as the principal supply reduction instrument. A second way that the international program can be helpful isby stepping up its efforts to support international criminalenforcement. In essence, the focus of the international programmight usefully shift from crop eradication, to efforts to denyinternational traffickers "safe havens" anywhere in theworld. This would mean concretely increased progress innegotiating extradition treaties with countries that now harbortraffickers, and improving operational coordination betweenforeign and U.S. police agencies to take advantage of bothextradition and investigations and prosecutions within the hostcountry. Such a thrust has potential for two reasons. First, it is anarrowly focused program. It has none of the logistical andbureaucratic difficulties of massive crop control programs.Second, it is targeted against a factor of production anddistribution that is probably in long run short supply, namelyindividuals with a sufficiently well established reputation forboth reliability in successful transactions and viciousness inbetrayals, who become the primary people with whom large drugdeals can be made. If this is the factor in long run short supplyin the illicit industry; and if the international program couldsqueeze this factor even more by denying notorious dealers safehavens anywhere in the world; then the international programwould have another more reliable and more powerful way of makinga contribution than cultivating the motivations and capacities offoreign governments to control illicit crops. Interdiction. In recent years, the interdiction program hasprobably been the fastest growing component of the supplyreduction effort. The growth has come primarily as a result ofengaging the U.S. Coast Guard and other military agencies in thepursuit of smugglers on the ocean and in the air. The results ofthis effort can be seen in the dramatic difference in the priceof drugs landed in the U.S. as compared with the price of drugsoff-shore, or in foreign source countries. The principal problem with interdiction as the dominantinstruction of supply reduction efforts is that it is principallyfocused on a single drug - marijuana. That is particularly trueinsofar as it concentrates on bulk shipments clandestinely landedbetween ports of entry, for marijuana is the only drug whosevolume restricts smugglers to these methods of getting the drugsacross the borders. Smugglers of heroin and cocaine have manymore options, and much more of these drugs seem to come across inrelatively small containers through ports of entry. Thus, theengagement of the Coast Guard, the Navy, the Air Force, and theFederal Aviation Administration, turns out to be an initiativethat is primarily targeted against marijuana. To the extent thatone thinks marijuana is currently a high priority drug tocontrol, this may be counted a benefit rather than a problem. Butto the extent that one thinks other drugs are higher priority, orto the extent one wanted flexible supply reduction instrumentsthat could be used for controlling several different drugs, thecurrent interdiction program has important limitations. The interdiction program has a further limitation. It isprincipally targeted on finished inventories of drugs. There is acertain, concrete satisfaction in capturing drugs that wouldotherwise reach illicit markets. But as in the case of cropelimination, one can wonder whether the inventories are what isin long run short supply. When we think about legitimate firms,we don't think of their inventories of finished goods as beingparticularly important. Obviously, the inventories have value,and to the extent they are eliminated, the firm had less capitalthan it otherwise would. But the inventories usually reflect onlya small portion of the total value of the firm. When Tylenol hadto be taken off the market, for example, no one expected thecompany to go out of business, even though a month's worth ofproduction had to be written off, and their reputation had beenseriously tarnished. Similarly, it is hard to understand why we think it is soimportant when drugs are seized. This may be important if thefirm was a short term operation, and the seized shipmentrepresented a large fraction of its total assets, but there is noparticular reason to believe this. Most of the time it seems thatshipments are divided up precisely to hedge against thepossibility that he drugs will be seized, and this seems to be alikely event. Current estimates indicate that somewhere betweenone-quarter and one-third of all marijuana shipments are seized,but this has had little impact on the effective price ofmarijuana. Thus, our experience and our reasoning suggest thatfinished goods are not a factor of production and distributionthat is in long run short supply. Consequently, a policyinstrument directed primarily against such inventories will notexert enormous leverage on the long run effective price of drugsin illicit markets. Domestic Enforcement. The standard criticism of the domesticenforcement program is that it is "too far from thesource" of drugs to allow effective control. By thisreckoning both the international and the interdiction programsare preferred instruments because they attack the chain ofproduction and distribution at an earlier stage than domesticenforcement. A second criticism is that the quantity of drugsseized in the domestic enforcement program is too low to allow itto have much effective control. A third criticism is that toomuch of the effort within the domestic enforcement program goesinto low level cases, which are farthest from the source andinvolve the smallest quantities of drugs. The difficulty with these criticisms is that they rely onassumptions - with little evidence or reasoning behind them -about the best way to control the supply of drugs. In fact, theyemphasize physical over economic relationships. A priori there isno particular reason to assume that resources are better spent"nearer the source." True, if one stops the drugsearlier rather than later on need not worry about the laterstages; and, true, the drugs may be at their maximumconcentration with respect to volume at the point they areprocessed into finished products. But neither point indicatesthat he source is the most important point to attack. As we haveseen, it may be quite difficult to mount an attack at that point.Moreover, both arguments place too much emphasis on the drugs andnot enough on the entrepreneurs and firms whose continueddetermination and adaptability keep the drugs flowing, even ifproduction runs are spoiled and inventories seized. If the principal difficulties that confront dealers inproducing and distributing drugs are risks posed by enforcementagents and other criminals, then the crucial factors ofproduction and distribution are not raw materials and technologyand warehouses, but the determination and capacity to completetransactions in this risky environment. Those may be qualitiespossessed by specific individuals or trafficking networks - notthe raw materials, not the finished inventories, not even thefinancial capital. If these observations are accurate, then anyinstrument that attacked the capacities to complete risky transactions would be more effective than those that attacked rawmaterials or inventories. It is here that domestic enforcement operations haveadvantages as an instrument in a supply reduction strategy. Theprincipal objective of domestic enforcement is the traffickersthemselves. The drugs are important only as convincing evidencethat will be sufficient to jail, and therefore presumablyimmobilize, the traffickers. In addition, the tactics of domesticenforcement operate principally on the capacity to executetransactions. The principal tactics include informants,undercover agents, and wiretap investigations. The first twoattack the ability to make transactions by forcing dealers to bewary of associates, employees and customers, since any of thesemight become an informant or an undercover agent. The third makesit difficult for traffickers to communicate efficiently withassociates, employees and customers. Therefore domesticenforcement presses hard on the factors of production anddistribution that seem in long run short supply. It is worth noting that slowing transactions and forcingdealers to be cautious has value at many different stages ofproduction and distribution. Even at the lowest levels ofdistribution there are some advantages in forcing dealers to becautious, for it prevents the aggressive recruitment of newcustomers and makes it more difficult even for regular consumersto find drugs. In short, street level enforcement increases theeffective price of drugs in illicit markets. At intermediate orhigh levels each transaction that is slowed reduces the overallcapacity of the system to supply drugs, and each traffickingnetwork that is eliminated results not only in loss of currentinventories, but also in future capacity to supply. Moreover, it is possible that the same techniques of attackingtransactions, and immobilizing those networks that have developeda continuing capacity to execute transactions in a riskyenvironment, would have enormous value in the internationalprogram as well as in the domestic one. Indeed, while one cannotassume that foreign countries have laws enforcement agencies thatallow them to attack criminal trafficking organizations, it seemsthat it is primarily convention that makes us think of theinternational program as focused on raw materials, and thedomestic program as focused on trafficking networks. Inprinciple, one could have a criminal enforcement program thatmoved across national boundaries. And that might hold the bestchance not only for minimizing the supply of drugs to illicitmarkets, but also for advancing the subjectives and using theresources of organized crime policy. An Alternative Approach to Attacking Illegal Drug Industries If the right way to think about strategies against the illegaldrug industry is to guess which factor of production anddistribution is in long run short supply and then to devise astrategy that presses hardest on that factor, and if the factorin long run short supply is the capacity to make transactionsquickly and effectively, then a different way is opened to thinkabout the strategy against the illegal drug industry.Specifically, the principal aim should be to frustratetransactions and immobilize the largest traffickingorganizations. With this as the principal aim the way that we think abouteach of the other instruments changes. Of course, theinternational efforts to control legitimate crops and eradicateillicit fields retain their special, occasional importance, andthe separate arguments for maintaining pressure at the streetlevel remain strong. But we can also see that the internationalprogram, interdiction, and domestic enforcement all representdifferent opportunities to slice into the illicit industry, andcreate possibilities for developing cases against illicittraffickers. To see how this alternative strategy would work, itis useful to introduce some different analytic terms. Patrol versus Investigation. If the goal is to immobilizetrafficking organizations that are able to complete transactionswith ease and efficiency, the central problem is to determine whothe traffickers are and to develop evidence against them. Thissounds like a problem of criminal investigation, and so it is.But all investigations must begin somewhere. In ordinary criminalinvestigations the start is usually provided by a victim orwitness to the offense or by physical evidence available at thesite of the crime. In narcotics investigations there is novictim, the witnesses are likely to be implicated in the crime,and the physical evidence will not reveal much. On the otherhand, the traffickers are likely to continue committing offenses,and therefore the opportunity to observe a crime occurring ishigh, if the enforcement agencies can get themselves intoposition to see it. In practice this means that narcotics investigations areextremely dependent on informants and undercover operators, whocan provide evidence themselves or produce sufficiently preciseand accurate information to justify a wire-tap or other lessintrusive but more expensive and less penetrating form ofsurveillance. They can position the evidence-gatheringcapabilities of enforcement agencies and how to infiltrateundercover agents into the illicit industry. The question thusbecomes how to develop and use informants and how to useinformants and how to infiltrate undercover agents into theillicit firms. One answer to that question is to attack the illicit supplysystems in the places where it is least protected. This means onthe streets in central cities where the distribution system mustfinally come into the open. Or, it means at the point that isinherently vulnerable, where drugs are moved physically from oneplace to another. Or, it means as raw materials are beingcollected from remote fields in foreign countries. Surveillanceand undercover operations conducted in these areas will not onlyfrustrate transactions at these levels, and remove small stocksof drugs, but they will also produce the rumors, the physicalevidence, and the potential informants who might provide thebasis for more intrusive and determined investigations of largernetworks. This will not always work, of course. Many people arrested atthis level will be small scale, transient operators. Others willbe employees, but they may be unable to supply information. Stillothers may know a great deal but be afraid to reveal it.Moreover, there are other ways of developing informants. One canoffer large payments to those who are greedy, or protection tothose who are afraid, or both to potentially valuable sources.And, just as low level enforcement operations against streetdealers, smugglers, and collectors in foreign countries canproduce potential informants,, all successful investigationsagainst medium and high level investigations can also yieldinformants. Therefore, successful cases can be built from manysources other than low level cases. But the argument is that a high volume enforcement effort atlow levels is often quite valuable as a source of rumors,intelligence and informants. In fact, there is an argumentsupporting low level enforcement. Even more unexpectedly, thereis an argument for a low level enforcement that is not directedor guided by intelligence about the operations of majortraffickers. The strength of investigative efforts is their capacity tomake connections among known facts and inform enforcementagencies how to position themselves to penetrate existingtrafficking organizations and develop evidence for a successfulprosecution. The weakness of investigation is that it becomesincreasingly narrow and discounts information that cannot berelated to something that is already known. In attackingsomething as mysterious and dynamic as the illicit drug industry,this tendency to become narrow is potentially very dangerous.There is always the chance that one is concentrating on only asmall piece of the overall industry and that there is a newer orbetter shielded piece that has so far escaped notice. If this istrue, the only way that enforcement agencies could discover thisis to look in areas where they didn't expect to find something.That is the role of broad, untargeted low level enforcementagencies. Like pickets and patrols sent out by a main militaryforce to maintain contact with a mysterious enemy force, agentson the street, at the border, and in the bazaars of foreigncountries help the investigative forces stay in touch with theemergence and development of new trafficking capabilities. For analytic purposes it is useful to think of these broad,low level enforcement operations as "patrol"operations, which are scanning for drug offenses, and theremaining pieces as "investigative" operations, whichcan develop the leads into powerful cases that immobilize majortrafficking organizations. Moreover, in many ways, the patroloperations perform better, if they are broad and random, ratherthan narrowly targeted. A random strategy is more successful indeterrence, and in disclosing previously unsuspected traffickingnetworks. The Role of Intelligence and Conspiracy Investigations. Totake full advantage of the potential relationship betweeninvestigative and patrol functions and to produce the maximumimpact on trafficking organizations, it is necessary that somepreviously neglected capabilities be more fully developed. Twoare particularly important: the intelligence function within theinvestigative agencies, and the capacity to develop and prosecuteconspiracy cases within investigative and prosecutorial offices. By the intelligence function, I mean the capacity to makedisciplined use of the information about trafficking networksthat is potentially available to the investigative agencies. Thisis essential not only to take full advantage of any opportunitiesthat present themselves, but also to make sure the investigativeagencies are not misled by informants. As we have seen, there isalways an incentive for traffickers to inform on theircompetitors. And there is always an incentive for enforcementagencies to use the information and keep the informant alive.This is acceptable as long as the informant is not more importantthan the traffickers he is delivering to the enforcementagencies. But if the informant is himself a dealer, then theresult of his informing looks like he and the enforcement agencyare colluding to maintain his position in the market. The onlyway to guard against this is to have relatively accurateinformation about both the informant and the target and to havesomeone other than the case agent monitoring this situation. Thatis something that a good intelligence analysis function couldprovide. The capacity to make conspiracy cases is essential becausethere are many traffickers who can be revealed only throughconspiracy indictments. They may never be in direct contact withdrugs, or with the violence and corruption that provide thestructure within which the drugs can be confidently moved fromplace to place and from person to person. In addition, conspiracycases have the advantage of simultaneously immobilizing manypieces of a trafficking network, leaving no remnants from which anew network might be constructed. If a single person is removed,he may be replaced. If the entire network is eliminated,replacement is more difficult because none of the personalrelationships that are so essential to successful traffickingremain. The challenges to investigators in making conspiracy cases arepartly matters of technique. Electronic surveillance is often anessential ingredient, as are financial investigations. And eachrequire the development of special skills. Hut producing highquality conspiracy investigations also requires a change inattitude. They require patience - including situations whereenforcement agencies allow some dealers to continue operatingeven though they are indictable. They also require riskingcertain cases that are certain, for a future case that may or maynot develop. Finally, the prosecution of conspiracy cases oftendepends on telling convincing stories rather than hard physicalevidence. Even though the stories night be a more accurateaccount of what has been happening than the hard physicalevidence, it requires a real knack for analysis and inference tomake the story solid and convincing. In short, patience, awillingness to take risks for an uncertain gain, and thought arerequired, and these are not always qualities plentiful inaction-oriented enforcement agencies. Yet, without these, theaggressive actions might have less impact than they otherwisecould. Summary and Conclusions Criminal statutes directed at illicit drug trafficking and useare an important part of drug abuse policy. If they wereperfectly effective in discouraging people from drug traffickingand drug abuse, there would be little need for any otherinstruments. The problem is that these laws are imperfectly effective: theyleave a residual market that consists of a continuing (butsmaller) demand for drugs, and a continuing (but smaller)capacity to supply drugs to that market. To deal with thecontinuing demand, the society relies on drug treatment andpreventive education programs. To deal with the continuingsupply, the country invests in diplomatic efforts to motivateforeign countries to control drugs destined for the U.S.,interdiction efforts to keep the drugs from landing on ourshores, domestic enforcement to disrupt trafficking networks anddiscourage the aggressive marketing of drugs to non-users,regulatory efforts to keep legitimate drugs contained inlegitimate channels of distribution and use. These efforts on the supply side of the illegal drug marketare helpful in achieving the purposes of drug policy. Theyincrease the price and reduce the availability of drugs, andtherefore discourage new drug use and motivate older users toabandon their drug use. But the laws create a problem fororganized crime policy, for they establish the soil from which anillegal industry can grow. The firms that continue in theindustry will make a great deal of money as compensation for therisks they run by continuing in the business. In addition, theywill engage in violence and corruption as crucial elements oftheir strategies for surviving in an illicit industry. Finally,some of the individuals and organizations involved in drugtrafficking may grow to become powerful criminal institutionsthat seem to defy effective control by law enforcement agencies.To the extent that these illicit firms become more adept atdealing drugs, they may become not only an organized crimeproblem, but an increased threat to the objectives of drug abusepolicy. Thus, the special instruments we associate with organizedcrime policy must be deployed not only to deal with the organizedcrime problem that is created by our drug abuse policy, but alsoto prevent organized criminal groups from defeating the purposesof drug abuse policy. Viewed from the perspective of drug abuse policy, the centralobjective of a strategy attacking the illegal drug industry is tominimize the capacity of the illicit drug industry to supplydrugs to illicit markets. In terms of traditional analyses ofindustrial organization, this objective can be described asminimizing the "performance" of the illicit industry. Viewed from the perspective of organized crime policy, thecentral objectives are to prevent the development of wealthy andpowerful criminal groups and to reduce the violence andcorruption associated with the illicit drug industry. Again, inthe traditional analyses of industrial organization, theseobjectives can be captured by attacking the structure and shapingthe conduct of the industry. There may be some tension between the objectives of drug abusepolicy on the one hand, and organized crime on the policy on theother. To the extent that the drug laws create the conditionsunder which an illicit industry might arise, there is an obviousconflict. Legalization of the drugs would almost certainlyincrease the number of chronic, intensive drug users andtherefore make the drug problem worse. But it would alsoeliminate drugs as an organized crime problem. Beyond thisobservation is another paradox, however. From the perspective ofdrug abuse policy, a highly concentrated industry may bepreferable to an atomized industry. A concentrated industry mightsupply fewer drugs at higher prices than an atomized industry.And, although each firm in the industry may be harder to attackeffectively, the impact of a successful attack might be largerand more enduring than the results of ten successful attacks onsmaller firms that accounted for a smaller portion of the totalsupply capacity and were easier to replace. From the perspectiveof organized crime policy, however, a concentrated industry wouldbe worse because it would imply the existence of large, enduringorganizations of substantial power and influence. What is not inconflict, however, is the need of both drug abuse policy andorganized crime policy to develop and use tactics that aresuccessful in attacking large, entrenched criminal organizations.This is useful to drug policy and essential to organized crimepolicy. In controlling the supply of drugs to illicit markets theUnited States relies on many instruments, in addition toattacks" on organized criminal groups that deal in drugs.There is an "international program" that tends to focuson the production of raw materials to produce heroin and cocaine.This has the advantage of occasionally producing a significantbut short-lived result when a foreign country's increasedmotivation and capacity to deal with the problem eliminates animportant source of supply to the U.S. But the value of theinstrument overall is limited by the widespread availability ofraw materials and the fact that U.S. objectives are alwayshostage to the motivations and capacities of foreign governments. There is also an "interdiction program" designed tointercept the drugs and shipment before they cross U.S. borders.This has the advantage of creating a significant obstacle totraffickers and inflicting economic losses on traffickers as aresult of seizures. It has the disadvantages of focusingprincipally on the inventories of drugs rather than on theorganizations that continue to send them, and of being relativelyless successful in dealing with heroin and cocaine than withmarijuana. Finally there is a "domestic enforcement program",designed to attack domestic trafficking organizations, and todiscourage the aggressive marketing of drugs through street levelenforcement. This program has the advantages of focusing on thetrafficking organizations and engaging the substantial resourcesof the nation's 400,000 local police officers. It has thedisadvantages to being only occasionally successful ineliminating major trafficking organizations. What appears to be missing in this common conception of thenation's strategy against the supply of drugs to illicit marketsis precisely the perspective that a focus on internationalcriminal organizations would bring. It seems likely that thecapacity to execute large scale transactions in the riskyenvironment of an illicit industry is in long run, short supplyin the illicit drug industry. The firms that can overcome thesedifficulties are likely to be large scale, enduring,organizations with a well established reputation for irresistibleviolence. Thus, these firms - in all likelihood, internationalfirms - should become the main targets of a supply reduction/organized crime policy. If this is the principal target, one's view of how the societyshould deploy it resources should change dramatically. Theinterdiction and domestic enforcement programs are suddenly seenprincipally as "patrol operations", which can produceintelligence and informants to be used in mounting attacks onmajor trafficking organizations. Moreover, the focus of theinternational program should shift from concerns about cropcontrol to the support of foreign enforcement efforts and thenegotiation of treaties, which would allow the more convenientprosecution of drug traffickers whose crimes cross nationalboundaries. Finally, major investments should be made in thecapabilities of intelligence agencies and an orientation towardssustained conspiracy cases among investigators and prosecutors.This strategy holds the greatest potential to achieve theobjectives of both drug abuse policy and organized crime policy.Moreover, this strategy depends most heavily on the continuingdevelopment of our capacity to deal with organized criminalgroups no matter what illegal goods and services they happen tobe supplying. Contents | Feedback | Search DRCNet Library | Schaffer Library | Government Publications | America's Habits WT01-B31-5IA031-000653-B005-38http://206.61.184.43:80/schaffer/GOVPUBS/amhab/amhabc9d.htm 206.61.184.43 19970122134314 text/html 15575HTTP/1.0 200 OKDate: Wednesday, 22-Jan-97 13:43:05 GMTServer: WebSitePro/1.1f (S/N wpo-0deb)Allow-ranges: bytesContent-type: text/htmlLast-modified: Saturday, 28-Dec-96 06:25:33 GMTContent-length: 15357 Consultant Paper: Winning the War Against Drugs Contents | Feedback | Search DRCNet Library | Schaffer Library | Government Publications | America's Habits America's Habit Drug Abuse, Drug Trafficking, & Organized Crime President's Commission on Organized Crime, 1986 Consultant Paper: Winning the War Against Drugs By Mitchell S. Rosenthal, M.D. Submitted: October 1, 1985. Dr.Rosenthal is President of the Phoenix House Foundation, a drugrehabilitation program. There is a popular perception these days that America islocked in a "no win" struggle against drugs. Thisnotion of "the endless battle," in which we seem unableto prevail, that has prompted a good many lawyers, scientists,and writers to suggest that it might be time for the UnitedStates to quit. Some Americans have always believed that the use of certainillicit drugs is not such a terrible thing and others have arguedthat the government has no right to tell citizens what they canor cannot ingest. But the strongest opposition to the nation'sdrug laws and policies has come from those who believe that theyshould be scrapped because they do not work well. The latestconverts to this cause contend that legalization of marijuana andcocaine (some would include heroin) would eliminate drug profitsand crime overnight and substantially reduce the costly burden ofenforcing drug laws. The "quit now" crowd plainly does not recognize thatthere is a world of difference between "not winning" awar and "losing" one. The war against drugs, althoughit is going badly at the moment, is far from lost. But quittingnow and attempting to solve the drug crime problem throughlegalization would he tantamount to losing - at least in terms ofthe impact on drug abuse. The notion that we could make drugs legal, whilesimultaneously mounting (as some advocates of legalizationsuggest) a massive public education campaign to discourage theiruse would give cocaine and marijuana the same status ascigarettes. The most likely result, according to the formerdirector of the National Institute on Drug Abuse, would be atenfold increase in cocaine use. There would be just about asmany Americans using cocaine as now smoke cigarettes. Another reason not to give up the fight is because we can win.After more than 20 years of treating and curing drug abuse, I seeenough evidence to convince me that the war is winnable - notnow, but in time. It is winnable because what denies us victorytoday is the nature of the war we are waging and not the natureof the enemy we are fighting. The war is going badly for much the same reasons that any wargoes badly. In part, it is inappropriate strategy fighting thewrong enemy, in the wrong place and with the wrong weapons. Inpart, it is a failure of will. We are on the defensive, with battle lines stretching alongour borders. Our main weapon is interdiction. Most of the billiondollars a year the Federal government spends enforcing drug laws(two-thirds of all it spends to fight drug abuse) goes to haltthe flow of illicit drugs into our country. Yet, the drugs keep flowing, even though 13 tons of cocaineand 1,500 tons of marijuana (with a total street value of $11billion) were seized by federal agents last year. It would seemthat when $5 million or $50 million or $500 million worth ofdrugs is impounded, the total available for distribution would hereduced by a like amount. Hut that is not the case. Drugs lostthrough seizure are instantly replaced by producers andimporters. The more Federal agents seize at our end of thepipeline, the more drug traffickers feed into the other end.Although interdiction efforts have expanded dramatically and vastquantities of drugs have been seized, the flow to the street hasdiminished hardly at all, and cost to consumers has actuallyfallen. In frustration, Americans have turned their ire on producingnations. Apparently, we feel more comfortable and justifiedpressuring Colombians, Peruvians and Bolivians to stop producingcocaine than pressuring Americans to stop using it. In spite of minimal success, we remain committed to battlingdrugs primarily by reducing supply rather than by reducingdemand. Yet, the supply side is obviously harder to hit and tohurt. Producers are beyond our reach. Major dealers aresophisticated, secretive, and ruthless, willing to acceptenormous risks and enormous losses as long as profits remainequally enormous. The demand side, however, is easier to reach. It is vast,barely concealed at all these days, and it consists of the morethan 20 million Americans who now regularly use illicit drugs.What's more, the demand side is where all three weapons at ourdisposal can be deployed - not only law enforcement, but drugtreatment and drug prevention as well. Our reluctance to attack demand as vigorously as we attacksupply reflects nothing less than a failure of will - not on thepart of the administration, law enforcement agencies or drugabuse professionals, but on the part of the American public.Public attitudes and public expectations determine how we goabout fighting this war, limit how much we can do and how far wedare go. What limits drug treatment is not just reduced governmentsupport. Even if resources were available, there is no way wecould help the great majority of drug abusers in this country toovercome their drug dependency because most of them are notseeking help. They are not seeking help because society does notrequire them, and the law does not compel them. Limits on what drug prevention can accomplish reflect what canonly be called a public demand for selective prevention theprevention of some but not necessarily all drug use. Just abouteveryone wants to prevent one kind of drug use or another. Mostparents believe that kids shouldn't use drugs. Most employers areconvinced that workers ought not use them. The public in generalwould like to see criminals stop using drugs and stop stealing inorder to buy drugs. But, beyond this point, public demand softensconsiderably and attitudes become ambivalent. Nowhere is our ambivalence more evident than in our attitudestowards law enforcement. We are content with a "trickledown" approach - one that focuses almost exclusively onputting major dealers behind bars. But we learned during the daysof strict enforcement in New York State during the 1960's andfrom recent crackdowns on street dealers in New York City, thatthe real victories of law enforcement are not the number ofdealers or users arrested or convicted but the number motivatedto seek treatment. We know that when it becomes too dangerous ortoo difficult to sell drugs or to buy them, then a great deal ofdrug use will simply disappear and demand for treatment will riserapidly to the level of real need. Lenient or selective enforcement of drug laws - what amountsto non-enforcement and de facto legalization - in some areas - isa reflection of our ambivalence. It comes down to the way thatAmericans feel personally about drugs - not only about our ownuse, but about use by our grown and half-grown children and byour friends, and about what is wrongheadedly called"recreational" use of marijuana and cocaine. While itmay make us uncomfortable, most of us do not think of it in thesame way as we think about drug use by nine- and ten-year-olds orabout the heroin addiction of criminals. And we are generallyunwilling to see our friends and children at risk of arrest andprosecution because of drug use. But I do not believe we can win the war against drugs until wehave positive consensus on the strict enforcement of drug laws.However, we need not make that decision any harder than it mustbe. We don't have to agree that drug users should go to jail. Thepurpose of drug laws is not punishment - certainly not whenapplied to users. These laws serve what must be recognized as apublic health function - a means of controlling a contagiousdisease by imposing on its carriers the requirement of whateverit takes in the way of education and treatment to overcome theirdrug use. We are not likely to see this consensus come soon. Too manydrug-using young adults are still convinced they enjoy somespecial "right" to use illicit drugs and believe theycan handle them. Too many Americans are torn between the urge tocondemn behavior, of which they disapprove, and the need totolerate behavior they have somehow come to believe is a matterof individual freedom or simply none of their business. But both drug users and drug tolerators ignore the contagiousnature of drug abuse. The hostess who overlooks a little discreetafter-dinner pot-smoking or the professional who pointedlyignores covert coke-sniffing by his or her colleagues musteventually come to realize that a person can no more tolerate alittle recreational drug use than he or she can tolerate a littlerecreational smallpox. As for users, even those convinced thattheir own drug habits are under control cannot guarantee that thefriends, coworkers or teenagers they influence will be able toavoid drug dependency and the other high risks of drug use. Noris there any basis for them to believe that they will continue toenjoy immunity from the costs of drug use - if indeed they enjoyit now. Broad societal disapproval of illicit drug use is neededbefore we can come to a consensus about strict drug lawenforcement. Needless to say, active disapproval and the use ofinformal social sanctions will make more aggressive lawenforcement irrelevant in most cases. The hostess who is certainenough of her own unwillingness to tolerate pot smoking in herhome doesn't need to call the cops to keep her guests fromlighting up - no more than she need call them to stop her guestsfrom stealing the silver or spitting in the soup. Nor doprofessionals who recognize the danger of drug use to theircolleagues, need to turn to the law. They have far more effectiveways of bringing the behavior of these colleagues into line -once they accept the need to draw such a line. In many ways our society resembles the American family in the1960's. Many parents then believed they were doing their childrena favor by laying back and not taking a hard-line stand againstdrugs. They allowed youngsters to stumble through the drugexperience. Only later they came to realize the costs. Thosecosts ran high, both in chronic impairment and lost educationaland career opportunities. As a result, parental attitudes havechanged markedly. Parents are now taking the hard line, which isreally the loving line, one that shows responsible concern. More recently, the Navy has demonstrated how to go aboutattacking drug use on the demand side. While it brought heavyweapons into play - drug tests and disciplinary actions - it alsoeffectively reduced widespread tolerance for drug use. Bystressing the interdependence of seamen, the Navy began replacingthis attitude with a far more responsible one expressed by themotto: "Not on my watch, not on my ship, not in myNavy." This is the kind of attitudinal change I expect to seeoccurring throughout the country over the next decade. It isalready underway. Adolescents have become far more critical ofdrug use by their friends, and this is the result not only ofbetter drug education in the schools, but also of more awarenessof drug dangers on the street. Employers are now responding toincreasing evidence of economic costs directly attributable todrug use in the work force. So, there is every reason to believe that public attitudesabout illicit drugs will become firmer and more responsible. As aresult, the limitations on what we have been able to achievethrough prevention, through treatment, and through lawenforcement, will gradually be removed. They will no longerdictate strategy that prevent us from moving as aggressivelyagainst domestic demand as we do against foreign supply. If law enforcement is to work effectively in cooperation withtreatment and with prevention in this attack on the demand side,then we need to adopt consistent goals. While we should certainlypersist in interdiction and target major dealers, we cannot focusmost of our energy and resources on these high visibilityefforts. It is on the street that the final battle is going to bewon, and it will be won by constant pressure, over time, thatwill be felt by every drug dealer and every drug user. This kind of pressure will not result in any impressive stringof convictions, but it will respond directly to the desperateneeds of drug-ridden communities. It will strengthendrug-troubled families, and it will improve the quality of lifefor millions of Americans. This kind of pressure, supported by a popular mandate, willresult in the gradual erosion of the drug market and the gradualdecline of drug use. Demand for treatment will grow. Preventionwill cease to be selective but reach out broadly across allsociety. And drug abuse, while it may never entirely disappear,will cease to pose any substantial threat to the nation, itsyouth. Contents | Feedback | Search DRCNet Library | Schaffer Library | Government Publications | America's Habits WT01-B31-6IA031-000653-B005-63http://206.61.184.43:80/schaffer/GOVPUBS/amhab/amhabc9e.htm 206.61.184.43 19970122134326 text/html 9621HTTP/1.0 200 OKDate: Wednesday, 22-Jan-97 13:43:12 GMTServer: WebSitePro/1.1f (S/N wpo-0deb)Allow-ranges: bytesContent-type: text/htmlLast-modified: Saturday, 28-Dec-96 06:25:28 GMTContent-length: 9404 Preventing Drug Abuse: What Can We Do? Contents | Feedback | Search DRCNet Library | Schaffer Library | Government Publications | America's Habits America's Habit Drug Abuse, Drug Trafficking, & Organized Crime President's Commission on Organized Crime, 1986 Consultant Paper: Preventing Drug Abuse: What Can We Do? By Dr. Arnold M. Washton. Submitted: October 1, 1985. Dr.Washton is Director of the Addiction Research and TreatmentCenter, The Regent Hospital, New York, New York; and ResearchDirector of The National Cocaine Hotline "800-COCAINE,"Fair Oaks Hospital, Summit, New Jersey. The most dramatic increase in drug use has occurred since the1960's, a time of radical change in political and social beliefs,lifestyles and mores. Traditional values, authorities, andrestrictions on behavior were vehemently challenged. Psychoactivedrugs and the breakdown of traditional taboos against using thembecame symbols of the rebellion against the established order. Wehave come to recognize in the 1980's that we are paying a veryhigh price for the casual attitude towards drugs that developedin the 1960's. Much misinformation has been corrected, and wehave begun to formulate a more realistic appraisal of theproblem, but now we must take specific actions to reduce thedemand for drugs. Interventions that merely condemn drug use and try to frightenchildren about the potential dangers ("scare tactics")are futile. The most effective prevention strategies are thosethat address the factors that make drugs attractive and thwartthe process that leads youngsters to try them. Children use drugsfor many different reasons. Usually there are at least severalfactors that enter into the decision to experiment or continuewith drug use. Drug use itself is no evidence that parents havefailed to properly raise their children. Many children with agood family upbringing have yielded to the enormous outsidepressures to use drugs. The influence of peers can often overrideeven the best parental input. Effective drug abuse prevention must address the most basicand fundamental forces that promote drug-taking in our society.These fall into two main categories: supply and demand. Reducing Supply Reducing the supply of illicit drugs is an obvious way ofcurtailing use. Although this does little to alter the demand fordrugs, the widespread availability and abundant supplies of manydifferent types of powerful mood-altering substances makes iteasier for our citizens to become involved in drug use. Itreinforces the notion that illicit drugs are an expected part ofAmerican life. People are more likely to try drugs when they aresurrounded by them - and children are no exception. Most Americanadolescents know someone who "deals" drugs, uses drugs,or is able to get them. To counter the supply problem, we must continue to enforce andstrengthen our laws against the manufacture, sale, and possessionof drugs. We must also take a firmer stand against drug-producingcountries that receive American foreign aid. The failure of Prohibition is a dramatic example of howdifficult it is to eliminate the use of a drug by law enforcementefforts alone; especially when the drug is so well-entrenched insociety. Nonetheless, to legalize drugs, such as cocaine,marijuana, or heroin would cause nothing short of a nationaldisaster. When drugs are cheaper and more readily available, morepeople use them, become addicted to them, and suffer seriousconsequences to their health and functioning. Legalization ofdrugs would create an epidemic of unprecedented proportions. Although enforcement efforts are necessary to check abuse,they cannot prevent the problem by themselves. Neither cantreatment programs, which are utilized only after a serious drugabuse problem has been identified. Reducing Demand Prevention of drug use in the United States must focusintensively on the problem of demand. The cultural forces thatencourage and perpetuate drug use in our society must beeliminated. We must recognize that drugs have become adeeply-ingrained part of American life and that prevention cannotoccur unless social attitudes toward drug use change. Changingsocial attitudes toward drugs is a difficult undertaking, but notan impossible one. Many segments of society must become involvedin the effort. The message that drug use is unacceptable,unhealthy, and unnecessary must be communicated in a credible andconsistent manner by the family, schools, media, businesscommunity, medical and legal experts, politicians, professionalathletes, and other public figures. This message must bereflected in every aspect of American life including education,entertainment, business management practices, and lawenforcement. Being free of drugs must become a highly desirablepersonal attribute: one that is seen as mandatory for success inour society. One might hope that non-involvement with drugs wouldbecome at least as desirable as physical fitness andattractiveness. Several prevention strategies are outlined below. Recommendations 1. Public Education and Media Campaigns. The media ispotentially one of our most powerful prevention tools. It couldbe used to better educate the public about the dangers of drugsand to change attitudes about drug use through direct andindirect communications. Public service messages, educationalprograms, documentaries, and greater efforts to eliminatepro-drug programs, might help to counteract accepting attitudestoward drugs. 2. School-based Prevention Programs. Every school system inthe United States must have an active and creative drug abuseprevention program. Prevention efforts, such as saying"NO" to drugs and learning of their potential dangers,must start in the early grades, not just in high school. Studiesshow that drug use often starts before the 7th grade and that bythe time youngsters reach teenage it may be too late to changetheir attitudes about drugs or their willingness to"try" drugs. Nonetheless, early identification ofdrug-abusing youngsters and swift efforts to ameliorate theproblem are essential in our nation's high schools. In this regard, the "Student Assistance Program"(SAP) in New York's Westchester County has served as a modelprogram to other school systems around the country. The SAP isbased on the EAP (Employee Assistance Program) model usedsuccessfully in business and industry, utilizing on-sitesubstance abuse counselors, who are especially skilled atidentifying drug-abusing youngsters and providing the necessaryassistance or referral. 3. Education of Health Professionals. Despite epidemic levelsof drug abuse over the past two decades, most healthprofessionals receive no formal training in the diagnosis andtreatment of drug dependency. This situation must be corrected bymandating that a core curriculum in the clinical management ofdrug abuse problems be part of the training of physicians,nurses, psychologists, social workers, and other healthprofessionals. Drug Testing in DWIs. Currently, not a single state in the United States requires drug testing of drivers stopped for suspected driving under the influence of alcohol. Someone "stoned" on drugs may be able to pass a breathalyzer test with no difficulty, but still be too impaired to drive safely. Contents | Feedback | Search DRCNet Library | Schaffer Library | Government Publications | America's Habits WT01-B31-7IA031-000652-B040-206http://206.61.184.43:80/schaffer/library/studies/inhemp/1intro.htm 206.61.184.43 19970122130323 text/html 11598HTTP/1.0 200 OKDate: Wednesday, 22-Jan-97 13:03:02 GMTServer: WebSitePro/1.1f (S/N wpo-0deb)Allow-ranges: bytesContent-type: text/htmlLast-modified: Saturday, 28-Dec-96 07:04:48 GMTContent-length: 11380 Indian Hemp Drugs Commission Report -- Introduction Contents | Feedback | Search DRCNet Library | Schaffer Library | Major Studies | IndianHemp Drugs Commission Indian Hemp Drugs Commission Report Introduction by Tod Mikuriya, M.D. The Indian Hemp Drugs Commission Report*, comprising some ninevolumes and 3,698 pages, is by far the most completed andsystematic study of marijuana undertaken to date. Because of therarity and, perhaps, the formidable size of this document, thewealth of information contained in it has not found its way intocontemporary writings on this subject. This is indeedunfortunate, as many of the issues concerning marijuana beingargued in the United States today were dealt with in the IndianHemp Drugs Commission Report. It is both surprising and gratifying to note the timeless andlucid quality of the writings of these British bureaucrats. Itwould be fortunate if studies undertaken by contemporarycommissions, task force committees and study groups could measureup to the standards of thoroughness and general objectivityembodied in this report. In the current context of violentlypolarized attitudes toward marijuana, the prospect of a study ofsimilar stature would be improbably if not impossible. History of British Involvement The British government in India had substantial knowledge ofintoxicants other than alcohol because of their activeinvolvement in regulation, taxation and actual trafficking inthese substances for over a hundred years prior to the Hemp DrugsCommission investigation and report. In 1790 duties on alcohol and other intoxicant drugs werefirst levied by the British on Landlords in India. The regulationof cannabis preparations was further specified in 1793 inregulation XXXIV of that year: "No personal shallmanufacture or vend any such drugs (bhang* ganja**, charas*** andother intoxicating drugs) without a license from the collector ofthe zillah_." This system of regulation was instituted "with a view tocheck immoderation consumption, and at the same time to augmentthe public revenue." In 1800 in a further modification of regulation, themanufacture and sale of charas was prohibited as "being of amost noxious quality," while daily rates of duty weredeclared as the basis for taxing procedures. Curiously, in 1824the restriction on charas was rescinded "as this drug wasfound on examination to be not more prejudicial to health thanganja or other intoxicating drugs." In 1849 limits on retail sale of cannabis drugs were fixed"for better securing the abkari__ revenue of Calcutta,"and later extended to the__________________________________________________________ * Leaves and flowers of wild growing or inferior cultivatedcannabis plants. ** Flowering tops of the cannabis plant *** Resin from the mature cannabis plant _ A county-sized district or administrative division (India) __ Manufacture or sale of intoxicating Liquors or drugs;hence, an excise or internal revenue tax on such manufacture ofsale (India) [Abkar: A wine seller; distiller. Also, one whose trade issubject to abkari tax] whole of Bengal. Four years later the daily tax method wasabandoned and a fee charged on a per weight basis, and in 1860 anadditional set of dealers' fees imposed. It should be noted, however, that the system of the state ofBengal was only one of several schemes among the many provinces.Variations on this approach existed in the other states, afunction of the differing local administrations, reflecting thedegree of administrative and fiscal controls exerted by theImperial government. There had apparently been controversies as to the possiblenoxious effects of cannabis drugs, at least from the time of theinception of British controls on these products, unless we assumethat the initial stated reasons for regulation were merelycynical rationalizations for obtaining additional sources ofrevenue. Within a country of several hundred millions ofinhabitants, divided into hundreds of regions, and with onlyrudimentary "homogenizing" forces of effectivetransportation and mass media, it is perhaps reasonable to inferthat wide variations in opinions and beliefs would beencountered. Formation of the Commission On 2 March 1893 a question was raised in the British House ofCommons concerning the effects of the production and consumptionof hemp drugs in the province of Bengal, India. In response, theGovernment of India convened a seven-member commission to lookinto these questions, 3 July 1893. Upon the suggestion of LordKimberley the scope of the investigation was expanded to includeall of India. Procedures The Commission actually met for the first time in Calcutta 3August 1893. Between this date and 6 August of the followingyear, when the study was finished, the Commission receivedevidence from 1,455 witness. Field trips were made to thirtycities in eight provinces and Burma from the end of October 1893through the latter part of April 1894. Eighty-six meetings forexamination of witnesses transpired during the inquiry. Actualparticipation of the members of the Commission was duly noted andreported -- a custom that it might be worthwhile to revive: The following statement shows the attendance of the members ofthe Commission during the period occupied in inquiry (3rd August1893 to April 1894): Period of Attendance with the commission Number of meetings (a) During the (b) during the for examination of Name first tour second tour witnesses attended President 83 days 183 days 86 Mr. Ommaney Ditto Ditto 85 Mr. Fraser Ditto Ditto 85 Dr. Warden Ditto Ditto 86 Raja Soshi From 3rd August From 30th October 44 Sikhareswar to 15th September to 24th January, Roy 44 days from 14th to 16th February, from 22nd to 24th February, and from 7th to 25th March, 112 days Kanwar Harnam Singh 83 days From 13th November 48 to 5th January, 22nd February to 2nd April, and from 12th to 25th April, 78 days Lala Nihal Chand 3rd August to From 30th October to 18th 5 20th September, November and from 17th to 49 days 25th April 29 days The attendance of Raja Soshi Sikhareswar Roy was broken byoccasional absence caused by ill-health and other reasons. The absence of Kanwar Harnam Singh during two short periodswas due to ill-health. The prolonged absence of Lala Nihal Chandwas due to the fact that he suffered from continued ill-health,and was able to be with the Commission only at Calcutta at thefirst; then for some part of their preliminary tour, and at a fewmeetings for the examination of witnesses during the second tour.All the members were present at Simla during the preparation ofthe report. Witnesses whose evidence was received by the Commission weredivided into three categories: (1) Official witnesses able to give information regarding hempdrugs, based on their official and local experience. (2) Non-official witnesses of all ranks able to giveinformation regarding the drugs generally or in connection withcertain classes of the people. (3) Other persons or associations having facts or holdingopinions which they desired to communicated to the Commission. Civil Officers 467 Medical Officers 214 Private Practitioners (European methods) 34 Private Practitioners (Native methods) 87 Cultivators 144 Professional men 55 Missionaries 34 Associations 24 Persons Engaged in Trade 75 Others 59 1,455 228* Native states 189* Native states * Supplementary Volume - 1895 To facilitate collection of information, seventy questionsframed by the Commission were given to witnesses. The writtenanswers to these questions constituted the bulk of the evidencebefore the Commission. Where appropriate, witnesses were examinedorally for further clarification or explanation. In addition,witnesses who had not submitted written statements were examinedorally. It was duly noted in the record which forms of testimonyhad been provided by the individual witnesses. The following excerpts discusses evidence received intestimony and from other sources. Philosophic premises concerningroles and responsibilities of the individual are outlined as aprelude to discussing the practical issues of taxation, politicalpolicy, public safety and health. In applying the principles ofEnglish Common Law to peoples in a subcontinent whose beliefs andcustoms varied greatly from those of Great Britain, the issues offeasibility and the common good were of prime concern. If schemesof regulation of intoxicants followed this rationalistic modeltoday, the mistakes made then might not require repeating in eachgeneration. Current technologic advances do not produce progressin the area of human behavior; they only help to magnify defectsand frailties. Contents | Feedback | Search DRCNet Library | Schaffer Library | Major Studies | IndianHemp Drugs CommissionWT01-B31-8IA031-000652-B040-231http://206.61.184.43:80/schaffer/library/studies/inhemp/2centen.htm 206.61.184.43 19970122130336 text/html 14542HTTP/1.0 200 OKDate: Wednesday, 22-Jan-97 13:03:25 GMTServer: WebSitePro/1.1f (S/N wpo-0deb)Allow-ranges: bytesContent-type: text/htmlLast-modified: Saturday, 28-Dec-96 07:04:43 GMTContent-length: 14324 Indian Hemp Drugs Commission Centennial Thoughts Contents | Feedback | Search DRCNet Library | Schaffer Library | Major Studies | IndianHemp Drugs Commission Indian Hemp Drugs Commission Centennial Thoughts Tod H. Mikuriya, M.D. This monumental study exposes the overriding and pervasivepowers of contemporary collective denial and moral failureunderpinning policies of cannabis prohibition. Motivated byconvenient moralism, questions are repeatedly disingenuouslyraised concerning the harm of hemp drugs, cannabis, or marijuana.The engine of agitprop bureaucratic ire fires up. Hearings arescheduled, witnesses heard, proceedings transcribed, summarized,presented to the requesting organization, discussed, filed, andforgotten. The prohibition policies go on. Enforcement,corrections systems strain under the demands of majoritarianmagical beliefs in coercive powers of Government; promoted bycontinuing self-serving Government misinformation and censorship.From the Indian Hemp Drugs Commission's policy perspective,today's drug polices would be unthinkable. In the century since the resolution passed the British Houseof Commons setting up the Indian Hemp Drugs Commission thatresulted in this massive inquiry documented in a nine volumereport there have been drastic changes in public policy in theUnited States and Great Britain. The Indian hemp drug regulation policies were explicitlypredicated upon optimal and minimal government intervention. The subsequent century in the United States, Great Britain,and Europe has seen pandemic spread of prohibitionistauthoritarian Government interference- the American Disease-social experiment run amok. Income taxes, mass conscription, and two world wars have seenregression from utilitarian governance of enlightenednon-interference to intrusive majoritarian autocracy.Authoritative Government has become authoritarian. Less and lessGovernment justification and demonstrated necessity are needed.The principle of non-interference is virtually inoperative. Thespace of human existence where a person reigns uncontrolledcontracts even further. The large departments of individualistichuman life are contracted or eliminated by laws, public andcorporate policy. The second intervention by Government; giving advice andpromulgating information has seen a parallel degradation. Fromlegitimate and trustworthy dissemination of factual informationthrough the institutions of science and medicine to censorship,giving bad advice, dissimulation and deception in the service ofcoercion and manipulation. The ensuing chaos of ignorance,partial truths, and outright lies has produced a cacophonoustoxic confusion surrounding the use of hemp drugs. The font ofcontemporary knowledge is now a stinking swamp, hopelesslypoisoned by the ignorant fantasies, fears, and untruths resultingfrom prohibitionists' drug propaganda efforts. Fifty years after the Indian Hemp Drugs Commission Report inAmerica the New York Mayor's Committee on Marihuana reported onuse of the drug after a five year study, seven years afternational marijuana prohibition. The perspective was based on thepremise that departments of human life and individual circle withuncontrolled reign did not include the right to use marihuana.The authoritative Government intervention of Prohibition is nowaccepted; the non-interference principle of the Millsean IndianHemp Drugs Administration policy; dead- a luxury enjoyed,ironically, by people of India subjugated by the Britishimperium. Descriptions of marihuana use were now from the perspective ofstudying the characteristics of the users of this illicit drug:to what extent, method of distribution, attitude of smoker towardsociety and use of the drug, relationship with eroticism, crime,and juvenile delinquency. Discussions of legitimacy of Governmentintervention are by implication discussing the relativedangerousness of marihuana. The legitimacy of Prohibition as asocial policy was neither justified nor discussed. Religious useor freedom is not mentioned. "I am glad that the sociological, psychological, andmedical ills commonly attributed to marihuana have been found tobe exaggerated insofar as the City of New York is concerned. Ihasten to point out, however, that the findings are to beinterpreted only as a reassuring report of progress and not asencouragement to indulgence, for I shall continue to enforce thelaws prohibiting the use of marihuana until and if completefindings may justify an amendment to existing laws." In the 1970 revision in Government marihuana prohibitionpolicy generated another report in 1972: Marihuana: a Signal ofMisunderstanding- First Report of the National Commission onMarihuana and Drug Abuse. Individual rights are at least discussed in order to beheavily discounted: "So, while we agree with the basic philosophical preceptthat society may interfere with individual conduct only in thepublic interest, using coercive measures only when lessrestrictive measures would not suffice, this principle merelyinitiates inquiry into a rational social policy but does notidentify it. We must take a careful look at this complicatedquestion of the social impact of private behavior. And we mustrecognize at the outset the inherent difficulty in predictingeffects on the public health and welfare, and the strongconflicting notions of what constitutes the publicinterest." "Religious freedom" as currently delineated by theGovernment places the burden on the individual to pass certain"tests" to prove that hemp drugs used for sacramentalpurposes: "Cases dealing with religious freedom in other contextshave isolated three distinct foci of inquiry when a law ischallenged as violative of the "free exercise" clause:(1) Is the claimant's belief and practice really a"religion" within the meaning of the First Amendment?(2) If so, is the practice prohibited by the challenged statuteessential to the practice of the "religion?" (3) Evenif the answers to (1) and (2) are yes, is there nevertheless asufficiently compelling state interest to warrant overriding thepractice? Only when the proscribed activity is essential to aqualified "religion" and the state's interest is notoverwhelming will the courts invoke the First Amendment toinvalidate an otherwise permissible legislativeproscription." In the 1989 Carl Olsen, a white Rastafarian and director ofIowa NORML unsuccessfully attempted a religious freedom defensefor charges of marijuana selling and importation for distributionto other members of the Ethiopian Coptic Zion Church. "If the 'compelling interest' test is to be applied...itmust be applied across the board, to all actions thought to bereligiously commanded... Any society adopting such a system wouldbe courting anarchy.... The rule respondents favor would open theprospect of constitutionally required religious exemptions fromcivic obligations of almost every conceivable kind- ranging fromcompulsory military service....to the payment of taxes.....druglaws." Dutifully crafted by Judge Ruth Bader Ginsburg, now on thesupreme court, no question of how authoritative interference ofGovernment is accepted to be appropriate public policy. Religiousfreedom is now restricted to activity that must be asserted andproven rather than assumed. Proving compelling interest hasswitched from the Government to the individual. Departments of human life were seen not to be imperiouslyguarded for the individual but regarded with mistrust and sourceof opportunities for dissent against public policy. At the heightof the Vietnam war marijuana use was strongly identified with thegrowing student antiwar resistance. The non-intervention principle is at least recognized but thedepartments of individuality and circle around the individualwere routinely stepped over by Government with justification inthis case for national security. Militarism preempted anyconsiderations of individual rights of privacy. Departments ofhuman life were small and confined to cosmetic obligatoryinstitutional ritual displays in the context of growing publicresistance to the American military industrial behemoth run amokin southeast Asia. Notwithstanding the cautious conclusion of the Commission tocritically examine the policies of marijuana prohibition, thereport was conspicuously rejected sight unseen by then presidentRichard M. Nixon to demonstrate his being "tough oncrime" in a presidency struggling to end the Vietnam war. Twenty-two years later on the centennial of the Indian HempDrugs Commission Report finds the principle of Governmentnon-interference is an all but forgotten faded idealistic icon,given hollow obeisance at state ceremonies, a quaintphilosophical curiosity of the past. The circle around theindividual is reduced to a pale, flaccid, tattered, transparent,and permeable membrane. Intrusion is limited only by availablefunding to Government interference. The worsening of the balanceof power between the individual and state has increased by anorder of magnitude, facilitated by advances in technology. Toqueville in his prophetic Democracy in America warns ofdangerous forms of despotism in democratic, egalitarian America: "A great many persons of the present day are quitecontented with this sort of compromise between administrativedespotism and the sovereignty of the people; and they think theyhave done enough for the protection of individual freedom whenthey have surrendered it to the power of the nation at large.This does not satisfy me: the nature of him I am to obeysignifies less to me than the fact of extorted obedience." "Thus it every day renders the exercise of the freeagency of man less useful and less frequent; it circumscribes thewill within a narrower range and gradually robs a man of all theuses of himself. The principle of equality has prepared men forthese things; it has predisposed men to endure them and often tolook upon them as benefits. After having thus successively taken each member of thecommunity in its powerful grasp and fashioned him at will, thesupreme power then extends its arm over the whole community. Itcovers the surface of society with a network of small complicatedrules, minute and uniform, through which the most original mindsand most energetic characters cannot penetrate, to rise above thecrowd. The will of the man is not shattered, but softened, bent,and guided; men are seldom forced by it to act, but they areconstantly restrained from acting. Such a power does not destroy,but it prevents existence, it does not tyrannize, but itcompresses, enervates, extinguishes, and stupefies a people, tilleach nation is reduced to nothing better than a flock of timidand industrious animals, of which the government is theshepherd." Attacked by oaths of "drug free," informers(including children), undercover police, drug-sniffing dogs,random and warrantless searches, child snatching, drug testing,forfeiture of property, surveillance of bank, business,electricity, and other records, the departments of human lifewither. The parts of human life considered reserved territory arenoticeably smaller- the individual, society and"civilization" suffer the loss. Review of the Indian Hemp Drugs Commission Report is importantfor perspective in assessing the legitimacy and direction ofcontemporary Government drug policy in a democratic society.Froude's theorem of functional governance: "no laws are ofany service which are above the working level of public morality,and evasion." was of importance to feudal England, theIndian Hemp Drugs Commission in 1894 and a century later a publicpolicy issue of prime magnitude. THM April 16, 1994 References Contents | Feedback | Search DRCNet Library | Schaffer Library | Major Studies | IndianHemp Drugs CommissionWT01-B31-9IA031-000652-B040-252http://206.61.184.43:80/schaffer/library/studies/inhemp/dopefien.htm 206.61.184.43 19970122130346 text/html 52686HTTP/1.0 200 OKDate: Wednesday, 22-Jan-97 13:03:34 GMTServer: WebSitePro/1.1f (S/N wpo-0deb)Allow-ranges: bytesContent-type: text/htmlLast-modified: Saturday, 28-Dec-96 07:03:55 GMTContent-length: 52468 Indian Hemp and the Dope Fiends of Old England Contents | Feedback | Search DRCNet Library | Schaffer Library | Major Studies | IndianHemp Drugs Commission INDIAN HEMP AND THE DOPE FIENDS OF OLD ENGLAND A sociopolitical history of cannabis and theBritish Empire 1840-1928 Sean Blanchard & Matthew J. Atha MSc When the report of the Indian Hemp Drugs Commission (IHDC)reached 1890's England it met official and public apathy. Therewas no political debate. It went into the 'forget about this'file on arrival and has stayed there ever since. There was nopublicity; The news that "Ganja is not appreciablyharmful" was of no concern to the majority of users, whotook cannabis products for their medical benefits. Thenon-medical users were mostly artists who didn't mind alittle harm. Prohibitionist sentiment was concentrated on theopium trade between India and China and on alcohol at home.Cannabis use in England was considered negligible, and theauthorities were content to have no laws at all controlling itfor another thirty years. When laws were later proposed, the Government paid noattention to the evidence in their possession from the IHDC. InIndia, the recommendations of the IHDC report for control bytaxes rather than prohibition went into force quietly,standardising laws and tariffs on cannabis in all the provinces.In March 1895, the Indian Government passed a resolution afterreviewing the report. It said that for the last twenty yearstheir policy had been of "restraining use and improving therevenue by the imposition of suitable taxation" and"imposing as high a rate of duty as can be levied withoutinducing illicit practices" on the grounds that "thebest way to restrict the consumption of drugs is to taxthem..." So, "to that policy the Governor-General...has decided steadily to adhere."[1] There was never any suggestion that the same rules might beapplied in the UK; the Empire didn't work like that. TheGovernor-General (also known as Viceroy), Lord Landsdowne, wasappointed by the UK Government. When they instructed him tocommission a report, he did so, then accepted or rejected it,passed any regulations needed, and told the UK what he'd done.His job was to 'keep natives in their place' and help the Britishget on with de, not to give advice on home affairs. From Mother's Friend to Opium Wars Cannabis was virtually irrelevant to 19th century England. Thedrug of the century was opium, freely available to the Britishpopulation and so popular that the government went to war toprevent the prohibitionist Chinese disrupting the trade. Theopium wars still write their history in the 1990s, as Britain issoon due to hand back Hong Kong, the territory it won from Chinaand those territories leased for 150 years, in 1997. Thomas De Quincy, in his 'Confessions of and English OpiumEater' gave the first popular account of the '...marvellousagency of opium, whether for pleasure or pain'. He may have beenthe first glamouriser of the psychotropic effects of the drug,but, for most people opium was a friend and medicine asindispensable as aspirin or Valium in the 20th century. Godfrey'scordial, or chemists' home-brewed versions of popular patentmedicines, were used to quiet children, while no home would bewithout laudanum (alcoholic tincture of opium). Opium was firstused in the treatment of cholera in the epidemics of the early19th century, and continued to be used for the treatment ofdiarrhoea and sickness, common complaints in the less than hygienicenvironment of the day. It was during the Crimean war that theanalgesic effects were fully exploited, and it is certain thatthe widespread use of laudanum, Collis Browne's mixture or otheropium-based medicines, available to the poor for a penny abottle, enabled ordinary people to cope with the harsh realitiesof life in Dickensian England. From the government's point ofview, it was no doubt preferable to have the poor in a state ofcomfortable stupor than rioting on the streets. India was not the main source of opium for the domesticmarket. Most of this was grown in Turkey or Persia (Iran), asthis opium was of generally high qualify, and trade flourished inthe period following the end of the Napoleonic wars, particularlyafter the treaty of Balta Limon (1838) granting the OttomanEmpire 'most favoured nation' trading status[2]. Indian opium,however, was responsible for one of the British Government inIndia becoming the largest drug-trafficking syndicate in theworld during the latter part of the century. Opium and tea were the mainstays of the British East IndiaCompany, who had a monopoly on the opium produced in Bengal. In1772 Warren Hastings, then chief executive of the company,realised the potential for foreign revenue in exporting Indianopium to China. Opium had been known in China for centuries, but imports bad been banned in 1729 by decree of the Emperor. Anforeign trade was funneled through Canton, opium being smuggledwith legitimate consignments in British ships, and sold throughcorrupt officials to an eager market Other traders smuggled opiumto China overland, and the consumption spread to all levels ofsociety, even to the personal retinue of the Emperor. Exports toChina rose from 10,000 chests ill 1820 to 40,000 chests in 1840.By 1836, a Chinese official in Canton, Hsu Nal-chi, petitionedthe emperor to legalise the trade after witnessing the failure ofprohibition... "the severer the interdicts against (opium)became, the more widely do the evils therefrom spread." Hewas summarily dismissed from his post and replaced with acommitted "war on drugs"-minded individual, LinTse-hsu. Lin was determined to wipe out the opium trade by threateningthe British merchants with the loss of the tea trade, and in 1839forced them to surrender 20,000 chests of the drug. CaptainCharles Elliot the British Chief Superintended, retaliated byordering all British ships out of the Canton estuary,transferring the tea trade to American ships who would transporttheir cargoes to Hong Kong, an inconvenience, but not anobstacle, to the trade. Instead of using Canton, smugglers wouldtake opium consignments ashore up and down the coast in sinallboats, fast enough to evade the Customs craft. Meanwhile Elliothad ordered an expeditionary force of naval steamships whicharrived in 1840 and put direct pressure on Peking. Lin wasdismissed and the trade continued uninterrupted following theChinese capitulation and the end of the first opium war in 1842.To the domestic audience in the UK, Palmerston, the PrimeMinister, bad portrayed the war as an attempt to force theChinese to accept free trade. In reality, the only commoditydirectly involved was -opium, tax revenue from which was becomingincreasingly important to the Indian Government [3]. In Britain, the Conservative opposition was not satisfied withPalmerston's explanations and they opposed the opium trade in the1840 Commons debate. By the time they took power in 1841 theirtune had changed, and the trade continued to expand. The Chinesegovernment was effectively warned that no British ships should besearched. Although fresh edicts against the drug were issued bythe Chinese, they were powerless to stop the trade following thetreaty of Nanking, which ceded Hong Kong to Britain, allowing abridgehead for further opium supplies. In 1856, following growingand-British sentiment, the Chinese gave the British government afurther excuse for war by seizing the Arrow, a Britishvessel with a crew of Chinese criminals anchored off Canton. Thefact that the Arrow's registration had expired,technically justifying the Chinese action, was overlooked byPalmerston, once again the Liberal Prime Minister after fightingan election forced by government defeat on an opposition motioncondemning the war, and winning on a wave of patriotic fervour. Lord Elgin was dispatched with an expeditionary force whichburned down the Summer Palace in Peking to impress upon theEmperor the need to keep agreements. The main consequence of theSecond Opium War was that China was forced to legalise the tradein opium, and were only permitted to tax the product at a levelacceptable to the British. Consumption increased from 60,000chests in 1860 to 105,000 by 1880. The trade generated taxes tothe British Indian Government equivalent to over half their totalrevenue, enough to cover the entire civil service and armedforces budgets. In this climate, financial expediency, as sooften is the case, took precedence over the growing moralarguments against the drug trade. Following increased public pressure to end the trade, and inresponse to a Parliamentary motion, the Government called a RoyalCommission on the production and consumption of opium, which wasonly to consider prohibition among other options, after fullinvestigation. It was during these manoevres that the IHDC wasalso established. The Indian Viceroy, Lord Lansdowne was againstanything that might disrupt business. Prime Minister Gladstonewas much more pro trade than he was anti drug. They packed theopium commission with pragmatists from the Indian Civil Service,with some of the more economically literate abolitionists, andensured that it would concentrate a good deal on money. It firstmet in September 1893 and saw 2,500 witnesses by February '94. When the report was published in '95, it said that opium was"generally used in moderation", and "led to noevident ill-effects". Even some senior anti-opiumists hadbeen convinced. The fact that Chinese missionaries wereoverwhelmingly critical of the effects of opium, in contrast tothe Indian witnesses who were predominantly favourable towardsthe drug, was put down to the fact that in India the drug isnormally taken orally, whereas in China it was generally smoked[3]. There was only one dissent; Joseph Rowntree, one of thecommittee members, was later to denounce the Commission's reportas a whitewash. By that time there was another election underway. Prohibition had no chance under the Conservatives, and therewould be no Liberal government until 1905.(4). The government,despite public opinion, was determined to continue the opium "The Lunatic asylums are filled with GanjaSmokers." The question of cannabis occasionally cropped up as anincidental issue in skirmishes during the long legislative battleagainst the opium business. As early as 1840 the pro-opium bankerWilliam Bingham Baring MP told the Commons that if the opiumtrade were suppressed then there would be a danger of usersturning to drugs "infinitely more prejudicial to physicalhealth and energy than opium". Baring, one of 10 MPs of bothparties from the same pro-free trade family, was particularlyconcerned about "an exhalation of the Hemp plant, easilycollected at certain seasons, which is in every way moreinjurious than the use of the poppy." [3] This was anotherjustification for the lucrative opium trade which flourished in aclimate of official and unofficial governmental encouragement.However, attitudes were slowly changing and in 1875 Mark StewardMP had proposed that the Indian Governor General be instructed toinvestigate the opium trade "with a view to gradualwithdrawal," and lost by 37 votes. Similar moves wereregularly defeated for the next twenty years. By April '91, aspokesman for the Society for Suppression of the Opium Trade(SSOT) had obtained a 30-vote majority for a motion that theGovernments' revenue from opium was "Morallyindefensible". On 16 July 1891 Stewart asked a three part question aboutganja [5]: "i Whether the Secretary of State for India has seen areport in the Allahabad Pioneer of 10 May that ganja, which isgrown sold and excised in much the same way as opium, is far moreharmful, and that "the lunatic asylum of Bengal are filledwith ganja smokers." ii Is he aware that ganja has been made illegal inLower Burma and that excise reports say this has been 'ofenormous benefit to the people.' iii Will he call to the attention of the Governor General thedesirability of extending theprohibition to otherprovinces?" The answers to which were yes, yes, and that he would"Enquire whether further steps should be taken to limitconsumption..." On 7 August 1892 those enquiries wereanswered at some length. The Viceroy's office told London thatthe whole question had been extensively discussed with provincialadministrations in 1871-73. They sent 174 pages of old dispatchesfrom Indian provincial governments to the centre, and from thereto London. After considering these, "The Governor General isof the opinion that while ganja may be among the most noxious ofall intoxicants commonly used in India... even if absoluteprohibition could be enforced, the result might be to induce theuse of more noxious drugs" (e.g. datura). Apart from whichit would be impossible to enforce a prohibition. It was "Ourduty to restrict consumption, but unnecessary to do more thanpersevere in the policy established In 1873." These paperslanguished unread in London, perhaps because there was a generalelection going on. The 1873 dispatches showed the pragmatism of imperialadministrators which was to be repeated by the IHDC, in verysimilar words. The then Viceroy had said that while theGovernment should endeavour to restrict the use of ganja, itwould be impossible to enforce general prohibition, especiallybecause of religious feelings in some groups and because theplants grew freely some areas. It would be inexpedient to orderwhat could not be enforced... "It does not appear to theGovernor-General to be specifically proved that hump incites tocrime more than other drugs or spirits." There was also someevidence that hump, "usually so noxious", mightusefully be taken for medical reasons. There was no doubt thathabitual use tended to cause insanity but not in very many casesrelative to the numbers of the insane.(6]. "General opinionseems to be that the evil effects of Ganja have beenexaggerated." The dispatches from regional governments were more forthright.The Lt.-Governor of the Punjab wrote that considering thepracticalities, they should not restrict hemp drug use unlessthere was proof of connection with crime. Civil, police andmedical officers disagreed on the details but: "His Honouris of the opinion that if people were prohibited from usingpreparations of hemp or opium, they would, in all probability,have recourse to some other stimulant, such as alcohol, the crimeresulting from the use of which would be much greater than thatresulting from the abuse of these drugs .... It seems that theamount of crime, violent or other, incited by ganja, isexceedingly small... If, therefore, these preparations have noeffect on crime and only injure the persons who use them, it isdifficult to see in what manner the law can restrict their use ina country where opium is a monopoly of the Government, theeffects of which are perhaps as injurious when taken in excess asthose of hemp." The local governments of Mysore, Hyderbad, Oudh, and Burmasaid that as hump drugs were little used locally, not necessary.Central Provinces sent plenty of data but no opinions. TheNorthwest Provinces (later Pakistan), one of the main cannabisgrowing areas, said the evidence on crime was confused, where ifthe situation was bad as supposed there would surely be aconsensus. To stop production would be almost impossible, so theycould not recommend attempts to limit or stop consumption.Bombay, Madras, and Bengal said that restrictions and taxesalready in place should be preserved. All agreed excessive use tobe somehow connected with physical harm and perhaps insanity, butthe numbers harmed were very small. Bengal sent the mostinformation. Asked if a particularly popular type of local ganjawas more deleterious than others, they submitted a long report oncultivation, uses and profit margins on all hemp products by DrWatt, State Reporter on Economic Products. Their local productwas popular due to the quality of plants and traditionalproduction skills, rather than sheer strength. A table of samplesanalysed for "Resinous extracts or Cannabin" rangedfrom 1.4% (NW Province) to 12% (Madras), mostly about 4% [7]. Allof the legal trade was inside India. The state of Bengal had beenmaking an average 1 million rupees per year through the 1860's intax on ganja shops and duty at government auctions, about100,000 - tens of millions in today's money. When these papers were taken from the files, twenty yearsafter they were written, the August 1892 elections were underway. The Conservatives went out and the Liberals came in. Drugcontrol was not high on their agenda; however, the new HomeSecretary, Foreign Secretary, and Secretary of State for Indiawere all known to be anti-opium, and the Prime Minister hadspoken out against it in the past. The prohibitionists knew theymight get some sort of opium control agreed if it didn't opposethe Liberals' central Free Trade policy. Believing their momenthad come, they began to quarrel among themselves. Criminalise it! Before the development of the hypodermic syringe by AlexanderWood, the main concern about opium was not the threat ofaddiction, but the danger of poisoning. Only after the 1860s didthe risk of dependency start to cause concern among the medicalprofession. Certainly, people would have been habituated to thedrug, but the stereotype of the drug addict had yet to gainacceptance within the UK. Even where individuals wrote of theirhabit, such as a chemists wife who had been using morphia for 30years, described her experience in a matter of fact way, freefrom any sense of stigma her major concern being the perceivedtendency of the drug to cause her to put on weight. Although thedependency syndrome had been described two centuries earlier byThomas Sydenham, the risk was not taken seriously by most medicalpractitioners. Following increasing reports of dependencysymptoms after 1860, culminating in a series of articles in ThePractitioner in 1870, the debate on the wisdom ofpermitting free access to opium accelerated. In 1878 EdwardLevinstein in Germany started the 'moral' argument about theeffect of opium on the character of the user, and was one of thefirst to promote abstinence as a cure for the addict [2]. From the 1840s on, there were several anti-opiumorganisations, all small and mostly broke. Their membershipsoverlapped, but the leaders didn't get on well. None of them hadever tried to gain mass support. The first organisation to comeout against the trade were the Birmingham Quakers. In 1869, LordShaftesbury urged the Indian government to withdraw from itsmonopoly position in the trade. By 1884 the Society for the Studyand Cure of Inebriety, founded by Sir Norman Kerr, aimed "toeducate the professional and the public mind to the dangers ofintemperance". At that time, alcohol was the main target forthe temperance movement, whereas other, more exotic drugs werenot seen as much of a threat to respectable Britons. These drugswere not expected to be a threat to the well-adjusted Britishgentleman, and habituation among the Chinese and others wasregarded as the kind of 'filthy foreign habit' that should bestopped for the foreigners' own good. Kerr recognised the dangersof opium with a crusading zeal, and railed against its use,denying any possibility that some persons could be able torestrict their use to a moderate level. The Society forSuppression of the Opium Trade (SSOT), founded in 1874, becamethe best-known anti-opium organisation, but had always beenelitist, controlled by Quaker businessmen with knighthoods,funded by one family. Their best argument combined economic andhumanitarian interest; other exports to China had been damaged bythe sleaziness of the opium business. Trade with China had beenstagnant between 1860-80 while business with Japan had tripled.The SSOT moved for ending the India-China opium trade, and anenquiry into alternate ways of making up the money. They took toolong agreeing a proposal with other lobbyists, but did manage toforce the government to concede the 1893 Royal Commission onOpium [8]. Meanwhile, in February '93, William Caine, MP (Bradford East),had the papers on ganja collected the previous year placed in theHouse of Commons Library. 0u the 2nd March 1893 he put a publicquestion to the Under-secretary of State for India. "If hewill instruct the Government of India to create a commission ofexperts to enquire into and report on the cultivation of andtrade in all preparations of hemp drugs in Bengal, the effects oftheft consumption on society, and on the moral condition of thepeople, and the desirability of prohibiting its growth andsale." Would he also invite written reports on the samematters from all other provinces, and include in the commissionnon-official natives of India. The Secretary of State would askthe Viceroy to do just that, "and he will be glad if theresult of this inquiry is to show that further restriction can beplaced upon the sale and consumption of these drugs."(7)Since the Government seemed so amenable, a secondary question bythe Right Hon. Sir Charles E. Schwann, Bart, was then dropped. The members of the commission were named on 3rd July, and heldtheir first meeting on 2nd August - a mouth before the Opiumcommission began to meet. They continued until April, seeing over800 witnesses, assembling over 3000 pages into seven volumes, anda confidential extra volume on hemp drug use in the Army; thenthe Finance and Commerce department of the Government of Indiaconsidered the report, and another British election crept closer.It is unclear what Caine and Schwann thought they were up to.Both were Liberals, Temperance campaigners, and probablyanti-opium. Schwann had a safe scat, a comfortable merchants'fortune and radical opinions. Caine wrote books, including 'YoungIndia', 'Picturesque India' and 'A Trip Around the World.' He hadquit the Liberal Party six years earlier over the Irish question,and been re-admitted in a new scat after losing as anIndependent; he was to lose it again in 1895. The timing, and therequest for the commission to include non-official Indians,suggest that they were part of a faction among theanti-opiumists, perhaps trying to stir them into holder demandsor quicker action. Perhaps they were simply trying to get in onwhat looked like a winning side. Neither is recorded as evermentioning hemp drugs in public again. The Dope Fiends of Old England The international drugs trade was quite a different thing fromhome consumption; for example although the British Empireproduced a great deal of the worlds' opiates, over 80% of theopium used in the UK was from Turkey and Persia [2]. The economicpressure for international prohibition came from traders andnations with rival products. In the UK drug control was at firstpan of an increase in medical involvement in social policy.Prescription by professionals had to take over fromself-medication before complete prohibition became possible. There was not much openly recreational drug use in VictorianEngland, other than alcohol. A few serf consciouslyunconventional young artists and mystics searched for innerexperience, rejecting vulgar materialism, but the majority ofdrug abusers, then as now, considered themselves to be takingmedicines, to help them work or relax. This was an age whichdemanded refinement, in every sense of the term. They tookextracts, tinctures, distillations or the 'active ingredients' oftraditional medicinal plants like Indian hemp or poppies, inamounts that would kill modern addicts. This was all for the goodof their health, so morally impeccable. They didn't do dope toget wasted, or didn't admit to it Vulgar materialism provided ever more purified forms of relieffrom the stresses of righteous life, as opium was dissolved intolaudanum, concentrated into morphine, re-concentrated intoheroin. Some condemned booze while chewing opium, just aswell-known modern anti-drug campaigners have been tranquilliseraddicts. In this atmosphere Cannabis Indica was just anotherpotentially useful plant, which could be perhaps refined intosome sort of medicine but was quite unsuitable in natural form.The distinction between drug use and abuse had hardly beeninvented. Doctors were expensive and not well trusted, so thepoor dosed themselves with whatever remedies they could afford.Pseudo-medical opiate use was decreasing, but still respectable;Elizabeth Barrett Browning and Florence Nightingale had used it,and William Wilberforce, saint of the anti-slavery movement, hadeaten twelve grains a day for thirty years. Self-medicationbluffed into non-medical use. Boozing was low class andunfeminine, so respectable ladies took "tonics." Patentmedicines were a huge business, often including alcohol, opium,or cannabis. Sales of pure morphine, cocaine, and barbiturates weresupposedly controlled by the 1868 Poisons and Pharmacy Act, butquack nostrums and patent medicines were not, and an attempt toextend the law in 1884 had failed. The Act only affected shops,not users. One especially dangerous popular remedy was CollisBrownes' Chlorodyne, containing chloroform and morphine, whichthe British Medical Association campaigned through the 90's tohave banned. "One of the most valuable medicines we possess" There had been increasing medical interest in cannabis sinceWilliam O'Shaughnessy described the use of indian hemp asmedicine and intoxicant [9], relying on accounts of hashish usefrom ancient Persian and Arabic sources, as well as on his ownobservations in India. He described the use of hemp in thetreatment of rheumatism, hydrophobia, cholera, tetanus andinfantile convulsions, as well as describing the delirium inducedby continued use. O'Shaughnessy had written in 1839 that, with acouple of exceptions, "I have been unable to trace anynotice of the employment of this drug in Europe." However,despite citing western works by Ainslie and von Estebeck hemanaged to overlook one classic account. The noted medieval herbalist, Nicholas Culpepper (1616-1654),listed a variety of medical uses of the common european hemp(Cannabis sativa), including anti-inflammatory, analgesic, andantiparasitic activity [10]. Culpepper made no mention of thepsychotropic activity, although the temperate hemp he describedwould normally be of low drug content and be grown for fibre.Culpepper's work would have owed much to the folk herbalism usedby British witches, or wise women, who until the christianpersecutions had provided most primary health care to the ruralpopulation, as well as to the monastic healers who replaced them.By the Victorian "age of reason" most traditional usehad been suppressed, as the pioneer pharmacologists began toanalyse folk medicines to refine and extract the active compoundstherein. An unsuccessful attempt had been made in the 1840's togrow hemp for medicine in the London suburb of Mitcham.Experimenters used it for athsma and other chest problems,sleeplessness especially in cases of opiate or alcoholwithdrawal, and with opium and bromide of potassium in treatinginsanity. One reason why cannabis was not as widely used as opiumproducts, or the newer chemical remedies, was the difficultyfound refining an "active ingredient." There wereproblems getting supplies of reliable strength, confusion aboutapparently different products from the same plant, anduncertainty about its effects in the body. However, it was usedto treat many disorders. In 1889, Dr E.A.Birch described in theLancet the successful use of cannabis indica in the treatment ofchloral hydrate and opium withdrawal, drawing attention to theabolition of craving and the antiemetic (vomit suppressing)effects and the stimulation of appetite in patients who would notnormally eat, or keep down, their food [111. Queen Victoria'spersonal physician, J.R. Reynolds described it in 1890 as"One of the most valuable medicines we possess." Inanother Lancet article published in 1890, he described the use ofcannabis indica for treating insomnia in the senile, alcoholicdelirium, neuralgia, migraine, spastic paralysis, and convulsions[12]..He allegedly prescribed tincture of cannabis to QueenVictoria herself for the treatment of menstrual cramps. Cannabistincture and an extract made from resin were available from PeterSquire of Oxford St in 1864, and wholesale through the Society ofApothecaries by 1871. Chemists extracted stuff they calledcannabene, cannabin tannin, cannabinnene etc. but had no ideawhich, if any, was the "active ingredient" untilcannabinol was isolated in 1895. At the same time some thought of drug-taking as a form ofpoisoning, and some researchers proposed that it either caused,or was, a type of insanity. W.W. Ireland compared the mentalstate of cannabis users to delirium, with its alteration of timeand space and visual illusions. British doctors' reports fromCairo Asylum in 1894 linked violent insanity with"Hashism"(13,14) Some of the medical studies would havebeen recreational use in any other context. Walter Dixon musthave tried it on himself as well as small furry animals when heshowed in 1899 that the effects vary according to type ofpreparation as well as method of ingestion. He recommendedsmoking for immediate effect and wrote in the British MedicalJournal, "Hemp taken as an inhalation may be placed in thesame category as coffee, tea and kola. It is not dangerous andits effects are never alarming, and I have come to regard it inthis form as a useful and refreshing stimulant and foodaccessory, and one whose use does not lead to a habit which growsupon its votary." He was to be a member of the RollestonCommittee on Morphine and Heroin Addiction in the 1920's, whoopposed criminalising narcotics policy. At the end of the century cannabis tincture became popularagain as a cure for cramps, migraine, opium addiction, withdrawaland insomnia, but the fashion faded. In the early 1900's aBritish Medical Association campaign against 'Secret Remedies'got most of the opiates, cocaine and cannabis out of tonics andnon-prescription medicines. Doctors became responsible for mostdrug distribution as the consumer beverage trade withdrew. Asdrag dispensing was professionalised, substances used forself-medication were replaced by more refined, more medicallycontrollable drags. The Indian Hemp Drugs Commission report madeno apparent difference to this at all, and it's quite possiblethat nobody in the medical establishment read it. It held quite alot of scientific data but its purpose had been political ratherthan medical. The political and economic interests of the BritishMedical Association were quite different from those of theGovernment of India. The Cosmopolitan Dope Fiends It is worth noting that most publications from the time referto "Hashish," the Arabic term, Indian Hemp, orCannabis, rather than Charas, Ganja or Bhang, the Hindi names.The French empire in North Africa had at least as much effect onEuropean cannabis use as the British empire in India. A certainstyle of drug use, the Wasted Artist role, as established by thelaudanum swigging Coleridge and De Quincey early in the century,was revived by Dr Jean Moreau in Paris after 1845. The doctor,who experimented with hashish to treat insanity, founded the Clubdes Hashishins with the writer Theophile Gautier, for non-medicalexperiments. Some of the members were quite keen on a littledelirium. Gautier was a hack with brilliant friends, an 'art forarts sake' romantic with a taste for macabre fantasy whoencouraged the Symbolist poets. Rimbaud and Verlaine shared hisdrugs. Baudelaire dedicated "Fleur du Mal" to him, andwrote an essay that explained their attitudes: "On Hashishand Wine as a means of expanding individuality." Theycreated strange, sensuous art, struck foreign poses based ontheir beliefs about the romantic East, scandalised bourgeoissociety [15]. By the 90's the club had imitators in London. If there was norecreational drug use "subculture" in the 1890's, onenetwork came close. This was the circle of poets, psychics,writers and would-be magicians around the Rhymers Club and theHermetic Order of the Golden Dawn. They didn't define theirconnection by shared drug use, but they certainly included drugexperiments in their self-definition. Occult studies, drugs,hypnotism, proto-psychiatry and new styles of arts were all1890's fashions mingled in overlapping cliques in central London.The Golden Dawn was established in 1888 by some occultistFreemasons, as a society of "Christian practiced magic. In1890 Yeats and two others formed the Rhymers Club as a sort ofliterary wing, drawing inspiration from the French Symbolists.None of the Rhymers Club apart from Yeats ever achieved as muchrecognition as their French heroes, but they had the style. Theywere melancholy, self-dramatising, they hoped Byronic. They haddoomed love lives and nervous breakdowns, and mostly died young.Their defiance of conventional society included such un-Englishdeviance as drinking black coffee and speaking comprehensibleFrench, as well as attempted magic, sexual permutations notdiscussed in polite company, and hefty drug use. Yeats and his lover Maude Gonne tried using hashish to improvetheir telepathic powers. Others had a more relaxed, recreationalapproach. Arthur Symons was one Rhymer who survived to hedescribed as "highly strong, over-sensitive" in the1930's, best known for "Confessions - A study inPathology" which described his two years in an Italianlunatic asylum and cure by near-fatal pneumonia in 1909. He wasthe author of 'The Opium Smoker; "I am engulfed, and drowndeliciously/soft music like a perfume, and sweet light/Goldenwith audible odours exquisite/ swathe me in cerements foreternity.../". In a biography of fellow Rhymer Ernest Dowsonhe described one afternoon; a couple of ballet dancers and a poetvisiting, the host issuing tea, cakes, cigarettes and thenhashish. "That slow intoxication, that elaborate experimentin visionary sensations... he sat awaiting the magic, half shy inthe midst of that bright company of young people." Dowsonwrote poems with Latin titles about doomed love affairs,and consorted with the "most degraded" women indockside dives. He experimented with mescal in 1896, with thesexuality researcher Havelock Ellis. He died of TB in 1900, aged32. The other poet present at the hash and tea party and themescal experiment was John Addington Symonds, a historian whostudied the criminal mentality - he was part blinded afterseveral breakdowns and TB. One of their associates, Count EricStenbock, who wrote The Shadow of Death and Studies of Death, wasknown for wearing a live snake around his neck; he died aged 35,of either alcohol or opium.(13) The Wasted Artists were picturesque and dramatic, and theirstyle became a popular image of drug abusers. Ethereal and ratherunhealthy, possibly creative but definitely pasty-faced. Theperception of a difference between drugs suitable for legitimateuse, under medical control, and drugs which can only be abused,was extended by their example; anything they took was obviouslynot doing any good for their health. Still there was no anti-drugpanic in the UK. Drugs were still seen as foreign stuff, onlyused by those who wanted to act like foreigners. The artists wereadded to an existing mythology of the opium addict and the opiumden, spread by popular fiction from Wilkie Collins to OscarWilde, the addict over-sensitive, hollow-cheeked with torment,the dens glided in rococo brothel style, populated by viciousChinese and degenerate aristocrats. The Respectable Fear begins The first demon dope stories came over from the USA in the mid1890's. There were, apparently, ever-increasing numbers of Blackmen with cocaine, Chinese with opium, and Mexicans with both,plus marijuana. These coloured men were allegedly using theirfiendish substances to gain the flesh of white women, and many ofthem would go crazy with big knives if frustrated in any way. TheBritish media only retold a few of these tales at first.The pathological imagination of the US Press kept it up for thenext forty years, changing the drug and the villains' colour nowand again. Heroin was refined in 1898 but for the first few yearsit was considered a miracle painkiller and cure for morphineaddiction. The subject of the grossest stories was cocaine, alsoconsidered a miracle cure a few years earlier. The medicalenthusiasts didn't think it suitable for recreational use. Therecreational users disagreed. The alcohol prohibitionists built amass following and inflicted a huge social disaster on the USA.When the alcohol ban was repealed, drug control was not. Themyths were retired for a few years, but similar stories can befound, only slightly less racist, in the mass media today. Before, during and after Prohibition, the USA lobbied forinternational drugs laws, mixing economic self-interest withmoralism. The Hague Conference in 1912 agreed to the principle ofcertain drugs being strictly for "legitimate medicalpurposes." It was never effective internationally because ofobstruction by the British opiate and German cocaine businesses.The conference suggested an investigation of hemp, but it wasn'tfollowed up. The Assam Opium & Ganja Committee of 1913(16)showed that the IHDC had been forgotten or ignored in thatprovince of India, for instance accepting that ganja causesinsanity without calling any evidence. It did say that when ganjaprices rose users turned to opium, when opium prices rose theyturned to alcohol or, alarmingly, morphine. The number oflicensed shops in Assam had fallen from 1116 in 1878 to 347 in1911, and the committee thought it couldn't be reduced furtherwithout provoking unrest. Recreational drug use in British literary circles in the '90sspread through the next two decades into a wider worlds. Cocaineuse had spread well into the upper class by the First World War.Officialdom grew concerned about officers on leave, who oftenweren't afraid to wreck their health since their chances ofsurvival were slim. Morale would not be improved, it was felt, bythe sight of the upper ranks behaving like beasts, and it wouldbe worse yet if the common soldiers imitated them. There was apress scare about the Germans using drugs and prostitutes,collecting blackmail material. This unlikely tale and otherstories of moral degeneracy caught the imagination of the ArmyCouncil, who banned the sale of all intoxicants to troops in mid1916. In July the first U K law against possession of drags wassneaked through, section 40B of the Defense of the Realm Act. Itcovered cocaine and opiates; cannabis was not included, althoughit had been considered. Section 40B also banned"Malththusian appliances" (contraception) and quackmedicines. The same Act established legal closing times for pubs,which caused a lot more fuss. The post war scandal boom Immediately after the Great War the British press got theirfirst US-style dope story. Actress Billie Carelton, age 21, diedsupposedly from cocaine taken at an alcohol-free Victory Ball.Her supplier was tried for manslaughter but could not beconvicted. It was just as likely the sleeping drug Veronal thatkilled her, but that didn't bother the Daily Express. Theyincluded hashish eating in the habits of a circle of degenerateswho, they said, had mined a sweet and innocent girl. In September1920 a Dangerous Drugs Act was passed, clarifying the wartimepossession law and effectively dividing the drug trade intomedical vs criminal. It was greeted with such apathy byParliament that it was hard to make up a quorum in some ofthe committees. Cannabis was still not banned. Internationally, the UK government stopped blocking drugcontrols after several scandals at home and reports that morphineand cocaine addiction were spreading in the colonies. There weremore sex drugs and foreigner stories to keep up the postwar drugscare. In 1922 the death of dancer Freda Kempton gained unwantedpublicity for Brilliant Chang, Chinese restaurant owner andalleged dope king since 1917, handling morphine, opium andhashish as well as cocaine. After many raids and mentions in thepress he was sentenced to 14 months - not much for such analleged villain - then departed in 1924. Eddie Manning, Jamaicanjazz drummer and alleged dope king, was convicted of dealingopium and cocaine in '23. Both, it was strongly implied, had usedtheir dealing to get close to English girls. In 1922 threesisters were found half dressed and unconscious in the company ofa dead Chinese man, Yee Sing a.k.a. Johnny Hop, in a sealed roomfull of opium smoke above a Cardiff laundry. The girls never toldquite what had happened, so the press made it up, including aChinese love potion made from hashish used especially to subduewhite women, with an antidote made from geraniums.(17) Pulpfiction by the likes of Sax Rohmer helped spread the corruptaristocrat and Chinese dope plot themes. Despite all this advertisement, there was still no workingclass drug subculture. The upmarket drug users of the 20'scontinued to be found where the overlap between high society andthe arts copied what were seen as American fashions for jazz andcocaine. Aleister Crowleys' 1922 novel, Diary of a Drug Fiend,thinly disguised a real West End scene where cocaine was dealt inthe Cafe Royal on Regent Sweet. Crowley was a former Golden Dawnmember who publicised himself as "The Wickedest Man in theWorld," and ran a black magic cult largely based on sex. Heoccasionally kicked his morphine habit cold turkey in front ofacolytes, to show the power of his will; he did quite a lot toestablish a link in the public mind between heavy drug use andbeing a dangerous but pretentious creep. Chloroform and morphinewere popular with Lady Diana Cooper and Katherine Asquith, modelsfor several wild aristos in fiction. Morphine might be risky andmaybe immoral, but boozing was common, which was much worse.Compared to these types cannabis users were sweethearts. Havingpreviously tried smoking it to no effect, the painter AugustusJohn tried a hashish compote or jam after sardines and wine withfriends in Hampstead; "...catching the eye of Iris, we wereboth simultaneously seized with uncontrollable laughter, aboutnothing at all..." Despite the publicity, and penaltiesincreasing in 1922, prosecutions under the Dangerous Drugs Actaveraged a steady 60 a year for cocaine, 65 for opium. Cannabis lust became illegal in the UK after the countryagreed the 1925 Geneva International Convention on NarcoticsControl. It was included in the '25 Convention with the opiatesand cocaine, because Egypt and Turkey proposed it. An Egyptiandelegate stirringly denounced "Chronic Hashism" whichhe said caused most of the insanity in his country. It also, hesaid, weakened users, gave them heart and digestive troubles andmade them look wild-eyed and stupid. India opposed includingcannabis in the Convention, as their delegate said it had beenused there since time immemorial, grew wild, and they doubtedthat a prohibition could enforced. The British delegate abstainedfrom the vote but signed in the end. There was hardly anyparliamentary debate before it came into law as amendments to theDangerous Drugs Act on 281h September 1928. Despite this cannabisoffences, and 206 for opium. In 1950 for the first time therewere more prosecutions for cannabis than for opium andmanufactured drugs together - 86 against 41 opium and 42 others.That year a series of police raids on jazz clubs produced a newcrop of stories about black men with drugs and white women, thistime involving marijuana and benzedrine. Cannabis had finally gotinto the shock horror league. Epilogue The Indian Hemp Drugs Commission finally had its moment inParliament in July 1967, after the Government had established anAdvisory Committee on Drug Dependence. J.J.S. Driberg, Chief ofPolice and Inspector of Prisons for Assam, had given gaveevidence to the IHDC. His son Tom was a Labour MP. According tohis autobiography [18], the poet Alan Ginsberg asked Tom to"look up for him the report... in the House library I foundthat my father had given evidence before this commission, puttingforward strongly the view that people living in a damp, coldclimate needed the traditional consolation of ganja... Theclimate referred to was that of Assam, rather than England; but Ifelt it was almost an act of filial piety to sign a full pageadvertisement in the Times calling for a liberalisation of thelaws on pot..." When it became obvious that there would beno liberalisation, be attacked the government, his own party, inthe parliamentary debate. He said his father had told the IHDCthat when insane people were arrested a form had to be filledsaying why they were insane, and the safest thing to say wasganja as the police knew that no further enquiry would be made.When the government spokeswoman asked rhetorically "Whatsort of society will we create if everyone wants to escape fromreality 7" Driberg answered that "They want to escapefrom this horrible society we have created." The 1968 WootonCommittee on Cannabis was "in agreement with the conclusionsreached by the IHDC... that the long-term consumption of cannabisin moderate doses has no harmful effects." Given widepublicity, the government couldn't completely to ignore this newstudy; instead they did exactly the opposite of what itrecommended, and increased penalties for all cannabis offences ina new 1971 Misuse of Drugs Act. Cannabis use continued toincrease dramatically. By 1990 there were 40,194 convictions andcautions for cannabis in the UK, well over 90% of all recordeddrugs crimes. References: 1. Resolution 1369, Finance and Commerce Dept. (SeparateRevenue), Government of India, 21/3/1895. 23 pp. 2. T.M.Parssinen, Secret Passions, Secret Remedies - Narcotic Drugs inBritish Society, 1820-1930. Manchester University Press 1980 3. B. Inglis (1975) The Forbidden Game London Hodder &Stoughton 4. Report of the Royal Commission on Opium. Parliamentarypapers 1895 5. Hansand, Parliamentary Questions, 6. Resolution 3773, Finance and Commerce Dept., Government ofIndia, 17/12/1873. 7. In full IHDC report. India (Ganja) 97 in House of Commonspapers 1893-4 LXVI.79. 8. In (2) V. Berridge & J. Griffith Edwards, Opium and thePeople, Yale 1982. 9 0'Shaughnessy W.B. (1839) On the preparations of IndianHemp, or Gunjah. Transactions of the Medical and Physical Societyof Bengal 1838-40 pp 421-461 10. Culpepper's Complete Herbal. London, W. Foulsham & Co. 11. Birch E.A. (1889) Indian hemp in the treatment of chronicchoral & opium poisoning. Lancet 30-3-89 p625 12. Reynolds Sir J.R. (1890) Therapeutic Uses & ToxicEffects of Cannabis Indica Lancet, 22-3-90 13. V. Berridge, Origins of the English Drug "Scene"1890-1930, Medical History 32, 1988. Also 14. Walsh J.T. Hemp Drugs and Insanity. Journal of MedicalScience 40 1894 15. The Hashish Club, Ed P. Haining, Peter 0wen 1975, 16. Assam Opium & Crania Committee 1913. 17 Marek Kohn, Dope Girls, Lawrence & Wishart, London1992. 18. Tom Driberg, Ruling Passions, Cape 1977 About the Authors. Sean Blanchard is a freelance journalist andresearcher. From 1981 to 1983 he was coordinator of the LegaliseCannabis Campaign. Matthew J. Atha B.Sc. MSc, was Legalise CannabisCampaign Secretary from 1983 to 1989. His MSc psychology thesis"Quantitative Assessment of Illicit substance use"(Birmingham University 1987) included analyses of surveys of druguse at pop festivals. He divides his time between advocacy workand performing as a rock musician. Contents | Feedback | Search DRCNet Library | Schaffer Library | Major Studies | IndianHemp Drugs CommissionWT01-B31-10IA031-000652-B040-293http://206.61.184.43:80/schaffer/library/studies/inhemp/4chapt9.htm 206.61.184.43 19970122130404 text/html 29501HTTP/1.0 200 OKDate: Wednesday, 22-Jan-97 13:03:45 GMTServer: WebSitePro/1.1f (S/N wpo-0deb)Allow-ranges: bytesContent-type: text/htmlLast-modified: Saturday, 28-Dec-96 07:04:37 GMTContent-length: 29283 Indian Hemp Drugs Commission Report - Social and ReligiousCustoms Contents | Feedback | Search DRCNet Library | Schaffer Library | Major Studies | IndianHemp Drugs Commission Indian Hemp Drugs Commission Report CHAPTER IX SOCIAL AND RELIGIOUS CUSTOMS. Scope of this Chapter. 431. In the instructions issued to the Commission by theGovernment of India, reference is made to the use of hemp drugsamong fakirs and ascetics who are held in veneration by largeclasses of the people, and to the custom, which is believed toobtain to a large extent in Bengal, of offering an infusion ofbhang to every guest and member of the family on the last day ofthe Durga Puja. The Commission were instructed to ascertain towhat extent these and similar customs prevail in Bengal and otherparts of India, and how far the use of hemp drugs forms a part ofsocial, or possibly religious, ceremonial or observance.Questions 32 and 33 of the Commission's questions were intendedto elicit information on these points. Bengal. 432. In Bengal there is a considerable body of evidencedealing with these customs, and more particularly with the customof offering an infusion of bhang on the last day of the Durga Puja.Some few witnesses, it is true, state either that no social orreligious custom with which hemp drugs are connected exists, orthat they are unaware of any such custom; but the great majorityof the witnesses either give an account of them more or lessfull, or allude to them briefly as matters of common notoriety. Durga Puja. 433. The custom of offering an infusion of the leaves of thehemp plant to every guest and member of the family on the BijoyaDasami, or last day of the Durga Puja, is common in Bengal, andmay almost be said to be universal. It is alluded to by many ofthe witnesses who refer to its use on this occasion as well as onother days of the Durga Puja festival. But, while there can be nodoubt as to the existence of the custom, there is considerabledivergence of opinion as to the true nature of it. The customitself is a simple one. On the last day of this great festivalthe male members of the family go forth to consign the image tothe waters and on their return the whole family with their guestsexchange greetings and embrace one another. During this rejoicinga cup containing an infusion of the leaves of the hemp plant ishanded round, and all are expected to partake thereof, or atleast to place it to the lips in token of acceptance. Sweetmeatscontaining hemp are also distributed. Opinion is almost equallydivided as to whether the custom is a mere social observance, orwhether it is an essential part of the religious ceremonial ofthe festival. There is difference whether there is any injunctionin theof opinion among the witnesses as to Shastras renderingobligatory the consumption of hemp; but Tantric religious workssanction the use, and the custom whatever be its origin may nowbe said from immemorial usage to be regarded by many people aspart of their religious observances. From the evidence of thewitnesses it would appear that there is no specific direction inthe Shastras of the manner in which the drug should beused but from the references quoted it would appear that the usealluded to is authority that of bhang in the form of aninfusion. Witnesses who can speak Mahamahon hopadhya MahesaChandra Nyayaratna, C.I onthe subject, such as Principalof the Government Sanskrit College, Calcutta, testify toreligious sanction for the use of bhang or siddhi, while manywitnesses of high social position, well acquainted with thehabits of the people, as, for example, Maharaja Sir JotindraMohain Tagore, K.C.S.I., Maharaja Durga Charan Law, Raja PiariMohan Mukharji, C.S.I., Rai Rajkumar Sarvadhikari Bahadur, RaiBahadur Kanai Lall . Day, C.I.E., and others, speak to theprevalence of the custom, its intimate association with thereligious devotions of the people, and the innocent harmlessnessof the practice. Other occasions on which bhang is used. 434. The custom described above, and which refers solely tobhang as distinguished from other preparations of the hemp plant,is he most important occasion on which bhang is used as a part ofsocial or religious ceremonies; but there is evidence to showthat the drug in this form is used at other festivals. Forexample, at the Holi festival, which is observed more generallyin Behar than in other parts of the Lower Provinces, bhang iscommonly consumed; and, according to many witnesses, at suchfestivals as the Diwali, Chait Sankranti, Pous Sankranti,Sripanchami, Sivachaturdasi, Ramnavami, and indeed on occasionsof weddings and many other family festivities. But, so far as theevidence shows, the use on those occasions is a matter of socialcustom observed more generally in some parts of the province thanin others, and, although nodoubt there may be some who considerit essential to their devotions, partaking but little of thenature of general religious observance. In Orissa bhang islargely used by the attendants and worshippers at the temple ofJagannath at Puri; and there appears also to exist a custom,somewhat similar to that of the Durga Puja in Bengal, of offeringsiddhi or bhang in the form of sweetmeats to the god Ganesh,which are then eaten by the worshippers and their friends andrelatives. This festival, called the Ganesh Chaturthi, occurs inthe month of Bhadro (August-September). Connection of ganja with the worship of Siva. 435. It is chiefly in connection with the worship of Siva, theMahadeo or great god of the Hindu trinity, that the hemp plant,and more especially perhaps ganja, is associated. The hemp plantis popularly believed to have been a great favourite of Siva, andthere is a great deal of evidence before the Commission to showthat the drug in some form or other is now extensively used inthe exercise of the religious practices connected with this formof worship. Reference to the almost universal use of hemp drugsby fakirs, jogis, sanyasis, and ascetics of all classes, and moreparticularly of those devoted to the worship of Siva, will befound in the paragraphs of this report dealing with the classesof the people who consume the drugs. These religious ascetics,who are regarded with great veneration by the people at large,believe that the hemp plant is a special attribute of the godSiva, and this belief is largely shared by the people. Hence theof many fond epithets ascribing to ganja the significance of adivine pro-party, and the common practice of invoking the deityin terms of adoration before placing the chillum or pipeof ganja to the lips. There is evidence to show that on almostall occasions of the worship of this god, the hemp drugs in someform or other are used by certain classes of the people it isestablished by the evidence of Mahamabopadhya Mahesa ChandraNyayaratna and of other witnesses that siddhi is offered to theimage of Siva at Benares, Baldynath, Tarakeswar, and elsewhere.At the Shivratri festival, and on almost all occasions before theon which this worship is practised, there is abundant evidenceCommission which shows not only that ganja is offered to the godand consumed by these classes of the worshippers, but that thesecustoms are so intimately connected with their worship that theymay be considered to form in some sense an integral part of it. Trinath. 436. The special form of worship by the followers of Siva,called the Trinath or Tinnath Mela, in which the use of ganja isconsidered to be essential, is mentioned by many witnesses, anddeserves more than a passing notice. A full account of thisreligious practice given by Babu Abhilas Chandra Mukharji will befound in Vol. III Appendices of this Report. The origin of therite, which it is said sprang up first in Eastern Bengal, appearsto be of recent date, about the year 1867. It appears to beobserved at all times and at all seasons by Hindus andMuhammadans alike, the latter calling it Tinlakh Pir. When anobject of special desire is fulfilled, or when a person recoversfrom illness, or a son is born, or a marriage or other ceremonyis performed, the god Trinath, representing in one the Hindutrinity, is worshipped. Originally one pice worth of ganja, onepice worth of oil, and one pice worth of betel-nut was offered tothe god. But now ganja--it may be in large quantities--isproffered, and during the incantations and the performance of theritual it is incumbent on all present to smoke. This form ofworship is shown to have spread extensively throughout EasternBengal and the Surma Valley of Assam, and, according to onewitness, it has penetrated. even to Orissa. On the other hand,there are a few witnesses who say that the practice is graduallydying out. Muhamadans 437. The use of hemp drugs is as a rule in no way connectedwith orthodox Muhammadan observances, whether social orreligious. The Muhammadan religion condemns such practices. Assam.. 438. In Assam, where the use of hemp drugs is but littlepractised by the Assamese proper, there appear to be noindigenous customs connected with the drugs. But the customsprevailing in Bengal are also found in Assam. There is evidenceas to the use of bhang or siddhi at the Durga Puja, and of ganjaby the worshippers of Siva. In Sylhet the Trinath form of worshipappears to prevail to a considerable extent. With reference tothis practice, one witness (Prasanno Kumar Das) observes that"in the Surma Valley ganja is offered in the name ofPit Muhammadan saint) for the benefit of the cattle." North-Western Provinces. 439. In the North-Western Provinces, where the celebration ofthe Durga Puja is not so generally observed as in Bengal, acon-siderable number of witnesses (some fifty in all) state thatthere are no customs, religious or social, with which these drugsare connected. But, on the other hand, there is overwhelmingevidence to establish the almost universal use by the people ofbhang at the Holi festival, and some evidence as to the commonuse of ganja by certain classes of the followers of Siva at theirfestivals and seasons of worship. Of the witnesses who speak tothe use of ganja in connection with religious observances, 22state that it is essential and 92 that it is not essential. As towhether the use of bhang should be regarded as a purely socialcustom or as essential to religious observance,. the opinion ofwitnesses who speak on the point is about equally divided. It issufficient to say that the custom is now a general one, and thatwhere the Holi festival is observed, there the practice ofconsuming bhang during its observance is common. On otheroccasions, such as the Diwali festival, marriages, and familyfestivities, there is evidence to show that among certain classesthe consumption of bhang is common. Allusion is also frequentlymade to the habit of using bhang, to which, for example, theChaubes of Mathra and Brindaban are notoriously addicted, but howfar the habit is connected with the religious observances at thetemples the evidence does not justify the formation of anopinion. A custom is mentioned by, a Kumaon witness, Dharma NandJoshi, who states that a class of people called Kouls, whoworship spirits, meat, fish, etc., have the bhang plant as one ofthe objects of their worship. Punnjab 440. In the Punjab there is evidence as to the general use ofhemp by some of the followers of Siva, and especially of bhang,at the Holi, Dasehra, Diwali, and other festivals, and on theoccasion o marriages and other family festivities. Among theSikhs the use of bhang as a beverage appears to be common, and tobe associated with their religious practices. The witnesses whorefer to this use by the Sikhs appear to regard it as anessential part of their religious rites having the authority ofthe Granth or Sikh scripture. Witness Sodhi Iswar Singh, ExtraAssistant Commissioner, says :"As far as I know, bhang ispounded by the Sikhs on the Dasehra day, and it is ordinarilybinding upon every Sikh to drink it as a sacred draught by mixingwater with it. Legend--Guru Gobind Singh, the tenthguru, the founder of the Sikh religion, was on the gaddi of BabaNanak in the time of Emperor Aurangzeb. When the guru was atAnandpur, tahsil Una, Hoshiarpur district, engaged in battle withthe Hill Rajas of the Simla, Kangra, and the Hoshiarpurdistricts, the Rains sent an elephant, who was trained inattacking and slaying the forces of the enemy with a sword in histrunk and in breaking open the gates of forts, to attack andcapture the Lohgarh fort near Anandpur. The guru gave one of hisfollowers, Bachittar Singh, some bhang and a little of opium toeat, and directed him to face the said elephant. This brave manobeyed the word of command of his leader and attacked theelephant, who was intoxicated and had achieved victories inseveral battles before, with the result that the animal wasoverpowered and the Hill Rajas defeated. The use of bhang,therefore, on the Dasehra day is necessary as a sacred draught.It is customary among the Sikhs generally to drink bhang, so thatGuru Gobind Singh has himself said the following poems in praiseof bhang: "Give me, O Saki (butler), a cup of green colour(bhang), as it is required by me at the time of battle (vide'Suraj Parkash,' the Sikh religious book). "Bhang is alsoused on the Chandas day, which is a festival of the god SheojiMahadeva. The Sikhs consider it binding to use it on the Dasehraday-The quantity then taken is too small to proveinjurious." As Sikhs are absolutely prohibited by theirreligion from smoking, the use of ganja and charas in this formis not practised by them. of old Sikh times, is annuallypermitted to collect without interference a boat load of bhang,which is afterwards. distributed throughout the year to thesadhus and beggars who are supported by the dharamsala. Central Provinces. 441. The evidence as to social or religious customs in theCentral Provinces is somewhat discrepant, but on the whole pointsto the existence of customs akin to those existing in theNorth-Western Provinces. The use of bhang at the Holi and Diwalifestivals and at marriages and such occasions, and of ganja orbhang in connection with. the worship of Siva, is frequentlymentioned by the witnesses. A few local customs are alsomentioned by some witnesses. Regarding a custom of the Chamarcaste, the Rev. Mr. Jacob says: "At Chanda; the Chamars useganja dust in the preparation of a beverage called gulabpani, whichis drunk at a ceremony called dadhi (the first shaving ofthe beard), when no liquor is permitted." Among the Gonds,Cowasjee Nusserwanjee Hattidaru describes the following custom asexisting:." In the funeral ceremony amongst the Gonds ofthese provinces, kalli or flat ganja is placed over thechest of the dead body of the Gond, and when the funeral partyreturns home, a little of the ganja is burnt in the house of thedead person, the smoke of which is supposed to reach the spiritof the dead." Another Satpura witness, Hosen Khan, mentionsa custom of offering "a little ganja at the ChitaraiDebis, or collections of stones with rags tied to some treeabove. They offer either a cock or a cocoanut or some ganja. Itis a custom among travellers. These Chitarai Debis are in theopen, and the travellers have a smoke at the same time." Onewitness states that he has heard of the hemp plant beingworshipped in the Berars, but this is not corroborated by any ofthe witnesses from these districts. Another has heard that theGonds in their hill homes are worshippers of the plant Madras. 442. In the Madras Presidency, where the use of hemp drugs isless common than in most other provinces, many witnesses assertthat there are no customs, social or religious, with which theyare connected, and the evidence as a whole fails to establish theprevalence of any customs so general as those connected with theDurga Puja and the worship of Siva in Bengal or the Holi festivalin the North-Western Provinces. But there is evidence as to theexistence of customs of a less general or widespread nature. InGanjam, the witnesses speak to the common use bhang on the MeshaSankranti day in honour of Siva and Anjanayya, and also inthe worship of Durga. Several also allude to a custom of offeringa confection or draught containing bhang to the image at thetemples of Hanuman. At the festival of Kama, the Indian cupid,bhang is freely made and drunk according to several witnesses.The Rajputs or Bondilis are particularly referred to inconnection with this custom. On occasions of holidays orgala-days, and at the Mohurram, a number of witnesses say it isusual for Muhammadans as well as Hindus to take bhang. It is alsosaid that various intoxicants, including ganja, are sometimesoffered to the gods in worship, and then swallowed by thoseoffering them. Witness M. Sundaram Iyer, Deputy Tahsildar (60),says: "Some of the lower orders make use of ganja asan offering, like cocoa-nut, plantains, liquor, and such otherarticles, for certain deities, such as Mathura--veeran,Muniappan, etc., according to the vow taken by each person. Thiscannot be considered as essential, but is only a practiceobserved in very rare cases. Such practice is not followed bymany people, and it is not injurious. "Others allude to theoffering of ganja to Karuppannam, Kali, Mathuraveeran, Muniappan,Karuannaswami, and Aiyaswami, more particularly in the south ofthe Presidency. Mr. Azizuddin, Sahib Bahadur, Deputy Collector,says: "Neither the Musalman nor the Hindu religionrequires the use of these drugs on religious occasions. On theother hand, it is prohibited. Nevertheless, in the maths ofbairagis, such as at Tripati, and of Muhammadan saints, such asat Nagore Conjeveram, Arcot, and other places, the manager of theshrine distributes ganja to all the fakirs who assemble duringthe festival. In none of these places, religiously speaking,ganja should be distributed, but, according to custom among thefakirs, its distribution is essential." The Rev. Mr.Campbell says that ganja is used in connection with the funeralceremonies observed by certain classes, but that the use is notessential. Mr. Merriman alludes to a custom of offering andconsuming bhang at the funeral of bhang consumers. Bombay 443. An interesting note, entitled "The Religion ofHemp," by Mr. J. M. Campbell, C.I.E., will be found in Vol.III Appendices. In the Bombay presidency the use of hemp inconnection with the worship of Siva, Mahadev or Shankar appearsto be very common. It is referred to by many witnesses. Thefollowing description of this custom as prevailing in part ofGujarat, Kaira, and probably Ahmedabad has been furnished to theExcise Commissioner by Mr. B. E. Modi, Deputy Collector: "Onthe Shivratri day (the last day but one of the month ofMagh), sacred to the god Mahadev or Shankar, bhang water isfreely poured over the lingam. Mahadev is an ascetic, andis fond of bhang, and on this day it is considered a religiousduty to offer him his favourite drink. From this day to the 11thday of Ashad, on which day gods go to sleep, water is keptconstantly dripping upon the lingam of Mahadev from anearthen pot kept above it. "Somewhat similar accountsvarying in detail are given by many witnesses coming fromdifferent parts of the province, of whom some also refer to thehabit which ganja smokers have of invoking the deity beforeplacing the pipe. to their lips. Others also refer to hemp asrequired in the worship of Baldeo and to its use at the Shimga orHoli festival. The Marwaris and some other classes appear to usebhang at marriages and other festivities. Mr. Charles, Collectorof Belgaum, says that among Musalmans and Marathas the ganjaplant is offered to dead relatives who used it in their lifetimeat the time of the anniversary ceremonies of their death. Thereappears to be no special custom of worshipping the hemp plantitself. R. K. Kothavale, of Satara district, says the hemp plantis worshipped, by one sect only, namely, by people from NorthernIndia and Nepal, while Mr. Lamb, Collector of Alibag, remarksthat some of the Kunbis who make Offerings to the localdivinities of their fields at the harvest season include a. smallquantity of ganja in the offerings. Sind. 444. In Sind the customs, both religious and' social, appearto be much the same as in Bombay. In Karachi and some otherplaces bhang is generally offered to all comers on occasions ofmarriages, panchayats, and other gatherings; and the custom offreely distributing bhang as a charity to all who dare to partakeis common both at temples and at other places of resort. Berar. 445. In Berar there is evidence as to the use both of ganjaand bhang at the Shivratri and Holi festivals and at socialgatherings. The hemp plant itself is not worshipped, but,according to one witness, when a consumer dies, the plant is keptnear his corpse during the funeral ceremony. Ajmere-Merwara. 446. At the Holi and the Shivratri and at family festivitiesthe drugs, especially bhang, are used. Baluchistan. 447. Major Gaisford, Deputy Commissioner, states that amongthe Hindu sect called Barn Bargis the consumption of bhang isregarded as essential. Native States. 448. From Native States there is but little informationregarding customs, either social or religious, with which thesedrugs are connected. No purely local or indigenous customs havebeen brought to the notice of the Commission, but there issufficient information to show that practices similar to thoseexisting in British provinces at the Holi and Shrivratrifestivals and on occasions of family rejoicings are observed bycertain classes of the people in many Native States. Worship of the hemp plant 449. The custom of worshipping the hemp plant, although not soprevalent as that of offering hemp to Siva and other deities ofthe Hindus, would nevertheless appear from the statements of thewitnesses to exist to some extent in some provinces of India. Thereason why this fact is not generally known may perhaps begathered from such statements as that of Pandit Dharma NandJoshi, who says that such worship is performed in secret. Theremay be another cause of the denial on the part of the largemajority of Hindu witnesses of any knowledge of the existence ofa custom of worshipping the hemp plant in that the educated Hinduwill not admit that he worships the material object of hisadoration, but the deity as represented by it. The custom ofworshipping the hemp plant, though not confined to the Himalayandistricts or the northern portions of India alone, where the useof the products of the hemp plant is more general among thepeople, is less known as we go south. Still even far south, insome of the hilly districts of the Madras Presidency and amongthe rural population, the hemp plant is looked upon with somesort of veneration. Mr. J. H. Merriman (witness No. 28, Madras)says: "I know of no custom of worshipping the hempplant, but believe it is held in a certain sort of veneration bysome classes." Mr. J. Sturrock, the Collector of Coimbatore(witness No. 2, Madras), says: "In some few localities thereis a tradition of sanctity attached to the plant, but no regularworship. "The Chairman of the Conjeveram Municipal Board,Mr. E. Subramana Iyer (witness No. 143, Madras) says: "Thereis no plant to be worshipped here, but it is generally used assacrifices to some of the minor Hindu deities. "There is apassage quoted from Rudrayanmal Danakand and Karmakaud inthe report on the use of hemp drugs in the Baroda State, whichalso shows that the worship of the bhang plant is enjoined in theShastras. It is thus stated: "The god Shiva says toParvati-- 'Oh, goddess Parvati, hear the benefits derivedfrom bhang. The worship of bhang raises one to my position. In BhabishyaPuran it is stated that "on the 13th moon of Chaitra(March and April) one who wishes to see the number of his sonsand grandsons increased must worship Kama (Cupid) in thehemp plant, etc.". General conclusions In summing up their conclusions on this chapter, the Commission would first remark that charas, which is a comparatively new article of consumption, has not been shown to be in any way connected with religious observance. As regards Northern India, the Commission are of opinion that the use of bhang is more or less common everywhere in connection with the social and religious customs of the people As regards ganja they find that there are certain classes in all parts, except the Punjab, who use the drug in connection with their social and religious observances. The Commission are also of opinion in regard to bhang that its use is considered essential in some religious observances by a large section of the community, and in regard to ganja that those who consider it essential are comparatively very few. The Commission have little doubt that interference with the use of hemp in connection with the customs and observances above referred to would be regarded by the consumers as an interference with long established usage and as an encroachment upon their religious liberty. And this feeling would, especially in the case of bhang, undoubtedly be shared to some extent by the people at large. Regarding Southern India, the same remarks apply with this reservation, that. the difference between ganja and bhang as materials for smoking and drinking respectively is much less marked there, and the distinction between the two forms of the drug is much less clearly recognised, although by the term "bhang" is generally meant the drug as used for drinking, and by "ganja" the drug as used for smoking. Contents | Feedback | Search DRCNet Library | Schaffer Library | Major Studies | IndianHemp Drugs CommissionWT01-B31-11IA031-000652-B040-315http://206.61.184.43:80/schaffer/library/studies/inhemp/5chapt14.htm 206.61.184.43 19970122130416 text/html 74425HTTP/1.0 200 OKDate: Wednesday, 22-Jan-97 13:04:06 GMTServer: WebSitePro/1.1f (S/N wpo-0deb)Allow-ranges: bytesContent-type: text/htmlLast-modified: Saturday, 28-Dec-96 07:04:29 GMTContent-length: 74207 Indian Hemp Drugs Commission Report - The Policy of HempDrug Administration Contents | Feedback | Search DRCNet Library | Schaffer Library | Major Studies | IndianHemp Drugs Commission The Indian Hemp Drug Commission Report CHAPTER XIV. THE POLICY OF HEMP DRUG ADMINISTRATION General principles regarding sumptuary laws and theirapplication to India. 553. The question of prohibiting the growth of the hemp plantand the sale of ganja and allied drugs is one which stands in theto forefront Of the present inquiry. It has been remarked by awell known historian that "no laws are of any servicewhich are above the working level of public morality, and thedeeper they are carried down into life, the larger become theopportunities of evasion. If these words are true as applied toEngland under a feudal system, they are much more true in thepresent day as applied to British India. The Government of thiscountry has not grown out of the forces contained within it, buthas been superimposed upon them, and the paternal system ofgovernment which may have been suitable in England during thesixteenth century, and in, the initial development of some Indianprovinces during the period immediately following theirannexation, becomes purely visionary when public opinion is inprocess of formation and the needs of the people are year by yearfinding more ready expression. Occasionally, no doubt, theLegislature in India has anticipated a standard of morality notuniversally accepted by the people, as in the case of lawsrelating to infanticide or the burning of Hindu widows; but thesemeasures were passed under an overwhelming sense of the necessityof correcting popular notions of morality in matters coming wellwithin the sphere of Government, and in the assurance that in thecourse of time they could not fail to secure the assent of allintelligent members of the community. In the chapter of Mill'sPolitical Economy which treats of the non-interference principle,a distinction is made between two kinds of intervention by theGovernment-- the one authoritative interference, and the othergiving advice or promulgating information. And the followingremarks are made regarding the former: "It is evident, even at first sight, that theauthoritative form of Government intervention has a much morelimited sphere of legitimate action than the other. It requires amuch stronger necessity to justify it in any case, while thereare large departments of human life from which it must beunreservedly and imperiously excluded. Whatever theory we adoptrespecting the foundation of the social union, and under whateverpolitical institutions we live, there is a circle around everyindividual human being which no Government, be it that of one, orof few, or of the many, ought to be permitted to overstep thereis a part of the life of every person who has come to years ofdiscretion within which the individuality of that person ought toreign uncontrolled either by any other individual or by thepublic collectively. That there is, or ought to be, some space inhuman existence thus entrenched around no one who professes thesmallest regard to human freedom or dignity will call inquestion: the point to be determined is where the limit should beplaced; how large a province of human life this reservedterritory should include. I apprehend that it ought to includeall that part which concerns only the life, whether inward oroutward of the individual, and does not affect. the interests ofOthers, or affect. them only through the moral influence ofexample. With respect to the domain of the inward consciousness,the thoughts and feelings, and as much of external conduct as ispersonal only, involving no consequences, none at least of apainful or injurious kind, to other people, I hold that it isallowable in all, and in the more thoughtful and cultivated oftena duty, to assert and promulgate with all the force they arecapable of their opinion of what is good or bad, admirable orcontemptible, but not to compel others to conform to thatopinion, whether the force used is that of extra legal coercion,or exerts itself by means of the law. Even in those portions ofconduct which do affect the interests of others, the onus ofmaking out a case always lies on the defenders of legalprohibitions. It is not merely a constructive orpresumptive injury to others which will justify the interferenceof law with individual freedom. To be prevented from what one isinclined to, or from acting contrary to one's own judgment ofwhat is desirable, is not only always irksome, but always tends, protanto, to starve the development of some portion of thebodily or mental faculties, either sensitive or active; and,unless the conscience of the individual goes freely with thelegal restraint, it partakes, either in a great or in a smalldegree, of the degradation of slavery. Scarcely any degree ofutility short of absolute necessity will justify a prohibitoryregulation, unless it can also be made to recommend itself to thegeneral conscience; unless persons of ordinary good intentionseither believe already, or can be induced to believe, that thething prohibited is a thing which they ought not to wish todo." These remarks have been given at length, because theCommission believe that they contain a clear exposition of theprinciples which should guide them in deciding whether theprohibition of the hemp drugs should be authoritatively enforcedby Government. The question of entirely suppressing all intoxicants. 554- Now, a certain number of .persons (among whom may in allprobability,- be reckoned the mover of the question in the, Houseof Commons which led to the appointment of the-Indian Hemp DrugsCommission) deem it to be the duty of the British Government tosuppress the trade in all intoxicants in all the countries underits sway; and there are no doubt special circumstances inIndia which render it less, impossible than in some othercountries to consider even so drastic a policy. These are notablythe general sobriety of its races and the feeling, popular aswell as religious, which prevails against their use among a largesection of the community. Even then no appeal in support of sucha measure can be made to the public morality or practice ofcivilised nations at large, nor, so far as the Commission areaware, to any marked success attending the experiment inparticular instances. In the exceptional cases in which theexperiment has been attended with partial success (as in some ofthe American States), the reformation of the habit has become anobject of desire to the majority of the people, and the enactmentfor promoting Such reformation has presented itself less as arestrictive force than as an auxiliary agency Not laid before the commission 555. But the Commission are not called upon to pronounce on sowide an issue. It was not upon the basis of this generalprinciple that the Secretary of State for India accepted theproposal made in the House of Commons, nor do the instructionsissued to the Commission by the Government of India cover so widea field. The question of prohibiting the production and sale ofthe hemp drugs in India has to be considered by the Commissionapart from the general question, and such prohibition must bejustified, if at all, on some more special ground than the merefact that they are intoxicants. The past history of the case how far to be relied upon. 556. Again, there are a certain number of persons whose'evidence before the Commission points to the assumption that thecase for prohibition of the hemp drugs has already beenestablished in the records of the Government, and that furtherenquiry implies a willful blindness to what has been abundantlyproved by such records. A reference to Chapter XII of this Reportwill show how untrustworthy these records are in regard to theproduction of insanity by the use of the drugs-- an aspect of thequestion which is of the utmost importance, and has formed thebasis of nearly all the official opinion heretofore recorded.against such use. And, after availing themselves fully of everyopportunity of consulting the official literature on the subject,the Commission have arrived at the conclusion that it showslittle originality, and that a very limited amount of personalobservation has been made to do duty as the basis of largeconclusions. The want of reliable data has been compensated byannual reiteration until the stamp of antiquity has secured forthe opinions so expressed a large amount of acquiescence amongofficials who had neither the time nor the opportunity to examinethe matter for themselves So far, therefore, as the effects ofthe hemp drugs are concerned, the Commission have had to approachthe subject as almost a tabula rasa, and, while availingthemselves of the imperfect data previously collected, haveendeavoured to avoid accepting any conclusions without asubstantial foundation of well ascertained facts. The attitude,however, of the Government in regard to the question may bebriefly described. So far back as 1798 an inquiry was made inBengal regarding the quality of ten intoxicating articles--"opium, madak ganja, subzi, bhang, majum, banker, charas,tobacco, and toddy--" with a view to determining whether itmight not be advisable to prohibit altogether the sale of any ofthem. The conclusion arrived at, which was stated in a letter ofthe Board to the Governor-General in Council, No. 22, dated 29thMay 1798, was to the following effect. "It appears that theoriginal productions are as follows: Tobacco, opium, ganja, subzior bhang, banker, and toddy, and that the three remainingarticles are for the most part compositions of those hererecited, as above mentioned. With respect to the drugs specifiedm the foregoing schedule, they are not for the most partrepresented as producing any very violent or dangerous effects ofintoxication except when taken to excess; and, although theoperation of them-may be more powerful in their compound state,we apprehend it would be difficult to sanction the sale of theoriginal productions, and to prohibit with effect the use ofcompositions of which they are susceptible; to which may be addedthat most of these articles, both as original productions and asartificial combinations appear to be useful either in medicine orotherwise; for these reasons we do not deem it necessary torecommend that the sale of any of them be altogether prohibited,but shall proceed to state what appear to us the. best means ofrestraining the use of them, and improving the revenue by theimposition of such taxes as are best adapted to the nature of thecase." A complete inquiry was made in 1871 from allprovinces as to the effects of several preparations of hemp; andif the result should call for any action in the direction ofrestricting them by enhancement of the duty or of limiting, oreven prohibiting, the cultivation of the. plant, the advice ofthe Local Governments was invited as to the expediency andpracticability of such measures. The result is contained in theResolution of the Government of. India, Finance Department, No.3773, dated 17th December 1873. The following passage shows theconclusion arrived at: "Upon a consideration of all the opinions thus collected,it does not appear to the Governor-General in Council to bespecially proved that hemp incites to crime more than other drugsor than spirits. And there is some evidence to show that on rareoccasions this drug, usually so noxious, may be usefully taken.There can, however, be no doubt that its habitual use doesproduce insanity. The total number of cases of insanity is smallin proportion to the population, and not large even in proportionto the number of ganja smokers; but of the cases of insanityproduced by the excessive use of drugs or spirits, by far thelargest number must be attributed to the abuse of hemp. LowerBengal the circumstances have admitted of a system under whichthe consumption of ganja has been reduced one-half, while theamount of duty levied on it has been doubled. It would be verydesirable to control the cultivation and preparation of ganja andbhang elsewhere-in the same way. But it is believed that thiswould not be easy; indeed, it would probably be impracticable.Moreover, with the exception of the Chief Commissioners ofBritish Burma and the Central Provinces, the Local Governmentsare not in favour of altering existing arrangements. HisExcellency in Council, however, trusts that the various LocalGovernments and Administrations will endeavour, wherever it maybe possible, to discourage the consumption of ganja and bhang byplacing restrictions on their cultivation, preparation andretail, and imposing on their use as high a rate of duty as canbe levied without inducing illicit practices. As regards BritishBurma, the Chief Commissioner has already been informed that theGovernor-General in Council concurs with him in thinking that thecultivation and consumption of ganja should be absolutelyprohibited, and it has been prohibited from the beginning of theyear 1873-74. " In 1877 the Bengal Government appointed a special officer,Babu Hem Chunder Kerr, to make a full inquiry into the details ofthe cultivation of ganja, the sufficiency or otherwise of thepresent safeguards, and the reforms which it might be advisableto introduce. Sir Ashley Eden's conclusions on this officer'sreport in regard to the effects of ganja and policy to befollowed were as follows: "The Lieutenant-Governor hashimself no doubt that the use of ganja in any form is injuriousto the consumer, and that it is the duty of Government to makethe tax on this article as high as it can possibly bear.Unfortunately it is habitually used by large numbers of the lowerclasses of the population, who would, if deprived of italtogether, apparently find in the leaves of the wild hemp plantand in other drugs narcotics and stimulants of equallydeleterious character. It does not seem possible, therefore, tostop the cultivation altogether. The policy of Government must beto limit its production and sale by a high rate of duty withoutplacing the drug entirely beyond the reach of those who willinsist upon having it." The last important utterance on thesubject previous to the appointment of the Commission iscontained in the letter of the Government of India, FinanceDepartment, to Her Majesty's Secretary of State, No. 212, dated9th August 1892, in which the following remarks occur: "Weare inclined to believe that ganja is the most noxious of allintoxicants now commonly used in India. But even if the absoluteprohibition of the use of the drug could be enforced, the resultmight be to induce the use of still more noxious drugs. Indiaabounds with plants growing wild from which drugs can be procuredwhich are more deleterious in their effects than ganja. One suchplant is the dhatura (Stramonium), the seeds of whichare already used to intensify the narcotic effects of bhang, aliquid preparation of hemp leaves; and we apprehend that if theuse of ganja were suppressed altogether, dhatura might be largelyresorted to by the poorer classes as a means of satisfying theircraving for stimulants. Apart, however, from the objections justmentioned, we believe. that it would be impossible to enforce inIndia a prohibition of the use of ganja. That drug is produced inNative States, and the difficulties in the way of preventing itsimport from them, if the supply in British India were cut off,would be immense. It would not, moreover, be possible to suppressthe supply in British India. The hemp plant grows readily inIndia, in many places wild without cultivation of any kind, andit would be easy for any one addicted to the use of ganja to growa plant or two in the enclosure of his own house and in nooks andcorners which would be safe from observation and from the risk ofdetection. The question in the House of Commons suggests that asthe possession and sale of ganja has been prohibited for manyyears in Burma, it is desirable that the same prohibition shouldbe extended to other provinces of British India. The analogy ofBurma does not, however, apply to India. When the prohibition wasenforced in Burma, the drug was very little used by the NativeBurmese, its consumption being almost entirely confined tocoolies and other immigrants from India; and the cultivation ofthe plant in Burma, which had never been extensive, had virtuallyceased, the consumers being dependent on importations for theirsupplies. In India, on the other hand, the practice of ganjasmoking has existed from time immemorial, and among certain sectsof Hindus, ascetics, and religious mendicants hemp intoxicationis habitually indulged in; and, as explained in the precedingparagraph, it would be impossible to suppress the growth of theplant. But, although we consider it impracticable to enforce theabsolute prohibition of the use of ganja, we fully recognise itas our duty to restrict its consumption as far as practicable,and we have distinctly laid down the policy to be pursued inrespect of this drug in our Resolution of the 17th December 1873already quoted. The annual reports of Excise Administration showthat the subject has since been continually before LocalGovernments, who are making every possible endeavour to minimisethe evils and discourage the use of the drug wherever it is asource of danger to consumers." Thus "restraining theuse and improving, the revenue by the imposition of suitabletaxation," "discouraging the consumption byplacing restrictions on the cultivation, preparation, and retail,and imposing on their use as high a rate of duty as can be leviedwithout inducing illicit practices," "limiting theproduction and sale by a high rate of duty without placing thedrug entirely beyond the reach of those who will insist uponhaving it," "restricting consumption as far aspracticable, minimising the evils, and discouraging the use ofthe drug wherever it is a source of danger to consumers"have from time to time been the watch-words of the Government inthe matter of the hemp drugs, a policy only once definitelyabandoned, viz., in the case of Burma, where totalprohibition was introduced in 1873. Prohibition in other countries. 557. Allusion must be made to precedents for the prohibitionof the hemp drugs in other countries in order to complete thesegeneral observations. Excepting British Burma (reference to whichwill be made further on), the Commission only know of four casesof prohibition, viz., in Turkey, Egypt, Greece, andTrinidad. For the first three of these, the only information atthe disposal of the Commission is contained in the communicationsfrom Her Majesty's representatives addressed to the Secretary ofState for Foreign Affairs in 1892 in consequence of a requisitionmade on them by the Earl of Rosebery at the request of Mr. W SCaine, M.P. Turkey 558. The ground of the prohibition in Turkey is thus stated ina note addressed by the Grand Vizir to the Ministry Commerce,Constantinople, on 1st March 1292 (sic):"From thereports furnished by the Imperial Medical Council, it appearedthat the use of hashish in the preparation of medicines wasextremely rare, and that, being a narcotic, its use must ofnecessity be injurious, and that consequently the suppression ofthe cultivation of hashish could not fail to prove highlyadvantageous." The effect of the prohibition is thusdescribed in an enclosure to the Ambassador's reply: "Theimportation and sale in Turkey of hashish, though contraband, isstill, I hear, largely carried on, and is used for smoking, inthe composition of various sweetmeats, and as an opiate ingeneral." Egypt. 559. In Egypt the cultivation, use, and importation of hashishwere first forbidden in 1868, but in 1874 it was allowed to beimported on payment of duty. In November 1877 an order wasreceived from Constantinople that all hashish brought into Egyptwas to be seized and destroyed, and finally, in March 1879, theimportation and cultivation of hashish were prohibited by aKhedivial decree. In March 1884 it was provided that confiscatedhashish should be sold by the Customs (for delivery abroad)instead of being destroyed as formerly, and the proceeds of thesale divided amongst the informers and officers who took part inthe seizure. "This measure was rendered necessary,"says Mr. Caillard, the Director-General of the Customs, "bythe absence of any fund from which rewards could bedistributed; while, on the other hand, the profits of smugglingbeing very great, large sums were paid by the smugglers to insurethe silence or complicity of the Customs officers,coastguards-men, and others. A considerable number of persons areemployed in the smuggling trade, many of them having subsistence.Great ingenuity is displayed by the smugglers no other means ofand no sooner has one trick been discovered than another isinthis illicit trade, of the contrainvented. The great obstacle,however, to the complete repression band trade is the refusal ofsome of the European Governments to recognize the right of theEgyptian Government to search suspected shops or warehouses, andto punish the delinquents by fine as well as confiscation. Inview of the impossibility of suppressing the contraband trade inhashish under the suggested to the Minister of Financecircumstances described above, desirability of removing theprohibition against the importation of the and I proposed tocollect a customs duty of P. T. 100 per kilogramme (9s. 3d.perlb.), besides it license-tax on the sale of hashish. It has beenabundantly proved that the vice of hashish smoking cannot besuppressed by legislation, whereas by a system of licenses it maybe kept under control to some extent. "Mr. Caillardestimates that the quantity of hashish consumed annually in Egyptcannot be less than 50,000 okes (about lbs. 140,000)notwithstanding the prohibition. He states that the hashishappears to be manufactured chiefly in Greece. Greece. 560. In Greece there is no law regulating or speciallyalluding to the product as merchandise is allowed, but a Policeorder of 1891 prohibits its sale and consumption in the smallcafes of Athens and the Piroeus, in some of which, during theprevious ten or fifteen years apparently, the habit of using thisdrug had been gradually introduced. The order was based upon areport of the Sanitary Board at Athens, in which prominentmention is made of the observations made in India by Englishdoctors, and the statistics of insanity in Bengal lunatic asylumsascribed to the use of the hemp drugs are put forward asjustifying, repressive measures. The effect of the order passedis not mentioned, sufficient time not having elapsed. Trinidad.. 561. As regards Trinidad, the Commission are not surethat the hemp drugs are prohibited. The fact has been stated bythe Indian Immigrants Commission, Natal, 1885-87, and by Dr.Thomas Ireland, Government Medical Officer, British Guiana, in apaper published in the Alienist and Neurologist, St.Louis, in October 1893. But, on the other hand,Surgeon-Major Comins, lately on special duty in British andForeign Colonies and the Netherlands, in his Note on Emigrationfrom India to Trinidad, 1893, quotes a statement of the Protectorof Immigrants, who says that in the year 1885 an Ordinance waspassed requiring the payment of L100 per acre to obtain a licenseto grow ganja, which had previously been grown in largequantities. This practically put a stop to the growth andconsumption for several years, but immigrants who had leftTrinidad two years previous to the writing of his report had beengrowing it in Venezuela, and several seizures had been made bythe Customs officers from persons endeavouring to introduce itinto Trinidad. The Protector adds: "With a coast linesuch as ours, adjacent to that of the Spanish Main, it will beimpossible to prevent its introduction into this colony ifimmigrants who go there continue to grow it." Dr. Cominshimself says: "I do not know what are the laws in force hereregarding the sale of opium and ganja." Basis of prohibition and results in these countries. 562. Thus in the case of other countries, where the useof the drugs has been prohibited, the Commission do not find inthe literature available to them many arguments for prohibition.In Turkey it rests upon the theory accepted by orthodoxMuhammadans that hashish "being a narcotic its usemust of necessity be injurious," while in Egypt theprohibition emanated from Turkey. In both these countries themeasure has by no means been attended with complete success. InGreece the prohibition in the cafes of Athens is based largelyupon Indian experience, which the Commission have had cause ingreat measure to recast. In Trinidad, if there has beenprohibition, it does not seem of late to have been effectual. Itmust be added that the Commission have no scientific informationregarding the strength of the article of commerce called hashish,and it may differ to some extent from the Indian products. Fromthe description of its manufacture even by the Mayor ofOrchomenus in Mantines in Arcadia, whence the Egyptian supply ismainly derived, it appears to resemble more the charas of Yarkandthan the ganja or bhang of India. Is prohibition in India justifiable, feasible, andadvisable? 563. Starting, therefore, from the position that what is knownof the hemp drugs in the past is not sufficient to justify theirprohibition in India, and that for such a measure there must bestrong justification based on ascertained facts scientificallyand systematically examined, the first question for theCommission to decide is whether such justification is to be foundin the evidence before them, and the second-whether, if this isso, prohibition is feasible and advisable on other grounds. Thesewill now be considered. Prohibition of bhang 564. The effects of the hemp drugs have been treated inChapters X to XIII of the Report; and as the first result ofthese conclusions, the Commission are prepared to state that thesuppression of the use of bhang would be totally unjustifiable.It is established to their satisfaction that this use is veryancient, and that it has some religious tion among a large bodyof Hindus; that it enters into their social customs; that it isalmost without exception harmless in moderation, and perhaps insome cases beneficial; that the abuse of it is not so harmful asthe abuse of alcohol; that its suppression, involving theextirpation of the wild hemp plant, would in some tracts be amatter of great difficulty; that such a measure would beextremely unpopular, and would give rise to widespreaddiscontent; and, finally, that, if successfully accomplished, itwould lead to the use of more hurtful stimulants. The Commissiondeem it unnecessary to traverse the evidence further than hasbeen done in the preceding chapters of this report in support ofthese propositions. It is almost unanimous in regard to them. Theutmost that is necessary in regard to this product is that itshould be brought under more effective control, and this matterwill be dealt with further on. But absolute prohibition is, inthe opinion of the Commission, entirely out of the question. Prohibition of ganja and charas 565. Though it has been shown that as a rule ganja and charasare used in moderation, and that the moderate use ordinarily.does not cause appreciable injury, yet it has been establishedthat the excessive use of these forms of hemp drugs has been moreinjurious than in the case of bhang. Whether they should beprohibited or merely controlled is a question which might besettled merely with reference to their ascertained effects. TheCommission consider that the effects are not such as to call forprohibition, and on the general principles discussed in theopening paragraphs of this chapter, such interference would beunjustifiable. Nevertheless, it. seems advisable to refer to theother evidence with a view to ascertaining the generallyprevailing views on the subject, and considering the grounds onwhich prohibition is advocated or opposed. The evidence regarding prohibition of ganja and charas maybe considered together. 566. In reviewing the evidence on these points, it will not benecessary to draw a distinction between ganja and charas. Theeffects of these two drugs have been shown to be similar, thoughcharas is cateris paribus the more potent. They are bothordinarily smoked, though very occasionally used for eating anddrinking usually in the form of admixtures with other condimentsstated by Mr. Lyall (Bengal 1): "Ganja and charas arereally one, and in time, if the question be scientificallyfollowed up, possibly charas will be the only form used."The refuse of ganja is used in some provinces as bhang, but thissubstance more nearly resembles bhang than ganja properly socalled. The ganja of the different provinces varies in quality.But these distinctions cannot here be specially observed; it willbe sufficient to bear in mind that the opinions in Bengal, theCentral Provinces, Madras, Bombay, and the smallerAdministrations relate to ganja; that those in the Punjab relateto charas; and that those in the North-Western Provinces and Sindrelate to ganja and charass, both of which consumed. Supply of ganja and charas in its relation to prohibition. 567. A few remarks, however, recapitulating the localconditions of ganja and charas will not be out of place. Charasis practically a foreign article. Small amounts are imported fromNepal and Gwalior, but they may be left out of the account. Thebulk comes from Yarkand through the Himalayan passes, or to amuch smaller. degree from offer parts of Central Asia through theroutes on the frontier of Afghanistan. It would not be a verydifficult matter to stop these imports, though the co-operationof the Kashmir Darbar would be necessary in regard to Yarkandcharas. It may, therefore, be accepted that the supply of charasmight be cut off without much difficulty, though, as this articleforms the principal import from Yarkand, the prohibition ofcharas would paralyse, if not extinguish, the trade with thiscountry. In regard to ganja, the problem is more complex. Ganjais regularly cultivated in Bengal, the Central Provinces, Madras,Bombay, and Berar. In Bengal and the Central Provinces, thecultivation of the hemp, plant for its production is undercomplete control. In Berer cultivation is only permitted underlicense. In the other tracts of British territory it is notdirectly Controlled. Assuming that control is possible in thesetracts, it does not follow that it would be equally possible toprevent cultivation altogether. Moreover, there still remains aconsiderable amount of production in many of the Native Statesall over India. To induce these States to prohibit cultivationwould be a difficult matter, and, even if this were done, thesuppression of illicit cultivation would offer the most seriousdifficulties. For, though ganja of good quality requires somecultivation and tending, the evidence before the Commission tendsto establish the fact that ganja of an inferior kind can bemanufactured from the spontaneous or casual growth which is foundnear human habitations and amidst cultivation of other crops inmany parts of India. While, therefore, it cannot be asserted thatthe task of preventing the manufacture of ganja is an impossibleone, it would certainly at the present time be attended withconsiderable difficulty. Opinions of the witnesses regarding prohibition of ganjaand charas. 568. The question addressed to the. witnesses regarding theprohibition of the hemp drugs (No. 35) was so framed as to elicitin the first place opinions as to the feasibility of such. ameasure. The considerations bearing upon the subject were alsoset forth in the form of subsidiary questions. The questionwhether the witnesses advocated prohibition. was not specificallyput, but it is not difficult, comparing the answers to thequestions above mentioned with those relating to other questions,to decide what the opinion of each witness is on this question.Those who hold decided views have no doubt generally stated themin some portion of their answers, and at all events ampleopportunity of doing so was afforded them. A larger number of thewitnesses have contented themselves with merely giving anaffirmative or negative answer to the questions on .the subject.It is impossible to attach much importance to such answers. TheCommission have abstracted them and considered them, but theyfeel bound to give far more weight to the opinions of witnesseswhose replies show that they have formulated an opinion, on thedesirability of prohibition. Some account will now be given ofthese answers. Opinions regarding prohibition of ganja and charas. 569. Out of the total of 1,193 witnesses, 575 haveexpressed a decided opinion on the question of prohibition. Ofthese only 99 advocate it in their answers. The remainder areagainst it. The classification of these witnesses is shown in thefollowing table: Superior Superior Subordinate Civil Officers. Officers. PRACTITIONERS. PROVINCE. ..... Bengal ......... Assam ......... 4 1 .. , North-Western Provinces 10 79 Punjab . 3 ."' 3 36 Cerntral Provinces ....... Madras ] 11111 67 Bombay and Sind 19 7 69 Berar, Ajmere, Coorg, and 1 12 . Quetta-Pishin.  Total - x6 138 4 3 106 4 2o Per cent .... 3 97 x7 83 1o 90 36 64 83 Thus, not only is there a very large preponderance of opinionagainst prohibition, but the preponderance is specially markedamong superior Civil officers. The only witnesses indeed of thelatter class who favour prohibition are three in the Punjab,where charas and not ganja is consumed. The most important of these opinions on either side will nowbe specified. The most forcible opinions in favour of prohibitionwill be quoted at some length in order that the argument for thisview may be .thoroughly appreciated. The opinions againstprohibition are too numerous to be quoted, but the witnesses willbe named under headings setting forth the most prominent viewsexpressed. Bengal opinions in favour of prohibition of ganja 570. The Bengal witnesses in favour of prohibition of ganjaconsist of a Sub-Deputy Collector, an Assistant Surgeon. twoMedical Practitioners, an Honorary Magistrate, two zamindars, twopleaders, a delegate from the Indian Relief Society, Calcutta,the Secretary to the Band of Hope, Faridpur, the Secretary to theBogra Medical Society, and two Missionaries. The Commissioncannot find much to quote from these opinions, but the followingare the most forcible: (238) Delegate, Indian Relief Society, Calcutta, BabuAmrita Krishna Mullick, B.A., B.L.: After quoting officialand medical opinions relating to the injuriousness of ganja, theSociety, endeavours to show that the cultivators of the hempplant lose largely by their occupation, and maintains that it isthe duty of the Government to come to their rescue by abolishingit. The society maintains that the privation to the consumerswould not be serious, and that it is difficult to suggest anydrug more deleterious than ganja to which they could take. TheSociety contends that the alleged religious sanction to the useof the drugs is a fallacy, and refers to the opinions of severalpandits in support of this view. The Society argues that to meetthe deficit in the revenue, which would be about lakhs per annum,the salaries of European officers should be cut down, the dutieson cotton goods re-imposed and the income-tax increased with anenhanced taxable minimum. Savings would be effected by reductionof establishment and by decreased cost of lunatic asylums. (286) Secretary, Band of Hope Temperance Society, Faridpur,Babu Purna Chandra Maitra: "This Society begs to urgeupon the Commission to consider the justice and propriety of ajust, benign, and Christian Government to allow cultivation andsale of a drug which has been excluded from some countries, andin England doubly protected in the poison list." The witnessargues that the drug" has been unreservedly condemned byeminent doctors as one of the most dangerous poisons known, asthe most potent cause of lunacy, and as the most pernicious anddeleterious of all excitants ever in use in any country." Headmits that there are a number of yogis, sanyasis, fakirs, andmendicants addicted to ganja smoking, but states that ganjasmoking forms no part of their religion, and there is not asingle Hindu or Muhammadan religious book which sanctions the useof ganja. "No real disaffection can under the benign rule ofthe British Government be seriously apprehended, and, even in theevent of there being such apprehension, the fact should not belost sight of that the Government in this case will have thesupport of the bulk of the population." He alleges thatganja produces crime, and that the taxation, amounting to 22lakhs, is a drain on the poverty-stricken and half-famishedpeople of Bengal. He finds it difficult to suggest a substitutefor ganja, but liquor may be one, and a peculiar preparation ofstrong tobacco may also serve the purpose. (134) Secretary to Bogra Medical Society (10 members),Pyari SankerDass Gupta, L.M.S.: "the prohibition willgive rise to no political danger. For the ganja smokers have verylittle influence over society. The Government has faced questionsof a greater religious character, as the Suttee or the Age ofConsent Act, with boldness. This is comparatively a minorquestion affecting only depraved men." (203) Rev. W. B. Phillips, Missionary.: "What withliquor and opium and hemp drugs of various kinds, all licensed byGovernment, it does seem as if the population were terriblyexposed to degrading influences. It is not my province to facethe difficult task of dealing with these evils; and I sincerelysympathize with the Government in the heavy duty of solving thegrave problems involved. But I do feel it my duty to set forth asstrongly as possible the assurance that very much mischief isbeing worked in the country by the various intoxicants so freelyand largely sold. I hardly care to distinguish between opium,alcohol, and ganja. I regard them all as bad. My mind is soimpressed with the evil effects of excessive use that I do notcare to consider the moderate use. I would wish Government tobegin with ganja, to proceed with little delay-against opium, andthen tackle alcohol. I prefer this as a matter of policy, asganja is easiest dealt with I am prepared to prohibit all threeintoxicants on account of the evil which I see done by them. (81) Kali Das Mukerji, Sub-Deputy Collector: Afteradvocating prohibition of ganja on the grounds of the evileffects, and stating that there would be no danger from thediscontent caused owing to the small number of the consumers, thewitness proceeds: "The reasons usually put forward infavour of ganja consumption are as follows: (1) that Hindu friarsand jogis cannot do without it, for it helps them in theirreligious contemplation, and sustains them under severe exertionand exposure; (2) that it is a safeguard against disease inmalarious tracts; and (3) that it serves the labouring classes asa refreshing stimulant, alleviating fatigue. I do not think thatany of these reasons is conclusive, though plausible. In fact,none of them stands the test of close examination. If anyintoxicating drug is at all necessary for friars and jogisalcohol, opium or siddhi may serve the purpose. Eight kinds ofintoxicating drugs are prescribed in the Tantras for Hindudevotees, and it is optional with them to take any if they careto do so at all. That ganja is a safeguard against disease inmalarious tracts is not necessarily true Even as a stimulant andremover of fatigue, ganja has very little to recommend it to thelabouring classes A careful observation is sure to establish thefact that any ordinary labourer whose only stimulant is tobaccois on the whole a better workman than his ganja consumingbrother." Opinions against prohibition of ganja in Bengal. 571. It is impossible to quote the mass of opinion againstprohibition of ganja, but the following analysis of some of themost important opinions will give an idea of the strength ofthese opinions :-- (1) Prohibition impossible or unnecessary, or could not beenforced without a large preventive establishment. (1) Hon'ble D. R. Lyall, C.S.I., Member, Board of Revenue. (2) Mr. Westmacott, Commissioner. (9) Mr. Price, Collector. (11) Mr. Skrine, Collector. (21) Mr. Jenkins, Collector. (17) Mr. Gupta, Commissioner of Excise (46) Ganendra Nath Pal, Deputy Collector. (197) Mr. H. M. Weatherall, Manager, Nawab's Estates, Tippera. (2) Prohibition would be strongly resented by religiousmendicants, would be regarded as an interference with religion,or would be likely to become a political danger. (1) Hon'ble D. R. Lyall, C.S.I., Member, Board of Revenue. (3) Mr. Westmacott, Commissioner.(19) Mr. Manisty,Collector.(18) Mr. Hare, Collector. (16) Mr. Marindin, Collector. (32) Mr. Bedford, Deputy Commissioner. (63) Abhilas Chandra Mukharji, Deputy Collector. (62) Kanti Bhushan Sen, Deputy Collector of Excise. (163) Maharaja Bahadur Sir Jotendra Mohan Tagore, K.C.S.I. (174) Radhika Churn Sen, Zamindar. (175) Raghonandan Parsad, Zamindar. .(185) Jogendra Krishna Rat Chaudhri. (207) Purnendu Narayan Sinha. (2o8) Mahendra Chandra Mitra, Chairman, Naihati Municipality. (92) Mr. Ricketts, Manager, Nilgiri State. (217) Biprodas Banarji, Pleader, Newspaper Editor, andChairman, Baraset Municipality. (250) District Board, Monghyr. (228) Jadubans Sahai, Vice-Chairman, Arrah Municipality (3) Prohibition might lead to the use of dhatura or otherintoxicantsworse than ganja. (21) Mr. Jenkins, Collector. (46) Ganendra Nath Pal, Deputy Collector. (62) Kanti Bhushan Sen, Deputy Collector of Excise. (161) Maharaja Girijnath, Roy Bahadur.(164) Raja Surja KantaAcharjya, Bahadur. (167) Radha Balav Chaudhri, Rai Bahadur. (233) Secretary, Rajshahi Association. (217) Biprodas Banarji, Pleader, &c. Assam.Assam.Opinions in favour of prohibition of ganja. 572. The opinions in favour of prohibition of ganja in Assamare those of a Civil Surgeon, the Secretary to the Tezpur RaiyatsAssociation, the Secretary to the Upper Assam .Association, amerchant, and a pensioned Overseer, Public Works Department, andmember of a Local Board. There is nothing especially to note inthese opinions. Opinions against.. 573. Against prohibition we have the Commissioner of the AssamValley, the Commissioner of Excise, the Director of Land Recordsand Agriculture, an Officiating Deputy Commissioner, a CivilSurgeon, an Extra Assistant Commissioner, a medical practitioner,four pleaders, and four planters. Mr. Driberg, Commissioner of Excise,says: "It would be useless to prohibit the use of ganja in aprovince like Assam, surrounded as it is by independent hillpeople, who would cultivate it in their hills and smuggle it downwith little risk of detection. Any prohibition will only lead tothe increase of illicit consumption and to the secret use of thedrug, which would be decidedly bad; of course, stop cultivationin Bengal, and the prohibition of the use of excise ganja couldbe enforced; but there would be serious discourse, though in thisprovince it might not amount to a political danger, and theprohibition would be followed by recourse to opium, and in somecases to alcohol." The evidence of planters tends generallyto show that the use of ganja by the garden coolies, who (exceptin the western districts of the Assam Valley and those of theSurma Valley, all of which border on Bengal) are the principalconsumers, produces no serious effects. There is nothing in anyof the Assam evidence to controvert these views. North-Western Provinces.Opinions in favour of prohibitionof ganja and charas. 574. The advocates of prohibition of ganja and charas in theNorth-Western Provinces are as follows: 6 subordinate civilofficers, 9 subordinate medical officers and private medicalpractitioners, and 18 non-officials. Butfew of these witnessesgive any reasons for their opinions. And the Commission are notable to quote any one of them as having any special weight. Theonly opinion which it appears worth while to quote is that of aCollector (Mr. Addis (4), who does not, however, specificallyrecommend prohibition. He says: "It probably would befeasible to prohibit the use of all these drugs. Public opinionis against their use, and the people are very obedient toauthority. The prohibition would certainly lead to the increaseduse of opium and alcohol. Opinions against prohibition. 575. On the other hand, the opinions against prohibition arevery strong. The following is an analysis of some of the mostimportant:- (1) Prohibition impossible or unnecessary, or could not beenforced without a large preventive establishment. (1) Hon'ble A. Cadell, Member, Board of Revenue.(5) Mr.Stoker, Commissioner of Excise(12) Mr. Brownrigg, OfficiatingDeputy Commissioner.(2o) Mr. Partridge, Officiating DeputyCommissioner.(9) Mr. Jackson, Collector.(10) Mr. Tweedy,Collector.(17) Mr. Spencer, Officiating Collector.(34) Mr.Cockburn, Assistant Sub-Deputy Opium Agent.(32) Mr. Robarts,Joint Magistrate.(26) Rama Shankar, Assistant Collector(24) Mr.Rogers, Assistant Commissioner.(191) Kanwar Kundan Singh,Zamindar. (12) Mr. Brownrigg, Officiating Deputy Commissioner.(9)Mr. Jackson, Collector.(10) Mr. Tweedy, Collector.(34) Mr.Cockburn, Assistant Sub-Deputy Opium Agent.(21) Mr. Gillan,Assistant Collector, (26) Rama Shankar, AssistantCollector.o(46) Panditi Bishambar Nath, Deputy Collector.(28)Mr.Bruce, Assistant Collector..(33)Pandit Sri Lulls OfficiatingJoint(227) Syad Mahammad Nuh, Zamindar. (3) Prohibition might lead to use of dhatura or otherintoxicants worse than ganja or charas. (6) Mr. Stoker, Commissioner of Excise.(15) Mr. Ferard,Collector (28) Mr. Bruce, Assistant Collector.(51) Thakur TukmanSingh, Deputy Collector. Punjab 576. The advocates of theprohibition of charas Opinions for prohibition of charas. in thePunjab are as follows:-- 3 superior civil officers, 3 subordinatecivi1 officers, 2 subordinate medical officers, and 10non-officials.It may be noted that Mr. Ogilvie, FinancialCommissioner in charge of Excise (2), records the followingopinion: "I am inclined to hold the opinion, though I am notquite satisfied on the subject, that the use of charas is sodeleterious that it might be permissible, both on grounds ofmorality and utility, for its use to be prohibited or for theprice of the drug to be so artificially raised as to confine itsconsumption to a very small number indeed. The reason why I saythat I am not quite satisfied on the point is because I have notsufficiently investigated the facts. All that I can, therefore,say with certainty is that my opinion tends to the directionabove indicated I would observe, however, with regard to theYarkand trade that the imposition of a duty so high as to bepractically prohibitive would very considerably injure thattrade, . because the Yarkand trader in exchange for the churnstakes back the products of the Punjab to his own country or toKashmir. The extinction or serious injury of the Yarkand tradewould, of course, be a very regrettable circumstance. On theother hand from my personal knowledge as Deputy Commissioner ofthe Dera  Ismail Khan District, I would say no harm wouldaccrue to general trade on the western border from theprohibition of churns." Mr. Coldstream. Deputy Commissioner (5), though he doesnot seem to have formed a definite opinion regarding the moderateuse of the drugs, says: "The gradual stoppage ofimport of ganja and charas might be tried. It is not as yet avery widely-spread habit, but it might grow. It would cause gentpain and discontent if the prohibition were sudden andcomprehensive, but this would not amount to political danger. Aprohibitory measure regarding ganja and charas would no doubt befollowed at once by a recourse to opium and alcohol. I can quitebelieve the moderate occasional use of the drugs may becomparatively harmless, but I am not aware that they are commonlyused occasionally and in moderation. They may, however, be soused for all I know." Mr. Wilson, Deputy Commissioner (14), says that heshould like to see the experiment made in selected districts ofprohibiting trade in charas (and bhang) all together. As regardscharas, he thinks the prohibition would be feasible, as it isimported, and the discontent would be insignificant. knows of noclass, such as labourers, who take the drug in moderation as anordinary stimulant. Among fakirs and other excessive consumers,he thinks the use produces great evils, and that there is no moreharmful drug which they are likely to take to. He does not knowanything of the use of dhatura except its administration as apoison. He thinks sudden prohibition would be cruel. He wouldtherefore begin by taxation and gradually raise it, leaving thequestion of total prohibition to be decided by experience. Theevidence of Arjan Singh, Extra Assistant Commissioner (19),is much to the same effect, but he states that the use of dhaturais general among the followers of Siva at the Shivratri in theDera Ghazi Khan district. He says it is taken in very smallquantities, so that its effect is almost imperceptible. GeneralMillet (69), formerly District Superintendent of Police,would like to see all intoxicants prohibited which cannot beproved to be actually necessary. He thinks gradual prohibition ofthe hemp drugs feasible, and that educated, intelligent nativepublic opinion, which to a great extent leads that of the lowerclasses, would support prohibition. Discontent at first among thedegraded classes would be inevitable, but there would be nopolitical danger, though tact and discretion would be needed andcalm-minded European officials at the helm. He fears thatrecourse to alcohol would be the result. Shekh Riaz Husain,zamindar (67), thinks that "having regard for thewelfare and good of the people which the British Government hasin view, the prohibition of the hemp drugs (including bhang) isimperatively necessary. Loyal and intelligent subjects andwell-wishers of the country would welcome the prohibition, thoughthe unscrupulous habitual consumers would indeed dislike it. Butas it would be for the good of the people, it is not hoped thatany class of persons would resent it. The enforcement of theprohibition should be effected like other new laws andregulations, exceptions being made to some extent in the case ofthe existing old habitual consumers, because its sudden stoppagewould cause them serious privation. The discontent resultingwould not amount to a political danger. If it were possible tomake charas as expensive as alcohol, that would be one way ofdealing with the subject."Sardar Sujan Singh, RaiBahadur, Contractor (59), considers charas as certainly mostinjurious, and thinks its use should most certainly beprohibited. It does no good to anybody. There are not many kaharswho take it. Those who do, go to the bad. He does not know ofthe use. of dhatura as an intoxicant. The use of madak and chanduis more injurious than charas, and they also should be prohibitedas well as liquor. He would not recommend immediate prohibition,but would put on such a tax, increasing it gradually, as to makeit impossible for the majority of people to buy them at all. Dr. H. M. Clark, Missionary (46), would like to seecharas prohibited if it were possible, He thinks. however, thatalcohol does more harm than charas. He cannot believe that amoderate use of charas is possible. Fakirs and devotees are thechief consumers. Devi Dayal, Editor of the Kaitistha Mitra,*Lahore, circulation 300 copies (83), says: "If charas becalled poison (fatal, killing, murdering drug), it is not anexaggeration of any kind. It is a great vice to smoke charas. MayGod not give this even in the lot of a foe. Only just people ashave bad luck get engaged in this vice. Government will do theirsubjects a very great obligation by saving them from early deathand whirlpool of destruction and ruin. My present belief is thatthere is no such thing as moderation in the use of chards,because, when a charsi visits another, he offers him the chillum,and they smoke in company. The smoke is thus repeatedfrequently." Consumers acknowledge that they would have nocomplaint; and if Government were to prohibit the use of charasto-morrow, the bad habit would die out of itself. Ganesh Das,Pleader, and President, Sarin Sabha, Hoshiarpur (77): Charasjogis, sanyasis, and suthra fakirs, andis consumed by shoemakers,musicians, by some Khatris and Brahmins. The physical effects arevery bad, and most consumers become incapacitated for work andlead a miserable life. The subcommittee of the Sarin Sabhaappointed to consider the subject recommend prohibition. Enquirywas not made from medical experts. Consumers would not take toother intoxicants, because the intoxication of chards is not likethat of opium or other intoxicants. The greatest loss would bethat of the traders of Hoshiarpur and Amritsar, who takemerchandise to Ladakh and Yarkand and bring back charas. Opinions against prohibition of charas. 577. The following is an analysis of some of the mostimportant evidence against prohibition (1) Prohibition impossible or unnecessary, or could not beenforced without a large preventive establishment. (1) Mr. Rivaz, First Financial Commissioner.(3) Mr. Thorburn,Commissioner. (6) Mr. Ibbetson, Deputy Commissioner.(8) Mr.Maconachie, Deputy Commissioner. (13) Mr. Drummond, DeputyCommissioner. (66) Kazi Syad Ahmad, retired Government servant. (2) Prohibition would be strongly. resented by religiousmendicants, or would be regarded as an interference withreligion, or would be likely to became a political danger. (3) Mr.Thorburn, Commissioner. (6) Mr. Ibbetson, Deputy Commissioner. (10) Mr. A. Anderson, Deputy Commissioner. (8) Mr. Maconachie, Deputy Commissioner. (13)Mr. Drummond, Deputy Commissioner. (29)Mr. Brown, Officiating Deputy Inspector-General of PoliceThis paper has ceded to (39) Thakur Das, Rai Bahadur, Assistant Surgeon. (36) BhagwanDass, Assistant Surgeon. (25) Muhammad Ikramulla Khan, Khan Bahadur, Honorary ExtraAssistant Commissloner. (27) Muhammad Barkat Ali Khan, KhanBahadur, retired Extra Assistant Commissioner (86) Bahram Khan, Honorary Magistrate.(93) Gujar Ma!,Trader.(94) Jawala Bhagat, Trader.(3) Prohibition might leadto use of dhatura or other intoxicants worse than charas. (76)Babu P. C. Chatterji Judge, Chief Court.(10) Mr. A. Anderson,Deputy Commissioner.(18) Rai Bahadur Bhagwan Dass, ExtraAssistant Commissioner.(39) Thakur Das, Rai Bahadur, AssistantSurgeon.(27) Muhammad Barkat All Khan, Khan Bahadur, retiredExtra Assistant Commissioner.(85) Lachman Dass, Merchant. Opinions.in favour of the prohibition ofganja. 578. There are only two witnesses in the Central Provinces whoadvocate the prohibition of ganja.Honorary Surgeon-Major Harrison(38) on the retired CentralProvinces.list, employed in theKalahandi State,. Advocates gradual prohibition, "which wouldcause discontent, but not any serious danger. The prohibitionwould no doubt be followed by recourse to alcohol and otherstimulants." The other is a pensioned hospital assistant,who also advocates gradual prohibition. Opinions against prohibition of ganja. 5 79. The following is an analysis of some of the mostimportant evidence against prohibition:- (1) Prohibition impossible or unnecessary, or could not beenforced without a large preventive establishment. (1) .Mr. Neill, Judicial Commissioner.(4) Mr. Laurie,Officiating Secretary to Chief Commissioner.(2) Colonel Bowie,Commissioner. (9) Mr. Drake-Brockman, Officiating ExciseCommissioner.(39) Dr. Prentie, Civil Surgeon.(.66) Rev. IsraelJacob, Missionary. a) Prohibition would be strongly resented by religiousmendicants, or would be regarded as an interference withreligion, or would be likely to become a political danger. (1) Mr. Neill, Judicial Commissioner.(4) Mr. Laurie,Officiating Secretary'to Chief Commissioner.(2) ColonelBowie, Commissioner.(3) Mr. Anderdson, OfficiatingCommissiOner.(6) Mr. Duff, Deputy Commissioner.(27} Mr. Lowrie,Officiating Deputy Conservator of Forests(17)Batuk Bharthy (65)Rev. Israel Jacob, Missionary.(68)Rev. Oscar Lohr,Missionary.(22)Vinayak Balkrishna Khare, Excise Daroga.(59)(47)Mir Iradad Ali Honorary Magistrate. (2) Prohibition might lead to use of dhatura or otherintoxicants worse than ganja. (1) Mr. Neill, judicial Commissioner.(9) Mr. Drake-Brockman,Officiating Excise Commissioner. (39) Dr. Prentie, Civil Surgeon.(64) Rao Sahib Balwantrao Govindrao Bhuskute, Jagirdar. Madrass Opinions in favour of theprohibition of ganja 580. The Madras witnesses in favour of prohibition are a CivilSurgeon, a subordinate civil officer, a medical practitioner, aHindu priest, and six missionaries. Dr. King, (85) says-"The restriction of the sale of ganja under conditionssimilar to those required for poisonous drugs in Great Britainwould be an unqualified blessing to the country, thus contrastingwith the action taken against agitation which I believe to beunnecessary and mischievous. I consider special measures shouldbe taken to restrain the use of ganja by sepoys, and especiallyto prevent the young sepoy from acquiring the habit" In oralexamination however, Dr. King, stated as follows- "Myopinion of the effect of the moderate use in impairing the moralsense and inducing laziness, etc., is a general impression andnot based on actual observation. My impression is based on thefact that persons alleged to have been ganja smokers havepresented these characteristics. They were pointed out asnotorious ganja smokers. I did not discriminate in these casesbetween the moderate and excessive use." Synd Mahmud(I22) says: "It is anunquestionable fact that ganja, bhang, and charas are poisons,and this fact is admitted by all. In my opinion their suppressionwould be an act of virtue deserving of future reward, but it isnot advisable to suppress their use at once. Its suppressionshould be regulated under certain rules without any loss to theState. To the best of my knowledge and researches, alcohol cannotbe safely used as a substitute for ganja, charas, andbhang." Rev. Mr. Laflamme (153) speaking on behalf of theBaptist Missionary Conferences of the Presidency, advocatesprohibition in these terms: "Owing to the scarcity of shopsin these parts practical prohibition exists. Much that isconsumed is consumed illicitly. The introduction of the licensesystem Seems to have had no appreciable effect on the use of thedrugs. The ganja is nearly all grown by the consumers in theirown yards." "The drugs should all be so safeguarded asto prevent or minimize any possible harm resulting from theirabuse." "The general sense of the people isopposed to the use of the drugs." So far as the witness cangather, the members of the Mission are. united in the belief thatin these parts hemp drugs are far less injurious than opium andalcohol; thus far that the latter are not only much moreextensively used, but much more baleful in, their effects. Twoother missionaries, though neutral in opinion, are worth quoting Rev.Mr. Pittendrigh Missionary (160) says that he would haveultimate prohibition in view if possible, but there is not muchground for special interference in anything that he has seen.Another Missionary, the Rev. Mr. Goffin. (145), cannotundertake to criticise the present or any system of exiseadministration. His impression is that Government would be wiseto adopt strictly "let-alone" policy, leaving it to thespread of education and enlightenment among the people to preventand lessen all its effects. The province government should becarefully to watch such effects, and wherever and whenevernecessary interfere with prohibitive legislation. Such necessity,however, in his opinion would not often occur. Opinions against prohibition 581. Among those who are opposed to prohibition, the evidenceof the following witnesses may be quoted :-- (1) Prohibition impossible or unnecessary, or could not beenforced without a large preventive establishment. (1) Hon'ble C. S. Crole, Member, Board. of Revenue.(8) Mr.Willock, Collector.(14) Mr. Bradley, Collector.(19) Raja K. C.Manevedan, Collector. (23) Mr. Campbell, Sub-Collector.(3o) Mr.Levy, Acting Deputy Collector, Salt and Abkari. (2) Prohibition would be strongly resented by religiousmendicants, or would be a political danger. (8) Mr. Willock, Collector.(10) Mr. Stokes, Collector.(6) Mr.Sewell, Collector. (30) Mr. Levy, Acting Deputy Collector; Saltand Abkari.(94) Dr. Walker, Civil Surgeon. (95) Dr. Sarkies,Civil Surgeon. (38) Buddhavarapu Narayana Murthi Pantalugaru,Assistant Collector.(23) Mr. Campbell, Sub-Collector.(121)H.S.A.M..Manju Miyyah Sahib, Medical Practitioner. (3). Prohibition might lead to use of dhatura or otherintoxicants worse than ganja. (23) Mr. Campbell,Sub-Collector, Bombay. Opinions in favour of prohibition of ganja. 582. For the prohibition of ganja or charas in Bombay andSind, we have the following advocates: in Bombay two mamlatdars,a hospital assistant, and a medical practitioner; and in Sind ahealth officer, two hospital assistants, and a. banker. There isnot much that need be quoted from the evidence of thesewitnesses. It may be noted that the Hon'ble T. D. Mackenzie,Commissioner of Abkari, etc. (1), holds that the policy ofGovernment in relation to the hemp drugs should be one ofrestriction, as far as restriction, 'is possible, and that, ifabsolute prohibition were possible, he thinks it would be a goodthing. Owing, however, to the fact that the territories of theBombay Presidency interlace so extensively with foreignterritory, and to the feeling which would be aroused among theconsumers and those who sympathize with them, it would in hisopinion be impossible or undesirable. The Secretary to the AryaSamaj in Bombay (109) states that while fully sympathising withthe objects of the Commission, which are apparently understood tobe the restriction or prohibition of the drugs, the Arya Samaj"is of opinion that any Governmental action in the directionof further restricting the preparation and sale of the drug willbe productive of very little good. The ' * Samaj believesthat education of the masses is the only proper and effective .remedy for correcting such baneful habits, and fears that anycompulsion in this matter is likely to drive the consumersof these comparatively innoccuous drugs to the use. of moreinjurious intoxicants that are plentifully supplied to the peoplelike the various preparations containing alcohol." TheSamaj.prays that the Government will devise measures for therestriction of the sale of European liquor in India. and leavethe hemp drugs to themselves. The only thorough advocateof prohibition whose opinion is worth specifying is RaoSahibShesho Krisna Madkavi (41), who considers-such prohibitionvery necessary and holds that, although there would be temporarydiscontent among the consumers such discontent would not amountto a political danger "the people in this part of thecountry being loyal and of mild nature. and the proportion of thepersons using bhang and ganja to the general population being toosmall to be taken into consideration." Opinions against prohibition 583. On the other hand, the opinions against prohibition areweighty. The following may be specially quoted: (1) Prohibition impossible or unnecessary, or could not beenforced without a large preventive establishment. Bombay (1) Hon'ble T. D. Mackenzie, Commissioner of Abkari, etc (3)Mr. Vidal, Chief Secretary to Government. (10) Mr. Monteath,CoIlector. (12) Mr. Cumine, Acting Collector. (53) Mr. Vincent,C.I.E., officiating commissioner of Police. (110) Rai BahadurVishvanath Keshava Joglekar, Merchant. (108) Daji Abaji Khare,Honorary Secretary, East Indian Association. Sind (1) Mr. James, Commissioner in Sind. (26) Seth VishindasNihalchand, Zamindar and Merchant. (2) Prohibition would be strongly resented by religiousmendicants, or would be regarded as an interference withreligion, or would be likely to become a political danger. Bombay. (l) Hon'ble T. D. Mackenzie, Commissioner of Abkari, etc. (2)Mr. Reid, Commissioner ganja. Apart from all this, there isanother consideration which has been urged in some quarters witha manifestation of strong feeling, and to which the Commissionare disposed to attach some importance, viz., that torepress the drugs in India and to leave alcohol alone would bemisunderstood by a large number of persons who believe, andapparently not without reason, that more harm is done in thiscountry by the latter than by the former. The conclusion of theCommission regarding bhang has been given in paragraph 564; underall the circumstances they now unhesitatingly give their verdictagainst such a violent measure as total prohibition in respect ofany of the hemp drugs. II. The policy advocated is one of control and restrictionaimed at suppressing the excessive use and restraining themoderate use within due limits (Chapter XlV, paragraph 586) Policy in regard to hemp drugs. 586 Failing prohibition, the question arises, whatshould be the policy of the Policy in regard to hemp drugs.Government in regard to the hemp drugs? On this point someimportant evidence has been recorded, and the Commission deem itto be within the scope of their duty to state in general termstheir own conclusions. In the first place, then, they are ofopinion that in view of the harmful effects produced by theexcessive use, and in exceptional cases even by the moderate use,of the drugs, the action of the Government should be directedtowards restraining the former and avoiding all encouragement tothe latter. The object should be to prevent the consumers, as faras may be possible, from doing harm to themselves and to lessenthe inducements to the formation of the habit which might lead tosuch harm In aiming at this object, however, other considerationsneed to be kept in view. There is in the first place the questionof illicit consumption. If the restriction. imposed by Governmentis counterbalanced by a corresponding increase in smuggling noadvantage is gained but, on the contrary, a moral wrong is doneto the community apart from the annoyance necessitated by suchrestrictions. Than, if there is a legitimate use of the drugs,restrictions should not be such as to make the exercise of thisuse impossible. The Commission have formed the opinion that thereis a legitimate use of the hemp drugs, and that it existsgenerally among the poorest of the population. Again, if therestrictions lead to the use of more deleterious substances, oreven drive the people from a habit the evil of which is known toanother of which the evil maybe greater, they are no longerjustifiable. The policy of Government must be tempered by allthese considerations, and the neglect of any one of them may leadto serious error. Contents | Feedback | Search DRCNet Library | Schaffer Library | Major Studies | IndianHemp Drugs CommissionWT01-B31-12IA031-000652-B040-343http://206.61.184.43:80/schaffer/library/studies/inhemp/6app1.htm 206.61.184.43 19970122130428 text/html 38653HTTP/1.0 200 OKDate: Wednesday, 22-Jan-97 13:04:17 GMTServer: WebSitePro/1.1f (S/N wpo-0deb)Allow-ranges: bytesContent-type: text/htmlLast-modified: Saturday, 28-Dec-96 07:04:13 GMTContent-length: 38435 Indian Hemp Drugs Commission Report - Note by Mr. G. A.Grierson Contents | Feedback | Search DRCNet Library | Schaffer Library | Major Studies | IndianHemp Drugs Commission Indian Hemp Drugs Commission Report NOTE BY MR. G. A. GRIERSON, C.I.E., MAGISTRATE ANDCOLLECTOR, HOWRAH, ON REFERENCES TO THE HEMP PLANT OCCURRING INSANSKRIT AND HINDI LITERATURE I have the honour to state that I have searched through allthe Sanskrit and Hindi books accessible to me, and to forward theaccompanying note on the references to the hemp plant occurringin the literatures of those languages. I have met the hemp plant in Sanskrit and Hindi literatureunder various names. The principal are: (1) Bhanga. (2) Indracana. (3) Vijaya or Jaya The earliest mention of the word ganja which I have noted isdated about the year 1300 A.D. Whenever the word vijaya is used, it is doubtful whether thehemp plant is meant, or the yellow myrobolan, as the words meansboth. The name Bhanga occurs in the Atharvaveda (say, B.C. 1400).The hemp plant is there mentioned simply as a sacred grass.Panini (say, B.C. 300) mentions the pollen of the hemp flower(bhanga). In the commencement of the sixth century we find thefirst mention of vijaya which I have noted. It is a sacred grass,and probably means here the hemp plant. The first mention of bhanga as a medicine which I have notedis in the work of Sucruta (before the eighth century A.D.), whereit is called an antiphlegmatic. During the next four centuriesbhanga (feminine) frequently occurs in native Sanskritdictionaries in the sense of hemp-plant. In the tenth century the intoxicating nature of bhang seems tohave been known: and the name Indracana, Indra's food,first appears, so far as I know, in literature. Its intoxicatingpower was certainly known in the beginning of the fourteenthcentury. In a play written in the beginning of the sixteenthcentury, it is mentioned as being consumed by jogis (Caivamendicants). It is there named "Indra's food." In later medical works it is frequently mentioned undervarious names. I append a more detailed account of the passages in which Ihave noted the uses of the Indian hemp. I may add that I have not traced in literature any differencebetween the uses of the word ganja and the word bhanga, thoughmodern kavirajas tells me that they are distinct plants. Cir. B.C. 1400. In the Atharvaveda (cir. 1400 B.C.) thebhang plant is mentioned (11, 6, 15) once: "We tell of the five kingdoms of herbs headed by Soma;may it and kuca grass, and bhanga and barley, andthe herb saha release us from anxiety." Here reference is evidently made to the offering of theseherbs in oblations. The grammarian Panini (5, 2, 29) mentions bhangukata,the pollen of the hemp flower, as one of his examples. Cir. B. C. 300. The fact that the pollen of this special flower was quoted isworth noting. Varahamihira in his Brihatsamhita (XLVIII, 39),mentions vijaya as used with other grasses in the rotes ofthe Pusya, bathing festival. A.D. 504. Vijaya is this passage certainly means some plant orother. The word may mean either the Indian hemp-plant or be asynonym of haritaki (the yellow myrobolan). Dr. Hoernleinforms me that in the oldest medical words the word is explainedby commentators in the latter sense. It is doubtful what meaningwe are to adopt here. The word may mean the hemp-plant bhanga.In the passage from the Atharvaveda, already quoted, amongst thefive plants special honoured as oblations, bhanga isclosely connected with the herb saha. So also in theBrihatsamhita, vijaya is mentioned as one of a long listof plants to be used in the offering, and the very next plantmentioned is saha, which is apparently the same as saha.This would encourage the theory that the vijaya of theBrihatsamhita was more probably the same as the bhanga ofthe Atbarvaveda. In Sucruta (Ut. XI, 3) Bhanga is recommended togetherwith a number of other drugs as an antiphlegmatic. Before the eighth century. Vijaya is mentioned in the same work as a remedy forcatarrh accompanied by diarrhea (Ut. XXIV, 20, and Ut. 39, page415, 20), as an ingredient in a prescription for fever arisingfrom an excess of bile and phlegm. In these two passages,however, vijaya is probably an equivalent of haritaki,the yellow myrobolan, and does not mean hemp. In the various kosas, or dictionaries, bhanga isfrequently mentioned as meaning the hemp-plant. Thus, (1) Amarakosa, 2, 9, 20. Cir. A. D. 500. (2) Trikandacesa, 3, 364. Tenth or eleventh century(3) Hemacandra's Anekarthakosa,2, 37. Twelfth century. (4) Hemakandra's Abhidhanacinlamani,1179. The Sarasundari (date not known to me), a commentary onthe Amarakosa mentioned above, Twelfth century by Mathureca, and quoted in theCabdakalpadruma, mentions that the seed of the bhangaplant is the size of that of millet (kalaya). Cakrapanidatta is said to have flourished under Nayapala, aprince who reigned Cir. 1050 A.D. in the eleventh century A.D. In his Cabdacandrika,a medical vocabulary, he gives the following Sanskrit names forbhang: (1) Vijaya (victorious), (2) Trailokyavijaya(victorious in the three worlds), (3) bhanga, (4) Indracana(Indra's food), (5) Jaya (victorious). These names seem to show that its use as an intoxicant wasthen known. The Rajanighantu of Narahari Pandita adds the followingnames to those given by A.D. 1300. Cakrapanidatta in the Cabdacandrika abovementioned: (6) Virapattra (hero-leaved or the leaf of heroes), (7) Ganja, (8) Capala (the light-hearted), (9) Ajaya (the unconquered), (10) Ananda (the joyful), (11) Harsini (the rejoicer) and adds that the plant possesses the following qualities: (1) Katulva (acridity); (2) kasayatra(astringency); (3) Usnatva (heat); (4) tiktatva(pungency); (5) vatakaphapahatva (removing wind andphlegm); (6) samgrahitva (astringency); (7) vakpradatva(speech-giving); (8)balyatva (strength-giving); (9) medhakaritva(inspiring of mental power); (10) cresthadipanatva (theproperty of a most excellent excitant). The Carngadhrasamhita, a medical work by Carngadhara,the date of which is unknown, Say A.D. 1500. but which must have been compiled during theMuhammadan period of Indian History, specially mentions (1, 4, 19) bhangaas an excitant (vyavayin). In the same passage it mentionsopium. The Dhurtasamagama, or "Rogues' Congress," isthe name of an amusing if coarsely A.D. 1550. written farce of about the year 1500 A.D., theauthor of which was one Jyotirica. In the second act two Caivamendicants came before an unjust judge, and demand a decision ona quarrel which they have about a nymph of the bazar. The judgedemands payment of a deposit before he will give any opinion. Oneof the litigants says: "Here is my ganja bag; let it be accepted as adeposit." The Judge (taking it pompously, and then smelling itgreedily): "Let me try what it is like (takes a pinch).Ah! I have just now got by the merest chance some ganja which issoporific and corrects derangements of the humours, whichproduces a healthy appetite, sharpens the wits, and acts as anaphrodisiac." The word used for ganja in the above is Indracana(Indra's food). The Bhavaprakaca, another medical work written byBhavadevamicra (cir. A.D. 1600), has as follows: Cir. A. D. 1600. Bhanga ganja matulani madini vijaya jaya Bhanga kaphahari tikta grahini pacani laghuh Tiksosna pittala moha -mada vag vahni vardhini "Bhanga is also called ganja, matulani, madini(the intoxicating), vijaya (the victorious), and jaya(the victorious). It is antiphlegmatic, pungent, astringent,digestive, easy of digestion, acid, bile-affecting; and increasesinfatuation, intoxication, the power of the voice, and thedigestive faculty." "The Rajavallabha, a materia medica, byNarayanadasa kaviraja, the date of which I 17th century. do not know, but which is quoted in the Cabdakalpadruma,and is believed to be ancient, has the following: Cakra-canam tu tiksno-snam moha-krit kustha-nacanam Bala-medha-gni-krit-clesma -dosa-hari rasayanam Jata mandara-manthanaj jala-nidhau piyusa-rupa pura Trailokye vijaya-prade 'ti vijaya cri-devaraja-priya Lokanam hita-kamyaya ksiti-tale prapta naraih kamada Sarva-" tanka-vinaca-harsa-janani yaih sevita sarvada. "Indra's food (i.e. ganja) is acid, produces infatuation,and destroys leprosy. It creates vital energy, the mental powers,and internal heat, corrects irregularities of the phlegmatichumour, and is an elixir vitae. It was originally produced, likenectar, from the ocean by the churning with Mount Mandara, andinasmuch as it gives victory in the three worlds, it, the delightof the king of the gods, is called vijaya, the victorious.This desire-fulfilling drug was obtained by men on the earth,through desire for the welfare of all people. To those whoregularly use it it begets joy and destroys every anxiety." The Rasapradhipa, a work, the date of which is unknownto me, and which is quoted in ? Date. the Cabdakalpadruma mentions jaya as aremedy for indigestion: Ksaratrayam sutagandhou pancakolam idam cubham Sarvais tulya jaya bhrista tad-ardha cigruja jata Natron, saltpetre and borax, mercury and sulphur, and theprosperous five spices (long pepper, its root, piper chaba,another pepper, and dry ginger). To these add an equal amount ofparched jaya and half of that amount of horse-radish (moringa)and jata. It is not certain whether jaya here means bhang or Haritaki(yellow myrobolan). The word has both significations. The latter,perhaps, suits the formula best. In the Rasaratna-samuccaya, a work written in the southof India, jaya is classified as a semi-poison, Langoli visamustic ca karaviro jaya tatha ? Date Tilakah kanako rkac ca vargo hy upavisatmakah. Langali (Vanguiera spinosa), the root of the Neriumodorum, jaya (Symplocos racemosa) kanaka and ak(a kind of Euphorbia), are semi-poisonous. Bhang is frequently mentioned by vernacular poets. The oldestinstance with which I 1400 A.D. am acquainted is the well-known hymn by Vidyapati Tbakur (1400 A.D.), in which he calls Civa "Digambarabhanga," in reference to his habit of consuming thatdrug. According to an old Hindu poem, on which I cannot now laymy hands, Civa himself brought down the bhang plant from theHimalayas and gave it to mankind. Jogis are well-known consumersof bhang and ganja, and they are worshippers of Civa. In folk-songs, ganja or bhang (with or without opium) is theinvariable drink of heroes before performing any great feat. Atthe village of Bauri in Gaya there is a huge hollow stone, whichis said to be the bowl in which the famous hero Lorik mixed hisganja. Lorik was a very valiant general, and is the hero ofnumerous folk-songs. The epic poem of Alha and Rudal, oruncertain date, but undoubtedly based on very old materials (theheroes lived in the twelfth century A.D.), contains numerousreferences to ganja as a drink of warriors. For instance, thecommencement of the canto dealing with Alha's marriage, describesthe pestle and mortar with which the ganja was prepared, theamount of the intoxicating drink prepared from it (it is called sabzi)and the amount of opium (an absurdly exaggerated quantity) givento each warrior in his court. That the consumption of bhang is not considered disreputableamong Rajputs may be gathered from the fact that Ajabes, who wascourt poet to the well-known Maharaja Bishwanath Singh of Riwa,wrote a poem praising bhang and comparing siddhi to the"success" which attends the worshipper of"Hari." Here there is an elaborate series of puns. Theword siddhi means literally 'success,' and harimeans not only the god Hari, but also bhang. NOTE BY BABU ABHILAS CHANDRA MUKERJI, SECOND INSPECTOR OFEXCISE, BENGAL, ON THE ORIGIN AND HISTORY OF TRINATH WORSHIP INEASTERN BENGAL. Date of origin._In 1867 Babu Ananda Chandra Kali orKailai, of Dhamrai, a village in thana Sabhar of the Daccadistrict, first started the worship at the house of hisfather-in-law at Fattehpur in the Atia pargana of the Mymensinghdistrict (sub-division Tangail). Antecedents of the originator._Dhamrai is an importantvillage in the Dacca district noted for its car festival, whichis annually held in honor of a local idol named Madhab Thakur,and which is witnessed by a large gathering of people. Ananda Chandra received education at the Dacca Normal School.After leaving school he served for some time as a pundit(schoolmaster), and then entered the Police Department, but wasthere only a short time. He is a Barendra Brahman and belongs toa respectable family. He learnt to smoke ganja when he was only aboy. His present age is 60 years. He has the reputation of beinga versifier. He smokes two pice worth of ganja every day. He married at Fattehpur in the Mymensingh district. There heintroduced Trinath worship 27 years ago. A panchali (poem)reciting the praises and exploits of Trinath was first publishedat Dacca in 1871 and the first edition (1,000 copies) was sold ina few months. The circumstances under which the worship was first started._AnandaChandra Kali was at the time living in the house of hisfather-in-law. He was thinking of introducing the worship of acommon god, who might be worshipped by all classes, rich andpoor, Brahman and Chandal, and by all creeds, Saktas, Baishnavas,and Shaivas, and the idea occurred to him of having the presentworship at which ordinary and inexpensive things, such as ganja,oil, and betel-leaf, were alone to be used. Trinath (from Sanskrit Tri, three, and Nath,lord) is represented to be Brahma, Bishnu and Shiva, the HinduTrinity in one. Being a ganja-smoker himself, Ananda Kali may have alsothought that by introducing the worship he would be able to savethe ganja-smokers from disrepute, as then ganja could be consumedin the name of a god and under colour of doing a religious orpious act. Religious aspect of the worship._The followingtranslation of the Introduction to the Trinath MelaPanchali gives some idea of the subject: "The universe consists of the earth, the heaven, and thenether world, and Trinath is the lord of these three worlds. "There was an incarnation of God in the form of Gour(Chaitanya), who delivered the sinners by preaching the name ofHari, but the Lord was not satisfied with this, and becameconcerned for the created, and soon he became incarnate again.Brahma, Bishnu and Shiva, gods in three forms, manifestedthemselves in one form. The one God, the Lord of the universe,seeing the miseries of mankind, came to their deliverance. Ananda(Ananda Chandra Kali, the originator) declares that the true andsincere worshippers of Trinath are sure to obtain salvation.Brahma, Bishnu, and Shiva met together and expressed their desireto come to this world in one form to receive worship. "He is a truly pious man who worships Trinath, andblessings are showered on the worshipper. "The worship should be made in a form in which the richand the poor may equally join and may perform it easily. "Only three things, each worth one pice, are required forthis puja (form of worship). The things which please allmust be selected. The offering should consist of siddhi(ganja), pan (betel-leaf), and oil, each worth one pice. "The votaries should assemble at night and worship withflowers. The ganja should be washed in the manner in which peoplewash ganja for smoking. The worshipper must fill three chillumswith equal quantities of ganja, observing due awe and reverence.When all the worshipers are assembled the lamp should be lit withthree wicks, and the praises of Trinath should be sung. As longas the wicks burn, the god should be worshipped and his praiseschanted. The god should be reverentially bowed to at the close ofthe puja. When the reading of the Panchali is finished,those that will not show respect to the Prasad (theoffering which has been accepted by the god), i.e. chillumof ganja, shall be consigned to eternal hell, and the sincereworshippers shall go to heaven." How the worship spread._Ananda Kali commenced the pujawith the aid of some ganja-smokers in the village of Fattehpur. Alarge number of people consume ganja in the Dacca. NOTE BY MR. J.M. CAMPBELL, C.I.E., COLLECTOR OF LAND REVENUEAND CUSTOMS AND OPIUM, BOMBAY, ON THE RELIGION OF HEMP To the Hindu the hemp plant is holy. A guardian lives in thebhang leaf. As the wife of Vishnu, the preserver, lives in thehysteria-curing tulsi, or Holy Basil, and as Shiva dwellsin the hysteria-curing bel, gle marmelos, so theproperties of the bhang plant, its power to suppress theappetites, its virtue as a febrifuge, and its thought-bracingqualities show that the bhang leaf is the home of the great Yogior brooding aascetics Mahadev. So holy a plant should have special rearing. Shiva explains tohis wife, Parvati, how, in sowing hemp seed, you should keeprepeating the spell 'Bhangri,' 'Bhangi,' apparently that thesound of that guardian name may scare the evil tare-sowinginfluences. Again, when the seedlings are planted the same holyname must be repeated, and also at the watering which, for thespace of a year, the young plants must daily receive. When theflowers appear the flowers and leaves should be stripped from theplant and kept for a day in warm water. Next day, with onehundred repetitions of the holy name Bhangri, the leaves andflowers should be washed in a river and dried in an open shed.When they are dry some of the leaves should be burnt with duerepeating of the holy name as a jap or muttered charm.Then, bearing in mind Vagdevata, or the goddess of speech, andoffering a prayer, the dried leaves should be laid in a pure andsanctified place. Bhang so prepared, especially if prayers aresaid over it, will gratify the wishes and desires of its owner.Taken in the early morning such bhang cleanses the user from sin,frees him from the punishment of crores of sins, and entitles himto reap the fruits of a thousand horse-sacrifices. Suchsanctified bhang taken at daybreak or noon destroys disease.Before the religious user of bhang stand the Ashtadevata or EightGuardians with clasped hands ready to obey him and perform hisorders. The wish of him who with pure mind pours bhang with duereverence over the Ling of Mahadev will be fulfilled. Such holiness and such evil-scaring powers must give bhang ahigh place among lucky objects. That a day may be fortunate thecareful man should on waking look into liquid bhang. So anynightmares or evil spirits that may have entered into him duringthe ghost-haunted hours of night will flee from him at the sightof the bhang and free him from their blinding influences duringthe day. So too when a journey has to be begun or a fresh duty orbusiness undertaken it is well to look at bhang. To meet some onecarrying bhang is a sure omen of success. To see in a dream theleaves, plant, or water of bhang is lucky; it brings the goodnessof wealth into the dreamer's power. To see his parents worshipthe bhang-plant and pour bhang over Shiva's Ling will cure thedreamer of fever. A longing for bhang foretells happiness: to seebhang drunk increases riches. No good thing can come to the manwho treads under foot the holy bhang leaf. So evil-scaring and therefore luck-bringing a plant must playan important part in the rites required to clear away evilinfluences. During the great spirit time of marriage in Bombayamong almost all the higher classes of Gujarat Hindus, of theJain as well as of the Brahmanic sects, the supplies sent by thefamily of the bride to the bridegroom's party during their sevendays' sojourn includes a supply of bhang. The name of the fatherwho neglects to send bhang is held in contempt. Again, after thewedding, when the bridegroom and his friends are entertained atthe house of the bride, richly-spiced bhang is drunk by theguests. The Gujarat Musalman bride before and after marriagedrinks a preparation of bhang. Among the Pardeshi or North IndianHindus of Bombay bhang is given not only at weddings, but thePardeshi who fails to give his visitor bhang is despised by hiscaste as mean and miserly. Another great spirit time during whichbhang plays an important part is the time of war. Before theoutbreak of a war and during its progress the Ling of Mahadevshould be bathed with bhang. Its power of driving panicinfluences from near the god has gained for bhang the name ofVijaya, the unbeaten. So a drink of bhang drives from thefighting Hindu the haunting spirits of fear and wariness. So thebeleagured Rajput, when nothing is left but to die, after loosinghis hair that the bhang spirit may have free entrance, drinks thesacramental bhang and rushing on the enemy completes his juharor self-sacrifice. It is this quality of panic-scaring that makesbhang, the Vijaya or Victorious, specially dear to Mahadev in hischaracter of Tripur, the slayer of the demon Tripurasur. As Shivais fond of bel leaves, as Vishnu is fond of tulsileaves, so is Tripuresvar fond of bhang leaves. He who wishes toobtain his desires must constantly offer bhang to Tripuresvar. Bhang the cooler is a febrifuge. Bhang acts on the fever notdirectly or physically as an ordinary medicine, but indirectly orspiritually by soothing the angry influences to whom the heats offever are due. According to one account in the Ayurveda, fever ispossession by the hot angry breath of the great gods Brahma,Vishnu, and shiva. According to another passage in the Ayurveda,Shankar or Shiva, enraged by a slight from his father-in-lawDaksha, breathed from his nostrils the eight fevers that withermankind. If the fever-stricken performs the Viraya abhishek, orbhang-pouring on the Ling of Shankar, the god is pleased, hisbreath cools, and the portion of his breath in the body of thefever-stricken ceases to inflame. The Kashikhanda Purana tellshow at Benares, a Brahman, sore-smitten with fever, dreamed thatbe had poured bhang over the self-sprung Ling and was well. Onwaking he went to the Ling, worshipped, poured bhang andrecovered. The fame of this cure brings to Benares sufferers fromfever which no ordinary medicine can cure. The sufferers are laidin the temple and pour bhang over the Ling whose virtue hasgained it the name Jvareshwar, the Fever-Lord. In Bombay manypeople sick of fever vow on recovery to pour bhang over a Ling.Besides as a cure for fever bhang has many medicinal virtues. Itcools the heated blood, soothes the over-wakeful to sleep, givesbeauty, and secures length of days. It cures dysentery andsunstroke, clears phlegm, quickens digestion, sharpens appetite,makes the tongue of the lisper plain, freshens the intellect, andgives alertness to the body and gaiety to the mind. Such are theuseful and needful ends for which in his goodness the Almightymade bhang. In this praise of the hemp the Makhzan or greatGreek-Arab work on drugs joins. Ganja in excess causes abscess,even madness. In moderation bhang is the best of gifts. Bhang isa cordial, a bile absorber, an appetiser, a prolonger of life.Bhang quickens fancy, deepens thought, and braces judgment. As on other guardian-possessed objects, the cow, the Vedas, orthe leaf of the bel tree, oaths are taken on the bhangleaf. Even to a truthful witness an oath on the bhang leaf isdreaded. To one who foreswears himself the bhang oath is death. So holy a plant must play a leading part in temple rites.Shiva on fire with the poison churned from the ocean was cooledby bhang. At another time enraged with family worries the godwithdrew to the fields. The cool share of a plant soothed him. Hecrushed and ate of the leaves, the bhang refreshed him. For thesetwo benefits bhang is Shankarpriya, the beloved of Mahadev. Sothe right user of bhang or of ganja, before beginning to drink orto smoke, offers the drug to Mahadev saying, lena Shankar, lenaBabulnath: be pleased to take it Shankar, take it Babulnath.According to the Shiva Purana, from the dark fourteenth of Magh(January-February) to the light fourteenth of Asbadh (July-July),that is, during the three months of the hot weather, bhang shouldbe daily poured over the Ling of Shiva. If not every day, bhangshould be poured at least during the first and last days of thisperiod. According to the Meru Tantra on any Monday, especially onShravan (July-August) Mondays, on all twelfths or pradoshs,and on all dark fourteenths of shivratris, still more onthe Mahashivratri or Shiva's Great Night on the dark fourteenthof Magh (January-February), and at all eclipses of the sun ormoon, persons wistful either for this world or for the world tocome should offer bhang to Shiva and pour it over the Ling. Notevery devotee of Shiva makes offerings of bhang. Such rites inBombay are seldom performed except in the Bhuleswar and Babulnathtemples and there only on special occasions. The bhang offered toMahadev is without pepper or other spice. It is mixed with water,water and milk, or milk and sugar. It is poured over the Ling.According to some authorities the offerer should not touch theoffered bhang. Temple ministrants Atits, Tapodhans, Bhojaks,Bhopis, Bharadis, Guravas alone should drink it. If there are noministrants the remains of the offering should be poured into awell or given to cows to drink. Other authorities encourage theofferer to sip the bhang, since by sipping the bhang reaches andsoothes the Shiva-Shakti or Shiva-spirit in the sipper. Oncertain special occasions during failures of rain, duringeclipses, and also in times of war libations of bhang are pouredover the Ling. Vaishnavas as well as Shaivas make offerings of bhang. Theform of Vishnu or the Guardian to whom bhang is a welcomeoffering is Baladev, Balaram, or Dauji, the elder brother ofKrishna. Baladev was fond of spirits, not of bhang. But Banias,Bhatias, and other high class Hindus, not being able to offerspirits, instead of spirits present bhang. In Bombay the offeringof bhang to Baladev, unlike the special offerings to Shiva, is acommon and every-day rite. Without an offering of bhang noworship of Baladev is complete. Unlike the plain or milk andsugared bhang spilt over the Ling, Baladev's bhang is arichly-spiced liquid which all present, including the offerer,join in drinking. Such social and religious drinking of bhang iscommon in Bombay in the temple of dauji in Kalyan Kirparam lanenear Bhuleshwar. As in the higher class worship of Baladev theliquor offering has been refined into an offering of bhang so itis in the worship of Devi, Shiva's early and terrible consort. Onany Tuesday or Friday, the two weeks days sacred to Devi, stillmore during the Navratra or Nine Nights in Ashwin orSeptember-October, those whose caste rules forbid liquor make apleasing spiced bhang. And as in the worship of Baladev allpresent, worshipper and ministrant alike, join in drinking.Shitaladevi, the Cooler, the dread goddess of small-pox, whosenature, like the nature of bhang, is cooling, takes pleasure inofferings of bhang. During epidemics of small-pox the burning andfever of the disease are soothed by pouring bhang over the imageof Shitaladevi. So for the feverishness caused by the heatsespecially to the old no cure equals the drinking of bhang.Unlike spirits the tempter to flesh bhang the craver for milk ispleasing to the Hindu religion. Even according to the straitestschool of the objectors to stimulants, while to a high casteHindu the penalty for liquor-drinking is death, no penaltyattached to the use of bhang, and a single day's fast is enoughto cleanse from the coarser spirit of ganja. Even amongthose who hold stimulants to be devil-possessed penalty anddisfavour attach to the use of hemp drugs only when they aretaken with no religious object and without observing the duereligious rites. At the other extreme of Hindu thought from the foes tostimulants, to the worshippers of the influences that, raisingman out of himself and above mean individual worries, make himone with the divine force of nature, it is inevitable thattemperaments should be found to whom the quickening spirit ofbhang is the spirit of freedom and knowledge. In the ecstasy ofbhang the spark of the Eternal in man turns into light themurkiness of matter or illusion and elf is lost in the centralsoul-fire. The Hindu poet of Shiva, the Great Spirit that livingin bhang passes into the drinker, sings of bhang as the clearerof ignorance, the giver of knowledge. No gem or jewel can touchin value bhang taken truly and reverently. He who drinks bhangdrinks Shiva. The soul in whom the spirit of bhang finds a homeglides into the ocean of Being freed from the weary round ofmatter-blinded self. To the meaner man, still under the glamourof matter or maya, bhang taken religiously is kindlythwarting the wiles of his foes and giving the drinker wealth andpromptness of mind. In this devotion to bhang, with reverence, not with theworship, which is due to Allah alone, the North Indian Mussalmanjoins hymning the praises of bhang. To the follower of the laterreligion of Islam the holy spirit in bhang is not the spirit ofthe Almighty. It is the spirit of the great prophet Khizr orElijah. That bhang should be sacred to Khizr is natural. Khizr isthe patron saint of water. Still more Khizr means green, therevered colour of the cooling water of bhang. So the Urdu poetsings 'When I quaff fresh bhang I liken its colour to the freshlight down of thy youthful beard.' The prophet Khizr or the Greenprophet cries 'May the drink be pleasing to thee.' Nasir, thegreat North Indian Urdu poet of the beginning of the presentcentury, is loud in the praises of his beloved Sabzi, the Greenone. 'Compared with bhang spirit are naught. Leave all thingsthou fool, drink bhang.' From its quickening the imaginationMusalman poets honour bhang with the title Warak al Khiyall,Fancy's Leaf. And the Makhzan or great Arab-Greek drug bookrecords many other fond names for the drug. Bhang is theJoy-giver, the Sky-flier, the Heavenly-guide, the Poor Man'sHeaven, the Soother of Grief. Much of the holiness of bhang is due to its virtue of clearingthe head and stimulating the brain to thought. Among ascetics thesect known as Atits are specially devoted to hemp. No social orreligious gathering of Atits is complete without the use of thehemp plant smoked in ganja or drink in bhang. To its devoteebhang is no ordinary plant that became holy from its guardian andhealing qualities. According to one account, when nectar wasproduced from the churning of the ocean, something was wanted topurify the nectar. The deity supplied the want of anectar-cleanser by creating bhang. This bhang Mahadev made fromhis own body, and so it is called angaj or body-born.According to another account some nectar dropped to the groundand from the ground the bhang plant sprang. It was because theyused this child of nectar or of Mahadev in agreement withreligious forms that the seers or Rishis became Siddha or onewith the deity. He who, despite the example of the Rishis, usesno bhang shall lose his happiness in this life and in the life tocome. In the end he shall be cast into hell. The mere sight ofbhang cleanses from as much sin as a thousand horse-sacrifices ora thousand pilgrimages. He who scandalises the user of bhangshall suffer the torments of hell so long as the sun endures. Hewho drinks bhang foolishly or for pleasure without religiousrites is as guilty as the sinner of lakhs of sins. He whodrinks wisely and according to rule, be he ever so low, eventhough his body is smeared with human ordure and urine, is Shiva.No god or man is as good as the religious drinker of bhang. Thestudents of the scriptures at Benares are given bhang before theysit to study. At Benares, Ujjain, the other holy places yogis,bairagis and sanyasis take deep draughts of bhang that they maycentre their thoughts on the Eternal. To bring back to reason anunhinged mind the best and cleanest bhang leaves should be boiledin milk and turned to clarified butter. Salamisri, saffron, andsugar should be added and the whole eaten. Besides over the demonof Madness bhang is Vijaya or victorious over the demons ofhunger and thirst. By the help of bhang ascetics pass dayswithout food or drink. The supporting power of bhang has broughtmany a Hindu family safe through the miseries of famine. Toforbid or even seriously to restrict the use of so holy andgracious a herb as the hemp would cause widespread suffering andannoyance and to the large bands of worshipped asceticsdeep-seated anger. It would rob the people of a solace indiscomfort, of a cure in sickness, of a guardian whose graciousprotection saves them from the attacks of evil influences, andwhose mighty power makes the devotee of the Victorious,overcoming the demons of hunger and thirst, of panic fear, of theglamour of Maya or matter, and of madness, able to rest to brookon the Eternal, till the Eternal, possessing him body and soul,frees him from the haunting of self and receives him into theocean of Being. These beliefs the Musalman devotee shares to thefull. Like his Hindu brother the Mussalman fakir reveres bhang asthe lengthener of life, the freer from the bonds of self. Bhangbrings union with the Divine Spirit. 'We drank bhang and themystery I am He grew plain. So grand a result, so tiny a sin.' Contents | Feedback | Search DRCNet Library | Schaffer Library | Major Studies | IndianHemp Drugs CommissionWT01-B31-13IA031-000652-B040-370http://206.61.184.43:80/schaffer/library/studies/inhemp/7relhemp.htm 206.61.184.43 19970122130445 text/html 27475HTTP/1.0 200 OKDate: Wednesday, 22-Jan-97 13:04:34 GMTServer: WebSitePro/1.1f (S/N wpo-0deb)Allow-ranges: bytesContent-type: text/htmlLast-modified: Saturday, 28-Dec-96 07:04:03 GMTContent-length: 27257 Indian Hemp Drugs Commission Report - Note on the Religionof Hemp Contents | Feedback | Search DRCNet Library | Schaffer Library | Major Studies | IndianHemp Drugs Commission REPORT OF THE INDIAN HEMP DRUGS COMMISSION, 1893-94. APPENDIX NOTE BY MR. J. M. CAMPBELL, C.I.E., COLLECTOR OF LANDREVENUE AND CUSTOMS AND OPIUM, BOMBAY, ON THE RELIGION OF HEMP. To the Hindu the hemp plant is holy. A guardian lives in thebhang leaf. As the wife of Vishnu, the preserver, lives in thehysteria-curing tulsi, or Holy Basil, and as Shiva dwellsin the dysentery-scaring bel, AEgle marmelos, sothe properties of the bhang plant, its power to suppress theappetites, its virtue as a febrifuge, and its thought-bracingqualities show that the bhang leaf is the home of the great Yogior brooding ascetic Mahadev. So holy a plant should have special rearing. Shiva explains tohis wife, Parvati, how, in sowing hemp seed, you should keeprepeating the spell 'Bhangi', 'Bhangi', apparently that the soundof that guardian name may scare the evil tare-sowing influences.Again, when the seedlings are planted the same holy name must berepeated, and also at the watering which, for the space of ayear, the young plants must daily receive. When the flowersappear the flowers and leaves should be stripped from the plantand kept for a day in warm water. Next day, with one hundredrepetitions of the holy name Bhangi, the leaves and flowersshould be washed in a river and dried in an open shed. When theyare dry some of the leaves should be burnt with due repeating ofthe holy name as a jap or muttered charm. Then, bearing inmind Vagdevata, or the goddess of speech, and offering a prayer,the dried leaves should be laid in a pure and sanctified place.Bhang so prepared, especially If prayers are said over it, willgratify the wishes and desires of its owner. Taken in the earlymorning such bhang cleanses the user from sin, frees him from thepunishment of crores of sins, and entitles him to reap the fruitsof a thousand horse-sacrifices. Such sanctified bhang taken atday break or noon destroys disease. Before the religioususer of bhang stand the Ashtadevata or Eight Guardians withclasped hands ready to obey him and perform his orders. The wishof him who with pure mind pours bhang with due reverence over theLing of Mahadev will be fulfilled. Such holiness and such evil-scaring powers must give bhang ahigh place among lucky objects. That a day may be fortunate thecareful man should on waking look into liquid bhang. So anynightmares or evil spirits that may have entered into him duringthe ghost-haunted hours of night will flee from him at the sightof the bhang and free him from their blinding influences duringthe day. So too when a journey has to be begun or a fresh duty orbusiness undertaken it is well to look at bhang. To meet some onecarrying bhang is a sure omen of success. To see in a dream theleaves, plant, or water of bhang is lucky; it brings the goddessof wealth into the dreamer's power. To see his parents worshipthe bhang-plant and pour bhang over Shiva's Ling will cure thedreamer of fever. A longing for bhang foretells happiness: to seebhang drunk increases riches. No good thing can come to the manwho treads under foot the holy bhang leaf. So evil-searing and therefore luck-bringing a plant must playan important part in the rites required to clear away evilinfluences. During the great spirit time of marriage in Bombayamong almost all the higher classes of Gujarat Hindus, of theJain as well as of the Brahmanic sects, the supplies sent by thefamily of the bride to the bridegroom's party during their sevendays' sojourn includes a supply of bhang. The name of the fatherwho neglects to send bhang is held in contempt. Again, after thewedding, when the bride-groom and his friends areentertained at the house of the bride, richly-spiced bhang isdrunk by the guests. The Gujarat .Musalman bride before and aftermarriage drinks a preparation of bhang. Among the Pardeshi orNorth Indian Hindus of Bombay bhang is given not only atweddings, but the Pardeshi who fails to give his visitor bhang isdespised by his caste as mean and miserly. Another great spirittime during which bhang plays an important part is the time ofwar. Before the outbreak of a war and during its progress theLing of Mahadev should be bathed with bhang. Its power of drivingpanic influences from near the god has gained for bhang the nameof Vijaya, the unbeaten. So a drink of bhang drives from thefighting Hindu the haunting spirits of fear and weariness. So thebeleaguered Rajput, when nothing is left but to die, afterloosing his hair that the bhang spirit may have free entrance,drinks the sacramental bhang and rushing on the enemy completeshis juhar or self-sacrifice. It is this quality ofpanic-scaring that makes bhang, the Vijaya or Victorious,specially dear to Mahadev in his character of Tripur, .the slayerof the demon Tripurasur. As Shiva is fond of bel leaves,as Vishnu is fond of tulsi leaves, so is Tripuresvar fondof bhang leaves. He who wishes to obtain his desires mustconstantly offer bhang to Tripuresvar. Bhang the cooler is a febrifuge. Bhang acts on the fever notdirectly or physically as an ordinary medicine, but indirectly orspiritually by soothing the angry influences to whom the heats offever are due. According to one account in the Ayurveda, fever ispossession by the hot angry breath of the great gods Brahma,Vishnu, and Shiva. According to another passage in the Ayurveda,Shankar or Shiva, enraged by a slight from his father-in-lawDaksha, breathed from his nostrils the eight fevers that withermankind. If the fever-stncken performs the Vijaya abhishek, orbhang-pouring on the Ling of Shankar, the god is pleased, hisbreath cools, and the portion of his breath in the body of thefever-stricken pleased to inflame. The Kashikhanda Purana tellshow at Benares, a Brahman, sore-smitten with fever, dreamed thathe had poured bhang over the self-sprung Ling and was well. Onwaking he went to the Ling, worshipped, poured bhang this curebrings to Benares sufferers from fever which no ordinary medicinecan cure. The sufferers are laid in the temple pour bhang everthe Ling whose virtue has gained it the name Jvareshwar, theFever-Lord. Bombay many people sick of fever vow on recovery topour bhang over a Ling. Besides cure for fever bhang has manymedicinal virtues. It cools the heated blood, soothes theover-wakeful to sleep, gives beauty, and secures length ofdays. It cures dysentery and sunstroke, clears phlegm, quickensdigestion, sharpens appetite, makes the tonic of the lisperplain, freshens the intellect, and gives alertness to the bodyand gaiety to the mind. Such are the useful and needful ends forwhich in his goodness the Almighty made bhang. In thispraise of the hemp the Makhzan or great Greek-Arab work on drugsjoins... Ganja in excess uses abscess, even madness. Inmoderation bhang is the best of gifts. Bhang is a cordial, a bileabsorber, an appetizer, a prolonger of life. Bhang quickensfancy, deepens thought, and Judgment. As on otherguardian-assessed objects, the cow, the Vedas, or the leaf oathsare taken on the bhang leaf Even to a truthful witness an oathon of the be1 tree, dreaded. To one who forswears himself thebhang oath is death the bhang leaf. So holy a plant must play aleading part in temple rights. Shiva on fire with the poisonchurned from the ocean was cooled by bhang. At another timeenraged with family worries the fields. The cool shade .of aplant soothed him. He crushed and of the leaves, and the bhangrefreshed him. For these two benefits bhang is Shankarpri , theMahadev. So the right user of bhang or of ganja, before beginningto drinker smoke, offers the drug to Mahadev saying, lenaShankar, lena Babulnath: be pleased to take Shankar, take itBabulnath. According to the Shiva Parann, from the darkfourteenth of Magh (January-February) to the light fourteenth ofAsbadh (June-July), that is, during the three months of the hotweather, bhang should be daily poured over the Ling of Shivaevery day, bhang should be poured at least during the first andlast days of this period. According to the Meru Tantra on anyMonday, especially on Shravan (July-August) Mondays, on alltwelfths pradoshs, and on all dark fourteenths or shivratrisstill more on the Mahashivratri or Shiva's Great Night on darkfourteenth of Magh (January-February.), and at all eclipses ofthe sun or moon, persons wistful either for this world or for theworld to come should offer bhang to Shiva and pour it over theLing. Not every devotee of Shiva makes offerings of bhang. Suchrites in Bombay are seldom performed except in the Bhuleswar andBabulnath temples and there only on special occasions. The bhangoffered to Mahadev is without pepper or other spice. It is mixedwith water, water and milk, or milk and sugar. It is poured overthe Ling. According to some authorities the offerer should nottouch the offered bhang. Temple ministrants Atits, Tapodhans,Bhojaks, Bhopis, Bharadis, Gutaras alone should drink it. Ifthere are no ministrants the remains of the offering should bepoured into a well or given to cows to drink. Other authoritiesencourage the offerer to the bhang, since by sipping thebhang reaches and soothes the Shiva-Shakti or Shiva-spirit in thesipper. On certain social occasions during failures of rain,during eclipses, and also in times of war libations of bhang arepoured ever the Ling. Vaishnavas as well as Shaivas make offerings of bhang. Theform of Vishnu Or, the Guardian to whom bhang is a welcomeoffering is Baladev, Bainram, or Dauji, the elder brotherKrishna. Baladev was fond of spirits, not of bhang. But Banins,Bhatias, and other high class Hindus, not being able to offerspirits instead of spirits the offering of bhang to Baladev,unlike the special offerings to Shiva, present bhang. In Bombay,without an offering of bhang no worship of Baladev is complete,offerings to Shiva is a common and everyday rite. Unlike theplain or milk and sugared bhang spilt over the Ling, Baladev'sbhang is a richly-spiced liquid which all present, including theofferer, join in drinking. Such social and religious ionsdrinking of bhang is common in Bombay in the temple of Dauji inKalyan' Kirparam lane near Bhuleshwar. As in the higher classworship of Baladev the liquor offering has been refined into anoffering of bhang so it is in the worship of Devi, Shiva'searly and terrible consort. On any Tuesday or Friday, the twoweek-days sacred to Devi, still more during the Navrata or NineNights in Ashwin or September-October, those whose caste rulesforbid liquor make a pleasing spices bhang. And as in, theworship of Baladev all present, worshipper and ,ministrant alike,join in drinking. Shitaladevi, the Cooler, the dread goddess ofsmall-pox, whose nature, like the nature of bhang, is cooling,takes pleasure in offerings of bhang. During epidemics ofsmall-pox the burning and fever of the disease are soothed bypouring bhang over the image of Shitaladevi. So for thefeverishness caused by the heats especially to the old no cureequals the drinking of bhang. Unlike spirits the tempterto flesh bhang the craver for milk is pleasing to the Hindureligion. Even according to the staitest school of the objectorsto stimulants, while to a high caste Hindu the penalty forliquor-drinking is death, no penalty attaches to the use ofbhang, and a single day's fast is enough to cleanse from thecoarser spirit of ganja. Even among those who hold stimulants tobe devil-possessed penalty and disfavor attach to the use of hempdrugs only when they are taken with no religious object andwithout observing the due religious rites. At the other extreme of Hindu thought from the foes tostimulants, to the worshippers of the influences that, raisingman out of himself and above mean individual worries, make himone with the divine force of nature, it is inevitable thattemperaments should be found to whom the quickening spirit ofbhang is the spirit of freedom and knowledge. In the ecstasy ofbhang the spark of the Eternal in man turns into light themurkiness of matter or illusionand self is lost in the centralsoul-fire. The Hindu poet of Shiva, the Great Spirit that livingin bhang passes into the drinker, sings of bhang as the clearerof ignorance, the giver of'knowledge. No gem or jewel can touchin value bhang taken truly and reverently. He who drinks bhangdrinks Shiva. The soul in whom the spirit of bhang finds a homeglides intothe ocean of Being freed from the weary round ofmatter-blinded self. To the meaner man, still under the glamourof matter or maya, bhang taken religiously is kindly thwartingthe wiles of his foes and giving the drinker wealth andpromptness of mind. In this devotion to bhang, with reverence,not with the worship, which is due to Allahalone, the NorthIndian Mussulman joins hymning the praises of bhang. To thefollower of the later religion of Islam the holy spirit in bhangis not the spirit of the Almighty. Itthe spirit of thegreat prophet Khizr or Elijah. That bhang should be sacred toKhizr isnatural. Khizr is the patron saint of water. Still moreKhizr means green, the revered colour of the cooling water ofbhang. So the Urdu poet sings 'When I quaff fresh bhang I likenits colony to the fresh light down of thy youthful beard.' Theprophet Khizr or the Green prophet cries ' May the drink bepleasing to thee.' Nasir, the great North Indian Urdupoet of thebeginning of the present century, is loud in the praises of hisbeloved Sabzi, the Green one. 'Compared with bhang spirits arenaught. Leave all things thou fool, drink bhang.' From itsquickening the imagination Musalman poets honour bhang with thetitle Warak al Khiyall, Fancy's Leaf. And the Makhzan orgreat Arab-Greek drug book records many other fond names for thedrug. Bhang is the Joy-giver, the Sky-flier, the Heavenly-guide,the Poor Man's Heaven, the Soother of Grief. Much of the holiness of bhang is due to its virtue of clearingthe head and stimulating the brain to thought. Among ascetics thesect known as Atits are specially devoted to hemp. No social orreligious gathering of Atits is complete without the use of thehemp plant. smoked in ganja or drunk in bhang. To its devotee bhang is noordinary plant that became , holy from its guardian and healingqualities. According to one account, when nectar was producedfrom the churning of the ocean, something was wanted to purifythe nectar. The deity supplied the want of a nectar-cleanser bycreating bhang. This bhang Mahadev made from his own body, and soit is called angaj or body-born. According to anotheraccountsome nectar dropped to the ground and from the ground thebhang plant sprang. It was because they used this child of nectaror of Mahadev in agreement with religious forms that thee seersor Hishis became Siddha or one with the deity. He who, despitethe example of the Hishis, uses no bhang shall lose his happinessin this life and in the life to come. In the end he shall be castinto hell. The mere sight of bhang, cleanses from as much sin asa thousand horse-sacrifices or a thousand pilgrimages. He whoscandalizes the user of bhang shall suffer the torments of hellso long as the sun endures. He who drinks bhang foolishly or forpleasure without religious rites is as guilty as the sinner of lakhsof sins. He who drinks wisely and according to rule, be heever so low, even though his body is smeared with human ordureand urine, is Shiva. No god or man is as good as the religiousdrinker of bhang. The students of the scriptures at Benares aregiven bhang before they sit to study. At Benares, Ujjain, andother holy places yogis, bairagis and sanyasis take deep draughtsof bhang that they may Centre their thoughts on the Eternal. Tobring back to reason an unhinged mind the best and cleanest bhangleaves should be boiled in milk and turned to clarified butter.Salamisri, saffron, and sugar should be added and the wholeeaten. Besides over the demon of Madness bhang is Vijaya orvictorious over the demons of hunger and thirst. By thehelp of bhang ascetics pass days without food or drink. Thesupporting power of bhang has brought many a Hindu family safethrough. the miseries of famine. To forbid or even seriously torestrict the use of so holy and gracious a herb as the hemp wouldcause widespread suffering and annoyance and to the large bandsof worshipped ascetics deep-seated anger. It would rob the peopleof a solace in discomfort, of a cure in sickness, of a guardianwhose gracious protection saves them from the attacks of evilinfluences, and whose mighty power makes the devotee of theVictorious, overcoming the demons of hunger and thirst, of panicfear, of the glamour of Maya or matter, and of madness, able inrest to brood on the Eternal, till the Eternal, possessing himbody and soul, frees him from the having of self and receives himinto the ocean of Being. These beliefs the Musalman devoteeshares to the full. Like his Hindu brother the Musalman fakirreveres bhang as the lengthener of life, the freer from the bondsof self. Bhang brings union with the Divine Spirit. 'We drankbhang and the mystery I am He grew plain. So grand a result, sotiny a sin.'' NOTE BY BABU ABHILAS CHANDRA MUKERJI. NOTE BY BABU ABHIILAS CHANDRA MUKERJI, SECOND INSPECTOR OFEXCISE, BENGAL, ON THE ORIGIN AND HISTORY OF TRINATH WORSHIP INEASTERN BENGAL,. ' Date of origin.--In 1867 Babu Annnda Chandra Kali orKailai, of Dhamrai, a village in thana Sabhar of the Daccadistrict, first started the worship at the house of hisfather-in- law at Fattehpur in the Atia pargana of the Mymensinghdistrict (sub-division Tangail). Antecedent: of theoriginator.--Dhamrai is an important village in the Daccadistrict for its car festival, which is annually held in honourof a local idol named Madhab Thakur, and which iswitnessed by a large gathering of people. Ananda Chandra receivededucation at the Dacca Normal School. After leaving school heserved for some time as a pundit (schoolmaster), and then enteredthe Police Department, but was there only a short time. He is aBarendra Brahman and belongs to a respectable family. He learntto smoke ganja when he was only a boy. His present age Is 60years. He has the reputation of being a versifier. He smokes twopice worth of ganja every day. He married at Fattehpur in the Mymensingh district. There heintroduced Trinath worship 27 years ago. A panchali (poem)reciting the praises and exploits of Trinath was first publishedat Dacca in 1871 and the first edition (l,000 copies) was sold ina few months. The circumstances under which the worship was firststarted.-Ananda Chandra Kali was at the time living in thehouse of his father-in-law. He was thinking of introducing theworship of a common god, who might be worshipped by all classes,rich and poor, Brahman and Chandal, and by all creeds, Saktas,Baishnavas, and Shaivas, and the idea occurred to him of havingthe present worship at which ordinary and inexpensive things,such as ganja, oil, and betel-leaf, were alone to be used.  Trinath (from Sanskrit Tri, three, and Nath, lord) isrepresented to be Brahma, Bishnu and Shiva, the Hindu Trinity inone. Being a ganja-smoker himself Ananda Kali may have also thoughtthat by introducing the worship he would be able to save theganja-smokers from disrepute, as then ganja could be consumed inthe name of a god and under colour of doing a religious or piousact. Religious aspect of the worship.--The followingtranslation of the Introduction to the Trinath Mela Panchaligives some idea of the subject : The universe consists of the earth, the heaven, and the netherworld, and Trinath is the lord of these three worlds. "There was an incarnation of God in the form of Gour(Chaitanya), who delivered the sinners by preaching the name ofHari, but the Lord was not satisfied with this, and becameconcerned for the created, and soon he became incarnate again.Brahma, Bishnu and Shiva, gods in three forms, manifestedthemselves in one form. The one God, the Lord of the. universe,seeing the miseries of mankind, came to their deliverance. Ananda(Ananda Chandra Kali, the originator)declares that the true andsincere worshippers of Trinath are sure to obtain salvation.Brahma, Bishnu, and Shiva met together and expressed theirdesire, to come to this world in one form to receive worship. . "He is a truly pious man who worships Trinath, andblessings are showered on the worshipper. "The worship should be made in a form in which therich and the poor may equally join and may perform it easily. "Only three things, each worth one pice, arerequired for this puja (form of worship).. The things which please all must be selected. The offeringshould consist of siddhi (ganja),. pan (betel-leaf),and oil, each worth one pice. . "The votaries should assemble at night and worship withflowers. The ganja should be washed in the manner in which peoplewash ganja for smoking. The worshipper must fill three chillumswith equal quantities of ganja, observing due awe andreverence. When all, the worshippers are assembled the lampshould be lit with three wicks, and the praises of Tri- should besung. As long as the wicks burn, the god should be worshipped andhis praises chanted. The god should be reverentially bowed to atthe close of the puja. When the reading of the Panchali isfinished, those that will not show respect to the Prasad (the offering which has been accepted by the god), i.e., chillumof ganja, shall be consigned to. eternal hell, and the sincere worshippers shall go to heaven., How the worship spread.--Anauda Kali commenced the pujawith the aid of some ganja smokers in the village of Fattehpur. Alarge number of people consume ganja in the Dacca and Mymensinghdistricts, and the worship soon became popular. In fact it spreadlike wild-fire from one village to another among theganja-smokers. Those that were not in the habit of consumingganja also followed their example. The following circumstances assisted the spread of the Worship: I.--The puja is open to all classes from Brahmans to Chandalsand to the rich and the poor. Caste does not stand in its way,and it may be performed almost every day and in all seasons. II.--The pup is a Manarik Puja (made in pursuance of avow on the fulfillment of the object desired).. People have beenled to believe that Trinath possesses the power of .healing thesick and fulfilling desires, and .that those who. neglect hisworship meet with disgrace, while those who observe it attain successin life. There are several stories m the Panchali narrated inillustration of this statement. It is also popularly believedthat in the house where Trinath is worshipped cold: fever andheadache do not appear. III.--This is a cheap form of worship. The puja can beperformed by even the poorest, only three pies beingrequired. IV.--People of the lowest class can mix with those above themwithout distinction of caste or creed on the occasion of thesepujas. V.--Ganja eau be consumed by all in the name of a god, and thepractice cannot be looked down upon, because it is done undercertain forms and religious ceremonies. It is also popularlybelieved that those who mock the worshippers of Trinath shall beruined and shall be the victims of misfortune. The worship prevails not only among the poor, but also amongthe well-to-do. The latter often entertain their friends afterthe puja. Women do not take any active part in the worship, but theyoften listen to the reading. of the Panchali. The worship is more or less general in the following districts:--(1) Dacca, (2) Mymensingh, (3) Faridpur, (4) Backergunge, (5)Noakhali, (6) Tippers, (7) Chittagong, (8) Bogra, (9) Sylhet, and(10) Pabna (SerajgaDj side). .,, The worship is on the decline. It is almost dying out amongthe educated ]Jut among the masses it Still exists. . I have ascertained the above facts from Dr. Chandra SekharKali (brother of the originator, Ananda Chandra Kali) and manyother respectable persons, and also from personal inquiries inthe Daces, Chittagong and Rajshahi divisions. Contents | Feedback | Search DRCNet Library | Schaffer Library | Major Studies | IndianHemp Drugs CommissionWT01-B31-14IA031-000652-B040-417http://206.61.184.43:80/schaffer/library/studies/op/op1.htm 206.61.184.43 19970122130515 text/html 130112HTTP/1.0 200 OKDate: Wednesday, 22-Jan-97 13:04:45 GMTServer: WebSitePro/1.1f (S/N wpo-0deb)Allow-ranges: bytesContent-type: text/htmlLast-modified: Saturday, 28-Dec-96 06:52:31 GMTContent-length: 129893 The Opium Problem - Chapter 1 - Extent Contents | Feedback | Search DRCNet Library | Schaffer Library | Major Studies | TheOpium Problem THE OPIUM PROBLEM BY CHARLES E. TERRY AND MILDRED PELLENS 1928 CHAPTER I - EXTENT The number of individuals involved is probably what firstbrings any problem to the attention of the public. It bears adefinite relationship to control and if it is demonstrated that aproblem is confined neither to a community nor to a section oftile country, neither to one social group nor even to one race,but is widespread and common to all, such facts should be used asthe basis for eliciting interest, for pointing out the need forremedial measures, and for framing such measures. Likewise theconverse is true. A knowledge, therefore, of the extent of tileproblem with which we are concerned is a matter of importance andshould receive early consideration. The attempts which we have made to secure an accurate estimateof the number of chronic opium users in the United States at thepresent time emphasize an unusual situation. We find estimatesvarying all the way from a few thousand individuals to severalmillions. One states that one hundred thousand to two hundredthousand is the outside limit while another states that twomillion or more is a conservative figure. The lay press, popularmagazines, and even scientific journals vary so widely in theirestimates of the number of sufferers from this condition that oneis justified in accepting none of them unreservedly and inanalyzing afresh all available means for the determination of theactual facts. It will be seen not only that no one is possessed of anaccurate knowledge as to the exact number of individualsregularly using opium in this country today, but also that underpresent conditions it is impossible to obtain such a figure.There are several reasons why this is true. In the first place,the fact that opium-using in any form is regarded by the generalpublic as alone a habit, vice, sign of weak will or dissipationundoubtedly has caused the majority of users to conceal theircondition. This attitude presumably attributes to the individualeither a physical or mental inferiority the concealment of whichis quite natural. This factor applied before the problem everbecame a matter for official and legislative action andundoubtedly became intensified when it was taken up officiallyand the individuals desirous of solving it made their views thebasis of propaganda for control. With the advent of prohibitorylegislation and the consequent fear of legal involvement, it isnatural that even greater efforts were made by individualsaffected to conceal their condition. Quite aside from this individual point of view is the factthat only in cases where large doses of the drug are beingconsumed can casual observation or even a fairly carefulexamination determine the existence of the condition. There is apopular belief extant that practically anyone can detect theso-called "dope fiend," that he is a miserable,emaciated, furtive individual with pinpoint pupils, tremblinghands, sallow complexion and characterized by a varied group ofmoral attributes, needing only to be observed to renderidentification of the condition complete. As a matter of fact noteven one of these alleged characteristics need be present and itis safe to say that in many cases only one or another of themexists and by no means would suffice to give the ordinaryobserver an idea of the true situation. It has been reported thatfor many years husbands and wives, to say nothing of othermembers of a family, have lived in complete ignorance of theexistence of this condition in one or the other and that quitepossibly the average physician, unaccustomed to dealing with thecondition, might have difficulty in determining its existence. In view of what has been said it would seem quite evident thatthere is no accurate knowledge as to the exact number of chronicopium users in the country today, as it is apparent that, if thecondition is considered a physical, mental, or moral stigma andif it is possible to conceal it from any but the mostscrutinizing examination unknown cases inevitably must exist.This may be expected to continue as long as the present attitudetoward the user of these drugs exists with the social andeconomic damage resulting from exposure, and the illicit trafficoffers a means of supply. That the illicit traffic exists to avery marked degree we know; to suppose that the dangers ofdisclosure are not appreciated by individual sufferers would beto consider them lacking in ordinary intelligence. However, inspite of the obvious difficulties in the way of an accuratedetermination of the number of cases of chronic opiumintoxication, startling statements constantly are being made. Although it is apparent that under present conditions thedifficulties in the way of arriving at exact knowledge or even anestimate known to approach the number of opium users in theUnited States are insurmountable, on a superficial examinationthere would appear to be two methods available for attaining atleast a minimal figure. As it is common knowledge that opium isnot produced in this country and that therefore all opium usedmust be imported, it is possible to secure through the properGovernment bureaus the quantity of opium legitimately imported.By suitable calculations apparently it should be possible toarrive at the total number of users, excluding those supplied bythe illicit traffic. Theoretically this could be accomplished bysubtracting from the amount imported for a given period theamount exported and the amount used for therapeutic purposes notconnected with chronic opium intoxication and dividing theresulting figure by the average amount consumed by the chronicuser for that period. This method has been used by some authors,but there are several factors which vitiate the totals arrivedat. First, some writers have neglected to distinguish betweengeneral importation figures and the figures dealing withimportations for consumption.* This at once makes for verydifferent totals as will be seen when it is stated that, for theperiod of ten years 1911-1920 inclusive, these amounts differedby about 400,000 pounds of opium. *'General imports" embrace imported articles entered atthe customs houses for immediate consumption and importedarticles entered for warehouse. "Imports entered forconsumption" embrace imported articles entered for immediateconsumption and imported articles withdrawn from warehouse forconsumption. Another source of error enters in any attempt to allow for theamount of opium and its derivatives employed for therapeuticpurposes not connected with chronic, opium intoxication. Theestimates as to the proportion of imported drug required for suchpurposes have varied very widely and obviously where such largefigures are dealt with the resulting estimates vary considerably.These allowances always seem to have been reached either in anarbitrary fashion or upon a basis of incomplete facts. Further so far as we know there has been made no study of asufficiently large and representative number of individual casesunder suitable conditions to permit of any definite statement asto an average daily dose. For instance, it is well known thatcertain cases continue for years on one or two grains or even afraction of a grain daily while others take such almostunbelievable doses as eighty to one hundred or more grains a day.Also, among a certain type, the amount stated as habituallyconsumed by an individual may include the ration of one or moreother individuals unknown to the investigator. As far as we know then there are two obstacles to thedetermination through importation figures of a minimal figure forthe number of chronic opium users in this country at the presenttime:-(1) the fact that the so-called "legitimatetherapeutic needs" are unknown and (2) the whollyspeculative nature of the "average dose." In view ofthese facts, all estimates as to the extent of this conditionbased on importation figures however used are potentiallyfallacious to such a great degree as to be practically valueless. The second method of determination is the employment of somemeans for the taking of a census of opium users in a givenlocality and adjusting it to the population of the country as awhole. Aside from the fact that it would not include those userswho, by reason of their desire for concealment and consequentdependence on illicit traffic for supply, could not be recordedby such a survey undoubtedly would possessa value not found in estimates based on importation figures in anattempt to reach a minimal figure, inasmuch as it would bedefinite and positive as far as it went. Of course, there ispossibility of error to a greater or less degree in this method.The floating population, for example, cannot be disregarded, yetthis is a source of error common to every method ofcensus-taking. Further, local conditions such as populationcomposition, climate, race distribution, occupation, etc., areinfluencing factors which tend to lessen the value of theindividual surveys as applied to the country as a whole.Unfortunately, there have not been enough of these surveys madein various sections to determine by comparison the degree towhich these factors operate. In what follows, the surveys whichwe have reviewed and which represent investigations made indifferent localities at different periods will be analyzed andthe features which tend to vitiate their application to thecountry as a whole, for the period in which they were made, willbe pointed out. 'This factor does not enter into the early surveys which werecarried on when illicit traffic was unknown or practicallynegligible. Before examining the first definite figures of which we haveknowledge, contained in a survey reported by 0. Marshall in theAnnual Report of the Michigan State Department of Health of 1878,it will be interesting to quote from some of the earliest authorswho refer to the extent of chronic opium intoxication in thiscountry. Their statements, however inexact, at least show thatthe problem is by no means one of recent development but theresult, as we know it today, of a continuous growth probablysince Colonial days. What effect the war of the AmericanRevolution and that of 1812 had upon its spread we have not seenindicated in any record we have consulted, but that the Civil Wargave it a considerable impetus seems definitely established. Fitzhugh Ludlow-1867.3 3 Ludlow, Fitzhugh-Harper's Magazine. August, 1867. "The habit is gaining fearful ground among ourprofessional men, the operatives in our mills, our weary servingwomen, our fagged clerks, our former liquor drunkards, our veryday laborers, who a generation ago took gin. All our classes fromthe highest to the lowest are yearly increasing their consumptionof the drug." Horace Day-1868 .4 4 Day, Horace-The Opium Habit. 1868. "The number of confirmed opium-eaters in the UnitedStates is large, not less, judging from the testimony ofdruggists in all parts of the country as well as from othersources, than eighty to one hundred thousand . . . The events ofthe last few years (Civil War) have unquestionably added greatlyto their number. Maimed and shattered survivors from a hundredbattlefields, diseased and disabled soldiers released fromhostile prisons, anguished and hopeless wives and mothers, madeso by the slaughter of those who were dearest to them, havefound, many of them, temporary relief from their sufferings inopium." Alonzo Calkins-1871.5 Calkins calls attention to the increased use of opium in thiscountry from the year 1840. Basing his computations on theimportations of opium and the population figures for those years,he reaches the following ratios of advance: He gives in some detail the method by which he reaches thesefigures which include "a comparison of opinions given byeighteen prominent apothecaries of New York City." "Such statistics," he asserts, "fully presentedbear no equivocal interpretation." Independent and collateral evidences, he believes, show that"opiummania, far from being restricted . . . to our cities .. . is fast pervading the country-populations." In the evidence he presents he quotes the following: "Thus addresses the writer, a physician and druggist of a New England city, Dr. S. S.: 'In this town I began business twenty years since. The population then at 10,000 has increased only inconsiderably, but my sales have advanced from 50 pounds of opium the first year to 300 pounds now; and of laudanum four times upon what was formerly required. About 50 regular purchasers come to my shop, and as many more, perhaps, are divided among the other three apothecaries in the place. Some country dealers also have their quotas of dependents.' Such is no solitary record. "In the Portland Press, IM, a correspondent sounds the alarm-note in these words: 'Very few of our people are aware how many habitual consumers of opium among us a careful scrutiny would disclose. In the little village of Auburn (of the neighborhood) at least fifty such (as counted up by a resident apothecary) regularly purchase their supplies hereabouts; and the country grocers, too, not a few of them, find occasion for keeping themselves supplied with a stock.' Corroborative accounts dome in from New Jersey and Indiana, from Boston at one extreme and from St. Louis at another, and from the impoverished South as well. In the Mississippi Valley particularly the use of stimuli of every name is fearfully on the increase (Pitcher, Comstock)." F. E. Oliver-1871. In the third Annual Report of the State Board of Health,Massachusetts, for the year 1871, there appears a chapter on theuse and abuse of opium written by this author. The writeraddressed the following questions to the physicians ofMassachusetts: 1. Are preparations of opium used by the people except for the relief of Pain? 2. We would like to know whether the injurious use of opium has increased of late years, and if so, the causes of such increase? Unfortunately, these questions were not so framed as to elicitthe information which the author desired to obtain and, as hehimself states, the data secured are most incomplete althoughsuggestive. Less than one-half of the physicians addressed wereheard from, representing a little more than one-third of thephysicians of the state. In all 125 physicians replied, 40 ofthese stating in answer to the first question that they knew ofno case of opium eating. The remaining 85 stated that the drugwas used to a greater or less extent in their respectivecircuits. In many of the smaller towns where the"habit" existed, the number of users was reported whereit could be ascertained, while in the returns from others suchterms as "few," "many" and"several" alone were given. In others again no mentionwas made of numbers, so that the author was not able to arrive atanything like an accurate computation. From the fragmentary dataso obtained the author states that the inference is unavoidablethat the "opium habit" is more or less prevalent inmany parts of the state and while it is impossible to estimate itthe number of users must be very considerable. The writer further gives the following extract from a letterreceived from Mr. S. Dana Hayes, one of the State Assayers: "'In reply to your inquiries, it is my opinion that the consumption of opium in Massachusetts and New England is increasing more rapidly in proportion than the population. There are so many channels through which the drug may be brought into the State, that I suppose it would be almost impossible to determine how much foreign opium is used here; but it may easily be shown that the home production increases every year. Opium has been recently made from white poppies, cultivated for the purpose, in Vermont, New Hampshire and Connecticut, the annual production being estimated by hundreds of pounds, and this has generally been absorbed in the communities where it is made. It has also been brought here from Florida and Louisiana, while comparatively large quantities are regularly sent east from California and Arizona, where its cultivation is becoming an important branch of industry, ten acres of poppies being said to yield, in Arizona, twelve hundred pounds of opium."' "'That which is not used where it is produced, including the shipments from California and the West, together with inferior and damaged parcels of foreign opium received and condemned at this port, is sent to Philadelphia, where it is converted into morphis. and its salts, and is thus distributed through the country! Pt a In his letter Hayes comments further on the use of opium andmorphin in family remedies such as cough mixtures and linimentsand in the dangerous so-called "cures" or "Relieffor Opium-Eaters" preparations. 'D. M. R. Culbreth in his "Materia Medica andPharmacology", 3rd edition, 1903, states: "During the Civil War opium was cultivated in Virginia,Tennessee, South Carolina, Georgia, being planted in Septemberand collected in May." In the 6th edition of the same work the author states thatthis opium was of high narcotic content. Oliver also quotes extracts from letters replying to hisquestion as to the increase in tile use of opium, some ofwhich are reproduced below: "Clarksburg-'I think it on the increase, because doctorsprescribe it more indiscriminately now than formerly, thusestablishing the habit with the patient! Eastham-2 I think the use of opium has slightly increased,mostly among females.' Swampscott-2 The use of opium in its various forms hasmaterially increased within the last ten years! Westfield---I have reason to believe this practice exceedinglycommon among certain classes of people, who crave the effect of astimulant, but will not risk their reputation for temperance bytaking alcoholic beverages.' Worcester-2 I have talked with some of our most intelligentapothecaries, who tell me that the use of opium has greatlyincreased, especially among women. The reasons which one gave arethese: The doctors are prescribing it more to their patients, andthus the habit is acquired. There is also the desire for Someform of stimulant. Alcoholic stimulants being prohibited, manyhave resorted to the use of opium.' Another gave it as his opinion that 'the use of opium in itsvarious preparations is increasing among the people as astimulant, and is now being used to an alarming extent. I believethis to be due largely to the unpopularity and restricted use ofalcoholic liquors. I believe there is a natural craving for someartificial stimulant with almost every human being, which isgreatly increased by the cares and perplexities of life, andtherefore is more apparent as age advances. This desire should besatisfied by the milder and least injurious drinks, as beer,light wines, etc.' Another states: 'I think opium and its preparation are used toa considerable extent as stimulants, and am inclined to theopinion that such use is increasing and that such increase isdue, in some degree, to the excitements, suffering and mentaldisquietude resulting from the late war! Boston-Among 20 or 30 druggists consulted there was adiversity of opinions many of them not selling opium without aphysician's order. The following statements are among the mostimportant: 'Believes the habit of opium eating diminishing, as he hasfewer calls than formerly! 'Has one customer who buys half an ounce at a time. The numberof calls is less than formerly. Has observed that veteransoldiers who contracted the habit in army hospitals are stilladdicted to opium.' 'In the experience of twenty-five years has observed nodecided increase in the habit of opium eating. Recognizes thecorrelation in the abuse of opium and of alcohol. The opium habitfrequently begins in the use of opium medicinally. Veteransoldiers, as a class, are addicted to it . . . ' 'Thinks the abuse is not uncommon in the community but that itis les,9 in Boston than elsewhere. Would look for it rather amongprofessional men threat among the poorer classes.' 'From his own experiences, believes that the habit of opiumeating has increased within the last five years from 50 to 75 percent. Never sells the drug without physician's prescription buthas on an average five or six daily applications for some one ofits preparations. It is largely taken by prostitutes.' 'Has butone customer and that a noted temperance lecturer.' S. F. McFarland-1877.7 ' McFarland, S. F.-Opium inebriety and the hypodermic syringe.Trans. New York State Medical Society, 1877. "If cases of opium inebriety occur as frequently in theprivate practice of other physicians as they have in my own, itis coining to be a serious matter, and a few words of caution,against the indiscriminate use of so active a drug, may bepardonable. "Since the introduction of the hypodermic syringe,especially, there has been a noticeable increase in thefrequency, as well as the severity, of these cases; and I wish toenter a protest against its imprudent use, and particularlyagainst leaving it in the hands of patients or their friends, tobe used at their discretion, or even allowing them to know thatthey can use it, except in the greatest emergencies; for once intheir possession, and used for any considerable length of time,they will seldom discontinue it, and will soon be inquiring wherethey can get 'one of those things'. It is certainly a mostvaluable instrument in the hands of the discreet practitioner,and will reach cases which nothing else will, with a certaintyand promptness which is very satisfactory; but it is too potentfor evil, as well, to be trusted beyond his grasp. "By the hypodermic use of opium the habit is much morerapidly produced than by taking it into the stomach, or by anyother method-a fact which should not be lost sight of." 0. Marshall-1878.8 'Marshall, O. The opium habit in Michigan. Annual Report MichiganState Board of Health. 1878. Turning to a consideration of the early surveys, the onealready mentioned by 0. Marshall deserves first consideration, asit was the earliest of which we have knowledge. While thesefigures are obviously quite incomplete, they represent at least aminimal extent and apparently can be depended upon as comprisingpositive information as far as they go. For these reasons theyare of great importance to us today in seeking to arrive at atrue conception, first, of the probable influence of factorsother than illicit traffic and, second, of their possiblerelationship to conditions of today. Marshall begins his report with the following paragraph: "At a meeting of the State Board of Health in January,1877, by a written communication, I called its attention to thelarge number of opium-eaters in the vicinity of North Lansing,giving many particulars relating to the opium habit as it existshere. In complying with the request of the Board to prepare anarticle for publication, I have extended the investigation toother parts of the State, the result of which investigation ishere given." From further observations the author realizes how impossibleit is to obtain complete and perfectly reliable informationconcerning this condition. He states: "Those beat acquainted with its extent are the physicianand druggist. As a rule, the physician, although originallyresponsible for many of the cases in his vicinity, is only awareof them through his business relation with the druggist. Thelatter, from whom the drug is obtained, from the fear of low oftrade, or, as some of them term it, a violation of confidentialbusiness, are often unwilling to furnish any information withregard to it." Marshall sent two hundred circulars to prominent physiciansthroughout the state asking for information in regard to theopium "habit" in their localities and enclosing apostal card with printed form for report of the number of men andwomen using opium and morphin in each place. Marshall took careto eliminate duplication of cases by addressing only onephysician in each locality and where reports from a physicianincluded figures from two or more druggists the lists werecompared and repeaters eliminated. To those, ninety-six replieswere received giving the number of morphin and opium users inninety-six cities, villages, and townships of the state. He saysin this connection: "From the supposed impossibility of getting reliableinformation of the numbers in the larger cities, no circularswere sent to Detroit, Grand Rapids or East Saginaw; and probablyfrom this cause no answers were received from many of the largercities of the State where circulars were sent." The majority of the reports received by him include only thosepersons with whom the physician personally was acquainted. This,he points out, resulted in obtaining less complete informationthan had the druggists themselves been addressed. This, he says,is noticeable in the reports from two neighboring cities, one ofwhich gives the large number of one hundred sixteen, which numberwas obtained after considerable effort by particular request,while the other reports only one case. A druggist, however,formerly in business in the latter city estimated the number ofopium users in that city at not less than sixty. From such factsas these Marshall comes to the conclusion that only the minimalnumber was obtained and that the actual number was probablygreater in many instances. We are including the complete table given in Marshall's report.It is of peculiar interest because of the fact that urban, ruraland semirural communities were included and that the largercities of the state, in which the underworld and vicious elementnaturally would be supposed to exist in the greatest degree, wereabsent. The assumption therefore is that, whatever the cause forthe original use of the drug, the influence of viciousassociation was relatively negligible. It is significant thatthroughout his whole report no mention is made of illicit trafficor of any source of supply other than that through physician anddruggist. Marshall summarizes his findings as follows: "The total number of opium caters reported in the placesgiven is 1313; of these 803 are females, and 510 are males ...The population of the cities and villages including the townshipsin which they are situated, according to the State census of1874, was 225,633. The population of the whole State at the sametime was 1,334,031. If the number of opium eaters, includingmorphine eaters, in proportion to the population in the placesgiven holds good for the entire State, the total number of opiumcaters, all classes, in the State would be 7,763. Taking everydegree of the habit into consideration, this estimate of thenumber is probably not too large." The smallest community from which figures were obtained had apopulation of but 315, the largest a population of 10,235, theaverage population of the 96 towns being 2350. In other words,whatever the prevalence of the use of narcotic drugs obtained byMarshall was, his facts were derived from small hamlets and townswhich scarcely could be dignified by the name of city even in thetime in which he wrote. These communities covered every sectionof the state and presumably gave a true picture of it as a whole.Obviously, as alreadk stated, underworld influences such asprostitution, gambling, etc., largely can be eliminated. At thetime of this investigation communication was much more difficultand less rapid than it is today; news was not so widelydisseminated and in an area of such an extent as that of thestate of Michigan, one must conclude that a situation of thisnature was caused by factors of common occurrence, by influencesshared alike by all communities rather than by artificial orunusual influences operating in selected localities. If,therefore, we find that Marshall's figures were based onrepresentative conditions common to all sections of the state, itis reasonable to assume that they may be applied also to thecountry as a whole. We may not assume, for instance, that thedistribution of painful disease, of insomnia, of nervousness, oreven of certain social proclivities and curiosity was peculiar toMichigan and that in 1877 through some mischance its people, morethan those of other states, were subjected to perniciousinfluences of this nature. Nor may we assume that the practice ofmedicine was conducted along widely different lines in Michiganfrom those elsewhere or that the druggists of Michigan were morecareless in the conduct of their business, less prone to make aprofitable sale or more blind to the harm resulting from thistraffic than those of other states. In other words, there wouldseem no valid reason for not applying to the country as a wholesuch figures as Marshall gives us in depicting the extent ofchronic opium intoxication in his state. Also the resultingestimate for the country would be a minimal figure not onlybecause of the incompleteness of Marshall's returns but alsobecause of the absence in Michigan of certain influences whichwould tend to increase the use of opium. At that time, as we knowfrom other sources, there were operating on both the Atlantic andPacific coasts influences that did not operate in Michigan, aninland state. On the west coast there were such influences as themaritime traffic with the Orient and the coolie labor importedfor railroad and other construction undertakings, while in NewEngland we have already seen poppy culture already was beingindulged in and shipments were being made to other states. TABLE I Showing the number of Opium and Morphine Eaters, with theNumber of Each Sex, Reported in 96 Cities, Villages and Townshipsof the State, with the Population of Each Place, Including theTownship in which it is Situated, according to the State Censusof 1874. As a preliminary to the application of Marshall'sfigures to the State of Michigan as a whole, three thingsmust be borne in mind-first, the total omission of returns fromthe larger cities, second, the fact which he himself brings out,that information secured from the stated source, namely,physicians, was less complete than would have been informationsecured from druggists, and, third, the use by Marshall ofpopulation figures for the year 1874 instead of 1877. From the ninety-six communities heard from, as we have seen,there were reported 1313 users of opium or morphin. For someunknown reason Marshall employs in his computation the statecensus figures of 1874 rather than an estimated figure for theyear 1877 in which the survey was made. The population ofMichigan, according to him, was in 1874, 1,334,031. Employingthis figure he comes to the conclusion that if the number ofopium and morphin users holds good for the entire state the totalnumber in the state would be 7,763. Taking into account thenatural rate of increase in population between the years 1874 and1877, this figure would represent a slight overestimate, allother things being equal. However, this is offset by otherfactors such as the relative incompleteness of the informationreceived from physicians as compared with that received fromdruggists and it is fair to assume that this is a minimalfigure. How great the error on the side of underestimation is, wehave no means of telling. The fact that in one town, Monroe, the physician addressedreported but one case while a druggist stated that therewere about sixty, is indicative possibly of a very great error inMarshall's total figure and it must be remembered that thedruggists were in a much better position to know the truth thanwere physicians. They supplied the drugs used and as a rule,especially at the time of Marshall's investigation when countersales were legal and a matter of common practice, physicians werecalled upon only by those opiate users seeking curative treatmentfor their condition. It is, therefore, doubtful if the medicalprofession at any time has been in a position to supply anythinglike a complete list of these cases while the druggists from thevery nature of things in the past could have furnished thisinformation. It is probable, therefore, that Marshall's figures are verymuch more incomplete than even he himself believed and it isquite possible that the actual number of cases in the towns andcities of Michigan from which Marshall received his returns wereseveral times larger than his figures indicated. Be this as itmay, his total of 1313 cases represents definite and positiveinformation indicative of the widespread use of these drugs inthe State of Michigan over fifty years ago, long before thedevelopment of an illicit traffic in opium and its preparationswith its resulting artificial impetus to the formation of newcases. If applied to the country as a whole for the year inquestion, 1874, this figure gives a total of 251,936. This is astartling figure for the period in question and yet in allprobability well below the actual one and deserving of the mostcareful consideration on the part of those who today, with theundoubted existence of new and increasingly powerful factors atwork in the stimulation of the use of these drugs, seek to becomefamiliar with the extent of our present narcotic problem. Further on in his report, Marshall introduces the importationfigures from 1850 to 1877. From these he estimates an averageimportation figure for the year 1877. From information securedfrom drug store sales he comes to the conclusion that the averageuser consumes about three pounds of opium during the year.Allowing one-fifth of the total importation for "legitimatetherapeutic use" and dividing the remainder by three hearrives at a figure of 93,654 as the number of users in thecountry as a whole. From this figure by suitable calculation heobtains for the State of Michigan about 25.50 users. Elsewhere we have pointed out some of the dangers ofcalculating the number of users upon such a basis as this and inMarshall's effort we have a good illustration of the fallaciesthat enter. If we take Marshall's figure of 2550 for the State ofMichigan we obtain, as the proportion of the ninety-six towns andcities from which lie received definite information as to thenumber of opium users, the figure of 421 or but one-third of theactual number of users positively known to exist in theseninety-six communities. It is quite evident that in (Calculationsbased on importation figures there enter very large errors whichit is impossible to determine or correct. It seems, therefore, werepeat, that little or no dependence can be placed on estimatesarrived at in this manner and that fragmentary as have been thevarious actual surveys they furnish data of far greater value forpurposes of generalization. C. W. Earle-1880.9 'Earle, C. W.-Tile opium habit. Chicago Med. Rev. 1880. Earle made a study of the extent of the use of opium inChicago by interviewing a number of druggists in that city.Although the figure of the number of users he obtained may not beused in a statistical analysis, his work is a distinctcontribution as an indication of the prevalence of the use of thedrug at the time. The following is a quotation from his report: "In an article entitled 'The Impending Danger,' Dr.Mattison, of Brooklyn, states that he is assured by both dealersin the crude drug and manufacturers of the alkaloids, thatimportation of opium is increasing rapidly every year, and thatthe supply may become insufficient for the demand. The questionnaturally suggesting itself is: What becomes of the vast amountyearly brought to our shores?" Earle investigated fifty drug stores, asking questions as tothe number of customers, their age, nativity, kind of narcoticused, quantity, etc. He reports: "The three divisions of the city were visited, andlocalities inhabited by the different classes and nationalitieswere thoroughly canvassed. I was greatly surprised to find thatdruggists on the West Side were patronized to a greater extent(excepting a few on Clark Street) than in any other part of thecity. Foreign druggists (German and Scandinavian), seem toexhibit more conscientious scruples in regard to the trade thanour own nationality. I learned from some of these gentlemen thatin Denmark, and, if I mistake not, in Norway and Sweden, thetrade is absolutely forbidden. Fifty druggists have 235customers, or an average of nearly five to each store." J. M. Hull-1885. An account of Hull's findings appears in the Biennial Reportof the State Board of Health of Iowa for 1985. This BiennialReport covers a period of two years ending June 30, 1885, and itis not quite clear from his article whether the investigation wasmade in the latter half of 1883, during 1884 or in the first halfof 1885. In using his figures, therefore, we shall choose themiddle period and base our computations on the population figuresof 1884. Hull begins his report with the following: "Although my paper on the opium habit is brief, and but asmall part of the sad story told, yet I am inclined to believe itcontains some facts regarding this rapidly increasing evil thatcannot fail to astonish even those who are well informed, and farmore those who have given the subject little or no attention. "Opium is today a greater curse than alcohol, and justlyclaims a large number of helpless victims, which have not comefrom the ranks of reckless men and fallen women, but the majorityof them are to be found among the educated and most honored anduseful members of society; and as to sex, we may count out theprostitutes so much given to this vice, and still find femalesfar ahead so far as numbers are concerned. The habit in a vastmajority of cases is first formed by the unpardonablecarelessness of physicians, who are often too fond of using alittle syringe, or of relieving every ache and pain by theadministration of an opiate." To fifteen hundred circulars sent to druggists in the state ofIowa, requesting information on the subject, Hull received 123replies reporting 235 users of opium in some form. Of these 86were men and 129 women.10 The form of drug used was morphin, 129;gum opium, 73; laudanum, 12; paregoric, 6; Dover's Powder, 3;McMunn's Elixir, 4. As to the method of using the drug he states: "While the drug is used less frequently by the hypodermicmethod than by the mouth, the former method is gaining ground.The habit may be formed about as readily one way as the other.Those who use it by the mouth as a rule make the most rapidprogress, as the drug is easier taken, is free from pain, andlarger than the hypodermic dose." He states that there were about 3,000 stores in Iowa whereopium was kept for sale and that if reports had come from all inthe same ratio it would have shown the number of users to havebeen about 6,000. By actual computation on the above basis we get5,732. Hull states, however, that his reports were mostly fromthe small villages, very few coming from the cities where, hestates, the "habit" was far more common. He statesfurther: "From reliable information which I have been able tosecure from various sources, I feel safe in saying that there arein this state over 10,000 people who are constantly under theinfluence of an opiate and who are wholly unable by any effort ofthe will to break the habit or even to abstain for 72hours." The estimated population of continental United States for 1884was according to the U. S. Bureau of the Census 55,379,154 andthat of the State of Iowa for the same year was 1,742,084. Using the lower figure of 5,732 obtained in the mannerdescribed above, as the actual number of users in theState of Iowa, we get 182,215 chronic users for thecountry as a whole for the year 1884. This must be by far anunderestimate as Hull himself states that he had good reason tobelieve that there were over 10,000 in the state. In considering estimates based on Hull's figure several pointsshould be borne in mind. First, Hull does not indicate thepopulation served by the 123 stores reporting the 235cases. Although he does state that there were about 3,000 storesin Iowa where opium was kept, in assuming that the sales averagedthe same in different stores, there is the possibility of error.Second, according to Hull's own statement most of the casesreported were from small villages with very few coming from thecities, where he states the "habit" was far morecommon. With the usual vicious elements of city life eliminated,one may assume that Hull's figures represent a minimal extent. It is worthy of note that here again no mention is made ofillicit traffic. B. H. Hartwell-1888.11 ' Hartwell, B. H. The sale and Use of Opium in Massachusetts.Annual Report, Massachusetts State Board of Health, 1889. Hartwell made a survey in the State of Massachusetts, inthe report of which, unfortunately, he failed to give thepopulation figures on which the study was based. If these figureswere available it might be possible to compute the per capitaconsumption. Although this cannot be done, we are giving below asummary of that part of his survey dealing with extent as aninteresting side-light on conditions obtaining in that period. Hartwell states that the investigation was undertaken inaccordance with the following "resolve" adopted by theLegislature of 1888: "Resolved, That the State Board of Health be requested tomake an investigation concerning the sale and use of opium, invarious forms and preparations, with a view to ascertaining theextent of the evils arising therefrom; whether such use and evilsare increasing, and, if so, the manner and cause thereof, andwhat remedies for such evils may be proposed; and to report theresult of such investigation to the General Court." Hartwell continues his report as follows: "This resolution was presumably an outcome of theprevalent belief that the use of opium is increasing veryrapidly. An expos6 of the opium joints in Boston appeared in oneof the leading dailies in 1885; there have been frequentallusions to the habit in other papers; a recent article,claiming to be the result of years of study of the opium habit inBoston, was published in one of our popular magazines, in whichthe writer says that the habit 'is increasing rapidly! In theseand numerous other ways the public has been taught to believethat the evil is widespread and extending. The large number ofopium habitues which seem to be among us, the novelty of thisform of stimulation, its secret character, the strong hold whichit has upon its victims, the horrible results arising therefrom,especially from the habit of opium smoking,-all tend to keep thesubject prominently before the people, and to magnify the evil inthe public mind. To get at the facts concerning the use of opium(the term opium will include all of its preparations), as far aspossible, is the object aimed at in this inquiry. This is besetwith many difficulties, from the very nature of things. There canbe no reliable statistics of the amount of opium used by themedical profession, the laity, or by habitues, or the proportionused by each. The most rigid inquiry into a habit as secret andas easily practised as is this form of inebriety could not besufficiently accurate for mathematical calculation; approximationonly can be attained. "That a great deal of opium is used besides thatlegitimately required for the relief of pain and treatment ofdisease, is unquestionably true. The unwillingness of people tobear pain, the habit of self-prescribing, the many facilities forobtaining opium and its preparations from the regular dealers aswell as by means of proprietary medicines containing it, thenumerous ways by which a knowledge is gained of the method ofobtaining and taking the drug-all extend its use in the mostdangerous manner. "As the best means for forming an opinion of the amountof opium used, and whether or not its use is increasing,circulars were sent to many of the druggists and physicians ofthe State; the questions asked and a synopsis of the answersreturned are given below. Some allowance must be made inconsidering the returns, for the reason that opium habitues, fromfear of detection or a desire for secrecy, scatter theirpurchases as much as possible; so that a druggist may easily getan impression of an increased or decreased use of the drug, whilein reality the sales are going on elsewhere or have returnedafter the rounds have been completed. So also the same habitualusers might be seen by different physicians, and counted severaltimes, or escape notice altogether, and thus convey a false ideaof the actual number. A circular containing five questions wassent to druggists. Replies were received from about 600druggists, representing 190 cities and towns, and embracingnearly every city and town in the State where a druggist islocated. (There are about 150 towns in which no druggistsreside.) About one-fourth of the answers came from Boston, therest from other parts of that State. Many of the returnedcirculars contained answers to all of the questions, others toonly part of them; hence the number varies in the differentquestions. The questions and answers were as follows:- "I. What amounts of opium are sold by you per month, noton the advice and prescription of a physician?" The answers numbering 512 to 541 showed the following: (a) Crude opium, opium in pill or other solid form? Sixty per cent. none-the remainder a few pills to 4 pounds. (b) Liquid preparations; Tincture? Twelve per cent. none; the remainder one gram to 32 pints;other liquid preparations none to 40 pints. (c) Morphia and its salts, in bulk, pill or powder? Thirty-three per cent. none; the remainder % gr. to 8 oz.morphia 2 to 500 morphia pills, mostly 1/8 grs. (d) Other preparations very little. "2. Is the demand for opium and its salts increasing? 535answers: 85 per cent., no; 8 per cent., yes; 5 per cent.,decreasing; 2 per cent., do not know." "For obvious reasons, circulars were also sent to many ofthe physicians of the State who commenced practice before 1875.About 260 replies were received, from 100 cities and towns out ofabout 250 in which physicians reside. Eight questions weresubmitted, which with the number and character of the answers,were as follows: "1. From your own observation, is the use of opium andits preparations increasing in the community in which you live?225 answers: 66 per cent., no; 28 per cent., yes; 6 per cent., donot know. "2. If such be the case, what is the probable cause ofsuch increase; this question called for answers only from thosewho had answered the first question affirmatively; consequently,but 75 of a miscellaneous character were received. Twenty percent., give the use of opium by physicians as the sole cause; 11per cent., give this as the cause in part. Ease of obtainingopium from druggists, duplication of prescriptions containingopium, increased knowledge of its effects, excessive brain work,desire for stimulation, fast living, comprise most of theremaining answers. "3. Are diseases calling for the use of opium increasing?209 answers: 84 per cent., no; 16 per cent., yes." Although he believes, as can be seen from the above, that agreat deal of opium "is used besides that legitimatelyrequired for the relief of pain and the treatment ofdisease," on the basis of his study, Hartwell concludes that " . . . the use of opium is notincreasing in Massachusetts. In the large centres of populationthere may be a slight increase from year to year. It is here thatexcesses and crime of all kinds, if not increasing, are much morecommon than in less populous districts. The better knowledge ofthe uses and effects of the drug, by means of the greaterintercommunication of the people; the many facilities forobtaining it; the general practice of writing prescriptions,followed by unrestrained reduplication of them; the excitement ofbusiness, leading to overwork and overtaxing of the mentalpowers,-are conditions which are favorable to the increased useof opium." A. P. Ginnell-1900.12 'Grinnell, A. P.-A review of drug consumption and alcohol asfound in proprietary medicine. Med. Leg. Jour., 1905. This author made a study of the consumption of drugs in the Stateof Vermont and while he made no attempt to estimate the number ofopium users from it, a report of his study is interesting as anindication of the use in Vermont at that time. There appears tobe no reason to believe that this report covers a communityinfluenced by any unusual factors but rather it represents anormal distribution of drug users. The author states: "Few people are aware of the enormous consumption ofnarcotics or stimulating drugs. With the development ofpharmaceutical science and the consequent improvement andfacility in preparing drugs and alkaloids the market has grownaccordingly. More widespread knowledge concerning the effects andspecial uses of opium, cocaine, quinine, Cannabis Indica, Chloraland Heroin, ha's further stimulated the demand for these drugs,until today the American people are confronted by a problem whichis only equaled in its magnitude by its terrible and appallingaspects. "When we pause to consider the fearful inroads theexcessive and habitual use of these drugs make on the mentality,physical health and general existence of those addicted to them,we can easily appreciate what a serious menace to society a rapidincrease of drug habitues must inevitably mean. "It is hardly necessary to speak of the results of thehabitual and excessive use of narcotic drugs. Physicians, morethan any other class, realize the fearful ravages made on thehuman system; and the large number of physical, moral and mentalwrecks they are constantly meeting who owe their conditionentirely to drug addiction, tells eloquently how extensive andfar-reaching the drug evil has become. Every alienist is dailybeing brought face to face with the growing influence of certaindrugs on psychic abnormalities and degenerations, and theinsidious onset and progress of such conditions, when soproduced, cannot fail to impress us with the Medico-Legalimportance of the drug habit." In order to secure information as to the consumption ofcertain drugs, Grinnell wrote the druggists of the State askingthem for estimates of their monthly sales of the following drugsand preparations: "Opium (gum or powder) Morphine sulp. (powder or pills) Dover powder Paregoric (tinct. opii. camph.) Laudanuin (tinct. opii) Cocaine Chloral Indian hemp (Cannabis Indica) Quinine (powder or pills)?" Of 130 druggists addressed 116 were heard from. He alsoaddressed 172 general stores which sold drugs in localities whereno drug stores existed and three wholesale druggists, butobtained no satisfactory information from the latter. He states that ninety per cent. of the physicians of Vermontdispense their own drugs and that sales of these drugs tophysicians were not included in the figures supplied bydruggists. He also states that the figures he secured could be multipliedby five and be below the actual consumption inasmuch as theyinclude "nothing in the composition of patent medicines orcough medicines; nothing dispensed by physicians; nothingdispensed by these three large manufactories-simply the regularretail drug store businesses and the sales of the 160 generalstores." From these two sources lie estimated 3,300,000 doses of opiumwere sold every month-enough to supply "one and one-halfdoses of opium to every man and woman in the State of Vermontabove the age of 21 years, every day in the year." The actual amounts sold by druggists as compiled by Grinnellwere as follows: The above figures cover reports from 69 out of 344 towns, andfrom 116 drug stores out of 130, but do not include amounts soldin the general stores. American Pharmaceutical Association-1902 13-1903. 14 A committee of this organization, H. F. Hynson, Chairman,reported on the replies received from pharmacists and physiciansin certain localities in response to queries sent by thecommittee. The conclusion arrived at was to the effect that atleast five users of certain drugs, commonly known as"habit-forming" but not opium alone, were known toevery pharmacist. From this it was estimated that there were atleast 200,000 in the country. 'Hynson, H. P.-Report of Committee on Acquirement of the DrugHabit. Amer. Jour. Pharm. November, 1902. In the following year the same Committee with E. G. Eberle aschairman made a more extensive canvass of the situation throughletters to all sections of the United States and Canada. As aresult of the information so gathered, which dealt with cocaineand other drugs as well as opium preparations, the Committee cameto certain conclusions, the most suggestive of which follow: Eberle, E. G. Report of Committee on Acquirement of DrugHabits. Amer. Jour. Pharm. October, 1903. "General reports indicate that the sale of narcotics isnot restricted to any section of the country, nor confinedexclusively to the fallen and lower class. Information comes fromseveral sources that in callings which demand many hours' work ata time or the hours of night, cocaine is resorted to forstimulation." "We are confident that the use of narcotics is increasingand that evil effects from it will come to succeedinggenerations. While the increase is most evident with the lowerclasses, the statistics of institutes devoted to the cure ofhabitues show that their patients are principally drawn fromthose in the higher walks of life." "Careful study of data personally collected and fromreliable sources forces the conclusion that the habitual use ofopium in its various forms is increasing and that this increaseis confined to no one class or occupation." "While it has not been practicable to obtain exactfigures, it can be stated that the drug habit is alarminglyincreasing among the men of our army and navy. The number of menusing opium in the army has greatly increased since theoccupation of the Philippines, many 'opium smokers' acquiring thehabit there from Chinese or natives. The smoking of opium by themen of the navy does not seem to be as prevalent as in the army,gum opium 'pills' or morphine being the way in which the drug ismostly used by sailors. Quite a number of enlisted men have beendischarged from both army and navy during the last year becauseof their being detected as habitual users of opium ormorphine-probably several hundred per cent. more during the lastfive years than for any ten years previous. To the best of thewriters knowledge-and he has carefully inquired into facts-practically all the cases of drug habitues in both army and navyarise from the men learning the habit from natives of foreigncountries or from lewd women and men in this country. Not asingle case of drug habit coming from the prescribing of anopiate by a medical officer can be recalled, opium and allieddrugs being very guardedly and carefully used by army and navymedical officers. A goodly percentage of the cases are men whohave acquired some drug habit prior to enlistment while a few-sadto say-are from men of the hospital corps who drifted into thehabit from constant opportunity and handling of the baneful drug. "At the present, it is calculated that there are over amillion opium smokers in the United States, the importation ofopium for smoking purposes being double that for medicinal uses,amounting to more than 500,000 pounds last year, valued at$3,000,000 1 " 1 -C. E. Terry-1913.15 'Terry, C. E.-Annual Report Board of Health, Jacksonville, Fla.,1013, In 1913 Terry, Health Officer of Jacksonville, Florida,collected data relating to the extent of the problem in his city.The figures were not dependent upon voluntary cooperation as inthe case of previous collections of such material, but weresecured through the operation of a local law which required,besides the usual prohibition of sale of opium preparations bydruggists without physicians' prescriptions and the keeping ofrecords of all sales, two procedures which resulted in bringingto the health office specific information relating to the extentto which opium preparations were employed. The first of theserequired physicians writing prescriptions containing more thanthree grains of morphin or its equivalent in alkaloids or saltsof alkaloids of opium to send to the office of the healthdepartment copies of such prescriptions together with the namesand addresses of the individuals for whom they were intended.Second, it provided that the city health officer or otherphysician in the employ of the city designated by him might giveto any user, upon the furnishing of satisfactory evidence ofhabitual use, a prescription for as much of such drug as might bedeemed expedient. Records were kept of all duplicate prescriptions sent in andof all those issued at the health office. These prescriptionswere free and were designed to remove from druggists thetemptation of making counter sales on the plea that indigentusers or those of small means could not afford to pay for thewriting of a prescription in addition to the cost of the drug.The law was enforced actively and both druggists and physicianswere watched carefully for violations. No effort was made at this time to limit the use of thesedrugs in the case of habitual users nor were they subjected tosuch treatment as might be calculated to discourage them fromcoming to the health department for a prescription. On thecontrary, during the operation of this law-a period of over twoyears-they were supplied upon application. Treatment was offeredthem from time to time and furnished to such as accepted theoffer. Through the operation of this law there were recorded at thehealth office during the year 1913, 541 persons using opium orsome preparation thereof or about .81 per cent. of the populationof Jacksonville. These were divided into 228 men and 313 women.Of the men 188 were white and 40 colored; of the women 219 whiteand 94 colored. The population of Jacksonville for 1913 asestimated by the U. S. Bureau of the Census was 67,209. Of thisnumber 32,998 were whites and 34,211 colored. Applied tocontinental United States on the basis of the estimatedpopulation for 1913 of 97,163,330, the Jacksonville incidencegives as the total for the country 782,118. In interpreting these figures, however, it should be borne inmind that while the percentage of whites using opium inJacksonville is much greater than that of blacks, the blackpopulation in Jacksonville is very high compared to that of thecountry as a whole. If, as is indicated by the Jacksonvillefigures, the white race is more prone to use opium than thenegro, suitable correction will be necessary in generalizing fromthe Jacksonville figures. As will be seen later, this samepredilection of the whites appears in Brown's figures of theTennessee studies. These two studies, however, are not sufficientin our judgment to assume the establishment of such racialtendencies as many other factors quite possibly may haveinfluenced these findings. If, however, such racial tendencies as the Jacksonville andTennessee findings seem to indicate do exist, then in computingthe distribution of opium use in the country as a whole it willbe necessary to correct for the different race distributionexisting in Jacksonville as compared with continental UnitedStates by applying the figures obtained in Jacksonville to thewhite and black populations separately. In 1913, the white population of continental United States was86,580,278 and colored 10,583,052. Applying the Jacksonvillefigures to the country as a whole, therefore, we get 1,109,340total opium using population. This naturally is a larger figurethan the original crude figure of 782,118. One source of possible error in figures of this kind exists inthe increase which may take place over the normal population ofusers through the registration of transients. In the case ofJacksonville, however, it would not seem that this was a largefactor inasmuch as the registration required either throughapplication to the health office or through the sending ofduplicate prescriptions by physicians was not required in nearbystates and cities at that time so that it was more difficult forstrangers to obtain the drug in Jacksonville than in other nearbypoints. Whatever this error was, however, it is very much morethan offset by the omissions in registration which occurred inthe following ways. It was known to the health officer, forinstance, that certain business and professional men and otherindividuals in high social standing who used the drug were neverregistered but secured their supplies either by mail order fromdistant points or through friendly physicians or druggists whowere willing to risk violating the law for them. Others throughthe nature of their employment in drug stores or drugmanufacturing concerns were able easily to supply themselves,while still others went to nearby points outside of the citylimits and hence beyond the operation of the ordinance to securetheir supply. What part differences in race composition (other than negro),economic, occupational and other sociologic factors may haveplayed in vitiating the Jacksonville figures for purposes ofgeneralization no one is in position to say at the present time,as enough studies of the prevalence of this condition in othersections of the country have not been made to justify claimseither for or against the existence of such influencing factors.In view, however, of the facilities at hand for the collection ofthe Jacksonville data, it is believed that they represent verycomplete information. As in a consideration of Marshall's figuresfor Michigan, it may be assumed that the distribution of painfulmaladies and the methods of medical practice in Jacksonville didnot differ widely from those of other sections. In 1913, however,the influence of prostitution and what is generally termed theunderworld obtained much more prominently in Jacksonville than inthe localities of Michigan with which Marshall's figures deal asthese were, it will be remembered, all small towns and villages.In the case of the Jacksonville figures, therefore, we may assumethat the influence of vicious association was a more markedfactor than in the Michigan figures. The illicit traffic in these drugs was practically negligiblein Jacksonville in 1913. One or two peddlers, it is true,supplied certain women in the restricted district more as amatter of convenience to these customers than because of anylarge profits involved. The traffic could not have been lucrativeas free prescriptions were available to any user asking for themand the price of the drug in the drug stores was in theneighborhood of 60 cents for a drachra of morphin when sold inoriginal bottles or large fractions. With this price it isevident that peddlers could not compete with profit. Lucius P. Brown-1915.16 ' Brown, L. P.-Enforcement of the Tennessee Anti-Narcotic Law.Amer. J. of Public Health, 1915, Vol. 5, No. 4. Brown, the State Food and Drugs Commissioner of Tennessee,reported on the results of the enforcement of the TennesseeAnti-Narcotic Law passed in 1913. The law provided for therefilling of prescriptions for persons using opium productshabitually "in order to minimize suffering among thisunfortunate class, and to keep the traffic in the drug fromgetting into underground and hidden channels." The lawprovided that upon application to the Secretary of the StateBoard of Health and the Pure Food and Drugs Inspector and uponpresentation of a certificate from the attending physician, thename and address of the druggist and certain other data, anindividual might be granted permission to have a prescription foran opium product refilled. This system brought a considerablemass of data to the officials concerned. It should be noted inexplanation that an effort was made at every renewal of permit tolessen the amount of the drug allowed. After twelve months of operation there were on January 1,1915, 2370 individuals registered under this system in the stateof Tennessee. Of these 784 were men and 1586 women. In commenting on the accuracy of the registration Brownstates: "As to what proportion of the total addicts of Tennesseeare registered under this permissive system, guesses only can begiven. It seems safe to say that not over one-half of the addictpopulation is registered-possibly not over one fourth. Taking,however, the lower figure, it would appear that there are in theneighborhood of 5,000 addicts in Tennessee. The state has about2.3 per cent. of the whole population of the United States. It isan agricultural state, and consequently, living conditions appearto be not so exhausting as in more thickly settled communities,nor life as a rule, so intense. In order to get the whole numberin the United States, we may multiply our figure of 5,000 by 43.This gives us about 215,000 addicts. Probably, however, in orderto allow for conditions in cities and, industrial communities, weought to add 25 per cent. to this number, giving not less than269,000 addicts in the whole United States. In my opinion this isa very conservative calculation. It shows by no means so many assensational writers appear to want us to believe, and while itthus shows better conditions it is bad enough." Brown points out that according to figures which he believesto be fairly accurate not over ten per cent. of the cases werecolored. He says: "This is due in part to the fact that the average negroavoids as far as possible any contact with an official, and tothe fact that the negro appears to use relatively less morphine,and more cocaine than the white man." This agrees with the race distribution in Jacksonville. If weshould take Brown's estimate of 5000 cases and distribute themaccording to what he believes to be a race incidence actuallyexisting, namely 9070 white and 1070 negroes, we should reach adifferent total for the country from that reached by Brown.Making this correction and applying, on the basis of Brown'sestimate for Tennessee, the race incidence obtaining to thecountry as a whole, we get 221,818 white users and 11,518 blackusers or 233,336 as a total in the United States for 1913. If wenow add, as Brown suggests, 2517c "in order to allow forconditions in cities and industrial communities," we obtaina total of 291,670 for the United States. Whether or not thiscorrection should be made has already been considered in ourdiscussion of the Jacksonville figures. We give it for what it isworth with no claim that the race distribution of opium use inthese two localities typifies racial characteristics. Such a generalization from the Tennessee figures indicates avery much smaller total for the country than is obtained on thebasis of the Jacksonville figures, although these twoinvestigations were made within a year of each other. Theterritory covered by the Tennessee law was very much larger thanin the case of Jacksonville and the machinery for enforcementdoubtless was less adequate. In Jacksonville, it must beremembered, every physician and every druggist personally wasknown to the health officer as were most of the opium users andit is to be expected that on these accounts more completeinformation could be secured than where, for the most part as inthe case of Tennessee, it was necessary to rely on correspondencewithout the close personal touch possible in the smallerterritory. Brown himself questions the completeness of hisfigures, stating that in his opinion they comprise a veryconservative estimate. Which of these estimates is nearer the truth for the period inquestion no one may state with certainty. It is noteworthy,however, that Brown's figures applied to the country as a wholegive a figure but little in excess of that obtained on the basisof the Michigan figures of 1877, about thirty-five years beforeBrown's work. It scarcely is to be expected that with theinfluences at work, which we shall note in the next chapter,during this period of thirty-five years, there could have failedto be a greater increase than is indicated by these two sets offigures. The estimates resulting from studies heretofore quotedrepresent conditions of opium usage freer from artificialinfluences of one kind or another than any that have been or willbe compiled dealing with later periods. Prior to this time therewas no federal law relating to the distribution of the drug andbut very few state laws which were at all rigidly enforced, sothat peddling of the drugs was not a marked factor in extendingtheir use. The usual causes mentioned, such as the employment ofopium and its products in medicine and self-prescribing for therelief of pain and discomfort, the effect of education throughill-considered articles in the lay press and magazines, fiction,vicious or ignorant associations, and the influence of naturaltendencies to dissipation or to seek refuge under stress andstrain, were operating alone without the additional stimulationof the illicit traffic which was a later development. Wherever,therefore, the exact truth lies as to the number of chronic opiumusers in the United States prior to the passage of the HarrisonNarcotic Act it represents what might be termed the normal forthe United States in contradistinction to an artificial orfortuitous figure resulting in addition to the forementionedcauses from the perniciously active propaganda of the commercialtrader in opium preparations. 'The federal anti-narcotic law passed December 17, 1914. Special Committee of Investigation appointed by the Secretaryof the Treasury-1918P 'Traffic in Narcotic Drugs--Report of Special Committee ofInvestigation appointed March 25, 1918, by the Secretary of theTreasury, June, 1919. Washington. 1919. This Committee was unable to determine the exact number ofaddicts in the United States, 'owing, as stated in the Report,"to the lack of laws and regulations making it compulsoryfor the registration of addicts throughout the country or thekeeping of any records as to their identity." The Committee believed, however, that a fairly accurateestimate of their number can be made from the information whichit has obtained. One source of information was a questionnaire addressed to allphysicians registered under the Harrison Narcotic Act, requestingdata as to the number of chronic users under treatment by them atthe time. The Committee reports as follows: "Replies were received from approximately 30 2/3 per centof the physicians registered in the different States, and theseshowed that there were under treatment at that time a total of73,150 addicts. On the basis of 100 per cent replies, if the sameaverage was maintained, there were under treatment at the timethis questionnaire was sent out a total of 237,655 addicts. Thefollowing table" shows in detail by States the number ofaddicts reported under treatment, the percentage of repliesreceived from physicians, and the estimated number on the basisof 100 per cent replies." Another questionnaire was addressed to state, district, countyand municipal health officers, the results of which are given asfollows: "Questionnaire No. 4 was addressed to 3,023 State,district, county and municipal health officers. To thisquestionnaire 983 replies were received, or 33 per cent of thetotal number sent out. Only 777 of these, or 26 per cent of thetotal, contained any information of value to the committee." The Report summarizes as follows: "The number of addicts reported by the health officialsreplying to questionnaire No. 4 was 105,887. As this numberrepresents the addicts reported by only 26 per cent of the healthofficials, from which this information was requested, it may beassumed that had all the health officials replied the totalnumber would have amounted to approximately 420,000. This number,however, appears to be much too low, in view of the fact that thephysicians of the country are estimated to have had about 237,000addicts under treatment during this same period, and only a smallportion of the total number of addicts present themselves fortreatment. Addicts of the "underworld," for instance,secure most of their supply through illicit channels and rarely,if ever, consult a physician. "It appears that a more accurate estimate of the totalnumber of addicts may be obtained from the data secured by thoseinvestigators who have made an intensive study of drug addictionin certain restricted communities. For example, the healthofficer of Jacksonville, Fla., reported 887 1 addicts in thatcity in 1913. This number represents 1.31 per cent of thepopulation. Upon this basis the total number of addicts in theUnited States, in 1918, taking the estimated population as106,000,000 would be 1,388,600. "In reply to questionnaire No. 4 sent to health officersof States, counties, and municipalities, the health officer ofNew York City reported a total of 103,000 addicts, which isequivalent to 1.8 per cent of the population. On this basis,there would be 1,9W,000 addicts in the United States. "Information in the hands of the committee indicates thatdrug addiction is less prevalent in rural communities than incities or in congested centers. It would, therefore, be unfair toestimate the number of addicts in the entire country on the basisof the figures obtained for New York City. Furthermore, it is theopinion of the committee that an estimate based on the number ofaddicts in a small city like Jacksonville, Fla., would not berepresentative for the entire country. Taking these facts intoconsideration, the committee is of the opinion that the totalnumber of addicts in this country probably exceeds 1,000,000 atthe present time." ' This figure includes 346 cocaine users. In reviewing the estimates arrived at on the basis of thereplies received to these questionnaires, there arises a questionas to what is meant by "treatment." From a laterstatement in the Report "treatment" here meanspresumably the supplying of the drug by physicians, but webelieve that in replying to this question the average physicianwould report only such cases as were under curative treatment. Bethis as it may, the propriety of estimating the number of caseson the basis of 100% replies from physicians registered under theHarrison Narcotic Act is open to question. It is stated in theReport that thirty and two-thirds per cent. of the registeredphysicians queried replied and that 73,150 cases were reported bythem as being under treatment. To assume that the resultingfigure of 237,655 calculated on -such a basis is a correctestimate, is still not warranted. For such an estimate to beaccepted as a logical conclusion on the basis of 100% replies 'itwould have to be assumed that all groups of physicians registeredunder the Harrison Narcotic Law answered in like proportion. Butit is natural to assume that nose and throat specialists,oculists, obstetricians, gynecologists, surgeons and others notoccupied with general practice would not be interested to thesame degree in replying to the questionnaire. In all probabilitythe thirty and two-thirds per cent. physicians reporting includea relatively greater proportion of those treating addiction casesthan those not reporting. Under these conditions the estimated237,655 addicts is too high a figure. As a matter of fact,however, the Committee appears not to accept this figure, anyway,inasmuch as it ultimately reaches a speculative figure of1,000,000, inclusive of cocaine users. As to the estimates based on replies received from state,county and municipal health officers of which the Committeestates only twenty six per cent. replied, we would call attentionto the fact that 103,000 were reported by the health commissionerof New York City, with a balance of the twenty-six per cent.reporting only 2887. This material was gathered in 1918. At thattime also nothing in the nature of a survey of chronic opiumusers in New York City had been made. The narcotic clinic was notopened until 1919 and this clinic disclosed but 7464 cases ofopium users. It is manifest therefore that the 103,000 reportedby the health commissioner in the previous year was whollyspeculative. It is also of interest to note that the healthcommissioner of New York City a year or two later stated that20,000 was an outside estimate for cases of chronic opium usersin New York City. Here again, however, the Committee admits dissatisfaction withthe resulting estimate of 420,000, stating that the figure is toolow and ultimately arrives at an approximate figure of 1,000,000including users of cocain. It is not apparent in the Report howthis figure is reached. New York City Health Department Narcotic Clinic-April, 1919,to January, 1920. 'Hubbard, S. D@The New York City Narcotic Clinic and differingpoints of view on narcotic addiction. Monthly Bulletin, Dept. ofHealth, City of New York, February 1920. Hubbard 21 reports on the findings resulting from the datagathered during the operation of this clinic over a period ofapproximately nine months. This clinic was conducted inco-operation with the New York State Department of Narcotic DrugControl. In regard to the extent of opium usage in New York City,Hubbard states: "The problem of narcotic addiction has been in the publiceye for some time, and the differing points of view regardingnarcotic addiction have been provocative of some very interestingdiscussion. "In the Spring of last year, the Federal authoritieshaving made several raids on trafficking physicians anddruggists, an acute emergency was created whereby it was fearedby some that a panic of these miserable unfortunates would ensue.These conditions caused the New York City Department of Health toopen a narcotic relief clinic in order to study and examine intothe subject of narcotic drug addiction. Number of Drug Addicts in New York City "Many opinions regarding the prevalence and frequency ofdrug addiction have been expressed. No doubt many of thesestatements are far from true. We do not know who the addicts are,nor how many there are of them, either here or elsewhere in thiscountry. Why? From opinions expressed, and from the literature onthis subject, we have been led to believe that addiction wasallocated with certain definite physical stigmata; pallor,emaciation, nervousness, apprehension, sniffing, needle puncturemarkings, and tattoo skin evidences; but in actual experiencewith hundreds of acknowledged drug addicts, persons actuallyseeking their drug supply, we find, like the weather indications,all such signs failing. "There are drug addicts constitutionally inferior, andsuperior; feeble-minded, and strong-minded; physically below, andabove par; morally inferior, and superior. No one class ofsociety seems, in our experience, to enjoy a monopoly in thispractice. Our opinions, therefore regarding the number of drugaddicts, here and elsewhere about this country, have verynaturally had to be revised. While it was the current opinion tothink that they existed in vast numbers estimated by some as oneper cent. of the community, and even two and three per cent byothers--we, today, think that this is greatly over-estimated. "It was formerly held that drug addiction was so generaland so frequent that if the law-the Harrison Act-was enforced, asit should be, a panic would be created by the immense numbers ofaddicts who would seek relief. "The efforts of the New York City Department of Health,actuated and urged by the Commissioner of Health, Dr. Royal S.Copeland, showed that this fear of the production of a panic wasa false one. Our efforts were given wide publicity, and theco-operation of medical and scientific societies earnestly andzealously sought to help solve this problem. It might be addedalso that the raids initiated by the Federalauthorities--arresting illicit prescribers anddispensers-together with the New York State Narcotic Commissionrequiring registration of all addicts in this locality, have notoccasioned any undue excitement among these individuals. We,naturally, must infer that the enormous number of drug addictssupposed to exist, in this vicinity at least (and it was supposedto be greater here than anywhere else) are mythical and untrueand that therefore the fear of a panic of these miserableunfortunates was negative." In his conclusion, Hubbard states: "The estimate of 1% of our population addicted to the useof narcotic indulgence as a habit-addiction-is very likelygreatly exaggerated." In his general statistics Hubbard gives as the number of usersregistered during the operation of the clinic (about ninemonths), 7464 of which 5882 were men and 1582 were women.Applying the incidence indicated for New York City by the numberregistered at the clinic, we obtain for the country as a whole140,554 for the year 1919. A number of factors combined to make the registration at theNew York City clinic incomplete. In the first place attendancewas voluntary. Further in New York City it was required that notmore than a twenty-four hour supply be furnished the addict, sothat it was necessary for individuals to visit their physiciansor the clinic daily in order to secure the drug legitimately.This requirement tended to influence those for whom it wasimpossible or too inconvenient to leave their business or work toseek their supply from the illicit traffic or from legitimatesources outside of the jurisdiction of this ruling. The numberregistered, therefore, represents only those who, because ofdifficulties in securing their supply by reason of the cost ofprescriptions or because the drug was sold more cheaply at theclinic than at the retail drug store in spite of the twenty-fourhour ruling chose to attend the clinic. Also there were several other factors operating, to keepcertain classes of users away from the clinic. First there wasthe inconvenience of the crowded condition of the clinic whereapplicants were required to stand outside in lines a block ormore long in any weather waiting their turn to be examined andotherwise attended to. Second, there was the fixing of anarbitrary dosage and then the enforced reduction by an arbitraryamount. Third, it was required that a considerable amount ofpersonal information having nothing to do with their addiction,such its the name of their employers and their addresses, besupplied and that the photograph of the patient be attached tothe registration card. Drug peddling in New York City was very rife at the time ofthe operation of the clinic, and every opportunity was offeredthose who could afford to pay the prices charged by the illicittraffickers in drugs to secure their supplies without submittingto the requirements of the twenty-four hour supply provisions orregistration at the clinic. Narcotic Drug Control Commission-New York-1920 .22 'Second Report of the Narcotic Control Commission. 1920. Referring to the number of users in New York State,Commissioner Herrick says: "I think a safe and conservative approximation would be39,000. The records of the Department show in round numbers13,000 registered addicts. This number is composed of those whoobtain habit-forming drugs through legitimate sources, that is,directly from a doctor or on prescriptions issued by a doctor,filled by a druggist, or from the different clinics establishedthroughout the State. To these figures should be added twice thenumber, which is an approximation of the users who obtain drugsfrom peddlers, or other illicit sources. Of course, this latterfigure, as I have stated, is only an approximation. I base it onthe percentage of addicts among the great number with whom I havepersonally conferred, who have admitted that they obtained theirdrugs from peddlers or other illicit sources. Between four-fifthsand two-thirds of the registered addicts are located in the cityof Greater New York, and the remaining fraction is scatteredthroughout the rest of the State. The larger the center ofpopulation the greater the percentage of addicts." When applied to the country as a whole, Herrick's estimate of39,000 addicts in New York State yields a figure of 396,978. If Commissioner Herrick's statement that between four-fifthsand two-thirds of the registered users were located in the cityof Greater New York is correct, we have from 10,400 to 8,666 inthe Greater City by using his figure of "in round numbers13,000" for the state as a whole or several thousand morethan were registered at the clinic. It should be pointed out that however far Hubbard's figurefalls short of the actual number of users in New York by reasonof the forementioned factors, it is at least 500 too low if ourinterpretation of the Commissioner's report is correct. Accordingto his statement, the Department of Narcotic Drug Control issuedexemptions for certain individuals who were not required toregister. The number of these exemptions was 500 in thebeginning, but later was reduced to 300. In attempting togeneralize, therefore, from the New York City clinic figures wemust bear in mind the apparently marked incompleteness of thesefigures. The figure of 7,464 however, as a minimum, is a figureof importance and of itself presents a serious problem, howeverfar it may come from indicating the actual conditions. Los Angeles Clinic-1920. In Los Angeles a narcotic clinic was operated from March 8 toAugust 17, 1920-a period of a little over five months-at whichtime, according to the report of the medical head, W. H. Bucher,the clinic was closed by federal orders. During this brief periodthere were registered at the clinic 582 persons-389 men and 193women. In addition, knowledge was had of 37 individuals who werenot registered and given the drug because they were not working,had previous undesirable records or gave insufficient evidence ofbeing chronic users. The exact number, therefore, of users wasunknown to the clinic authorities. In the case of Los Angeles asin New York all opium users were not required to come to theclinic and register nor were records kept of cases handled byoutside physicians. Another factor which tended to influence thesituation in Los Angeles and which did not obtain in like degreein other localities where clinics were operated was the proximityof this city to Mexico. Tile constant smuggling of the drugfurnished easy sources of supply to those who wished to avoidregistration at the clinic. Taking, however, the Los Angeles figures as indicated by theclinic registration for what they are worth, we find at least aminimum of 564 known chronic opium users, giving an incidencerate of about .1 70'. On the basis of the Los Angeles figurethere would be in the United States a total of 102,005 for 1920.It will also be remembered that the Los Angeles clinic was inoperation for but five months, while in Jacksonville andTennessee registration of narcotic users covered a much longerperiod. 'In using the phrase "normal incidence" asindicating the cases of chronic opium usage caused throughmedical practice, self-medication and constitutional make-up butexclusive of cases stimulated by such artificial influences asunderworld association, illicit traffic, etc., we would not beunderstood as meaning that the normal as at present existing isan irreducible figure. We believe only that it is an actualfigure existing as of this time-the present period in medicalpractice and lay knowledge-that with better medical education anda more widespread dissemination among the laity of the facts ofchronic opium intoxication this "normal" in the futurematerially will be lessened. Shreveport, Louisiana, Clinic-1919-1923. In many respects the next figures to be considered possess aunique value. They were supplied by W. P. Butler, medicaldirector of the narcotic clinic at Shreveport, Louisiana, andinclude the cases of chronic opium intoxication in the city ofShreveport and Caddo Parish in which Shreveport is located,comprising thus a territory including both urban and ruralpopulation. Further they represent only resident cases.Transients, non-residents or those who were induced possibly toseek Shreveport because of the opportunity for attending a clinicand profiting by treatment have all been eliminated by Dr. Butlerthrough his intimate personal knowledge of the circumstancessurrounding each case. The size of Shreveport, its relativeisolation from populous centres, the absence of large industriesand manufactories would all tend to minimize underworldinfluences as etiologic factors of importance. For the most partthese cases represent those arising from the prescribing of thesedrugs by physicians, from self-medication and that element whicheverywhere, even without unusual opportunity or artificialincitement, tends to seek adventure, stimulation or solacethrough the use of narcotics. In other words, Butler's figuresrepresent more nearly than any others in our possession whatmight be termed a normal incidence 23as existing in a communitywhere unusual exciting causes have not existed. Further it should be remembered in considering these figuresthat the operation of this clinic continued without interruptionfor a period of nearly four years, from May 3, 1919, to February10, 1923. This is a longer period of existence than has beencomprised in the life of any other narcotic clinic. The methodsemployed by Butler, differing in several particulars from thoseemployed elsewhere in similar work and the support from localofficials, physicians and public combined to make this unusualperiod of existence possible in view of the attitude of theBureau of Internal Revenue in regard to the operation of narcoticclinics. The local educational influence of the clinic undoubtedly wasvery great in Shreveport and the adjoining rural districts, whichfact must not be lost sight of in attempting to generalize fromthe Shreveport figures. Not only the very great majority of allcases were handled personally by Dr. Butler and his staff-only avery few remained in the hands of private physicians-but thenature of the work was so thoroughly understood and so widelyendorsed by the local medical profession that it could not havefailed to have a deterrent effect upon the ill-advised, carelessor unnecessary prescribing and administering of opiumpreparations in the ordinary practice of medicine. Therefore,there must have been an influence during the operation of theclinic tending to lessen rather than to increase the number ofnew cases usually arising from and attributable to the unwise useof opium by the practicing physician at large. In other words,there appear to have been no artificial stimulating influencestoward narcotism but, on the contrary, there were presentinfluences which tended distinctly to lessen the formation of newcases. Also it should be noted that . during the operation of theclinic the illicit traffic was reduced to the minimum if notwholly eradicated. This matter received the particular attentionof the Bureau of Internal Revenue whose agents repeatedly visitedShreveport and noted the conditions under which the clinicoperated. According to Butler, they stated to him as theirpersonal opinion that the drug was very scarce on the streets ofShreveport; one agent made several attempts at different times tobuy the drug or to have it bought, but was unsuccessful. It would-appear, therefore, that one may generalize with lesschance of error, at least on the side of exaggeration, from theShreveport figures than from those of any other locality. Furtherin such generalizations we have a more nearly accurate portrayalof the extent of the use of opium preparations in this countryarising from what we may term the more natural causes,-causesinherent in all communities in which medicine is practiced,painful illness is experienced and predisposing constitutionaltendencies do not exist in excess or are not influenced unduly byartificial conditions-than in other generalizations. In other communities, especially in the metropolitan centresand industrial cities where racial, social and economic factorslead to congested living conditions and tend to stimulate thevicious employment of opium preparations for purposes solely ofdissipation, where prostitution is considerably more prevalentand where peddling is highly profitable, we should expect a verymaterial increase in the underworld or vicious element among thedrug-using population as a whole. In addition to this, wherepublic and professional attention has not been continuously andfor a relatively long period directed at constructive efforttoward the elimination of this evil, we should not look for n decreasein the drug-using population resulting from an increased cautionon the part of members of the medical profession. Whatever theeffect of these two influences in the causation of chronic opiumintoxication in such large centres as we have referred to here orelsewhere, the cases attributable to them must be considered asan increment in excess of those normally existing in thesecommunities and resulting from such widespread and omnipresentcauses as those apparently responsible and chiefly operative inShreveport. The Shreveport incidence, therefore, of opium users for thepopulation at large may well be considered a minimum. Had Butler not eliminated the non-resident and transientcases, the cases recorded at the Shreveport clinic since itsinception would be 1,237. This figure, Dr. Butler states,includes transients, residents, non-residents, and all thosedispensed to one time or more and comprises all cases handled bythe clinic from the date of its opening to February, 1923. In thecase of Shreveport, however, where the collection of informationhas been made with unusual care and over a considerable period,it has been possible for those in charge of the work to eliminateartificial or unusual conditions and to determine with exactnessthe true resident incidence. Butler reports this figure to be371, which covers exclusively those residents registered andcared for during a period of nearly four years. This figure,however, cannot be used for the determination of the addictionincidence in Shreveport, and for purposes of comparison withother surveys for three reasons: First, it covers a period ofmore than one year, while in the Tennessee, Jacksonville, LosAngeles and other figures heretofore considered the numbers dealtwith surveys made during one calendar year; second, the figure isa strictly resident figure, whereas the figures of the othercities deal with the crude population; third, in Shreveport thenarcotic clinic and the hospital facilities for treatmentundoubtedly attracted addicts from other sections of the country,as the figure of 1,237 given above indicates. Therefore, DoctorButler has supplied us with the number of addicts treated andregistered during one calendar year of the clinic, 1920. Thetotal number of cases treated in this year was 542, but into thisfigure enters the error incident to the fact that numbers ofindividuals came to Shreveport throughout the period of theclinic because of the clinic and its facilities. In an attempt tocorrect for this source of error, it was possible for DoctorButler to subdivide these 542 cases into residents andnon-residents, the basis for the former being residence in CaddoParish for a period of one year prior to registration at theclinic. The resident figure for 1920 is 211, the non-residentfigure is 331. None of these figures unfortunately permits ofcomparison with the figures dealing with addiction incidence inother communities, inasmuch as these latter figures have includedthe general run of population usually present in a community,residents and transients, but they did not include-and there wasno reason why they should include-individuals especiallyattracted because of a local situation having to do with thespecial handling of opium addicts. The true number which would betypical of Shreveport lies somewhere between the strict residentfigure of 211 and the exaggerated figure of 642. The residentfigure gives to Shreveport an opium user rate of .25%. Applied tocontinental United States it would furnish a total of 264,276 for1920. From what already has been said of the conditions underwhich the Shreveport figures were obtained-the elimination ofnon-residents, transients, drug traffickers-and from the absenceof unusual exciting causes which would lead to theformation of any considerable percentage of vicious or underworldcases, it is at once apparent that this figure represents aminimum and must be considerably below the real number. For wemay not minimize without danger of serious underestimation what,is so often reported by local and federal authorities throughoutthe country as a powerful influence in the causation of thiscondition in the younger age groups of both sexes, particularlyof males, namely, the etiologic factor comprised in under-worldassociations and the instinct of the illicit trafficker. In the preceding pages we have utilized such figures as wehave found available in an effort to show the extent of thisproblem. These figures have been in sonic cases incomplete, andin others, for one reason or another, subject to doubt orcontroversy. Unfortunately a sufficient number of local surveysat any given period has not been made to furnish material for areliable cross-section of the country. Conditions existing in onesection may be attacked with at least a show of justice whenapplied to others. Population composition, occupation, and evenclimate, to say nothing of many other sociologic influences, tendto vitiate generalizations made from local data of this kind. For comparison we are giving in the following table thefindings of the surveys suitable for purposes of generalizationtogether with certain computations based thereon. The othersurveys of which we have record are too incomplete or for onereason or another too inconclusive to warrant their use as basesfor general estimates. A more recent estimate 24 of the number of addicts inthe United States is that of Lawrence Kolb and A. G. Du Mez ofthe United States Public Health Service. While not based on anoriginal survey of a community or section of the country, theestimate of these authors is of interest as a result of theiranalysis of certain recent surveys and other data. In theirintroduction they state: 'Kolb, Lawrence, and A. G. Du Mez---'The Prevalence and Trendof Drug Addiction in the United States and Factors InfluencingIt." Public Health Reports--May 28, 1924. "It is realized that it is impossible at the present timeto make an exact count of the persons addicted to narcotics inthe United States in an individual State, or even in one of ourlarger cities, because of the social and legal factors tending tomake addiction a secret practice. It is believed, however, thatit is possible, by utilizing all of the information nowavailable, to delimit the number by certain maximum and minimumfigures. With this object in view, a number of the more importantnarcotic surveys made in recent years were analyzed; also thereports made by agents of the Bureau of Internal Revenue andother persons on the narcotic clinics conducted in differentparts of the country; statistics on the dose of addiction, worldproduction of narcotics, and the quantities imported into thiscountry were compiled and studied; and numerous physicians indifferent parts of the country were interviewed in person toascertain the number of addicts they were treating in the courseof their practice. The results of these analyses and studiesfollow:" After their analysis of the surveys and clinic reports, theyconclude as follows: "In summing up it may be stated that according to Brown'ssurvey, 215,000 was approximately the number of addicts in theUnited States in 1915. The New York City, the TreasuryDepartment, and the clinic surveys were made four or five yearslater. An objection to making a general application of the NewYork City survey is that the sex and age distribution of addictsshown by it does not obtain throughout the country. This wasprobably due in part to the fact already referred to, namely,that young addicts are attracted to large cities, and conditionsexist in them which cause a delinquent type of addiction; and itis also due in part to the fact that some of the older addictswere being taken care of by physicians and were not counted whenthe survey was made. Just how far these two factors balance eachother is not known, but the 140,600 indicated by the New YorkCity survey in 1920 shows a reduction over the 1915 figures. Theclinic surveys made at the same time or a year later took innearly all sections of the country and comprised a morerepresentative group of population. These surveys show 104,300addicts.' The Pennsylvania figures, collected over a period offive years and ending about a year after the clinics were closed,show approximately 109,250 addicts in the United States in 1922when the actual count of 9,000 is used. The Army rate isundoubtedly too low for the particular group surveyed, and forreasons already given for estimating addiction in the populationas a whole. The 1918 Treasury Department survey shows 237,655addicts and apparently contains an indeterminate error ofexaggeration, as already pointed out. The highest estimate basedon any unrevised survey is 269,000; the lowest, exclusive of theArmy survey, is 104,300. These figures may therefore be acceptedas the maximum and minimum numbers for the period 1915 to 1922;but from what has been brought out relative to the surveys itwould seem that somewhat less than 215,000 is more nearly correctfor the beginning and about 110,000 the approximate number forthe end of the period." The second part of their report is a consideration of theestimated number of addicts "based on dosage and availablesupplies." Using as a basis for their computations anaverage daily dose of six grains of morphin sulphate, which theystate they obtained as a result of their studies, the authorsshow in tabular form in ten-year periods in the next table thenumber of addicts who would be supplied if all of the opiumentered for consumption were used for addicts. They state: "These figures are given for a period prior to the timewhen restrictions were placed on the traffic in opium, and therewas no incentive to the smuggling trade as there is to-day. It istherefore believed that at no time have there been more than246,000 opium addicts in the United States." ' A press release from the Narcotic Division of theProhibition Unit, Bureau of Internal Revenue, dated May 4, 1924,states: "It is estimated that there are upwards of 500,000drug addicts in the United States . . . . .. Following the same reasoning in regard to the total worldproduction of opium these authors conclude that at this rate"the total annual production of opium, exclusive of thatproduced in the countries of the Far East, if used entirely forthe satisfaction of addiction, would supply only about 566,000addicts." It is necessary to emphasize, as the authors themselves havepointed out, how impossible it is to obtain accurate statisticson the world opium production. The data upon which the aboveestimate of 566,000 was based were obtained from statisticscompiled by the Advisory Committee on Traffic in Opium of theLeague of Nations who the authors state, "admits that thefigures given are only estimates in the majority of cases."Further it should- be remembered that the annual productionfigures vary from year to year and an estimate based on thefigures for one year-the above estimate of 566,000 is based onthe production figures of 1922-is true for that year alone,granting that the figures are correct, and may be quite differentfrom those based on figures of other years. They continue: "It has been shown that at no time have the annualimportations of narcotic drugs into this country been greaterthan would be necessary to supply 264,000 addicts, assuming thatthey were used in their entirety for the satisfaction ofaddiction. No one contends that they were so used, but it hasbeen asserted that at least 75 per cent of the quantitiesimported are used for this purpose. It is believed that a fairlyaccurate estimate of the amounts used for the satisfaction ofaddiction subsequent to 1909, when the entry of smoking opium wasprohibited, can be obtained by using the import statistics givenin Tables 2 and 3. "For the four-year period, 1920-1923, the importations ofopium amounted to 144,805 pounds annually. For this same period5,282 ounces of opium alkaloids were imported annually. Thenarcotic division of the Bureau of Internal Revenue estimatesthat not over 15 per cent of these quantities get intoillegitimate channels. Making these deductions it may be assumedthat 123,084 pounds of opium and 4,490 ounces of opium alkaloidsare required annually to supply the legitimate medicinal needs ofthe country, including the needs of many old and incurableaddicts now being supplied by physicians, which number isconstantly decreasing. By subtracting these amounts from theamounts imported annually for the decade 1910 to 1919 we obtain242,971 pounds of opium and 22,653 ounces of opium alkaloids. "These quantities would supply approximately 100,000addicts for a year. Making similar computations for coca leavesand coca leaf alkaloids, it is found that approximately 9,000addicts could be supplied with the quantities which were formerlyimported in excess of what has been imported in recent years.This would make a total of 109,000 addicts who, prior to 1915,could have obtained their supplies of narcotics from thequantities imported legally. In view of the limited supplies ofmedicinal opium available in the world and the rigid control ofnarcotics exercised by this country, it is highly improbable thatthe combined quantities available to addicts in 1919 and 1920from smuggled sources and from leakage through legitimatechannels were more than sufficient to supply the number(109,000). This is probably too high, in view of the reductionwhich has been shown, but if we add to this figure the number ofaged and incurable addicts who received their supplies throughlegitimate channels, the total number of addicts in this countryfor the period stated was probably somewhere between 120,000 and140,000, which is in keeping with the figures arrived at from thesurveys and clinic reports. "That the quantities of narcotics smuggled into thiscountry are in all likelihood not as great as is believed bysome, is shown by the quantities reported as falling into thepossession of the Bureau of Internal Revenue in the enforcementof the narcotic laws. For the year ending June 30, 1922, thetotal quantity, including opium and coca leaves, preparationscontaining opium and coca leaves, the alkaloids of opium andcocaine, and preparations containing these alkaloids, was only4,447 pounds. In 1923 it was 542 pounds." In connection with the above statements, we should like topoint out that in our opinion a decrease in the amount of drugconfiscated does not necessarily indicate a decrease insmuggling. The report of the Special Committee of the TreasuryDepartment, 1918, states that "in recent years, especially since the enactment of theHarrison law, the traffic by 'underground' channels has increasedenormously, and at the present time it is believed to be equallyas extensive as that carried on in a legitimate manner!" Howmuch of this traffic found its source of supply in smuggling andto what extent the activities of the federal bureau charged withthe enforcement of the law have diminished smuggling operationssince 1918, we are unable to say. However, we believe that thesignificance of the above statement should be considered. Earlier in this chapter we have. pointed out theundesirability of attempting to make an estimate of the number ofaddicts based on the amount of the drug available for consumptionand the average daily dose. We again wish to point out thepresent lack of data, at least in our experience, which wouldwarrant the acceptance of any figure as a representative averagedaily dose for addicts. From their interviews with physicians the authors conclude asfollows: "Confirmation of the estimates based on the supplies ofnarcotics available and on the findings of the various surveys asto the number of addicts and the trend of narcotic addiction inthe United States is furnished by the experience of physicians asrelated to us. We have interviewed physicians from all parts ofthe United States and it is unusual to find one who has an addictamong his patients. Few besides those who have contact with penalinstitutions and sanitariums meet any great number. Manyphysicians still occasionally see a transient addict who drops inand begs for a dose, but this, too, is growing rare. Some of thephysicians who have been practicing for years in small towns andrural communities speak of addicts they have cured by the aid ofthe Harrison law or who have, without outside assistance, curedthemselves. Some of them are taking care of one or more old orincurable cases but from the information they give it seems thatnew cases of addiction are not arising to take the place of theold ones who die. "The accuracy of our observation is Supported by thefindings of Dr. Carleton Simon, special deputy policecommissioner in charge of the narcotic division of the policedepartment of New York City, who sent out a questionnaire to thephysicians in New York State. Of the 7,599 physicians whoreplied, only 52 per cent reported that they were treatingaddicts in 1922." Two questions arise as to the justification of the abovedeductions based on interviews with physicians throughout thecountry; first, were a sufficient and representative number ofphysicians interviewed to portray a fair picture of existingconditions; and second, is it reasonable to expect that themajority of addicts under present conditions place themselves inthe hands of physicians? In regard to the latter question webelieve that for reasons pointed out in the following chapter thetendency of the physician is to avoid contact with the problem ofaddiction. As a final conclusion in regard to the present number ofaddicts, the authors state: "The evidence seems to show that a maximum estimate forthe number of addicts in the United States at the present timewould be 150,000. The estimates based on actual counts and on theavailable supplies of narcotics, together with conditionsreported by the physicians interviewed, point to about 110,000,which number is believed to be nearly correct." In general, a review of the material already covered in thischapter will show it in the above study in the first placecertain surveys have not been taken into consideration and in thesecond place, incorrect deductions have been drawn from two ofthe official reports cited. Among the first may be named theJacksonville, Fla., survey made in 1913, about a year before theTennessee study. A consideration of the earlier surveys may havebeen omitted because of the supposed existence of differentinfluencing factors by reason of time. In regard to this point webelieve that however different conditions may be at the presenttime, the changes have not been great enough to eliminatecompletely the significance of these early figures. In regard to the second point, namely the incorrectdeductions, it is true that there actually were reported only73,150 addicts in the survey made by the special committee of theTreasury Department, 1918, which on the basis of 100 per centreplies would yield 237,655 addicts under treatment in the entirecountry. The report from which they take this figure has alreadybeen considered above. The figure which they quote is not givenin the original report as the committee's estimate of the totalnumber of addicts in the country, but only as the estimatednumber of addicts under treatment by physicians during the periodwhen the survey was made, as the report states, I............only a small portion of the total number of addicts presentedthemselves for treatment. Addicts of the 'underworld', forinstance, secure most of their supply through illicit channelsand rarely, if ever, consult a physician." Further, had Kolband Du Mez employed the figures resulting from queries sent tohealth officials they would have reached a total for the countryof 420,000 addicts, which figure, the committee's report states,"appears to be much too low in view of the fact that thephysicians of the country are estimated to have bad about 237,000addicts under treatment during the same period." Further onthe report of the Treasury Department, after considering theerrors potentially residing in all of the -figures presented,both from general and local sources, reaches the followingconclusion: "Taking these facts into consideration, thecommittee is of the opinion that the total number of addicts inthis country probably exceeds 1,000,000 at the present time,'-astatement which Kolb and Du Mez did not take into account. Again,these authors quoted only the lower figures and lost sight of thefinal estimate of the number of addicts in the state of New Yorkmade by Commissioner Herrick in his report of the work of theNarcotic Control Commission when he states: "I think a safe and conservative approximation would be39,000. The records of the Department show in round numbers13,000 registered addicts. This number is composed of those whoobtain habit-forming drugs through legitimate sources, that is,directly from a doctor or on prescriptions issued by a doctor,filled by a druggist, or from the different clinics establishedthroughout the State. To these figures should be added twice thenumber, which is an approximation of the users who, obtain drugsfrom peddlers, or other illicit sources. Of course, this latterfigure, as I have stated, is only an approximation. I base it onthe percentage of addicts among the great number with whom I havepersonally conferred, who have admitted that they obtained theirdrugs from peddlers or other illicit sources." The importance of these estimates in relation to their use asa basis for further estimates or comparisons is obvious. Finally in view of the various considerations pointed out inregard to the above study, we cannot agree that the ultimateestimate of 110,000 is warranted. While we on the one handdeplore unjustifiable, sensational exaggerations, on the other,we recognize the danger of basing maximal estimates on selecteddata. One other method of arriving at a satisfying conclusion as tothe extent of this problem exists. It is quite remote from whatwe may terra the mathematical procedure, and, while neitherspecific in its application nor concerned with actual numbers,includes presumptive evidence of such importance and brings intoconsideration such deeprooted human attributes and suchwell-known characteristics as to render it, perhaps, the mostimportant method of all, while, parodoxical as it may seem, theleast definite. We refer to a review of the growth in the use of opium through the many and varied motives aspresented and revealed by available historic record. That therehas been a continuous, marked increase in the consumption ofopium and its products in the United States, at least through1915, is shown in the following table of importations. The supplyhas but filled the demand. Tile conclusion is inevitable that thenumber of chronic users, for one reason or another, steadily hasbeen increasing, as upon the basis of the therapeutic use ofthese drugs alone-in the treatment of disease other than that ofchronic opium intoxication-such an increase would have beenimpossible. In 1915 two things occurred simultaneously, theimportations decreased and the illicit traffic began to develop.This doubtless was due chiefly to the fact that chronic users,because of the restrictions placed upon physicians andpharmacists in the handling of these drugs, sought their suppliesfrom underworld sources. It does not mean necessarily that theconsumption of opium has decreased. Inasmuch as this comprises a study of the development of theproblem of chronic opium intoxication we shall take it up in aseparate chapter, tracing its progress through the earlyunrestricted use and popularity of opium to relieve pain in thatperiod of medical enlightenment when attention was directed atsymptoms rather than cause, the ignorance of the dangers ofcontinued use, the discovery of its value for therapeutic uses,the influence of such writings as De Quincey's and others of hisday, the introduction and widespread use of the hypodermicsyringe, the influence of the Civil War and other wars, thepractice of opium smoking, the influence of the patent medicineindustry, the discovery and use of heroin, the illicit trafficwhich has grown up since the enactment of anti-narcotic laws andthe general lack of interest and laxness in medical teachings andpractice in the employment of opium preparations. RESUME The period covered in the foregoing material dates from theearliest time in which this problem in the United States appearsto have received individual or public recognition up to thepresent time. From beginning to end the material is fragmentary.Altogether very few surveys have been made and those that doexist are more or less imperfect due to one or another vitiatingfactor. Incompleteness seems to be an outstanding feature ofpractically all surveys. This may be explained by the nature ofthe problem and the prevailing early and present attitudes towardthe individuals affected, as a result of which they are notinclined to reveal their condition. Other influences tending torender the surveys already made inapplicable to generalizationare community variations such as race composition, method ofconducting survey, method of registration, classes represented insurvey, attitude and experience of investigators, etc. Moreover,singularly enough, in spite of a growing interest evinced in theproblem as a result of the enactment of the Harrison NarcoticAct, the results of several of the earlier investigations appearbetter adapted to generalization than most of those made publicsince the enforcement of this law. In consideration of the abovefactors it must be concluded that we do not know the total numberof opiate users in the United States today. Whatever their inaccuracies, these surveys and estimatesindicate sufficiently clearly the existence of a majormedico-social problem to make the denial of the existence of ageneral situation far more dangerous than its affirmation. As amatter of fact, it is not necessary to know the exact number ofusers or even the minimal extent, to realize that there are alarge number in the country and that the problem is serious. CliffSchaffer's Home Page Contents | Feedback | Search DRCNet Library | Schaffer Library | Major Studies | TheOpium ProblemWT01-B31-15IA031-000652-B041-24http://206.61.184.43:80/schaffer/library/studies/lag/foreword.htm 206.61.184.43 19970122130533 text/html 4414HTTP/1.0 200 OKDate: Wednesday, 22-Jan-97 13:05:20 GMTServer: WebSitePro/1.1f (S/N wpo-0deb)Allow-ranges: bytesContent-type: text/htmlLast-modified: Saturday, 28-Dec-96 07:03:11 GMTContent-length: 4197 La Guardia Report on Marijuana - Foreword Contents | Feedback | Search DRCNet Library | Schaffer Library | Major Studies | LaGuardiaCommittee Report The LaGuardia Report FOREWORD by Fiorello LaGuardia As Mayor of the City of New York, it is my duty to foresee andtake steps to prevent the development of hazards to the health,safety, and welfare of our citizens. When rumors were recentlycirculated concerning the smoking of marihuana by large segmentsof our population and even by school children, I sought advicefrom The New York Academy of Medicine, as is my custom whenconfronted with problems of medical import. On the Academy'srecommendation I appointed a special committee to make a thoroughsociological and scientific investigation, and secured funds fromthree Foundations with which to finance these studies. My own interest in marihuana goes back many years, to the timewhen I was a member of the House of Representatives and, in thatcapacity, heard of the use of marihuana by soldiers stationed inPanama. I was impressed at that time with the report of an ArmyBoard of Inquiry which emphasized the relative harmlessness ofthe drug and the fact that it played a very little role, if any,in problems of delinquency and crime in the Canal Zone. The report of the present investigations covers every phase ofthe problem and is of practical value not only to our own citybut to communities throughout the country. It is a basiccontribution to medicine and pharmacology. I am glad that thesociological, psychological, and medical ills commonly attributedto marihuana have been found to be exaggerated insofar as theCity of New York is concerned. I hasten to point out, however,that the findings are to be interpreted only as a reassuringreport of progress and not as encouragement to indulgence, for Ishall continue to enforce the laws prohibiting the use ofmarihuana until and if complete findings may justify an amendmentto existing laws. The scientific part of the research will becontinued in the hope that the drug may prove to possesstherapeutic value for the control of drug addiction. I take this occasion to express my appreciation and gratitudeto the members of my committee, to The New York Academy ofMedicine, and to the Commonwealth Fund, the Friedsam Foundation,and the New York Foundation which supported these importantinvestigations so generously. F. H. LaGuardia Mayor Contents | Feedback | Search DRCNet Library | Schaffer Library | Major Studies | LaGuardiaCommittee ReportWT01-B31-16IA031-000652-B041-46http://206.61.184.43:80/schaffer/library/studies/lag/intro.htm 206.61.184.43 19970122130546 text/html 11661HTTP/1.0 200 OKDate: Wednesday, 22-Jan-97 13:05:36 GMTServer: WebSitePro/1.1f (S/N wpo-0deb)Allow-ranges: bytesContent-type: text/htmlLast-modified: Saturday, 28-Dec-96 07:03:08 GMTContent-length: 11443 La Guardia Committee Report on Marijuana - Introduction Contents | Feedback | Search DRCNet Library | Schaffer Library | Major Studies | LaGuardiaCommittee Report INTRODUCTION E. H. L. Corwin, PhD, Secretary On September 13, 1938, The New York Academy of Medicine wasinformed of Mayor LaGuardia's concern about the marihuana problemand of his desire "that some impartial body such as The NewYork Academy of Medicine make a survey of existing knowledge onthis subject and carry out any observations required to determinethe pertinent facts regarding this form of drug addiction and thenecessity for its control." The Mayor's request was referredto the Committee on Public Health Relations of the Academy, whichCommittee on October 17, 1938, authorized the appointment of aspecial subcommittee to study the Mayor's request. This Subcommittee, consisting of Dr. George B. Wallace,Chairman, Dr. E. H. L. Corwin, Secretary, and Drs. McKeenCattell, Leon H. Cornwall, Robert F. Loeb, Currier McEwen, B. S.Oppenheimer, Charles Diller Ryan, and Dudley D. Shoenfeld,reviewed the existing literature on the subject. On the basis ofthis review, the Subcommittee could come to no conclusionregarding the effect of marihuana upon the psychological andphysiological functions of the human being. Nor were attempts tolearn the extent of the use of marihuana in New York City anymore successful. A conference with representatives of the PoliceDepartment, the Department of Education, the Department ofCorrection, the Psychiatric Division of the Department ofHospitals, the Court of Domestic Relations, the DistrictAttorney's office, and the Citizens Committee on the Control ofCrime served to emphasize the existing differences of opinionregarding the extent of the use of marihuana in this city and itsrelationship to crime. The Subcommittee therefore came to the conclusion that, inview of the possibility that marihuana smoking might constitutean important social problem, it was time that a study of itseffects be made based upon well-established evidence, andprepared an outline of methods of procedure for the study of theproblem. It recommended that such a study should be divided intotwo parts: ( 1 ) a sociological study dealing with the extent ofmarihuana smoking and the methods by which the drug is obtained;in what districts and among what races, classes or types ofpersons the use is most prevalent; whether certain socialconditions are factors in its use, and what relation there isbetween its use and criminal or antisocial acts; and (2) aclinical study to determine by means of controlled experimentsthe physiological and psychological effects of marihuana ondifferent types of persons; the question as to whether it causesphysical or mental deterioration; and its possible therapeuticeffects in the treatment of disease or of other drug addictions. The Committee on Public Health Relations adopted the report ofits Subcommittee and recommended to Mayor LaGuardia that heappoint a special committee to carry out the proposed study.Accordingly in January 1939 he appointed the Mayor's Committee onMarihuana, composed of the members of the Subcommittee of theCommittee on Public Health Relations which recommended the studyand four ex-officio members: Dr. Peter F. Amoroso, First DeputyCommissioner (later Commissioner) of Correction; Dr. Karl M.Bowman, Director of the Psychiatric Division of the Department ofHospitals; Dr. S. S. Goldwater, Commissioner of Hospitals- andDr. John L. Rich, Commissioner of Health. Upon his accession tothe commissionership of the Department of Hospitals, Dr. WillardC. Rappleye succeeded Dr. Goldwater as a member of thisCommittee. This Committee studied the broad outlines of theproposed plans for about a year before work was actually begun. At its first meeting in March 1939 two subcommittees wereappointed; one, consisting of Drs. Shoenfeld, Ryan, and Corwin,to plan the sociological study, and the other, composed of Drs.Cattell, Bowman, Cornwall, and Loeb, to work out the details ofthe clinical study. Drs. Bowman and Wechsler were appointed asspecial advisers for the clinical study and Dr. J. Murray Steeleand Dr. S. Bernard Wortis as the supervisors of this study. The studies were made possible by the financial support ofthree Foundations, the Friedsam Foundation, the New YorkFoundation, and the Commonwealth Fund, each of which donated$7,500. The whole amounts granted by the Friedsam Foundation andthe Commonwealth Fund and $5,000 of the New York Foundation'sgrant were to be applied to the clinical study- the remaining$2,500 given by the New York Foundation was earmarked for thesociological study. The Research Council of the Department ofHospitals undertook the financial supervision of the clinicalstudy and The New York Academy of Medicine that of thesociological study. The sociological study proceeded under the active direction ofDr. Dudley D. Shoenfeld and was carried out by six policeofficers who were trained by Dr. Shoenfeld as socialinvestigators. In acknowledgment of the great help rendered tothe Committee by these officers, the Committee passed thefollowing resolution at its meeting on March 18, 1941. Now that the sociological study of the marihuana problem inNew York City has been completed, the Mayor's Committee onMarihuana wishes to record its appreciation of the Mayor'sinterest in this problem and his placing at the disposal of theCommittee the services of the Narcotic Squad Division of thePolice Department. Without the cooperation of CommissionerValentine, Inspector Curtayne, Lieutenant Cooper, SergeantBoylan, and Detective Loures, this study would have beenimpossible. They helped in planning it and assigned to theCommittee six members of the Force, four men and two women, whoseintelligence, interest in the work, and desire to obtain thefacts of the situation were of invaluable aid in obtaining theinformation on which the sociological report is based. The fourmen and two women assigned to us made painstaking observationsand reports, acted as investigators and social workers and not aspolice officers, and brought to the performance of this task anative intelligence, specialized training, and civic interest.The thanks of the Committee are due to them and through them totheir superiors. The clinical study consisted of two parts; the medical,including psychiatric, and the psychological. Dr. Karl M. Bowmandirected the medical and psychiatric part of this study and Dr.David Wechsler the psychological part. The members of theCommittee closely supervised the work during the course of thestudy. The staff of the clinical study included: Samuel Allentuck, MD, Psychiatrist, who was in charge. Louis Gitzelter, MD Frank Anker, MD Assistant Physicians Robert S. Morrow, PhD Florence Halpern, MA Adolph G. Woltmann,MA Psychologists Miss Rose Horowitz, who was the secretary-stenographer and bookkeeper. The Committee is indebted to the Department of Hospitals formaking available two small wards and office space in the WelfareHospital (now known as the Goldwater Memorial Hospital), to Dr.Chrisman G. Scheri, the Superintendent of the hospital, and tothe laboratory staff of the Third Medical Division for theirassistance in the conduct of laboratory experiments.Acknowledgment should also be made of the services of Dr. RobertC. Batterman who interpreted the electrocardiograms and Dr. HansStrauss for the electroencephalographic work. Professor Walter R.Miles of Yale University assisted in the planning of thepsychological part of the study. This whole undertaking wouldhave been impossible without the help and cooperation of Dr.Peter F. Amoroso, of the Department of Correction, who, asidefrom his services as a member of the Committee, was responsiblefor arrangements for volunteers from among the prisoners of theRiker's Island Penitentiary. Thanks are due also to the medicalstaff of the Riker's Island Hospital for their assistance in thenarcotic addiction study. At the suggestion of Dr. Cattell a pharmacological study wasdone in the Department of Pharmacology of Cornell Medical Schoolby Dr. S. Loewe. Dr. W. Modell collaborated in this work. We areindebted to Dr. Roger Adams, Professor of Chemistry at theUniversity of Illinois, and to Dr. H. J. Wollner, ConsultingChemist of the United States Treasury Department, who suppliedsome of the active principles of marihuana which were used in thestudy. The names of those who conducted the investigations are givenunder the different chapters. Those sections of the report forwhich no author is indicated have been written by the Chairman ofthe Committee. The tremendous task of compiling, editing, and revising thereports was undertaken by Dr. George B. Wallace, the chairman ofthe Committee, and Miss Elizabeth V. Cunningham of the staff ofthe Committee on Public Health Relations of The New York Academyof Medicine. They had the assistance of Dr. Dudley D. Shoenfeld,who prepared the sociological report, Dr. David Wechsler, whorevised the psychological reports, and Dr. McKeen Cattell, whoedited the pharmacological report. In the judgment of the Committee, this painstaking studyshould be of considerable value from a scientific and socialviewpoint. Contents | Feedback | Search DRCNet Library | Schaffer Library | Major Studies | LaGuardiaCommittee ReportWT01-B31-17IA031-000652-B041-68http://206.61.184.43:80/schaffer/library/studies/lag/socintro.htm 206.61.184.43 19970122130555 text/html 19224HTTP/1.0 200 OKDate: Wednesday, 22-Jan-97 13:05:44 GMTServer: WebSitePro/1.1f (S/N wpo-0deb)Allow-ranges: bytesContent-type: text/htmlLast-modified: Saturday, 28-Dec-96 07:02:54 GMTContent-length: 19006 La Guardia Committee Report, The Sociological Study Contents | Feedback | Search DRCNet Library | Schaffer Library | Major Studies | LaGuardiaCommittee Report The LaGuardia Committee Report, THE SOCIOLOGICAL STUDY Dudley D. Shoenfeld, MD INTRODUCTION In order to understand fully the purpose and scope of thisparticular part of the survey conducted by the Mayor's Committeeon Marihuana, a brief digest of the history of the growth andusage of this drug is essential. Indian hemp, from which marihuana (the American synonym forhashish) is obtained, has been known to man for more than threethousand years. This plant, although originally indigenous toCentral Asia, is now found in practically every section of theworld, growing either wild or cultivated, legally or illegally. When originally discovered, the use to which this plant wasprincipally put was the conversion of its fiber for commericalpurposes in the production of cord, twine and textiles. Shortlythereafter its pharmaceutical properties were employed in thepractice of medicine and surgery. Authoritative proof isavailable that the Chinese found it valuable as an effectiveanesthetic in surgery as far back as two thousand years. It wasnot until approximately the tenth century that the peoples ofAfrica and Asia began to use it in a rather indiscriminate mannerfor its intoxicating effects. Very shortly after its usage became popular, this drug engagedthe attention of the various African and Asian governments, aswell as of lay persons interested in medical, religious andsociological problems. Some of these very early investigatorspropounded the theory that physical and mental deterioration wasthe direct result of smoking hashish. Others extolled itsbenefits, deeming it actually essential to life, and urged peopleto indulge in it. During this early period, the peoples of Europe were aware ofthe use of hashish in Africa and Asia, and considered it a viceparticularly common to the peoples of those continents. In thenineteenth century their interest was raised to a high pitchbecause of the fictional reports of the smoking of hashish givenby the romanticists of that period. These individuals, who hadthe power of the pen, experimentally indulged in the smoking ofhashish, and described in an expansive, subjective manner theeffects the drug had upon them. A review of the fancifulliterature reveals that in most instances these writings referredto the authors' experiences with toxic doses. Summed up, theconclusions were that hashish could cause psychotic episodes andeven death and that prolonged use would result in physical andmental deterioration. The exalted position held by theseromanticists tended to influence the Europeans to accept theirconclusions as scientific monographs on the subject of hashish,so that the smoking of hashish did not become popular with them.However, in recent years there has been a fairly wideparticipation on the part of Europeans in smoking hashish ormarihuana, but it is referred to as an American vice. This allowsone to infer that whereas the knowledge pertaining to this habitwas very early recognized in Europe, at the present timeparticipation in it is from their point of view the direct resultof its introduction into Europe not from Africa and Asia, butfrom America. In America, Indian hemp was planted in the New Englandcolonies, solely for commercial purposes, as early as theseventeenth century. At the present time it can be found growingeither wild or cultivated, legally or illegally, in practicallyall our states. Lawful cultivation is confined principally to thestates of Kentucky, Illinois, Minnesota, and Wisconsin. It hasbeen estimated that not more than ten thousand acres are devotedto its legal production. It is of value commercially in themanufacture of rope, twine, and textiles. The seed is used forbird- food, and the oil extracted from the seed is occasionallyused as a substitute for linseed oil in the preparation ofartists' paints. A rosin extracted from the plant is used in theproduction of pharmaceutical preparations. Since the history of hemp cultivation in America dates back tothe seventeenth century, it is exceedingly interesting, butdifficult to explain, that the smoking of marihuana did notbecome a problem in our country until approximately twenty yearsago, and that it has become an acute problem associated with agreat deal of publicity only in the past ten years. The origin of the word "marihuana" is in doubt. Someauthorities are of the opinion that it is derived from thePortuguese word "mariguano," meaning intoxicant. Othersare of the opinion that it has its derivation in the Mexicanwords for "Mary and Jane." The introduction into theUnited States of the practice of smoking marihuana has been thesubject of a great deal of speculation. The most tenablehypothesis at the present time is that it was introduced byMexicans entering our country. It is accepted that in Mexico marihuana smoking is an old,established practice. Therefore, it would appear logical toassume that Mexican laborers crossing our border into theSouthwest carried this practice with them. Having used marihuanain their native land, they found it natural to continue smokingit in the new country, and planted it for personal consumption.Once available, it was soon made use of by our citizens. At thepresent time, the smoking of marihuana is widespread in thisnation. Believing that marihuana smoking might be deleterious, andknowing it to be widespread, federal and municipal governments,private individuals, and such agencies as the Opium AdvisoryAssociation, the International Narcotic Education Association,and others investigated the subject. These investigativeorganizations have contributed a great deal of data and pertinentinformation to the knowledge of the use of marihuana. The mass ofinformation so obtained when untangled can be summed up with thegeneral statement that a majority of investigators are of theopinion that marihuana smoking is deleterious, although aminority maintain that it is innocuous. The majority believe thatmarihuana smoking is widespread among school children; that thedispensers of the drug are organized to such an extent that theyencourage the use of marihuana in order to create an ever-increasing market; that juvenile delinquency is directly relatedto the effects of the drug; that it is a causative factor in alarge percentage of our major crimes and sexual offenses; andthat physical and mental deterioration are the direct result ofthe prolonged habit of smoking marihuana. As a result of these official and semi-official conclusions inregard to the disastrous effects produced by this habit, thenewspapers and magazines of our country have given it widepublicity. At this point it may be profitable to give theconclusions of some of the investigators and quote the publicityassociated with it. In a pamphlet "Marihuana or Indian Hempand Its Preparations" issued by the International NarcoticEducation Association, one finds: (quotation) Marihuana is a most virile and powerful stimulant. Thephysiological effect of this drug produces a peculiar psychicexaltation and derangement of the central nervous system. Thestage of exaltation and confusion, more marked in some addictsthan in others, is generally followed by a stage of depression.Sometimes the subject passes into a semi- conscious state,experiencing vivid and extravagant dreams which vary according tothe individual character and mentality. In some the stage is oneof self-satisfaction and well-being. In others, it is alarming,presenting the fear of some imminent and indefinite danger or ofimpending death. Later the dreams are sometimes followed by astate of complete unconsciousness. Sometimes convulsive attacksand acute mania are developed. The narcotic content in marihuana decreases the rate of heartbeat and causes irregularity of the pulse. Death may result fromthe effect upon the heart. Prolonged use of marihuana frequentlydevelops a delirious rage which sometimes leads to high crimes,such as assault and murder. Hence marihuana has been called the"killer drug." The habitual use of this narcotic poisonalways causes a very marked mental deterioration and sometimesproduces insanity. Hence marihuana is frequently called"loco weed." (Loco is the Spanish word for crazy.) While the marihuana habit leads to physical wreckage andmental decay, its effects upon character and morality are evenmore devastating. The victim frequently undergoes such degeneracythat he will lie and steal without scruple; he becomes utterlyuntrustworthy and often drifts into the underworld where, withhis degenerate companions, he commits high crimes andmisdemeanors. Marihuana sometimes gives man the lust to killunreasonably and without motive. Many cases of assault, rape,robbery, and murder are traced to the use of maribuana.(1) (end quotation) (1) International Narcotic Education Association."Marihuana or Indian Hemp and Its Preparations." LosAngeles, 1936. In an article published in the New York Daily Worker, NewYork, Saturday, December 28, 1940, there appeared under thecolumn headed "HEALTH ADVICE": (start quoted article) A DRUG AND INSANITY. Bill Wilson was strolling by his favorite soda joint on theway home from high school when he heard a familiar voice whisperloudly, "Hey, Bill, c'mere." Behind the Texacobillboard, he found his side-kick Jim, who said excitedly,"I got some reefers!" "Reefers, what'rethey?" Mysteriously, Jim reached into his pocket and pulled out twolarge cigarettes. "Marihuana!" Jim's pupils dilated."Come on over to the club and we'll smoke 'em. Boy, that'sfun!" Bill is only one of thousands of new marihuana smokerscreated yearly among boys and girls of high school age. What is this drug? It is a narcotic in the same class as opiumand is derived from a plant, which grows wild, extensively insome parts. For this reason, it is hard to control and the drugis easy to obtain at very little cost. Smoking of the weed ishabit-forming. It destroys the willpower, releases restraints,and promotes insane reactions. Continued use causes the face tobecome bloated, the eyes bloodshot, the limbs weak and trembling,and the mind sinks into insanity. Robberies, thrill murders, sexcrimes and other offenses result. When the habit is first started, the symptoms are milder, yetpowerful enough. The smoker loses all sense of time and space sothat he can't judge distances, he loses his self-control, and hisimagination receives considerable stimulation. The habit can be cured only by the most severe methods. Theaddict must be put into an institution, where the drug isgradually withdrawn, his general health is built up, and he iskept there until he has enough willpower to withstand thetemptation to again take to the weed. The spread of this terrible fad can be stopped only when theunscrupulous criminals trafficking In the drug are rooted out. (end quoted article) Dr. Robert P. Walton, Professor of Pharmacology of the Schoolof Medicine of the University of Mississippi, has written a mostcomprehensive book on the subject of marihuana, embodying indetail pharmacological and social studies.(2) A chapter on the"Present Status of the Marihuana Vice in the UnitedStates" was prepared by Dr. Frank R. Gomila, Commissioner ofPublic Safety of New Orleans, and C. G. Lambou, Assistant CityChemist. They refer to New Orleans as being possibly the firstlarge city in the United States where the drug habit becamewidely established among the native population, and theytherefore believe that the authorities in this city had a decidedopportunity to observe the progress of the smoking of marihuanaas a social problem. Referring specifically to the use ofmarihuana among school children, they state that reporters in NewOrleans not only heard about but observed large numbers of boysof school age actually buying and smoking marihuana cigarettes.One peddler was so brazen as to keep his stock under the streetstairs to a girls' high school. Inquiries further revealed that school children of forty-fourschools in New Orleans (only a few of these were high schools)smoked marihuana. As a result of exposure and widespreadagitation, (start quotation) Verifications came in by the hundreds from harassed parents,teachers, neighborhood pastors, priests, welfare workers and clubwomen. Warrington House for boys was full of children who hadbecome habituated to the use of cannabis. The superintendent ofthe Children's Bureau reported that there were many problemchildren there who had come under the influence and two who hadrun away because they couldn't get their "muggles" atthe Bureau. The Director of Kingsley House for boys received manypleas from fathers of boys who had come under the influence andwere charged with petty crimes. After personally seeing these boys in an hysterical conditionor on the well-known "laughing jags," the directortermed the situation decidedly grave. The Waif's Home, at thistime, was reputedly full of children, both white and colored, whohad been brought in under the influence of the drug. Marihuanacigarettes could be bought almost as readily as sandwiches. Theircost was two for a quarter. The children solved the problem ofcost by pooling pennies among the members of a group and thenpassing the cigarettes from one to another, all the puffs beingcarefully counted.... The result of these investigations ended in a wholesale arrestof more than 150 persons. Approximately one hundred underworlddives, soft-drink establishments, night clubs, grocery stores,and private homes were searched in the police raid. Addicts,hardened criminals, gangsters, women of the streets sailors ofall nationalities, bootleggers, boys and girls, -- many flashilydressed in silks and furs, others in working clothes -- all wererounded up in the net which Captain Smith and his squad had set. . . . Notwithstanding the thoroughness with which this policeroundup was carried out, it did not entirely eradicate in onestroke a vice which had already become so well established.During the next few years New Orleans experienced a crime wavewhich unquestionably was greatly aggravated by the influence ofthis drug habit. Payroll and bank guards were doubled, but thisdid not prevent some of the most spectacular holdups in thehistory of the city. Youngsters known to be"muggle-heads" fortified themselves with the narcoticand proceeded to shoot down police, bank clerks and casualbystanders. Mr. Eugene Stanley, at that time District Attorney,declared that many of the crimes in New Orleans and the Southwere thus committed by criminals who relied on the drug to givethem a false courage and freedom from restraint. Dr. GeorgeRoeling, Coroner, reported that of 450 prisoners investigated,125 were confirmed users of marihuana. Dr. W. B. Graham, StateNarcotic Officer, declared in 1936 that 60 per cent of the crimescommitted in New Orleans were by marihuana users.(3) (end quote) The Mayor's Committee on Marihuana decided to confine itsinvestigations to a limited area. For a number of reasons theBorough of Manhattan seemed to be the most profitable section ofthe city in which to concentrate. In order to crystallize ourparticular project we deemed it advisable to direct our effortsto finding answers to the following questions: 1. To what extent is marihuana used? 2. What is the method of retail distribution? 3. What is the general attitude of the marihuana smoker towardsociety and toward the use of the drug? 4. What is the relationship between marihuana and eroticism? 5. What is the relationship between marihuana and crime? 6. What is the relationship between marihuana and juveniledelinquency? In the course of our investigations, we have made extensiveuse of subjective data obtained from those who were actualsmokers of marihuana and directly acquainted with its effects andthose who were not smokers, but, because of residence, occupationor other interests, were acquainted with the general subject. (2) Walton, R. P. Marijuana: America's New Drug Problem. J. B.Lippincott Co., Philadelphia, 1938. (3) Ibid. Contents | Feedback | Search DRCNet Library | Schaffer Library | Major Studies | LaGuardiaCommittee ReportWT01-B31-18IA031-000652-B041-94http://206.61.184.43:80/schaffer/library/studies/lag/organiz.htm 206.61.184.43 19970122130611 text/html 13319HTTP/1.0 200 OKDate: Wednesday, 22-Jan-97 13:05:59 GMTServer: WebSitePro/1.1f (S/N wpo-0deb)Allow-ranges: bytesContent-type: text/htmlLast-modified: Saturday, 28-Dec-96 07:03:00 GMTContent-length: 13101 LaGuardia Committee Report - Organization of Staff Contents | Feedback | Search DRCNet Library | Schaffer Library | Major Studies | LaGuardiaCommittee Report Organization of Staff In October 1939 Police Commissioner Lewis J. Valentinedesignated Deputy Chief Inspector Daniel Curtayne, LieutenantEdward Cooper, Sergeant Bernard Boylan and Detective JosephLoures of the Narcotic Squad of the Police Department of the Cityof New York to cooperate with the Mayor's Committee on Marihuana.These police officials submitted a list of intelligent youngofficers with a suitable background. From this list six officerswere selected: two policewomen, and four policemen, one of whomwas a Negro. They were: Mr. James Coen, Mr. William Connolly, Mr.Benjamin Weissner, Mr. John Hughes, Miss Adelaide Knowles andMiss Olive Cregan. These police officers were encouraged to readliterature on the subject of marihuana and to familiarizethemselves with some of the characteristics of the plant, as wellas of marihuana cigarettes. They became expert in detecting thearoma of burning marihuana, and were thus able to recognize itand to identify its use in a social gathering. Regular assignments were made by the director of the survey.At intervals each officer dictated a general report on hisactivities and findings to a stenographer engaged by theCommittee. Frequent conferences were held in the office of thedirector of the survey, at which time individual reports werediscussed in detail and evaluated. An attempt was made to give the "marihuana squad" apsychological approach to the performance of their duties. At notime were these officers permitted to make known their activityto other members of the police force, or to make arrests. Thisarrangement was considered essential in order that they mightmaintain an effective role of investigator without being in anyrespect recognized as police officers. Although they were membersof the police force and constantly in contact with violators oflaw, their immediate superiors cooperated to an extreme degree byallowing the "marihuana squad" to report directly tothe director of the survey. While on duty the squad actually "lived" in theenvironment in which marihuana smoking or peddling was suspected.They frequented poolrooms, bars and grills, dime-a-dance halls,other dance halls to which they took their own partners, theatres-- backstage and in the audience -- roller-skating rinks,subways, public toilets, parks and docks They consorted with thehabitues of these places, chance acquaintances on the street,loiterers around schools, subways and bus terminals. They posedas "suckers" from out of town and as students incolleges and high schools. We highly commend these officers individually for theirexceptionally good performances. The aid given by Deputy ChiefInspector Daniel Curtayne, Lieutenant Edward Cooper, SergeantBernard Boylan and Detective Joseph Loures throughout deservesmention and appreciation. At times we must have been a source ofannoyance to them, but our requests were always cheerfully metand assistance heartily extended. Method of Retail Distribution In general, marihuana is used in the form of a cigarette.Occasionally some individuals chew the "weed" and seemto get the same effect as do others through smoking. The commonnames for the cigarettes are: muggles, reefers, Indian hemp,weed, tea, gage and sticks. Cigarettes made of marihuana differin size as do cigarettes made of tobacco: they are long, short,thick or thin. The price varies in accordance with the accepted opinion as tothe potency of the marihuana used in the cigarettes, and thisappears to be determined by the place of origin. The cheapestbrand is known as "sass-fras," and retails forapproximately three for 50 cents. It is made of the marihuanathat is grown in the United States. Smokers do not consider suchmarihuana very potent. They have found that they must consume agreater number of cigarettes in order to obtain the desiredeffect colloquially termed as "high." This opinion,expressed by smokers in the Borough of Manhattan, is at variancewith that of some authorities who believe that marihuana grown inthe United States is as potent as the marihuana grown in othercountries. The "panatella" cigarette, occasionally referred toas "meserole," is considered to be more potent than the"sass-fras" and usually retails for approximately 25cents each. The hemp from which the "panatella" is madecomes from Central and South America. "Gungeon" is considered by the marihuana smoker asthe highest grade of marihuana. It retails for about one dollarper cigarette. The "kick" resulting from the use ofthis cigarette is reached more quickly than from the use of"sassafras" or "panatella." It appears to bethe consensus that the marihuana used to make the"gungeon" comes from Africa. The sale of this cigaretteis restricted to a clientele whose economic status is of a higherlevel than the majority of marihuana smokers. A confirmed marihuana user can readily distinguish the qualityand potency of various brands, just as the habitual cigarette orcigar smoker is able to differentiate between the qualities oftobacco. Foreign-made cigarette paper is often used in order toconvince the buyer that the "tea is right from theboat." There are two channels for the distribution of marihuanacigarettes-- the independent peddler and the "tea-pad."From general observations, conversations with "pad"owners, and discussions with peddlers, the investigatorsestimated that there were about 500 "tea-pads" inHarlem and at least 500 peddlers. A "tea-pad" is a room or an apartment in whichpeople gather to smoke marihuana. The majority of such places arelocated in the Harlem district. It is our impression that thelandlord, the agent, the superintendent or the janitor is awareof the purposes for which the premises are rented. The"tea-pad" is furnished according to the clientele itexpects to serve. Usually, each "tea-pad" hascomfortable furniture, a radio, victrola or, as in mostinstances, a rented nickelodeon. The lighting is more or lessuniformly dim, with blue predominating. An incense is consideredpart of the furnishings. The walls are frequently decorated withpictures of nude subjects suggestive of perverted sexualpractices. The furnishings, as described, are believed to beessential as a setting for those participating in smokingmarihuana. Most "tea-pads" have their trade restricted to thesale of marihuana. Some places did sell marihuana and whisky, anda few places also served as houses of prostitution. Only one"teapad" was found which served as a house ofprostitution, and in which one could buy marihuana, whisky, andopium. The marihuana smoker derives greater satisfaction if he issmoking in the presence of others. His attitude in the"tea-pad" is that of a relaxed individual, free fromthe anxieties and cares of the realities of life. The"tea-pad" takes on the atmosphere of a very congenialsocial club. The smoker readily engages in conversation withstrangers, discussing freely his pleasant reactions to the drugand philosophizing on subjects pertaining to life in a mannerwhich, at times, appears to be out of keeping with hisintellectual level. A constant observation was the extremewillingness to share and puff on each other's cigarettes. Aboisterous, rowdy atmosphere did not prevail and on the rareoccasions when there appeared signs indicative of a belligerentattitude on the part of a smoker, he was ejected or forced tobecome more tolerant and quiescent. One of the most interesting setups of a "tea-pad,"which was clearly not along orthodox lines from the businesspoint of view, was a series of pup tents arranged on a roof-topin Harlem. Those present proceeded to smoke their cigarettes inthe tents. When the desired effect of the drug had been obtainedthey all merged into the open and engaged in a discussion oftheir admiration of the stars and the beauties of nature. Because of the possibility of spreading disease, note shouldbe taken of what seems to be a custom known as"pick-up" smoking. It is an established practicewhereby a marihuana cigarette is lit and after one or twoinhalations is passed on to the next person. This procedure isrepeated until all present have had an opportunity to take a puffor two on the cigarette. Occasionally a "tea-pad" owner may have peddlers whosell their wares in other localities and at the same time serveas procurers for those who wish to smoke marihuana on thepremises. One also finds other methods of retail distribution. Afterproper introduction, one may be able to purchase the cigarette incertain places. This is not an easy procedure, but it can beaccomplished. In some bar-and-grills, restaurants, and bars ourinvestigators were able to establish contact with someone who inturn, would introduce them to a peddler who apparently maderegular rounds of these places in order to sell cigarettes. Itappears that the owners of such places are not aware of thispractice, and in many instances they would discharge any employeeknown to be directly or indirectly associated with the sale ofmarihuana. On rare occasions public guides, if properly approached wouldrefer one to a place where the "reefer" could bebought. There was no evidence that the guide received money whenacting as go- between. Terminal porters, mainly Negroes, appearedto be more directly connected with the traffic of marihuana. Theywere more conversant with the subject and it was easier for themto establish contact between purchaser and peddler. Marihuana smoking is very common in the theatres of Harlemaccording to the observations of the investigators. We havereason to believe that in some instances, perhaps few in number,employees actually sold cigarettes on the premises. In the Harlemdance halls smoking was frequently observed either in thelavatories or on the main floor. The patrons as well as themusicians were seen in the act of smoking. There was no evidenceof sales being made by employees on the premises, or that therewas any gain on the part of the owners or employees in permittingthis practice. Whereas the smoking of marihuana was notencouraged, nothing was done to prohibit such practice. There are specific sections in the Borough of Manhattan wherethe sale of marihuana cigarettes appears to be localized: 1) theHarlem district; 2) the Broadway area, a little east and west ofBroadway and extending from 42nd Street to S9th Street. While itis true that one may buy the cigarette in other districts, it isnot as easily obtainable as in the two localities mentioned. Contents | Feedback | Search DRCNet Library | Schaffer Library | Major Studies | LaGuardiaCommittee ReportWT01-B31-19IA031-000652-B041-119http://206.61.184.43:80/schaffer/library/studies/lag/attitude.htm 206.61.184.43 19970122130620 text/html 16531HTTP/1.0 200 OKDate: Wednesday, 22-Jan-97 13:06:11 GMTServer: WebSitePro/1.1f (S/N wpo-0deb)Allow-ranges: bytesContent-type: text/htmlLast-modified: Saturday, 28-Dec-96 07:03:22 GMTContent-length: 16313 The Mental Attitude of the Marijuana Smoker Toward Societyand M Contents | Feedback | Search DRCNet Library | Schaffer Library | Major Studies | LaGuardiaCommittee Report The LaGuardia Committee Report on Marihuana The Mental Attitude of the Marihuana Smoker Toward Societyand Marihuana Most of the smokers of marihuana coming within the scope ofour survey were unemployed, and of the others most had part-timeemployment. Occasional, as well as confirmed, users were all aware of thelaws pertaining to the illegal use of the drug. They did notindulge in its use with a spirit of braggadocio or as a challengeto law as has been reported by some investigators in otherdistricts. They did not express remorse concerning their use ofmarihuana, nor did they blame this habit as a causative factor inthe production of special difficulties in their personal lives.Except for musicians there appeared to be no attempt atsecretiveness on the part of the habitual smoker. This attitudeis in marked contrast to that usually taken by those addicted tomorphine, cocaine, or heroin. The consensus of marihuana users is that the drug is notharmful and that infrequent or constant use of marihuana does notresult in physical or mental deterioration. In describing the most common reaction to the drug they alwaysstated that it made them feel "high." Elaboration ofjust what the smoker meant by "high" varied with theindividual. However, there was common agreement that a feeling ofadequacy and efficiency was induced by the use of marihuana andthat current mental conflicts were allayed. Organic illness wasnot given as a cause for smoking "reefers." A person may be a confirmed smoker for a prolonged period, andgive up the drug voluntarily without experiencing any craving forit or exhibiting withdrawal symptoms. He may, at some time lateron, go back to its use. Others may remain infrequent users of thecigarette, taking one or two a week, or only when the"social setting" calls for participation. From time totime we had one of our investigators associate with a marihuanauser. The investigator would bring up the subject of smoking.This would invariably lead to the suggestion that they obtainsome marihuana cigarettes. They would seek a "tea-pad,"and if it was closed the smoker and our investigator would calmlyresume their previous activity, such as the discussion of life ingeneral or the playing of pool. There were apparently no signsindicative of frustration in the smoker at not being able togratify the desire for the drug. We consider this point highlysignificant since it is so contrary to the experience of users ofother narcotics. A similar situation occurring in one addicted tothe use of morphine, cocaine, or heroin would result in acompulsive attitude on the part of the addict to obtain the drug.If unable to secure it, there would be obvious physical andmental manifestations of frustration. This may be consideredpresumptive evidence that there is no true addiction in themedical sense associated with the use of marihuana. The confirmed marihuana smoker consumes perhaps from six toten cigarettes per day. He appears to be quite conscious of thequantity he requires to reach the effect called "high."Once the desired effect is obtained he cannot be persuaded toconsume more. He knows when he has had enough. The smoker determines forhimself the point of being "high," and is everconscious of preventing himself from becoming "toohigh." This fear of being "too high" must beassociated with some form of anxiety which causes the smoker,should he accidentally reach that point, immediately to institutemeasures so that he can "come down." It has been foundthat the use of such beverages as beer, or a sweet soda pop, isan effective measure. Smokers insist that "it does somethingto the stomach" and that it is always associated with"belching." A cold shower will also have the effect ofbringing the person "down." Smokers have repeatedly stated that the consumption of whiskywhile smoking negates the potency of the drug. They find it isvery difficult to get "high" while drinking whisky, andbecause of that smokers will not drink whisky while using the"weed." They do, however, consume large quantities ofsweet wines. It is their contention that this mild alcoholicbeverage aids the drug in producing the desired effect. Mostmarihuana smokers insist that the appetite is increased as theresult of smoking. We have been unable to confirm the opinion expressed by someinvestigators that marihuana smoking is the first step in the useof such drugs as cocaine, morphine, and heroin. The instances areextremely rare where the habit of marihuana smoking is associatedwith addiction to these other narcotics. Marihuana and Eroticism In the popular agitation against the use of marihuana, itserotic effects have been stressed repeatedly. As previouslystated in this report, our investigators visited many"tea-pads" in the Borough of Manhattan. It is true thatlewd pictures decorated the walls but they did not find that theywere attracting attention or comment among the clientele. In factone of the investigators who was concentrating his attention onthe relation between marihuana and eroticism stated in his reportthat he found himself embarrassed in that he was the only one whoexamined the pictures on the wall. Numerous conversations with smokers of marihuana revealed onlyoccasional instances in which there was any relation between thedrug and eroticism. At one time one of our investigators attendeda very intimate social gathering in an apartment in Harlem,having succeeded in securing the position of doorman for theoccasion. There was a great deal of drinking, and the dancing was of themost modern, abandoned, "jitter-bug" type. This form ofdancing is highly suggestive and appears to be associated witherotic activity. The investigator made careful observation ofthose who were dancing, and found that there was no differencebetween the ones who were and the ones who were not smoking"reefers." Similar impressions were received aftercareful observations in public dance halls, places where theyknew that some persons were under the influence of marihuana. Visits to brothels which occasionally also served as"teapads" revealed that the use of marihuana was notlinked to sexuality. These observations allow us to come to theconclusion that in the main marihuana was not used for directsexual stimulation. Crime One of the most important causes of the widespread publicitywhich marihuana smoking has received is the belief that thispractice is directly responsible for the commission of crimes. During our investigation many law enforcement officers,representing various federal, state and local police bureaus,were interviewed and asked for a confidential expression ofopinion on the general question of crime and marihuana. In mostinstances they unhesitatingly stated that there is no proof thatmajor crimes are associated with the practice of smokingmarihuana. They did state that many marihuana smokers are guiltyof petty crimes, but that the criminal career usually existedprior to the time the individual smoked his first marihuanacigarette. These officers further stated that a criminalgenerally termed as a "real" or"professional" criminal will not associate withmarihuana smokers. He considers such a person inferior andunreliable and will not allow him to participate in thecommission of a major crime. In the period beginning October 1939 and ending November 1940,the Police Department made 167 arrests for the possession and useof marihuana. Classified according to race they were: white, 33men, 4 women; Latin-American, 26 men, 2 women; Negro, 83 men, 6women; Latin-American (colored) 9 men, 1 woman- British EastIndies 1, Filipino 1, Chinese 1. Classified according to age, 12per cent were between the ages of 16 and 20, 58 per cent betweenthe ages of 21 and 30, 24 per cent between the ages of 31 and 40,and 6 per cent between the ages of 41 and 50. During the period under discussion, the Police Departmentconfiscated approximately 3,000 pounds of marihuana. The sale and use of marihuana is a problem engaging thevigilance of the New York Police Department. However, the numberof officers available for such duty is limited. Officersspecifically assigned to the Narcotics Division of the PoliceDepartment are acquainted with the problem, but the majority ofthe officers are fundamentally without authoritative knowledgeregarding this subject. The relation between marihuana smoking and the commission ofcrimes of violence in the city of New York is described by Dr.Walter Bromberg, psychiatrist-in-charge of the Psychiatric Clinicof the Court of General Sessions, in an article published in theJournal of the American Medical Association: (start quotation) In the south of this country (New Orleans) the incidence ofmarihuana addicts among major criminals is admittedly high.Sporadic reports from elsewhere in the country of murders andassaults due to marihuana appear in the press frequently. It isdifficult to evaluate these statements, because of theiruncritical nature. The bulletin prepared by the Foreign PolicyAssociation lists ten cases "culled at random from the filesof the U.S. Bureau of Narcotics" of murder and atrociousassault in which marihuana was directly responsible for thecrime. Among the ten patients, the second, J. O., was described ashaving confessed how he murdered a friend and put his body in atrunk while under the influence of marihuana. J. O. was examined in this clinic; although he was apsychopathic liar and possibly homosexual, there was noindication in the examination or history of the use of any drug.The investigation by the probation department failed to indicateuse of the drug marihuana. The deceased, however, was addicted toheroin. Our observations with respect to marihuana and crime were madein the Court of General Sessions over a period of five and a halfyears. The material in that court is limited as to residence toNew York County, although it must be remembered that theoffenders come from many sections of the country and are of manyracial types. This is important, because the Britishinvestigators have noted in India that cannabis does not bringout the motor excitement or hysterical symptoms in Anglo-Saxonusers that occur in natives. There are several other difficultiesin collecting reliable material, one being the completedependence on the history and statements of the prisoners withoutan opportunity for objective tests or other corroborative check,as in the case of other drugs, e.g., heroin or morphine. During routine interviews of some 17,000 offenders in six anda half years, several hundred have been found who had directexperience with marihuana. Their testimony checks withexperimental results and clinical experiences with regard to thesymptoms of intoxication, the absence of true addiction, and thenegative connection with major crime. Especially is thisnoteworthy among sexual offenders and in cases of assault ormurder. The extravagant claims of defense attorneys and the pressthat crime is caused by addiction to marihuana demands carefulscrutiny, at least in this jurisdiction.... Most of the narcotic cases in New York County are heard in theCourt of Special Sessions, where misdemeanants are handled andwhere indictments on charges of the possession of drugs for useare returned. In the Court of Special Sessions in the samesix-year period, of approximately 75,000 indictments for allcrimes, 6,000 resulted in convictions for the possession and useof drugs. Since neither the law, the district attorney nor the policedepartment makes any distinction between the several kinds ofnarcotics in arraignments or indictments, there were no figuresfrom which to estimate the number of users of marihuana asdistinguished from the number of users of other drugs. A systemof sampling the 6,000 cases was therefore adopted in order tofurnish an approximate estimate of the total number of marihuanausers who came into conflict with the law. In this sampling the records of 1,500 offenders, or 25 percent of the 6,000, were examined. Of these, 135 were charged inconnection with marihuana. From this fact it was estimated thatabout 540 offenders, or 9 per cent of all drug offenders comingto the Court of Special Sessions in six years, were users ofmarihuana. In analyzing this sample of 135 cases, it was foundthat 93 offenders had no previous record, the previous charges orcharges of 8 concerned only drugs, 5 had records including drugcharges and 29 had records not including drug charges. Amongthose with longer records, that is, from four to seven previousarrests, none showed progression from the use of drugs to othercrimes. As measured by the succession of arrests and convictions inthe Court of General Sessions (the only method of estimation) itcan be said that drugs generally do not initiate criminalcareers. Similarly, in the Court of Special Sessions, only 8 percent of the offenders had previous charges of using drugs and 3.7per cent had previous charges of drugs and other petty crimes. Inthe vast majority of cases in this group of 135, then, theearlier use of marihuana apparently did not predispose to crime,even that of using other drugs. Whether the first offenderscharged with the use of marihuana go on to major crime is amatter of speculation. The expectancy of major crimes followingthe use of cannabis in New York County is small, according tothese experiences.(4) (end quotation) Bromberg, W., "Marihuana: a psychiatric study." J.A.M.A. 113: 4, 1939. Contents | Feedback | Search DRCNet Library | Schaffer Library | Major Studies | LaGuardiaCommittee ReportWT01-B31-20IA031-000652-B041-136http://206.61.184.43:80/schaffer/library/studies/lag/children.htm 206.61.184.43 19970122130630 text/html 22493HTTP/1.0 200 OKDate: Wednesday, 22-Jan-97 13:06:20 GMTServer: WebSitePro/1.1f (S/N wpo-0deb)Allow-ranges: bytesContent-type: text/htmlLast-modified: Saturday, 28-Dec-96 07:02:48 GMTContent-length: 22275 La Guardia Committee Report -- Marijuana and SchoolChildren Contents | Feedback | Search DRCNet Library | Schaffer Library | Major Studies | LaGuardiaCommittee Report The LaGuardia Committee Report on Marijuana Marihuana and School Children One of the most serious accusations leveled against marihuanaby special feature writers has been that it is widely used by theschool children of this nation. These authors have claimed thatit has so detrimental an effect on development that it is a majorfactor in juvenile delinquency. This phase of the marihuanaproblem was deemed serious enough to merit primary considerationin our study of the marihuana problem in New York City --specifically in the Borough of Manhattan. We decided to attackthis aspect of the problem along the following lines: To observe schools in order to see if pupils bought marihuana cigarettes from any peddlers operating in the neighborhood. To investigate thoroughly complaints made by parents to school and police authorities relative to marihuana and its use by school children. To interview principals, assistant principals, and teachers of many of the schools in New York City with reference to our project. To gather relevant statistics from various city bureaus and private agencies. Unknown to the school authorities, our investigators had undersurveillance many of the schools in the Borough of Manhattan.They would observe a particular school for a number ofconsecutive days, watch loiterers and suspicious characters inthe locality, and, under certain circumstances, follow some ofthe children. This procedure was repeated at varying intervals indifferent localities. From time to time the investigators wouldreturn to some of the schools which they previously had keptunder surveillance. Attention was naturally concentrated uponthose schools from which emanated the most numerous complaintsand which were located in suspected neighborhoods. We must admitthat it would have been possible for such sales to have takenplace during the time that our investigators were not on duty,but we came to the conclusion that there was no organized trafficon the part of peddlers in selling marihuana cigarettes to thechildren of the schools we observed. Certain of the school authorities deserve special commendationfor their alertness in singling out suspicious charactersloitering in the vicinity of their schools. While investigatingone of the suspected schools, our investigators who wereloitering in the neighborhood were suspected and treated as"suspicious characters" by the school authorities. During the period of this survey the Police Department whileengaged in an entirely separate criminal investigation received alead indicating the sale of marihuana to children in a certainhigh school. As a result, one pupil was arrested and convictedfor selling cigarettes to his classmates. In the Harlem district we discovered a few places where schoolchildren gathered during and after school hours for the purposeof indulging in smoking ordinary cigarettes, drinking alcoholicbeverages, and engaging in homosexual and heterosexualactivities. One of our investigators, having gained entrance to such aplace, ostentatiously displayed marihuana cigarettes which he hadwith him. The madam of the place promptly cautioned him againstusing the "weed" and insisted that at no time did shepermit any person to smoke it on her premises. A surprising number of school children smoking ordinarycigarettes were noted. A checkup revealed that these cigaretteswere being illicitly sold by men on the street and in candystores in the "loose" form. It is possible that thistrade in ordinary cigarettes is occasionally misinterpreted astrade in "reefers." Interviews with school authorities were very significant, andit is of value to summarize briefly some of the statementsactually made by them. The locations of the schools and the namesof the persons quoted are in our official files. High School. Predominantly white. The principal stated, "The school has never had any connection with marihuana, not even a rumor." High School. Predominantly white. The principal at first appeared to be evasive and did not readily volunteer information, but after repeatedly being pressed with the question stated that the school "had not had any difficulty with the subject of marihuana." High School. Predominantly white. The principal emphatically stated, "I have had no trouble with marihuana in my school." A vocational school in the Borough of Queens. Mixed. "I have never heard the slightest thing about marihuana in connection with this school." High School. Queens. Mixed. "We never had the slightest connection with marihuana in any way." Junior High School. Harlem. Predominantly Negro and Latin-American. The principal stated that there had been a few marihuana cases among the boys about eighteen months ago. His assistant volunteered the information that there had been some boys in the school who had "reefers" in their possession. On other occasions some of the boys appeared to be intoxicated and when examined confessed to having smoked "reefers." He further stated, "It was difficult to be sure if sleepy, perspiring, pallid-looking boys were feeling the effects of marihuana or were just recovering from too much 'partying' or drinking." He volunteered the opinion that since marihuana was an acute problem among the adult population in that particular district, it could be assumed that marihuana could occasionally become a problem in the school. Junior High School. White and Latin-American. On the fringe of Harlem. Principal and assistant principal stated that they have never had the slightest difficulty arising from marihuana. Junior High School. White and Negro. Bordering on Harlem. The principal, because of his short tenure of office, was unable to express his opinion on the subject. The chief clerk stated that marihuana had never been a problem in the school. She was certain, however, that it was sold in the neighborhood. Junior High School. White, with a high percentage of Negro and Latin-American. The principal stated, "As yet we have had no contact with marihuana although, considering the neighborhood, it would not be unlikely." Junior High School. Latin-American, Negro, and some white. The principal stated, "We have had no trouble with marihuana." He was of the opinion that because of the locality it would be possible for some older boys to smoke it without anybody being cognizant of it. He added that he would let us know if any boys were detected smoking. During the period of the survey no such report was made. Junior High School. Latin-American predominating. The principal stated that she had not had any trouble with marihuana. Junior High School. White predominating. The principal stated, "I have had no contact with it." However, due to the location of the school, which was near Harlem, she stated she would notify the Juvenile Aid Bureau if such a problem arose. During the period of the survey no such report was received. Junior High School. White. The principal stated that no information concerning the use of any narcotics had ever come to his attention and was equally insistent that teachers would have reported any such information to him. Junior High School. White. The principal stated that she had never found anything to indicate the use of any drug in the school. Junior High School. White and mixed. The principal stated that last year he had suspected that a group of chronic truants were using marihuana but he was unable to obtain any direct evidence. Junior High School. White. The principal and his assistant stated that they had no real evidence of any marihuana problem in the school, and they do not believe that the drug is used to any extent. Junior High School. White. The principal stated that although she had no tangible evidence of marihuana smoking among the students, she has problem groups that gather in premises where she is inclined to think that marihuana could be obtained if they wished to get it. She is certain no marihuana is used in the school itself. We investigated thoroughly the suggestions made by the principal as to premises where marihuana might be sold but we were unable to gather any evidence of its sale. Junior High School. White. The acting principal and a teacher in the school who had been there for a number of years stated that there had never been any evidence of the use of marihuana or any other drugs in the school. Junior High School. White. The health director of this school stated that any evidence concerning the use of narcotics by pupils would have been called to his attention, but none had been. Junior High School. White. The authorities stated that there had been no traces of marihuana smoking. Junior High School. White. The authorities stated that there had never been the slightest suggestion of marihuana smoking in the school. Junior High School. White. The assistant principal stated that he knew of no marihuana problem in the school. Junior High School. White. The principal stated that because of the publicity given to marihuana smoking she had been on the alert to discover indications of its use in her school but had found no evidence of marihuana in the school or of anything that would lead her to believe that any one of her students used marihuana outside of the school. Junior High School. White. The principal stated that nothing pertaining to the use of narcotics had been reported to him in all the years he had been there. High School. Predominantly white. Authorities, including the medical department, stated that no student had ever been reported for being under the influence of marihuana. High School. Predominantly white. The principal stated, "There is no indication of a marihuana problem in the school." Grammar School. The principal stated that anonymous letters had been received from time to time from pupils in the school in reference to marihuana. One letter was actually signed by a pupil of the school, who reported the sale of marihuana in a candy store in the vicinity. The principal with held the name of the pupil but requested us to investigate the report. We kept this school, the immediate neighborhood, and all candy stores in the vicinity under strict surveillance, but were unable to gather any evidence which would indicate that the pupils of this school were obtaining marihuana. Junior High School. Negro. Queens. The assistant principal stated that he had never heard anything about marihuana being a problem in his school. We had received a complaint about this school and one of our investigators had an informal chat with one of the teachers of this school who, because of her interest in the school children, appeared to be more conversant than anyone else with general problems at the school. She stated that she was certain marihuana was used by some of the students. She elaborated on the subject and recalled that a few months prior to the interview she had sent home five students (three Negroes and two Italians) whom she had noticed acting "dopey" in the classroom after the noon recess. She was not positive they were under the influence of marihuana but was fairly certain that they were under the influence of some drug. A student had told her that these boys used "reefers" and, noticing their stupor, she had concluded that they were under the influence of marihuana. Superficial examination showed her that their condition was not due to drinking whisky or any alcoholic beverage. In this school it was not necessary to notify the principal if a student was sent home. The teacher did so on her own account, arriving at a diagnosis without informing the principal of the condition. There was no doctor or nurse to examine the students. Grammar School. Negro. The principal and the social worker attached to this school stated that some time prior to the interview they had heard that cigarettes were being sold to children in Harlem. We were told of a certain man who was suspected of selling them to the children. The social worker was certain that a year before the interview marihuana cigarettes were sold on a certain street in Harlem to school children, but she had no knowledge as to whether the condition existed at the time of our investigation. While working on another part of the survey, we interviewed a young Negress, approximately 20 years of age, who was a marihuana smoker. She stated that she and another girl started to smoke marihuana cigarettes while attending this particular school. High School. Mixed, predominantly white. The principal stated that he was positive that there was no marihuana problem in his school. High School. Predominantly white. A student was arrested for selling marihuana cigarettes to other pupils. We kept this school under surveillance after the arrest. Although we heard rumors that the sale of marihuana would start again, we were unable to gather any evidence of this. Our investigators attended the dance of the graduating class of this school at one of the hotels in the city. The dance was well conducted and had a large attendance. There was no evidence of smoking at this affair. The principal was cooperating with the Juvenile Aid Bureau of the Police Department in conducting the investigation of the marihuana problem in his school. High School. White and Negro. Although rumor is widespread that "reefer" smoking is common at this school, thorough investigation did not produce evidence of it at the time of our investigation. We did obtain information, which we consider authoritative, that in 1935 a man was offered the concession to sell marihuana cigarettes to the students of this school. He refused the offer. The principal of this school stated that there had never been any trouble as a result of marihuana smoking and he knew of no actual cases. High School. White, Negro, and Latin-American. The director of health education, who was conversant with the subject, stated that the school had no problem with regard to marihuana smoking on the premises but that a Puerto Rican student who lived in Harlem had informed him that he could obtain marihuana cigarettes in his locality. College. White, some Negroes and Latin-Americans. We did not interview the authorities. Observation of the be havior of and conversation with students did not reveal any marihuana problem. College. White, some Negroes and Latin-Americans. This college is located near one of the famous "tea-pads" of Harlem. Many of the students pass the house regularly. Continued observation did not reveal any student attendance. Junior High School. Negro. Most of the boys of this school were familiar with the subject of marihuana. The pupils of the school are incessant smokers of ordinary cigarettes. We were unable to obtain any information which would indicate that they used "reefers." Some students were observed entering a house in which there was a "tea-pad," but we never found any of the occupants of this "tea-pad" to be pupils of the school. The counselor at the school stated that during the previous term there were suspicions regarding the use of marihuana. Junior High School. Negro. The principal, who is considered qualified to discuss this subject, stated that for the three months prior to the interview there had been no marihuana problem. She ventured the opinion that a few cases do arise in the spring and summer. Observation of this school reveals that practically every day young boys between the ages of 18 and 20 loitered near the gates of the schoolyard at the close of the session. Some of these boys were known to our investigators as "reefer" smokers, and they associated with the girls of the school. Two young girls known by our investigators to be "reefer" smokers stated that they started to smoke marihuana while at that school. High School. White, many Negroes and Latin-Americans. Many students smoked ordinary tobacco cigarettes. Numerous complaints and rumors were associated with this school. The principal stated that in 1934 they had an acute marihuana problem but that at the present time they did not think it existed. They are constantly on guard, especially at the beginning of a term, because they get many new students from the Harlem district. We are of the opinion that there are definite signs indicating that there is some marihuana smoking in the school. High School. Negro and white. The principal of this school stated that they did not have a marihuana problem. We are certain, however, that this school does to some extent present an acute problem for we have observed a few students smoking "reefers" away from the school. We have reason to believe that some of them smoke it while at school. The girls attending this high school have a very low moral standard. On the basis of the above statements and findings, we feeljustified in concluding that although marihuana smoking may beindulged in by small numbers of students in certain schools ofNew York City, it is apparently not a widespread or largescalepractice. In the belief that actual facts concerning the roleplayed by marihuana in the production of juvenile delinquencycould best be revealed in the records of the Children's Court ofNew York City, we interviewed the proper authorities on thissubject. On the basis of the Children's Court records for 1939,marihuana is not an important factor in the development ofdelinquency. Contents | Feedback | Search DRCNet Library | Schaffer Library | Major Studies | LaGuardiaCommittee ReportWT01-B31-21IA031-000652-B041-154http://206.61.184.43:80/schaffer/library/studies/lag/conc1.htm 206.61.184.43 19970122130639 text/html 3760HTTP/1.0 200 OKDate: Wednesday, 22-Jan-97 13:06:30 GMTServer: WebSitePro/1.1f (S/N wpo-0deb)Allow-ranges: bytesContent-type: text/htmlLast-modified: Saturday, 28-Dec-96 07:02:35 GMTContent-length: 3543 LaGuardia Committee Report Sociological Study --Conclusions Contents | Feedback | Search DRCNet Library | Schaffer Library | Major Studies | LaGuardiaCommittee Report The LaGuardia Report - Sociological Study Conclusions From the foregoing study the following conclusions are drawn: Marihuana is used extensively in the Borough of Manhattan but the problem is not as acute as it is reported to be in other sections of the United States. The introduction of marihuana into this area is recent as compared to other localities. The cost of marihuana is low and therefore within the purchasing power of most persons. The distribution and use of marihuana is centered in Harlem. The majority of marihuana smokers are Negroes and Latin-Americans. The consensus among marihuana smokers is that the use of the drug creates a definite feeling of adequacy. The practice of smoking marihuana does not lead to addiction in the medical sense of the word. The sale and distribution of marihuana is not under the control of any single organized group. The use of marihuana does not lead to morphine or heroin or cocaine addiction and no effort is made to create a market for these narcotics by stimulating the practice of marihuana smoking. Marihuana is not the determining factor in the commission of major crimes. Marihuana smoking is not widespread among school children. Juvenile delinquency is not associated with the practice of smoking marihuana. The publicity concerning the catastrophic effects of marihuana smoking in New York City is unfounded. Contents | Feedback | Search DRCNet Library | Schaffer Library | Major Studies | LaGuardiaCommittee ReportWT01-B31-22IA031-000652-B041-173http://206.61.184.43:80/schaffer/library/studies/lag/clinic1.htm 206.61.184.43 19970122130648 text/html 12011HTTP/1.0 200 OKDate: Wednesday, 22-Jan-97 13:06:38 GMTServer: WebSitePro/1.1f (S/N wpo-0deb)Allow-ranges: bytesContent-type: text/htmlLast-modified: Saturday, 28-Dec-96 07:03:16 GMTContent-length: 11793 LaGuardia Committee Report -- Clinical Study Contents | Feedback | Search DRCNet Library | Schaffer Library | Major Studies | LaGuardiaCommittee Report The LaGuardia Report THE CLINICAL STUDY PLAN AND SCOPE Interest in the effects of marihuana on the human subjectfollows two main lines: first, concerning what may be calledpleasurable effects which account for its widespread use- andsecond, regarding undesirable effects, including those leading tocriminal and other antisocial acts. In his monograph on marihuana, Walton has reviewed at lengththe literature on hashish experience. He has grouped thesedescriptions as retrospective accounts by professional writersand physicians who have taken the drug through curiosity orscientific interest, reports by physicians concerning patientswho have taken excessive doses, and observations by psychiatristson subjects under marihuana influence. In all of these instancesa dose toxic to the individual had been taken and the effectsdescribed correspond to psychotic episodes of greater or lessdegree. In the literature there are commonly described two basic typesof effect, one of excitation, psychic exaltation, and innerjoyousness, with divorcement from the external world; the other astate of anxiety with fear of consequences, such as death orinsanity. Either one of these types of reaction may beexperienced alone, but usually both are present during theintoxication. They occur in no regular sequence but replace eachother in rapid succession. The euphoric and anxiety states aregenerally accompanied by mental confusion, a rapid flow ofdissociated ideas, and a feeling of prolongation of time andspatial distortion. Sexual desires or phantasies may also occur. The detailed descriptions of the experience vary. Those givenby trained writers, such as Ludlow and Bayard Taylor, are vividand dramatic, embodying sensual, visual, and auditoryillusions-phantasies of overpowering splendor and beauty, on theone hand, and intense suffering and horror on the other. Theauthors, familiar with stories of hashish effects and gifted withstrong imaginative powers, undoubtedly were expectant of muchthat happened. The account given by the eminent Philadelphiaphysician, H. C. Wood, while following the same general pattern,has much less embellishment. He describes a feeling of well-beingand inner joyousness and buoyancy and the performance of anticswhich he knew to be foolish but was unable to control. He wasable to recall no illusions or hallucinations. Later a state ofanxiety came on, developing into an overpowering fear of death. A number of studies by psychiatrists on selected subjects havebeen reported. An excellent example is that of Kant and Krapf.Each acted as subject for the other and the effects of marihuanaare described and analyzed at length. In general, the objectivein such studies is the interpretation of the reactions in termsof disturbances in psychological processes and functionings. Thedescriptions referred to have been given by persons of a highersocial class, well educated and accustomed by training to act inconformity with conventional social behavior. Although a state ofirritability may occur and threats of suicide be made byindividuals of this type under toxic doses of marihuana, it isnoteworthy that in none of the descriptions is there found anexpression of antagonism or antisocial behavior which led to actsof violence or what would be called criminal conduct. Of more direct interest are the publications of WalterBromberg, psychiatrist, Bellevue Hospital,Psychiatrist-in-Charge, Psychiatric Clinic, Court of GeneralSessions of New York County. Marihuana users who are broughtbefore the court or admitted to the hospital come under hisobservation and he has reported at length on the psychiatricobservations of 29 of these who showed psychotic reactions. Hedescribes two types of reactions, one an acute marihuanaintoxication with a psychotic syndrome, the other a toxicpsychosis. Acute intoxication occurs in any individual if themarihuana is taken in sufficiently large doses. It comes onpromptly and passes off some hours later. In marihuana psychosis,the symptoms are much more severe and of longer duration. Hedescribes a number of cases in which the psychotic statecontinued for a number of days and required hospitalization. The toxic psychosis seen in marihuana users occurs at any timeand is of indefinite duration. Bromberg states that therelationship between cannabis and the onset of a functionalpsychotic state is not always clear. The personality factor is ofundoubted importance and other toxic agents, such as alcohol andother drugs, as well as endogenous elements, may be involved. Thesymptoms, except for the longer duration, resemble those observedin persons under marihuana intoxication, but often take on thecharacteristics seen in schizophrenic or manic- depressivepsychosis. A description of 11 cases admitted to Bellevue Hospital isgiven for illustration. The marihuana was taken in the form ofcigarettes. In this group were 5 Negroes, 2 of whom were women, 1Puerto Rican, and 5 whites, one of whom was a Mexican and anothera boy of 16. Except for one of the whites, a homosexual, theywere all of a low intellectual and social order. One of theNegroes was arrested for following women in Central Park. Theothers were admitted at their own request, or were sent in by thepolice or family. Three of the group had definite sexualstimulation but in none was there an outburst in the form of anattack on women. The Puerto Rican became confused and excited andbegan chasing people with an ice pick. Shortly after hisdischarge he was readmitted to the hospital, was diagnosed asdefinitely psychotic, and was transferred to a state hospital asa schizophrenic. The majority of the group, 8 in fact, hadpsychopathic personalities and 3 of these were transferred tostate institutions for further care. The group as a whole isrepresentative of those who come into the hands of the policebecause of abnormal conduct and who are the source of thesensational newspaper and magazine stories. Bromberg's findings concerning the lack of a positiverelationship between marihuana and crime are described in thesociological section of this study. In marihuana literature, the action of the drug is usuallydescribed from retrospective observation of the effects on asingle individual. Relationship to varying dosage, to thesubject's personality and background, to environmental conditionswhen the drug was taken, is given little if any attention. It isthe lack of information concerning these and other factorsinvolved in marihuana reaction which has given rise to thepresent confusion regarding its effects. The clinical study here described was designed to affordinformation not found in marihuana literature but necessary forany comprehensive view of marihuana action. For obtaining thisinformation there were these requisites: an adequate number ofsubjects for the study, a clear understanding of the mental andphysical make-up of each subject, a uniformity of environmentalfactors, accurately graded dosage of marihuana, and standardizedmethods of obtaining and recording marihuana effects. In additionto defining the usual and unusual effects of marihuana, as shownby subjective and objective symptoms and alterations in behaviorand in physical reaction, the study was expected to answerquestions which must arise in consideration of the problem as awhole. Of special importance are these: Do marihuana users showfundamental traits differentiating them from non-users? Do userspresent evidence of psychological or physical damage directlyattributable to the drug? What are the pleasurable effects whichaccount for the widespread usage of marihuana? To what extentdoes it lead to antisocial or dangerous behavior? The sections covering the clinical study are under thefollowing headings: A. Medical Aspects 1. Symptoms and Behavior 2. Organic and Systemic Functions B. Psychological Aspects 1. Psychophysical and Other Functions 2. Intellectual Functioning 3. Emotional Reactions and General Personality Structure 4. Family and Community Ideologies C. Comparison Between Users and Non-Users from theStandpoint of Mental and Physical Deterioration D. Addiction and Tolerance E. Possible Therapeutic Applications Organization for the Study The clinical studies were carried out at the Welfare Hospital(1) a New York City hospital for chronic diseases on WelfareIsland. The quarters assigned to the study consisted of a ward ofeight beds for the group to be studied at any one period, anadjoining ward of two beds for the study of individuals of thegroup, three additional rooms with equipment for specialexaminations, and a diet kitchen for the preparation of thesubjects' meals. Four female nurses were employed and the subjects in thelarger ward were under constant supervision. In addition toroutine records, each nurse reported the behavior of the subjectswhile she was on duty. Guards were assigned from the Departmentof Correction and the New York City Police Force for the subjectsdrawn from the Riker's and Hart Island penitentiaries and theHouse of Detention for Women. The facilities of the Third Medical Division laboratory wereused for general clinical laboratory examinations and for moredetailed study of organ functioning. For measurement ofpsychological reactions, special apparatus was provided. Adescription of equipment used for each division of the study isgiven under its proper section. Contents | Feedback | Search DRCNet Library | Schaffer Library | Major Studies | LaGuardiaCommittee ReportWT01-B31-23IA031-000652-B041-195http://206.61.184.43:80/schaffer/library/studies/lag/subjects.htm 206.61.184.43 19970122130655 text/html 12296HTTP/1.0 200 OKDate: Wednesday, 22-Jan-97 13:06:47 GMTServer: WebSitePro/1.1f (S/N wpo-0deb)Allow-ranges: bytesContent-type: text/htmlLast-modified: Saturday, 28-Dec-96 07:01:52 GMTContent-length: 12078 LaGuardia Committee Report - Subjects Selected for theStudy Contents | Feedback | Search DRCNet Library | Schaffer Library | Major Studies | LaGuardiaCommittee Report Subjects Selected for the Study For the purpose of establishing a uniform plan of procedure tobe followed throughout the study, a test group of 5 individualswho had had no previous experience with marihuana was selected.These were volunteers who were paid for their services. They wereof a low socio-economic level, but classified as of better thanaverage intelligence. Only one of the group came within the rangeof what is considered normal personality. They represented thetype of person who would readily take to marihuana were theopportunity offered. The main group, 72 subjects, was drawn from the inmates of thepenitentiaries at Riker's and Hart Islands and the House ofDetention for Women, all of which are under the supervision ofthe Department of Correction of New York City. There were twoadvantages in selecting subjects from this particular group;first, they could be kept under continuous observation throughoutthe period desired, and second, they constituted an excellentsample of the class in New York City from which the marihuanauser comes. The subjects all volunteered for the study afterhaving its purpose and the part they were to take in it fullyexplained to them. Race, Sex and Age. Of the group, 65 were males and 7 were females; 35 were white,26 were Negroes, and 11 were Puerto Ricans. The ages ranged from21 to 37 years except for one who was 45 and another who was 43.Of the women, 6 had been opium addicts for a number of years. Previous Experience with Marihuana. Forty-eight of the group, including 6 of the women, gave ahistory of marihuana smoking. The extent of the usage wasvariable- for some it was occasional, while others had indulgedin the habit fairly steadily over a period of years. Of the 48users, those who were sellers of marihuana were probably the mostconsistent smokers, as in carrying on the traffic they wouldendeavor to keep a stock on hand. But in any instance, the numberof cigarettes smoked during any stated period would varyaccording to circumstance. Thus one user stated that he smokedfrom 2 to 6 marihuana cigarettes a day, another from 10 to 15 aday, another 3 or 4 a week, and another 5 or 6 a month. Those whosmoked daily are here classified as steady users, those whosmoked when opportunity was offered but not daily, as occasionalusers. (TABLE 1) The users had all been deprived of marihuana from the time oftheir arrest, the shortest period being two weeks, the longest,one year and ten months. They all stated that the habit had oftenbeen interrupted voluntarily and the enforced discontinuation ofit had caused no discomfort. Health Record. The subjects were individually selected by Dr. Allentuck assuitable for the study. A physical and neurological examinationat the hospital showed no evidence of disease. However, theWassermann and Kline tests gave positive results for 6 subjectsand the Kline test alone was positive for 2 and doubtful for 2.These figures are consistent with those of the population fromwhich the group was selected. Of the 12,000 inmates of theRiker's Island Penitentiary in 1940 and the 8,000 in 1941, 10 percent reacted positively to serological tests. Intelligence Record. Sixty subjects (40 users and 20 nonusers ) to whom theBellevue Adult Intelligence Test was given had an average I.Q. of99.3, range 70 to 124. The average I.Q. of the user group was96.7, range 70 to 124, while that for the non-user group was104.5, range 93 to 114. When analyzed according to racial distribution, the two groupswere even better equated intellectually than the total resultsindicate. Of the 28 white subjects examined, the average I.Q. ofthe 13 users was 106.1, range 77 to 124, and that of the 15non-users was 106.3, range 96 to 114. The 19 Negro users had anaverage I.Q. of 92.6, range 70 to 112, and the 5 Negro non-usersaveraged 98.8, range 93 to 101. Although in the colored group thenon-users averaged 6.2 points higher than the users, it must betaken into account that the number of Negro non-users tested wassmall. The average I.Q. of the 8 Puerto Rican users was 91.0,range 72 to 100; that is, they were very similar in mentalability to the Negro users. From the results obtained from theBellevue Adult Intelligence Test, one may conclude that neitherthe users nor the nonusers were inferior in intelligence to thegeneral population. Marihuana Used The marihuana that was used for oral administration wassupplied by Dr. H. J. Wollner, Consulting Chemist of the UnitedStates Treasury Department. It was in the form of an alcoholfluid concentrate, the alcohol content ranging from 55 to 67.3per cent and the content of solids from 22.9 to 33.6 Sm. per 100cc. According to the bio-assay made by Dr. S. Loewe of theDepartment of Pharmacology of the Cornell University MedicalSchool, the strength of the fluid concentrate was found to befrom 71 to 90 per cent of that of the U.S.P. fluid extract forcannabis marketed by Parke, Davis and Company. The fluid extractwas not miscible with water and had a characteristic,disagreeable taste which made it easily recognized. For thesereasons the concentrate was evaporated to a viscid consistencyand made into pill form, with glycyrrhiza as the excipient. Eachpill was equivalent to 1 cc. of the concentrate. For controls, glycyrrhiza pills without marihuana were used.Several products prepared by Dr. Roger Adams in his investigationof the chemistry of marihuana were used. A comparison of theiraction with that of the concentrate will be found below. Inaddition to the concentrate, marihuana cigarettes were used.These were obtained from supplies confiscated by the New YorkCity Police. Each contained approximately from .4 to .8 gm. ofmarihuana. As the quality of the marihuana varied and the amountof active principles taken in with the smoke was unknown, therewas no exactness in dosage. In general, however, it appeared thatsmoking 2 cigarettes was equivalent to taking 1 pill. The minimal dose of the concentrate which produced clearcuteffects was 2 cc. During the repeated observations on each memberof the group larger doses were given, commonly up to around 8 cc.and in one instance up to 22 cc. For smoking, from one to as manyas eleven cigarettes were used. The Active Principles. Determination of relative potencies of drugs having similaraction can be made on human beings to a limited extent only. Thecomparison is based on easily measurable effects on some organ orsystem on which the drug has a highly selective action, but theexisting state of the system influences greatly the ensuingresult. Marihuana effects come mainly from action on the centralnervous system. The type and degree of response of this system tostimuli of various origins vary in different individuals and inthe same individual at different times. When marihuana is giventhe pre-existing state cannot be classified but it has influencein determining the response, and the same dose of marihuana doesnot produce identical effects in different subjects or in onesubject at different times. In general, however, when the dosegiven is definitely effective the responses are of a fairlyuniform character. For this reason the relative potency of the active principlessupplied by Dr. Roger Adams could be determined onlyapproximately. The principles used were the naturaltetrahydrocannabinol, the synthetic isomer, and the synthetichexylhydrocannabinol. These all brought on effects similar tothose of the marihuana concentrate. The estimate of theirrelative potency is as follows: 1 cc. of the concentrate,representing the extraction from 1 Gm, of marihuana, had as itsequivalent 15 mg. of the natural tetrahydrocannabinol, 60 mg. ofthe synthetic hexylhydrocannabinol, and 120 mg. of the synthetictetra compound. In explaining the differences in the estimatedpotencies, the rates of absorption must be taken into accountsince the action of marihuana depends on the amount of activeprinciple absorbed and its concentration in the brain at acertain time. The main conclusion is that the action of the marihuanaconcentrate is dependent on its tetrahydrocannabinol content andthat the synthetic compounds retain the action of the naturalprinciple. Procedure The procedure for examining the main group of subjects wasadopted in the light of the experience gained from thepreliminary study. The subjects were brought to the hospital in groups of fromsix to ten, and they stayed there from four to six weeks. Eachsubject had his history taken and was given a physicalneurological, and psychiatric examination on the day ofadmission. Since it has been shown that pulse variation is the mostconstant index of marihuana action, the pulse rate was recordedevery half hour during the day with the subjects at rest for fiveminutes before each reading. During the following days, through careful observation by theDirector, the general make-up of the subject, his personality,the character of his responsiveness, and his behavior in newsurroundings were determined both before and while he was underthe influence of marihuana. Additional information came throughthe nurses' reports. In addition, each subject was given a series of tests beforeand after the administration of marihuana in order that thechanges brought about by the drug might be measured. Includedamong these tests were psychological tests for mental functioningand emotional reactions, psychomotor tests for both simple andcomplex psychophysical functions, tests to determine suchabilities as musical aptitude and the perception of time andspace, and laboratory examinations to test the functioning of thevarious organs and systems of the body. Contents | Feedback | Search DRCNet Library | Schaffer Library | Major Studies | LaGuardiaCommittee Report WT01-B31-24IA031-000652-B041-220http://206.61.184.43:80/schaffer/library/studies/lag/symp.htm 206.61.184.43 19970122130723 text/html 13070HTTP/1.0 200 OKDate: Wednesday, 22-Jan-97 13:07:02 GMTServer: WebSitePro/1.1f (S/N wpo-0deb)Allow-ranges: bytesContent-type: text/htmlLast-modified: Saturday, 28-Dec-96 07:01:41 GMTContent-length: 12852 LaGuardia Committee Report on Marijuana -- Symptoms andBehavior Contents | Feedback | Search DRCNet Library | Schaffer Library | Major Studies | LaGuardiaCommittee Report LaGuardia Committee Report on Marihuana Medical Aspects SYMPTOMS AND BEHAVIOR Samuel Allentuck, MD IN PRELIMINARY GROUP The preliminary study of the 5 volunteer subjects had for itspurpose the establishment of methods of procedures to be followedfor the main group, and the obtaining of a general picture of thephysical and mental effects induced by the drug. Having noknowledge of the safe limits of marihuana dosage, the dosagegiven to this group was restricted to from 1 to 4 cc. of theconcentrate, and for smoking from 1 to 3 cigarettes. When ingested, 1 cc. of marihuana was slightly effective, themultiples of this more so. There was noted in all subjects someincrease in pulse rate and in blood pressure, dilated andsluggish pupils, dryness of the mouth and throat, ataxia, andsome clumsiness and incoordination of movement. Symptomsdistinctly disagreeable were dizziness in 3 subjects, a sense ofheaviness of the extremities in 2, nausea in 2 and faintness in2. Three showed motor restlessness. A state classed as euphoria,characterized by laughter, witticisms, loquaciousness, andlowering of inhibitions occurred in 3 subjects. This was notsustained but alternated with periods during which disagreeablesymptoms were dominant. In one of the subjects (V.C.) there wasno euphoric state, but a feeling of discomfort and depressionthroughout. Finally in one of the 5 (A.V.) with 2 cc. There was astate of depression with anxiety and with 4 cc. a psychoticepisode with fear of death. With the exception of the one individual during his psychoticepisode, the subjects gave no evidence of abnormal mental contentat any stage of the drug action, the only change noted being adelay in focusing attention on questions asked and difficulty insustaining mental concentration. While there was objection attimes to carrying out repetitious tests, there was no definiterefusal. There was no sexual stimulation giving rise to overtexpression. With the cigarette smoking, ataxia and charges in the pulserate, blood pressure, and pupils corresponded to those followingoral administration. In only one of the subjects, however, wasthere definite euphoria. The common symptoms were dizziness anddrowsiness. Two of the subjects found it difficult toconcentrate. The duration of the effects of marihuana was variable. When itwas ingested, the effects usually passed off in from two to fourhours, but in one instance persisted for seven hours and inanother for fourteen hours. After smoking, the duration ofeffects was from one to three hours. IN MAIN GROUP The evidence of the effects of marihuana was obtained by thesubject's statement of symptoms and sensations, by the nurses'reports and by the examiner's observations and interpretation ofchanges in the subject's mental state and behavior. The dosage of the marihuana concentrate ranged from 2 to 22cc. and in each subject the effects of more than one dose werestudied. Dosage ranging from 2 to 5 cc. was used for the largestnumber of subjects, and that from 14 to 21 cc. on only sevenoccasions. It is known that marihuana intoxication may bringabout a comatose state, but no attempt was made to determine thedosage required for this. The number receiving each of theselected doses is shown in Table 2. (TABLE 2) While the duration of action and its intensity tended toincrease with dosage, this was not always the case and equaldoses did not bring about uniform effects in all those receivingthem. Thus, 3 cc. produced a striking effect in one individual,much less in another in still another, 10 cc. produced lesseffect than S cc. Such variations are to be explained bydifferences in the mental make-up of the subject, and theparticular state of his responsiveness at the time when marihuanais taken. The number of cigarettes smoked ranged from one to eleven. Thesmoking of a single cigarette took about ten minutes and up toeight could be smoked in an hour. In smoking, increasing thenumber of cigarettes usually increased the sensation described as"high," but here also there was no uniformity inindividuals or groups. When marihuana was ingested, in dosages from 2 cc. up, itsactions became evident in from one half to one hour. The maximumeffects were seen in from two to three hours. These subsidedgradually, but the time of disappearance was variable, usuallythree to five hours, in some instances twelve hours or more. When marihuana cigarettes were used the effects appearedalmost immediately. After one cigarette, these had usuallydisappeared in an hour. After several cigarettes had been smokedthe effects increased progressively in intensity and reached amaximum in about an hour. In most instances they disappeared infrom three or four hours. The Concentrate Behavior Symptoms. The effects on the general behavior of the subjects taking theconcentrate were variable. If left undisturbed some remainedquietly sitting or lying, showing little interest in theirsurroundings. Others were restless and talkative. Under theheading "Euphoria" there are listed those marihuanaeffects which give rise to pleasurable sensations or experiences.These are a sense of well-being and contentment cheerfulness andgaiety, talkativeness, bursts of singing and dancing,daydreaming, a pleasant drowsiness, joking, and performingamusing antics. The drowsiness, daydreaming and unawareness ofsurroundings were present when the subject was left alone. Othereuphoric expressions required an audience and there was muchcontagiousness of laughing and joking where several of thesubjects under marihuana were congregated. The occurrence of aeuphoric state, in one or another form, was noted in most of thesubjects. But except for those who were allowed to pass the timeundisturbed, the pleasurable effects were interrupted from timeto time by disagreeable sensations. Quite commonly seen, as with the preliminary group, was adifficulty in focusing and sustaining mental concentration. Thus,there would occur a delay in the subject's answers to questionsand at times some confusion as to their meaning. There was,however, except in a few isolated instances, no abnormal mentalcontent evident and the responses brought out by the examinerwere not different from those in the pre-marihuana state. Altered mental behavior which would give rise to more concernwas seen in a relatively small number of subjects. In some thistook the form of irritation at questioning, refusal to complywith simple requests and antagonism to certain of the examiners.There was, however, only verbal and no active opposition in anyof these behaviors, caused by the subject's desire to be leftundisturbed and his disinclination to carry out certain testswhich in his pre-marihuana period he had considered tiresome andmeaningless. With this came antipathy to those conducting thetests. The occurrence of the disagreeable physical symptomsaccompanying marihuana action would naturally lead to a feelingof disquietude and some alarm as to significance andconsequences. This, however, was a prominent feature in relatively fewinstances. A pronounced state of anxiety reaching a panic stage,associated usually with fear of death or of insanity, wasobserved only in those subjects experiencing psychotic episodesand here the anxiety state led to pleas for escape and not toacts of aggression. Even in the psychotic states there were nouncontrollable outbursts of rage or acts of violence. Some evidence of eroticism was reported in about 10 per centof the 150 instances in which marihuana was administered to thegroup. The presence of nurses, attendants and other womenassociated with the study gave opportunity for frank expressionof sexual stimulation, had this been marked. There was no suchexpression even during the psychotic episodes. In some isolated instances there was evidence of markedlowering of inhibitions such as loud discharge of flatus,urinating on the floor instead of in the vessels supplied, and inone instance frank exhibitionism. In the last instance thesubject, who was not a regular marihuana user, had been arrestedon three occasions for indecent exposure. The frequency with which significant changes in behavioroccurred is indicated in Table 3 (TABLE. 3) As used in Table 3, anxiety means the subject's expressedworry concerning what might happen to him. Excitement, shown byphysical restlessness, muscular twitchings and jerky movements,and loud talking, and some degree of antagonism are known to beexpressions of an "alarm" or "fear" state. It is seen from this table that, except for euphoria, theeffect of marihuana was definitely more pronounced on thenonusers. This might be taken as evidence of a persistingtolerance to the drug in the user group, but, on the other hand,it may have as its basis a feeling of greater apprehension in thenonusers. Such a feeling would undoubtedly arise among those whohave had no previous experience with marihuana and are in a stateof uncertainty as to its possible harmful effects. Physical Symptoms. Of the subjective symptoms, a feeling described as lightness,heaviness, or pressure in the head, often with dizziness, was oneof the earliest and occurred in practically all subjects,irrespective of dose. Dryness of the mouth and throat werereported by over half of the subjects as was also a floatingsensation. Unsteadiness in movement and a feeling of heaviness inthe extremities were commonly experienced as was a feeling ofhunger and a desire for sweets especially. Less commonly notedwere nausea, vomiting, sensations of warmth of the head or body,burning of the eyes and blurring of vision, tightness of thechest, cardiac palpitation, ringing or pressure in the ears, andan urge to urinate or defecate. From observation by the examiner, tremor and ataxia werepresent in varying degrees in practically all instances and inall dosages used, as were also dilatation of the pupils andsluggish response to light. These effects were often present on the day followingmarihuana administration. The frequency of the more common subjective symptoms and theirrelation to dosage is shown in Table 4. The figures are takenfrom the subject's reports. There is a tendency for the symptoms to be more frequent inthe non-users than in the users but the differences are variableand in general not striking. Contents | Feedback | Search DRCNet Library | Schaffer Library | Major Studies | LaGuardiaCommittee ReportWT01-B31-25IA031-000652-B041-247http://206.61.184.43:80/schaffer/library/studies/lag/jackb.htm 206.61.184.43 19970122130738 text/html 14017HTTP/1.0 200 OKDate: Wednesday, 22-Jan-97 13:07:27 GMTServer: WebSitePro/1.1f (S/N wpo-0deb)Allow-ranges: bytesContent-type: text/htmlLast-modified: Saturday, 28-Dec-96 07:02:10 GMTContent-length: 13799 La Guardia Committee Report - The Marijuana Cigarette Contents | Feedback | Search DRCNet Library | Schaffer Library | Major Studies | LaGuardiaCommittee Report The LaGuardia Committee Report on Marihuana The Marihuana Cigarette (Look for the Jack Benny Jello Hour) The Cigarette Smoking. When marihuana is smoked, there is, as has beenstated, no such accuracy in dosage as is the case when it isingested. The marihuana user acquires a technique or art insmoking "reefers." This involves special preparation ofthe cigarette and regulation of the frequency and depth ofinhalations. In a group of smokers, a cigarette circulates fromone to another, each in turn taking one or more puffs. Theperformance is a slow and deliberate one and the cigarette, heldin a forked match stick, is smoked to its end. When the smoke comes in contact with the respiratory mucousmembrane, the absorption of the active principle is rapid and theeffects are recognized promptly by the subject. He soon learns todistinguish the amount of smoking which will give pleasanteffects from the amount which will give unpleasant ones and soregulates his dosages. Providing there are no disturbing factors,as is the case in gatherings of small friendly groups or partiesin "tea-pads," the regulated smoking produces aeuphoric state, which accounts for continued indulgence. (TABLE 4) The effect from smoking marihuana cigarettes was studied in 32subjects. Of these, 20 were classed as users, that is, prior totheir arrest they had had more or less extensive experience insmoking. In the study the smoking was repeated by each subjectseveral times, the number of cigarettes smoked within an hourranging from one to eight. In all of the user group the smoking produced a euphoric statewith its feeling of well- being, contentment, sociability, mentaland physical relaxation, which usually ended in a feeling ofdrowsiness. Talkativeness and laughing and the sensation offloating in the air were common occurrences. These effects wereof short duration, from one to three or four hours after thesmoking was concluded. In none of these subjects was there anexpression of antagonism or antisocial behavior. In the non-user group the effects were similar except that inone subject a state of mental confusion occurred and in anotherthe main effect was a feeling of dizziness, unsteadiness, andmuscular weakness. Finally one subject showed effects entirelydifferent from the others. He smoked one cigarette and becamerestless, agitated, dizzy, fearful of his surroundings, afraid ofdeath. He had three short attacks of unconsciousness. At oneperiod he had visions of angels, and for a few minutes a euphoricstate. The entire episode lasted a little over an hour, afterwhich he went to sleep. This subject had a similar psychoticepisode after taking 120 mg. of tetrahydrocannabinol. On sevenother occasions he had been given the marihuana concentrate ortetrahydrocannabinol with no unusual effects. Of the physical symptoms occurring with smoking, dryness ofthe mouth and throat, dizziness, and a sensation of hunger werethe most common. None of these or other symptoms seemed to lessenmaterially the pleasurable effects. The effect of smoking on the 7 females, 6 of whom were classedas users, corresponded to that on the male group. All showedeuphoric effects. One of the subjects was nauseated and anotherwas restless, irritable, and contrary. These effects wereobserved in both of the subjects when marihuana was taken bystomach. One of the users, euphoric after smoking 6 and 10cigarettes, had a psychotic episode after 8 cc. of marihuanaconcentrate. Tea-Pad Parties. (This section on "Tea-Pad Parties"was prepared by Mrs. Halpern.) In addition to the quantitativedata regularly obtained from the subject during the course of thetesting program, the examiner had opportunity to make diverseobservations of the subject's global reactions, which threwinteresting light on the general effect of the drug on theindividual personality. When the subject became "high," his inclination wasto laugh, talk, sing, listen to music, or sleep, but therequirement that he solve problems, answer questions, or rememberdrawings created an artificial situation, tending to bring him"down" and spoil his pleasure. In order, therefore,that the influence of the drug might be observed in less formalcircumstances and in a set-up more nearly like the customary"tea-pad," two groups of men were given"parties" on the last night of their hospital sojourn.The men were consulted beforehand, and the stage was setaccording to their desires. They requested that nothing be doneuntil it was really dark outside. They brought the radio into theroom where the smoking took place and turned it to soft dancemusic. Only one shaded light burned, leaving the greater part ofthe room shadowy. The suggestion was made that easy chairs orfloor cushions be procured but the party progressed withoutthese. The men were allowed as many cigarettes as they wanted. Whenthe "reefers" were passed out they crowded around withtheir hands outstretched like little children begging for candy.The number of cigarettes the men smoked varied, the range beingfrom two to twelve or thirteen. There were both users andnon-users in these two groups. The users of course were highlyelated at the prospect of getting much free "tea," andsome of the non-users also smoked with genuine enjoyment. In the beginning the men broke up into little groups of twosand threes to do their smoking, or in some instances went off bythemselves. Smoke soon filled the atmosphere and added to thegeneral shadowy effect. After the initial smoking there was somemoving about- some men laughed and joked, some becameargumentative, while some just stared out of the window. Thearguments never seemed to get anywhere, although they often dealtwith important problems, and the illogical reasoning used wasnever recognized or refuted by the person to whom it wasaddressed. Gradually, as though attracted by some force, allrestlessness and activity ceased, and the men sat in a circleabout the radio. Occasionally they whispered to one another, laughed a little,or swayed to the music, but in general they relaxed quietly intheir chairs. A feeling of contentment seemed to pervade, andwhen one man suddenly got a "laughing jag" they wereannoyed at the interruption. In general, they gave the impression of adolescent boys doingsomething which was forbidden and thereby adding spice to theindulgence. Many of the adolescent personality patterns as theyappear in group activities were clearly observable here. Therewas the eternal "wisecracker," the domineering"important" individual who tried to tell everyone whatto do, the silly, giggling adolescent and the shy, withdrawnintrovert. One forgot that these were actually adults with allthe usual adult responsibilities. One could not help drawing theconclusion that they too had forgotten this for the time being. Although urged to smoke more, no subject could be persuaded totake more than he knew or felt he could handle. After about anhour and half of smoking, the men were given coffee and bread andjam and the party broke up. They all went to bed and reported thenext day that they had slept very well. Another attempt at evaluating the effect of marihuana in lessformal situations was made in the following manner. The examiner,one of the police officers and the subjects listened to JackBenny on the Jello Program at 7 o'clock Sunday evening. Thepolice officer noted the number of times the audience laughed,and the length of time the laughter lasted. The examiner checkedthese items for the subjects. The first time this was donewithout marihuana; the following week the subjects were givenseveral "reefers" about fifteen minutes before theradio program started. The results were as follows: Without drug, the subjects laughed 42 times as against 72laughs in the radio audience. The total time for all laughs was63 seconds as compared with 139 seconds for the radio audience.With cigarettes the subjects laughed 43 times as compared with 47laughs in the audience, the total laugh time being 129 seconds ascompared with 173 seconds of laughter in the audience. Withoutdrug, the subjects laughed, roughly speaking, only half as oftenand as long as the audience- while under the drug they laughedalmost as often and the laugh time was about 75 per cent that ofthe audience. It is obvious that under marihuana the subject laughs morereadily and for longer time intervals. This is probably due bothto the fact that things seem funnier to him and because whenunder the influence of the drug he is less inhibited. Differences Between Concentrate and Cigarette When marihuana was ingested, it was in the form of theconcentrate, containing all the active principles which aresoluble in the medium used. The relative proportions of theprinciples present are unknown, and the effects can be assumed togive a composite picture of different actions, the dominating onebeing that of tetrahydrocannabinol. There is no informationavailable concerning the principles present in marihuana smoke,and it is possible that some of those found in the concentratehave been destroyed by the heat of combustion. The effects fromsmoking correspond to those induced by tetrahydrocannabinol takenby stomach, so it may be assumed that this principle is presentin the smoke. The rapidity with which effects occur after smokingdemonstrates the quick absorption of the cannabinol from therespiratory tract and the short duration of these effectsindicates its prompt excretion or detoxification. When theconcentrate is taken, the absorption from the intestinal tract isslower and more prolonged. For these reasons it is not possibleto make a precise comparison between the effects of the two formsof administration. In general the subject's consciousness of unpleasant symptomsis more marked when the concentrate is taken and this mayinterrupt or obscure the pleasant effects. The long duration ofaction and the inability of the subject to stop it serve toaccentuate the physical symptoms and to cause apprehensionconcerning what may happen. The result of all this readily accounts for the irritability,negativism and antagonism occurring. The lessening of inhibitionsis not peculiar to marihuana, for in a few subjects who weregiven alcohol in intoxicating doses the behavior corresponded tothat induced by marihuana. After smoking the main effect was of a euphoric type. Somedizziness and dryness of the mouth were generally present butwere not pronounced enough to distract from the pleasantsensations. The condition described as "high" came onpromptly and increased with the number of cigarettes smoked, butit was not alarming or definitely disagreeable, and did not giverise to antisocial behavior. On the contrary it prompted sociability. The marihuana wasunder the subject's control, and once the euphoric state waspresent, which might come from only one cigarette, he had noinclination to increase it by more smoking. When a considerablenumber of cigarettes were smoked, the effect was usually one ofdrowsiness and fatigue. The description of the "tea-pad parties" brings outclearly the convivial effect on the groups and the absence of anyrough or antagonistic behavior. Contents | Feedback | Search DRCNet Library | Schaffer Library | Major Studies | LaGuardiaCommittee ReportWT01-B31-26IA031-000652-B041-271http://206.61.184.43:80/schaffer/library/studies/lag/psycho.htm 206.61.184.43 19970122130750 text/html 20678HTTP/1.0 200 OKDate: Wednesday, 22-Jan-97 13:07:38 GMTServer: WebSitePro/1.1f (S/N wpo-0deb)Allow-ranges: bytesContent-type: text/htmlLast-modified: Saturday, 28-Dec-96 07:01:58 GMTContent-length: 20460 La Guardia Committee Report - Psychotic Episodes Contents | Feedback | Search DRCNet Library | Schaffer Library | Major Studies | LaGuardiaCommittee Report The LaGuardia Committee Report on Marihuana Psychotic Episodes Psychotic Episodes What has been referred to as psychotic episodes occurred in 9subjects, 7 men and 2 women. A description of the happenings ineach instance is given. (2) (2) Throughout this section fictitious initials are used toavoid any disclosure of the subjects' identities. A.V. Male. Non-user. Given 4 cc. of marihuana concentrate.About three hours later he became restless, tremulous, agitated,fearful of harmful effects, suspicious of examiners. For shortperiods he was euphoric. At one time he had visual hallucinationsof figures making gestures suggesting harm. He talkedcontinuously, mainly expressing fear. His answers to questionswere delayed but intelligent. W.P. Male. Occasional user. Given 3 cc., repeated two hourslater. At first there was a euphoric state; later he becameresistant and negativistic. He showed antagonism to the examiner,demanding to be left alone. He vomited twice. Throughout he washighly excited and talked to himself. The effects in generalresembled those seen in a maniacal state. He returned to hisnormal state in about three hours after the second dose. F.D. Male. Occasional user. Given 4 cc. Five hours later hebecame confused, disoriented and slow in answering questions.There were periods of elation and depression with laughter andweeping. The effects passed off in six hours. R.W. Male. Non-user. Given 5 cc. Three hours later he becamedisoriented with continued talkativeness and rapid shifting ofthought. He had fits of laughter and weeping, grandiose ideas,some paranoid trends. He answered questions clearly but withoutperseveration. He returned to normal after six hours. I.N. Female. Occasional user. Also heroin addict for manyyears. Given 8 cc. Three hours later she became confused andanxious with periods of laughing and weeping. There were severalshort episodes resembling hysterical attacks and dyspnea, pallorand rapid pulse during which she felt that she was dying andscreamed for the doctor and for a priest. Throughout, herresponse to questioning was intelligent but delayed. There was areturn to her normal state in three hours. E.C. Male. Non-user. Given 6 cc. Two hours later he developeda marked state of anxiety accompanied by a sensation ofdifficulty in breathing. This began during a basal metabolismtest. In the Sanborn equipment used there is a nose clipoccluding nasal breathing and a rubber mouthpiece through whichthe air is inspired and expired. During the test the subjectbecame confused, panicky and disoriented as to time. The anxietyover breathing continued for four hours but could be interruptedby distraction. He was then given 4 cc. more. The breathingdifficulty lasted five hours more. The condition here hadfeatures seen in claustrophobia. Before the episode, the subjecthad taken marihuana on five occasions in 2, 4, 5, 5, and 2 cc.dosage, without any symptoms of respiratory distress. However,after the episode he took marihuana on three occasions in 2, 5,and 6 cc. dosage and each time the respiratory symptoms occurred.A certain degree of nervousness was present but there was nomental confusion. The subject realized that there was no physicalobstruction to his breathing and had learned that byconcentrating his thought on other lines he could keep hisrespiratory difficulties in abeyance and would not suffer fromreal anxiety. Smoking up to as many as thirteen marihuanacigarettes did not bring about the respiratory effect. Itappeared then that the respiratory symptoms were precipitated bythe wearing of the apparatus while under the influence ofmarihuana, and through suggestibility there resulted aconditioning to the marihuana concentrate which was givensubsequently. The description of these six psychotic episodes fits in withmany others found in marihuana literature. They are examples ofacute marihuana intoxication in susceptible individuals whichcomes on shortly after the drug has been taken and persists forseveral hours. The main features of the poisoning are the restlessness andmental excitement of a delirious nature with intermittent periodsof euphoric and an overhanging state of anxiety and dread. Three other subjects presented the features of marihuanapsychosis. R.H. Male. White. Age 23. Non-user. In prison for the offenseof living on prostitution. The family history was bad. His fathernever supported his wife or family and there was continualdiscord at home. When the subject was 9 years old the fatherdeserted the family. Three brothers received court sentences, onefor stealing a taxi, one for rape, and one for striking ateacher. R.H. was a problem child at school and on account oftruancy and waywardness he was sent to the Flushing ParentalSchool. He ran away from this school several times and was transferredto the House of Refuge on Randall's Island. At the age of 16 hewas discharged. Since that time he had had two jobs, one forthree months in a factory, the other for four and one-half monthsin the W.P.A. When he was 16 he was run over by a truck and wasunconscious for a time. After his return to the Riker's IslandPenitentiary from Welfare Hospital further questioning concerninghis past revealed that he was subject to "fits"occurring once or twice every two months. During the attacks hisbody became rigid and his mouth felt stiff. The subject was admitted to Welfare Hospital for the marihuanastudy on February 20th. After the usual program of examinationshe was given 2 cc. of the concentrate on February 27th andFebruary 28th. These doses brought on the symptoms of dizzinessand tremor and heaviness of the head and the state called"high" which is characterized by periods of laughterand talkativeness. These effects passed off in a few hours andwere followed by drowsiness and a sense of fatigue. On March 1stat 1 p.m. he smoked one marihuana cigarette. Immediatelyafterwards he became agitated and restless and suddenly lostconsciousness. He recovered quickly and stated that he had hadvisions of angels and had heard choirs singing. Later he had asecond short period of unconsciousness. During the afternoon hecontinued to be agitated and restless and had periods of laughingand weeping. After he was given phenobarbital he went to sleep.On the next day his only complaint was that he felt dizzy.Following this episode he was given 4 cc. Of marihuanaconcentrate on March 3rd and 2 cc. on March 10th and 2 cc. oftetrahydrocannabinol on March 5th and 4 cc. on March 8th. Theeffects corresponded to those seen after the earlieradministrations of 2 cc. doses of the concentrate. On March 11th R.H. was given 5 cc. (75 mg.) of thetetrahydrocannabinol at 11 a.m. and 3 cc. at 2 p.m. No unusualeffects were noted during the afternoon and he ate his supperwith appetite at 4:30 p.m. At 6 p.m. he became restless,apprehensive and somewhat belligerent. He felt that something hadhappened to his mother, that everybody was acting queerly andpicking on him. He continued to be agitated and fearful, refusedmedication and slept poorly. This condition persisted and onMarch 13th he was returned to Riker's Island. After four daysthere he became quiet and composed. The psychotic state clearedup completely. The resident psychiatrist's report was: Impression1. Psychosis due to drugs. (Marihuana experimentallyadministered.) Acute delirium, recovered. 2. Convulsive disorder,idiopathic epilepsy. Petit mal on history. H.W. Female. White. Age 28. Non-user. Drug peddler, servingthree years' indefinite sentence for unlawfully possessing adrug. Her parents died when she was about 10 years old and shewas raised in an orphanage. At the age of 19 she entered atraining school for nurses, but gave this up after four monthsand supported herself by prostitution. Her sister and hersister's husband were drug addicts and through them she begantaking morphine and heroin, being, according to her account,depressed and dissatisfied at the time. She continued using thesedrugs up to the time of her arrest, a period of eight years. In1938 she married a man who was also a drug addict, and engaged inthe drug traffic. On May 7th she was given 2 cc. of marihuana. Aside from aheadache and a feeling of muscular weakness and uncoordination,the effect was to make the subject feel gay and very good-naturedOn May 8th she was given 3 cc. Of the concentrate and becamesomewhat confused and unsteady, irritated and upset at carryingout tests, and greatly worried about the physical symptoms. Fivehours after she had taken the drug the effects had largely passedoff. Six hours later, however, she became restless and agitated,moving about constantly, and worried about past conduct. Thisstate continued for a few hours. On other occasions the subjectwas given marihuana in doses of 2, 3, and 4 cc. Twice after theadministration of 3 cc. The general effect was of a euphorictype, and after 4 cc. Had been given a state of sadness set in ontwo occasions and one of euphoria on a third. Toward the end ofher stay the subject became depressed and moody, constantlydwelling on the belief that she had committed unpardonable sins. She was returned to the House of Detention on June 2nd,transferred to the Psychiatric Division of Bellevue Hospital onJune 9th, and from there was sent to Matteawan State Hospital onJuly 10th. On admission to the State Hospital she appearedconfused, retarded, apprehensive, and depressed. She had a markedfeeling of guilt. She began to improve in September and wasdischarged, cured, in January. Since her return to New York shereports at frequent intervals to the parole officer. She hassecured employment in a food shop and is to be promoted to theposition of manager of the shop. The diagnosis made at the State Hospital was: Psychosis, dueto drugs and other exogenous poisons (morphine and heroin). D.P. Male. Colored. Age 23. Occasional user. Sentenced forunlawful possession of drugs. Since graduation from high schoolat the age of 16 he had had no occupation. His criminal recorddated from his graduation. He was arrested in 1934 for disorderlyconduct and in the same year sentenced to Elmira Reformatory forfive years for second-degree assault. He was paroled in 1936, butduring the same and the following year was arrested three timesfor assault or robbery. He was returned to Elmira where heremained until his discharge in 1940. In August 1940 he wasarrested for the possession of drugs and sentenced to athree-year indefinite term. He had served eight months of thissentence when he was admitted to Welfare Hospital as a subjectfor the marihuana study. During his stay at Welfare Hospital, D.P. was given marihuanain the form of a concentrate and as cigarettes on numerousoccasions. His symptoms and behavior corresponded to thoseusually seen, lasting a few hours with no after-effects. When thetime came for his return to Riker's Island he urged that he beallowed to stay at the hospital and assist in the study. Twoweeks after his return to the penitentiary he developed apsychosis characteristic of schizophrenia. He was transferred toMatteawan where the diagnosis made was: Psychosis withpsychopathic personality. These three cases are of special interest from the standpointof the relationship of marihuana to the psychosis. The firstsubject, R.H., had a definite history of epileptic attacks. Aftersmoking one marihuana cigarette he experienced an acuteconfusional state which lasted a few hours. In the second episodewhich lasted six days there was a more prolonged confusionalstate. Epileptics are subject to such attacks, epileptic orepileptic equivalents, which may be brought on by any number ofupsetting circumstances. In this case marihuana is the only knownfactor which precipitated the attack. The second subject, H.W., was a heroin addict of longstanding. During her stay in the hospital, in her retrospectivereports on her marihuana experiences there were usually includedexpressions of worry and remorse at her failure to answerquestions or perform tests honestly, informing on the other womenin her group, and denials concerning a syphilitic infection shethought she had had. Prior to this incarceration she had had noprison experience. The mental picture developed from the study atthe hospital and at Matteawan and the subject's subsequenthistory represent a fairly typical example of what is termed aprison psychosis. The third subject, D.P., did not develop his psychosis untiltwo weeks after he had been returned to the Riker's IslandPenitentiary. He had shown no unexpected effects from marihuanaand had hoped to be allowed to stay on at the hospital instead ofgoing back to prison to complete more than two years of anunexpired sentence. At Matteawan this subject was considered tohave an underlying psychopathic personality. His case also may betaken as an example of prison psychosis. With both the second andthird subjects, the exact role of marihuana in relation to thepsychosis cannot be stated. Dr. Peter F. Amoroso, Commissioner of Correction of the cityof New York, has given us information concerning the prisonerssentenced to the penitentiary at Riker's Island from whom oursubjects were drawn. During the year beginning July 1, 1941, andending June 30, 1942, there were 1,756 inmates in thisinstitution. They had received an indeterminate sentence, thatis, from a minimum of a few months to a maximum of three years.Of this group, 175 were subjected to intensive study by thepsychiatrist because they were considered possible psychoticcases, 117 were sex offenders, and 200 were miscellaneous casesreferred for mental observation, making a total of 492.Twenty-seven of these cases were committed to state institutionsfor the criminal insane, namely, 25 to Matteawan and 2 toDannemora. Commissioner Amoroso, after reviewing these cases, writes asfollows: "The prison atmosphere may place a most severe strain onthose who are physically or mentally abnormal upon commitment . .. Emotionally unstable persons find themselves duringincarceration denied the assertion and enjoyment of the basichuman urges and impulses and it is natural to expect, therefore,that prison life may result in various types of explosions, suchas psychoses, neuroses, sex perversion, and even physical andmoral deterioration.' "I am indeed surprised that we had so little trouble withour volunteers upon completion of their study and sojourn atWelfare Hospital, and the few psychotic episodes that occurredare exactly what we would expect in the whole group withoutconsidering the administration and effects of excessive doses ofmarihuana." Summary In the study of the actions of marihuana in respect tosubjective and objective symptoms and behavior, the marihuana wasgiven a number of times to each of the subjects in the form ofthe concentrate taken by stomach. The amount given ranged from 2to 22 cc., in most cases from 2 to 5 cc. After marihuana wastaken, the systematic action became evident in from one- half toone hour and the maximum effects were seen in from two to threehours. They passed off gradually, usually in from three to fivehours, although in some instances they did not completelydisappear until twelve or more hours. Of the symptoms occurring, a feeling of lightness in the headwith some dizziness, a sensation of floating in the air, drynessof the throat, hunger and thirst, unsteadiness and heaviness inthe extremities were the most frequent. Tremor and ataxia,dilation of the pupils and sluggishness in responsiveness tolight were observed in all subjects. From observations on the behavior and responses of thesubjects, it was found that a mixture of euphoria andapprehension was generally present. If the subjects wereundisturbed there was a state of quiet and drowsiness, andunawareness of surroundings, with some difficulty in focusing andsustaining mental concentration. If they were in company,restlessness, talkativeness, laughter and joking were commonlyseen. A feeling of apprehension, based on uncertainty regardingthe possible effects of the drug and strengthened by anydisagreeable sensations present, alternated with the euphoria. Ifthe apprehension developed into a state of real anxiety, a spiritof antagonism was shown. However, any resistance to requests madeto the subjects was passive and not physical and there was noaggressiveness or violent behavior observed. Erotic ideas orsensations when present took no active expression. Six of the subjects developed toxic episodes characteristic ofacute marihuana intoxication. The dosage varied from 4 to 8 cc.of the concentrate, and the episodes lasted from three to sixhours, in one instance ten hours. The effects were mixtures ofeuphoric and anxiety states, laughter, elation, excitement,disorientation and mental confusion. The doses given were toxic to the individuals in question butnot to others taking the same or larger ones. Once the drug hadbeen taken the effects were beyond the subject's control. Theactions described took unusual expression because for theparticular subject at a particular time the dose was unusuallyeffective. A corresponding toxicity did not occur from cigarettesfor here the effects came on promptly and on the appearance ofany untoward effects, the smoking was stopped. In three of the subjects a definite psychotic state occurred,in two shortly after marihuana ingestion, in one after a two weekinterval. Of the first two, one was an epileptic and the otherhad a history of heroin addiction and a prepsychotic personality.The third was considered a case of prison psychosis. Theconclusion seems warranted that given the potential personalitymake-up and the right time and environment, marihuana may bringon a true psychotic state. Contents | Feedback | Search DRCNet Library | Schaffer Library | Major Studies | LaGuardiaCommittee ReportWT01-B31-27IA031-000652-B041-284http://206.61.184.43:80/schaffer/library/studies/lag/organic.htm 206.61.184.43 19970122130757 text/html 18172HTTP/1.0 200 OKDate: Wednesday, 22-Jan-97 13:07:49 GMTServer: WebSitePro/1.1f (S/N wpo-0deb)Allow-ranges: bytesContent-type: text/htmlLast-modified: Saturday, 28-Dec-96 07:02:05 GMTContent-length: 17954 LaGuardia Committee Report -Organic and Systemic Functions Contents | Feedback | Search DRCNet Library | Schaffer Library | Major Studies | LaGuardiaCommittee Report LaGuardia Committee Report on Marihuana ORGANIC AND SYSTEMIC FUNCTIONS Samuel Allentuck, MD The functions of the body organs and systems were studied inthe manner common to hospital practice according to the methodsand with the equipment in use at Welfare Hospital. The study wasdesigned to show not only the effects of varying doses ofmarihuana but also whether subjects who had long been users ofthe drug gave evidence of organic damage. The tests were madebefore the drug was administered, during its action, and often inthe after period. The heart and circulation, blood composition, kidney, liverand gastro-intestinal function, and basal metabolism receivedspecial consideration. SUMMARY The most consistent effect of marihuana observed in thisdivision of the study was an increase in pulse rate which beganshortly after the taking of the drug, reached a peak in about twohours, and gradually disappeared. In-a few instances a temporarysinus tachycardia or sinus bradycardia was noted, but except forthese there were no abnormalities in rhythm. The increase inpulse rate was usually accompanied by a rise in blood pressure. There was in general an increase in the blood sugar level andin the basal metabolic rate, quite marked in some subjects, butin the majority the levels reached did not exceed the high normallimits. An increase in the frequency of urination was often observed. There was, however, no appreciable increase in the totalamount of urine passed during the drug action. Hunger and an increase in appetite, particularly for sweets,was noted in the majority of the subjects, and the taking ofcandy or sweetened drinks brought down a "too high"effect of the drug. Nausea and vomiting occurred in a number of instances,diarrhea only during psychotic episodes. On the other hand, the blood showed no changes in cell count,hemoglobin per cent, or the urea nitrogen, calcium and phosphorusfigures. The figures for the circulation rate and vital capacityand the results of the phenolsulfonphthalein test for kidneyinfection and the bromsulfalein test for liver function were notdifferent from those of the control period. Theelectrocardiograms showed no abnormalties which could beattributed to a direct action on the heart. In the fewobservations on gastric motility and secretion no evidence ofmarihuana action on these functions was obtained. The positive results observed, increase in pulse rate andblood pressure, increase in blood sugar and metabolic rate, urgeto urinate, increased appetite, nausea and vomiting, anddiarrhea, were not intensified by an increase in dosage, for theycould occur in an equal degree after the administration of any ofthe effective doses within the range used. All the effectsdescribed are known to be expressions of forms of cerebralexcitation, the impulses from this being transmitted through theautonomic system. The alterations in the functions of the organsstudied come from the effects of the drug on the central nervoussystem and are proportional to these effects. A direct action onthe organs themselves was not seen. Psychological Aspects PSYCHOPHYSICAL AND OTHER FUNCTIONS Robert S. Morrow, PH.D. In this phase of the study an effort was made to determine theeffect of marihuana on various psychomotor and some specialmental abilities. Appraisal of these effects was made whereverpossible through the use of standardized tests. A number ofdifferent tests were originally tried under varying experimentalconditions on the group of 5 volunteer subjects who had neverbefore taken marihuana. Only those tests were retained which, inthe course of this preliminary investigation demonstrated thegreatest potentialities. With the tests finally selected it washoped to measure the effect of marihuana on the followingfunctions. FUNCTIONS AND CAPACITIES TESTED Static Equilibrium This was measured by means of the MilesAtaxiameter, which is an instrument for recording body sway. Thesubject remains stationary in the ataxiameter with his hands athis sides and his feet together while a system of pulleysattached to a helmet on his head records the direction and degreeof movement. The subject's score is the cumulative sway in alldirections measured in millimeters. This test was applied to eachsubject for two minutes with his eyes open and two minutes withhis eyes closed. Each trial was followed by a rest period of fiveminutes. Hand Steadiness Hand steadiness was measured by means of theWhipple Steadiness Tester which consists of a metal disk with ahole 3/16 of an inch in diameter, connected in series with drycells, an electric counter, and a stylus. The subject wasinstructed to hold the stylus in the hole for two minutes withouttouching the metal sides. Each contact with the side of the holewas recorded and the total number of contacts gave an index ofunsteadiness of hand. Speed of Tapping Speed of tapping was measured in somewhat thesame manner as was hand steadiness. The Whipple Apparatus wasused, the tapping board replacing the steadiness disk and athicker and heavier stylus replacing the steadiness stylus. Thesubject tapped repeatedly on the metal plate for two minutes andthe total number of taps was recorded on the counter, therebygiving a measure of motor speed. Strength of Grip The Collins Dynamometer was used to measurethe subject's strength of grip. Three trials were made for eachhand and the scores averaged. Simple and Complex Hand and Foot Reaction Time Specialapparatus was constructed to measure simple and complex hand andfoot reaction time. To measure simple hand reaction time, thesubject was instructed to press down on a telegraph key andremove his hand as quickly as possible when a red light appearedon the board which stood directly before him. A Cenco counterrecorded the reaction time, that is, the time which elapsedbetween the presentation of the stimulus and the response. For the measurement of simple foot reaction time, the subjectpressed down on a pedal with his foot, removing it as quickly aspossible when the red light appeared. For the measurement of complex (choice or discrimination) handand foot reaction time either a red or a blue light served as astimulus. The subject had no advance knowledge as to which colorlight would appear. For measuring the response with the hand, thesubject pressed down on the telegraph key with the right handand, at the sight of the red light, moved the peg from the redcompartment into the center (neutral) compartment with the lefthand, then removed the right hand from the key; at the appearanceof the blue light, he moved the peg from the blue to the neutralcompartment. For measuring complex foot reaction time, theprocedure was similar to that for estimating the hand reactiontime except that the right foot and the pedal were substitutedfor the right hand and the telegraph key. Each subject made fifteen trials for each of the fourvariations. Musical Aptitude Musical aptitude was determined by means ofthe Kwalwasser- Dykema Music Tests. The eight tests administeredwere the tonal memory test, the quality discrimination test, theintensity discrimination test, the tonal movement test, the timediscrimination test, the rhythm discrimination test, the pitchdiscrimination test, and the melodic taste test. The sum of thescores for these separate tests was used to give a total scorefor musical aptitude. Auditory Acuity By means of the Galton Whistle, the subjects'limits of auditory acuity were gauged for both ascending anddescending frequencies. The final score was the average of the results of three trialsin each direction. Perception of Time An attempt was made to appraise thesubject's facility in estimating time by asking him to statewhen, after a given signal, he thought the following intervalshad elapsed - fifteen seconds, one minute, and five minutes.Several trials were given for each time interval and the averageof the results of the trials was taken as the final score. Perception of Length Subjects were asked to estimate thelength of lines which were 3 inches, 5 inches, and 8 inches inlength and to draw lines of 3 inches and 7 inches. The Subjects Fifty-four subjects were used in this part of theexperiment, 36 marihuana users and 18 non-users. The two groupswere equated approximately for the following factors: age,height, weight, years of formal education, and number of arrests.The age range for the user group was from 21 to 45 years with27.9 years as an average, the age range for the non-user groupwas from 22 to 43 years with 29.8 years as an average. The rangein height for the users was from 54 to 75 inches with a mean of67.5 inches- for the non-users the range was from 60 to 71 incheswith a mean of 66.8 inches. Range in weight for the users wasfrom 123 to 178 pounds with 151.3 pounds as the mean, for thenon-users from 115 to 180 pounds with 149.5 pounds as the mean.The schooling of the user group ranged from no education at allto 10 years with a mean of 7.1 years, that of the non- usersvaried from 6 to 12 years with a mean of 8.3 years. As regardsthe number of arrests, the range for users was from 1 to 20 witha mean of 5.1 and for the non-users from 1 to 15 with a mean of5.3. The two groups differed radically with respect to race. Of the36 marihuana users, 11 (31 per cent) were white, 18 (50 per cent)were Negroes, and 7 (19 percent) were Puerto Ricans. Of the 18non- users, 12 (67 per cent) were white, 6 (33 per cent) wereNegroes, and none were Puerto Rican. In addition, the user group was analyzed with respect to theage when the marihuana habit was begun, the duration of thehabit, the number of marihuana cigarettes generally smoked perday, and the period of deprivation. The variation of the habit asalready described for the entire group of users applies to the 36subjects studied here. Procedure The tests were first administered to the subjectsbefore they had taken marihuana, then about a week later whenthey were under the influence of 2 cc. of marihuana, and finallyanother week later after 5 cc.(1) of marihuana had beenadministered. On each occasion the psychomotor tests for staticequilibrium, hand steadiness, tapping, strength of grip, andreaction time were repeated at hourly intervals for eightsuccessive hours in order that the time-effects of marihuanamight be determined.(2) The other tests, that is, those measuringmusical ability, auditory acuity, visual ) memory, and perceptionof time and length were given to the subjects while in theundrugged condition and from three to four hours after the drughad been administered. The music tests were given under normalconditions and after 5 cc. of marihuana had been administered,but not under 2 cc. dosage. In almost all instances the marihuana was given in the morningshortly after breakfast and generally after a day when no drughad been taken in order that "hangover" effects mightbe avoided. For the most part the subjects rested and did littleor nothing except the prescribed tests on days when marihuana wastaken. The equilibrium, steadiness, tapping and strength of griptests were given together on one day and the different forms ofthe reaction- time test on another day. Ordinarily four or fivedays elapsed between retests. In addition to being tested after standard doses of themarihuana concentrate had been ingested, 11 users and 9 non-userswere tested after smoking marihuana cigarettes.(3) The cigarettesweighed from 4 to 8 grains each. Most of the subjects smoked fivecigarettes, two non-users smoked only three, and one nonusersmoked four. The tests with cigarettes were given atquarter-hour, half-hour and hour intervals. (1) A dose of 5 cc. of marihuana proved "too much"for many non-user subjects in the sense that ingestion of thisamount was often followed by nausea and general symptoms ofmalaise which interfered with further testing. For this reason the higher dose for non-users was sometimesreduced to 3 cc. or 4 cc. In all, only 6 of the non-user subjectstook the S cc. dose. Accordingly, although the higher dosage isreferred to as S cc. it should be noted that the actual amountused varied from 3 cc. to 5 cc. (2) The scores for the first 25 users and 6 non-users wereobtained every half hour, but since there was little differencebetween the half-hourly and hourly results it was decided torecord hourly scores only, except for the first half hour. (3) A short experiment in which placebos were employed wasalso tried on these subjects. An attempt was made to have theplacebos simulate the marihuana as much as possible butunfortunately the placebo pills had a distinctive taste whichrendered them easily identifiable. The subjects referred to themas the "licorice" pills or the "blanks."While the experiment was completed and resulted in someinteresting findings, the factors which might have invalidatedthe results were so serious that these experiments are notreported at this time. Summary and Conclusions 1. The effect of marihuana on the psychomotor functionsdepends primarily on the complexity of the function tested.Simpler functions like speed of tapping and simple reaction timeare affected only slightly by large doses (5 cc.) and negligibly,if at all, by smaller doses (2 cc.). On the other hand, the morecomplex functions like static equilibrium, hand steadiness, andcomplex reaction time may be affected adversely to a considerabledegree by the administration of both large and small doses ofmarihuana. 2. The function most severely affected is body steadiness andhand steadiness. The ataxia is general in all directions ratherthan predominant in any particular axis. 3. The effects produced by larger doses (5 cc.) aresystematically, though not necessarily proportionately, greaterthan those brought about by small doses. 4. The time required by the drug to exert its maximum effectvaries somewhat with the function and size of dose, but, on thewhole, time curves for both functions and dosages have similarityof form The effect of the drug begins from one to two hours afteringestion and reaches its peak at the fourth hour, after which itdeclines so that by the eighth hour most of it is dissipated. 5. When marihuana is taken in cigarette form the psychomotoreffects are similar in character and trend to those observedafter the ingestion of the drug but they occur much sooner andtaper off more quickly. 6. The effects seem to be essentially the same for women asfor men, except that women are sometimes affected maximally atthe second or third hour after the drug is administered. In womenthe return to the normal condition is in some instances quickerand more abrupt than it is in the men. 7. Non-users generally seem to be more affected by the drugwhen it is ingested than are users. 8. Auditory acuity is notaffected by marihuana. 9. There is no evidence that musical ability, of non-musiciansat least, is improved by marihuana. The ability to estimate short periods of time and short linear distances is not measurably affected by the ingestion of marihuana. Contents | Feedback | Search DRCNet Library | Schaffer Library | Major Studies | LaGuardiaCommittee Report WT01-B31-28IA031-000652-B041-308http://206.61.184.43:80/schaffer/library/studies/lag/intell.htm 206.61.184.43 19970122130810 text/html 44975HTTP/1.0 200 OKDate: Wednesday, 22-Jan-97 13:07:57 GMTServer: WebSitePro/1.1f (S/N wpo-0deb)Allow-ranges: bytesContent-type: text/htmlLast-modified: Saturday, 28-Dec-96 07:02:21 GMTContent-length: 44757 LaGuardia Committee Report on Marihuana -- Intellectualfunction Contents | Feedback | Search DRCNet Library | Schaffer Library | Major Studies | LaGuardiaCommittee Report LaGuardia Committee Report on Marihuana INTELLECTUAL FUNCTIONING Florence Halpern, MA In this phase of the study investigation was directedprimarily toward establishing the effect of marihuana on thesubject's intellectual functioning. An attempt was made todetermine what changes in mental ability occur under differentamounts of the drug, what direction these changes take, when theyare first measurable, and how long they persist. TESTS Bellevue Adult Intelligence Test This test was used tomeasure the general mental level of all the subjects. It waschosen in preference to other available scales because it is theonly individual test of intelligence which has been standardizedon an adult population, takes into account both verbal andperformance abilities, and compares the individual with standardsestablished for his particular age group. It consists of tentests, five verbal and five performance. The verbal tests coverthe fields of general information and general comprehension, drawon the individual's capacity for abstract reasoning and test hisarithmetical ability and his rote memory. The performance testsalso evaluate the subject's comprehension of social situations,but here the results are independent of language. There are alsotests of the individual's ability to carry out a routine task, toorganize parts into a meaningful whole, to distinguish betweenessential and unessential details, and to analyze and synthesize.Army Alpha (Bregman Revision, Forms A, B. 5, 7 and BellevueRevision) This is a group test first used in the United StatesArmy in 1917 and 1918 when it was given to more than a millionrecruits. It consists of eight tests: test 1, a direction testwhich was not used in this study since the item does not appearon all forms; test 2, a test of arithmetical reasoning; test 3, atest of common sense in which the subject indicates which heconsiders the best of three possible responses to a givenquestion; test 4, a.modified vocabulary test; tests. in which thesubject must mentally reorganize disarranged sentences and thenindicate whether the resultant statement is true or false; test6, a test of numerical relations in which the subject must supplythe last two numbers in a numerical series on the basis of therelationship between the first six numbers; test 7, a test ofanalogies in which the subject determines the relationshipbetween two given words and then underlines one of four wordswhich is related to a third word in the same way; and test 8,which on Forms A and B and on the Bellevue Revision is a test ofgeneral information in which the subject is given a choice offive answers to a question. On Forms 5 and 7, this test is a testof directions. Because this test has five alternate forms which are roughlyof equivalent difficulty it could be repeated many times within ashort time interval. It was therefore used to establish a curveshowing at what time following ingestion the marihuana has aneffect on general intelligence and on individual higher mentalprocesses. Pyle's Digit Symbol Test In this test each number from1 through 9 is associated with a specific symbol, as, forexample, number 1 is associated with a square and number 2 withan asterisk. The numbers and their associated symbols appear atthe top of the sheet of paper. Below the sample are rows ofsymbols, five symbols to a row, followed by five blank squares.The subject is expected to fill in each square with the numberassociated with the respective symbol. With practice theassociation bond between the number and the symbol becomesstronger and the subject depends less and less on the model atthe top of the sheet. He is therefore able to work faster and hislearning rate is reflected in the increased number of squaresfilled. Cancellation Test The subject is required to cross out aspecific geometric form wherever it appears on a sheet which iscovered with rows of geometric figures. This measures theindividual's capacity for carrying out a routine task. Form Board Test The measurement of the ability to manipulateconcrete material in contrast to the verbal or abstract abilitydetermined by the Army Alpha test required the introduction ofcertain form board tests. These were the Seguin Form Board, theTwo Figure Board, the Casuist Board, - the Five Figure Board,Healy A, Triangle Test, Diagonal Test, all administered andscored according to the Pintner-Patterson Performance Series. TheSeguin Form Board has ten blocks of various goemetric forms, tobe put in their appropriate places as rapidly as possible. Threetrials are given. The Two Figure Board has nine pieces which,when placed correctly, form a large cross and a large square.Time and the number of moves are recorded. The Casuist Board hastwelve pieces which, when correctly placed, form three circlesand an oval. Time and errors are recorded. The Five Figure Boardhas five geometrical figures which are formed by the correctplacement of two or three pieces for each figure. Time and errorsare recorded. Healy A has five small rectangular pieces which,when placed correctly, form a large rectangle. Time and thenumber of moves are recorded. The Triangle Test consists of fourtriangular pieces which are fitted together in a board. Time anderrors are recorded. The Diagonal Test has five pieces of variousshapes which must be fitted together in a rectangular frame. Timeand moves are recorded. Kohs Block Design Test This is aperformance test which is less a test of manual dexterity andmore dependent on abstract intelligence than are the form boardtests. It correlates more highly with intelligence than do mostperformance items and yet it is entirely independent of language.Therefore, the individual who cannot express himself well or whosuffers from a language handicap is not penalized as he is onverbal scales. The test consists of sixteen cubes each with ared, a white, a blue, a yellow, a red-and- white, and ablue-and-yellow side. A colored design which can be reproducedwith the cubes is placed before the subject and he is expected tomake it. Results are rated numerically, depending upon the timeconsumed in execution. In this experiment two sets of designs ofequivalent difficulty were required- Designs IV, VI, and XIV wereselected for one series and V, VII, and XII for the other. Memory Tests Although memory in itself cannot be considered ameasure of intelligence, it is essential to any intelligentfunctioning and must therefore be included in any estimate ofintelligence. Three aspects of memory, namely rote memory, theability tof recall presented objects, and visual memory weretested. The rote memory test requires the repetition of digits inforward and reverse order as given on the Bellevue IntelligenceTest. Object memory was tested by exposing ten small objects forthree seconds and recording the number of articles the subjectwas able to recall. Visual memory or the ability to reproducedesigns after a ten-second exposure was estimated by using thedesigns and scoring technique from the Army Performance Test.PROCEDURE The Bellevue Adult Intelligence Test Each subject wasgiven the Bellevue Adult Intelligence test within two or threedays after his admission to the hospital and before any marihuanahad been administered. The Army Alpha, Pyle's Digit Symbol, and Cancellation TestsThese tests were given as group tests to a total of 20 subjects.The Army Alpha and Pyle's Digit Symbol tests were given everyhalf-hour, beginning a half-hour after drug ingestion. The ArmyAlpha was continued for seven hours and Digit Symbol for fivehours. The Cancellation test was given every hour for six hours,beginning one hour after drug administration. Eleven users and 9non-users took the Army Alpha and the Digit Symbol tests, while 9users and 11 non-users took the Cancellation test. Tests 2through 8 of the Army Alpha require twenty and a half minutes foractual performance while such preparations as the distribution ofpapers and the reading of directions consume almost ten minutesmore, so that had the entire Alpha been given at each half-hourlysession, the subjects would have gone from test to test with nointermittent rest period. For this reason the tests were dividedand the following schedule arranged: (table a) Each subject took three test series, one without the drug, onewith 2 cc. and one with 3, 4, 5, or 6 cc., depending on individual tolerance. A test series consisted of fourteen half-hoursessions for the Alpha, ten half- hour sessions for the DigitSymbol and seven hourly sessions for the Cancellation tests.Because of the time factor, a series required two days for itscompletion. The halves of a series were given on successive days,and the different series a week apart. Thus for example, asubject might take his first test series with 2 cc. on Monday andTuesday of one week; the following Monday and Tuesday the serieswould be repeated with the subject in a different drug state (nodrug or S cc.); and a final series would be given the third weekwith the subject in still another drug condition. An effort was made to obviate practice effect by giving thefirst test series to one third of the subjects without drug, toone third with 2 cc., and to one third with 3, 4, or 5 cc.However because of the necessity of increasing dosage graduallythis ideal presentation was not actually obtained. The followinggives the amount of drug administered to users and non-users ateach test series. (table b) Since the various forms of the Army Alpha are notabsolutely equivalent in difficulty, their order of presentationfor any one group had to be identical in each of the three drugstates. However, for each of the three groups tested the order ofpresentation was different so that all the difficult forms didnot come at the same interval, as is shown on the following page.Kohs Block Design, Form Board, and Memory Tests Administration ofthese tests differed markedly from those discussed above in thatno attempt was made to give them at regular successive timeintervals. Rather, they formed part of a battery of individualtests given to various subjects under specific drug conditions.For example, 5 cc. of marihuana would be ordered for a patientfor 8:00 A.M., and testing began as soon thereafter as thepatient appeared "high," the state of"highness" being judged by the subject's own statement,his pulse rate, the condition of his pupils and otherphysiological signs. (table c) Kohs Block Design was given to each subject twice,once without the drug and once with 5 cc. The test was taken by atotal of 21 subjects, 10 users and 11 non-users. Five users toolsthe test first without the drug, S had their first trial with 5cc. Of the non-user group 8 had their first trial withoutmarihuana, 3 with 4 cc. The average time at which the test wasgiven to the user group was three and a half hours after drugadministration, with range from two to five and a half hours. Forthe nonuser group, the average time of administration of the testwas also three and a half hours after the drug was given, rangetwo and a half to five and a half hours. The two series of designs (one series being Designs IV, VI andXIV, the other V, VII and XII) were presented in such manner thathalf of the subjects were tested on one series and half on theother series while they were under the influence of marihuana.Thus any difference in degree of difficulty between the two setsof designs was canceled out. The weighted scores given on theArthur Point scale were used in evaluating the results. Form Board Tests were divided into three batteries, eachbattery consisting of the Seguin Form Board, one of the threelarger boards (Two Figure, Five Figure, or Casuist) and one ofthe three smaller boards. Various combinations of boards wereused under various drug conditions in order to make the resultsas comparable as possible. The following indicates the number oftimes the various boards were used with different dosages ofmarihuana. From the results it appears that Gwyn Triangle was used toooften with 5 cc. and Healy A was not used often enough. (table d) Aside from the Triangle and the Healy A, the distribution ofboards in different drug stages was such as to obviate anydifferences in degree of difficulty. Nineteen subjects, 10 usersand 9 non- users, took this test. The results were scored fortime and errors according to the Pintner-Patterson Performanceseries. Memory tests. The first digit span test was always givenbefore marihuana had been administered, since the Bellewe Scalewas given each patient during the first two or three days of thestudy. The trials under 2 cc. and 5 cc. were alternated. In all,28 subjects, 17 users and 11 non-users, took this test before andafter the ingestion of marihuana. The final score equaled thenumber of digits recalled. To test Object Memory, ten small articles such as a key, aring, a pill box, and a crayon were placed on a flat, neutralsurface and exposed for three seconds. An attempt was made tovary some of the articles at each presentation so that six orseven were the same and three or four were different. Twenty-sixsubjects, 11 users and 15 non-users, took this test. They were sodivided that 10 of them took the test the first time withoutdrug, 10 with 2 cc., and 6 with 5 cc. To test Visual Memory, Army designs were given each subjectthree times, once prior to the administration of marihuana, onceunder 2 cc., and once under 5 cc. The test was riven to a totalof 28 subiects. 16 users and 12 non-users. Because there is noalternative form for this test, results were definitelyinfluenced by practice. Here, therefore, more than with any other test, it becameimportant to arrange the order of administration. The followingindicates the dosage of marihuana at the first test. (table e) It is obvious that the initial examination was given slightlymore often when the subjects were not under the influence of thedrug. Improvement derived from practice is therefore more of afactor in the tests which were performed under marihuana. FINDINGS Bellevue Adult Intelligence Test General Intelligence. Theresults of the Bellevue Adult Intelligence Test which wasadministered to 60 subjects, 40 users and 20 non-users, are shownin Table 5. As has been pointed out elsewhere, these findingsindicate that both the user and the non-user groups may beclassified as of average intelligence. (Table 5) Mental Deterioration. Studies of mental deterioration due totoxic, organic or psychotic factors, as given in the literature,reveal that in such cases the subtest scores on the BellevueAdult Intelligence Test show marked irregularity, depending uponthe functions involved in the deteriorative process. As a group,the marihuana users tested show very even functioning, and whatlittle irregularity occurred can be explained on the basis oflanguage and racial factors.(4) From this we may conclude thatthe marihuana users had suffered no mental deterioration as aresult of their use of the drug. The age factor does not affectthe result since the groups were well equated in this respect. Army Alpha Test Total Mental Functioning. The total scoresobtained from this test at the successive testing periods areshown in Table 6. Those recorded before the administration of thedrug give a picture like that seen in any learning curve, thatis, there is a gradual increment in test scores at each testinginterval, interspersed with plateau periods. Thus, without drug the test score for the second testinginterval showed a 2 per cent gain over the initial score, thescore for the third testing interval showed a 4 per cent gainover the initial score, and so on up to the last testing periodwhen there was a 13 per cent gain over the initial test score. Between two and a half and three hours after ingestion of 2cc. of the drug there appeared to be a possible very slightfalling off in mental ability. Otherwise the results paralleledthe findings obtained in the undrugged condition except thattoward the end of the day the increments were larger than thosewhich occurred when the subjects were undrugged. This may be dueto complications in the experimental procedure or may be anindication of accelerated mental functioning resulting from drugingestion. This point is discussed more fully when the effect ondifferent mental functions is considered. Deleterious effects were apparent an hour after the ingestionof 5 cc. of marihuana. There was a 3 per cent drop from theinitial score at this one-hour period and this first attainmentis not surpassed until four and a half hours after drugingestion. From the four-and-a- half- hour period on to the endof the testing there were gradual increments in score. Different Mental Functions. A very elaborate study was made ofthe scores made on the subtest (Table 7). Some irregularitiesoccurred even in the undrugged state, and these may be attributedprimarily to chance factors, as, for example, the difference indifficulty of the various test forms. On the whole, the findingswere in line with those which one would expect in any situationwhere constant repetition increases efficiency. The effects of 2 cc. of marihuana on the different mentalfunctions were variable. Tests involving number concepts gaveclear-cut, consistent findings and revealed that impairmentoccurred an hour after the drug was taken and continued for fromtwo and a half to three hours after ingestion. Results of othertests showed that there was little if any loss in ability, andsome of them, especially those done toward the end of the day,showed gains which exceeded the ones made in the undrugged state.It is not possible on the basis of the present data to ascertainwhether these large increments indicate that small amounts of thedrug serve as stimulants in situations dependent primarily uponverbal facility or whether they are due to certain complicationsin the test technique. The former theory coincides with theincreased verbosity noted on other tests as well as with theclinical impression, but the latter also cannot be overlooked. Further investigation of this point is definitely indicated. The effect of the 5 cc. dosage on each function was in linewith that reported for total scores, that is, there was a fallingoff in efficiency one hour after the drug was taken and thisimpairment continued for anywhere from three and a half to sixand a half hours after ingestion. Here too the scores on testsinvolving number concepts were most severely affected, recoveryfor them taking place from six to six and a half hours after drugadministration. Degree and Duration of Drug Effect. In general it may bestated that marihuana has a deleterious effect on mentalfunctioning, the extent, time of onset, and duration of theimpairment being related to the amount of drug taken. The adverse effect of the 2 cc. dosage on global intelligencewas slight (about 3 per cent to 4 per cent impairment inefficiency) and of sort duration, occurring at about two and ahalf hours after ingestion and lasting little longer than ahalf-hour or an hour. Certain mental functions, especially thosedealing with number concepts, appear to have been affected muchearlier than others, the effect on the number test scores beingmeasurable as early as one hour after ingestion and continuinguntil two and a half hours after ingestion. For other functions,in particular those involving verbal facility, the results werevariable, in some instances showing no adverse effect and even aslight acceleration. The effect of 5 cc. of marihuana on global intellectualfunctioning was apparent within an hour from the time the drugwas taken and was operative until four and a half hours afteringestion. All mental functions showed this early impairment butfor some of them recovery from the adverse effect was earlierthan for others. Those most severely impaired from point of viewof duration were the ones dealing with number concepts. (Table 6) The testing program was continued for only seven hours afterthe drug was taken and, therefore, any estimate of the effect ofmarihuana after this time is purely a subjective one. However,both the subject and the examiner felt that the drug produced a"hang- over" which in most cases continued into thefollowing day. The subject complained of being headachy, sleepy,and unable to work at his usual level, and the examiner alsonoted that the subject did not work as well or as quickly whencalled upon to do something on a day following marihuanaingestion. The impairment reported here is not entirely representative ofthe maximum impairment which occurs under the influence ofmarihuana. Two opposing variables account for the resultsobtained in the drugged condition. One variable is practiceeffect which tends to increase test scores with each succeedingtrial. The other variable, the drug, tends to lower test scores.In the earlier sessions there was evidence that the marihuana,especially when given in large doses, is the more potent force,as seen by the continuing downward trend of the curve during thefirst few hours. In these earlier phases, in spite of repetition,results were lower with each succeeding trial, or if there was noactual loss, the increments made were never comparable to thosemade in the undrugged state. Three or four hours after drugadministration there was a general trend toward rising scores.Some of this gain must be attributed to increased practice effectwhich was counteracting, in part at least, the deleterious effectof the marihuana. For this reason it is not certain that the drugwas less effective at later points in the curve than it was atthe moment of seemingly greatest impairment. This seemsparticularly plausible because, beginning with the third hour,the subject was no longer working on new tasks but was actuallyrepeating identical tasks that he performed earlier in the day.Thus, at the third hour the test form used was the same as theone given at the initial session; at the end of thethree-and-a-half-hour period the form was the same as theone-hour examination, and so on. What is shown in the curves isthe effect of marihuana on intellectual tasks with which thesubject has become very familiar. For practical purposes the testsituation has the advantage of being comparable with daily livingsince the tasks performed in daily routine are usually relativelyfamiliar ones. (Table 7) Speed Versus Power. Intellectual impairment under theinfluence of marihuana resulted from a loss in both speed andefficiency. There was a slowing up in output indicated by thedifference in the number of items done before and after theadministration of the drug. On the whole the number of test itemsattempted tended to increase at each succeeding examinationperiod even when the subject was under the influence ofmarihuana, but the percentage of increase in the drugged statepractically never equaled that attained for the correspondingtime interval when the subject had not ingested the drug. Thefindings for the number of items done in the drugged andundrugged condition follow very closely the findings in respectto the number of items correctly done. From this it may beconcluded that under the influence of marihuana an individualfunctions less rapidly and also less efficiently than when he hashad no drug. Careful analysis of what causes the loss in efficiency revealsthat certain factors not necessarily related to mental abilityper se were accountable for the reduced scores in the druggedstate. For example, under the influence of the drug the subjectfelt dizzy, had blurred vision, or exhibited other handicappingphysiological disturbances. These impeded his efficiency inputting his answer on the correct line, or marking a cross in theright box. Men were observed running their fingers across thepage in an effort to keep their place. On the other hand, much ofthe intellectual loss can be ascribed to an impairment in thethinking processes, and there seemed to be a general confusion ofideas and inability to maintain a fixed goal. Some subjectsreported that the reason they accomplished so little was that, bythe time they had finished reading a question, they no longerremembered what their purpose in reading it had been.Occasionally perseveration of a form of response specific to onetest was found in a subsequent test. For example, some forms ofthe Same-Opposite test require the subject to mark the answer Sor O. In a later test requiring a plus or minus responseoccasional irrelevant S's or O's appeared. Comparison of the Effect of Marihuana on User and Non-User. When the group is divided into marihuana users and nonuserscertain interesting and suggestive differences are revealed(Table 8). Although the general findings for total intelligence scoresfor the two groups follow similar curves, the deleterious effectswere not as great on the user as on the non-user. Thus under 2cc. of marihuana the user showed no real intellectual impairmentexcept for a very short interval beginning about two and a halfhours after ingestion and lasting for an hour or an hour and ahalf. In contrast to this he made gains both at the beginning ofthe testing and toward the end of the day which exceeded thosemade in the undrugged state. The non-user who had ingested 2 cc.of marihuana showed a definite drop in score beginning about twoand a half hours after ingestion, and for a period from one and ahalf to two and a half hours after this time he did not makeincrements comparable to those which he made in the undruggedstate. Following this, during the last two hours of testing he,like the user, obtained scores which showed an acceleration notparalleled in the undrugged state. (Table 8) Under 5 cc. of marihuana both the user and the non-user showeda 3 per cent loss in efficiency within an hour of the time thatthe drug was taken. Although recovery was slow for both groups,the user was less severely affected, as is indicated by the factthat at the next testing interval his score was only 1 per centbelow his initial score as compared with a 7 per cent loss on thepart of the non-user. The disparity in the degree of impairmentfor the two groups continued for several hours. The more markeddrug effect in the case of the non-user was further evidenced bythe fact that the user showed recovery four or four and a halfhours after ingestion (as measured by the time when his scoresapproach those made when in the undrugged state) while thenon-user, even at the end of seven hours of testing, did notapproximate his undrugged performances. No simple explanation of this difference is available. Themost probable reason seems to be that previous use of the drug insome way serves to ameliorate that anxiety and inevitabledisorganization which the use of any drug may have on anindividual who has never taken it before. Another explanation maylie in possible physiological adaptation to the drug which,though not identical with tolerance in the ordinarypharmacological sense, seems to act in the same direction. Variability. The results reported here are all in terms ofaverages. A study of individual scores indicates that there was markedvariability in the effect of the drug on different subjects. Inone case the drug action came early and soon disappeared. Anothersubject experienced no reaction until after he had eaten hislunch, at which time a very definite effect was apparent. A thirdsubject showed impairment late in the day when the drug effect onalmost all the other subjects had worn off. There were some hardysouls who did not appear to be affected by even large quantitiesof marihuana, while a few (mainly non-users) became so ill thatthey could not continue with the examinations. Pyle's Digit Symbol Test Comparison of the results obtained onthis test when the subject was in the undrugged condition andwhen he had had 2 cc. of marihuana reveals that small amounts ofthe drug did not interfere with his ability to carry out theappointed task (Table 9). In fact, as was noted above for certainother tests, the improvement in score at the end of two and ahalf or three hours was greater after the ingestion of 2 cc. ofmarihuana than it was when no drug had been administered, and atthe end of the five-hour testing period there was a 32 per centincrease in score as against a 22 per cent increase in theundrugged condition. Under the influence of 5 cc. of marihuana, however, there wasa decrease in ability occuring within an hour after the time thedrug was administered. Although the scores show no actual loss ascompared with the initial score, the increments did not equalthose made in the undrugged condition until from four to four anda half hours after ingestion. It may therefore be concluded that certain types of learningability are not affected by small amounts (2 cc.) of marihuana,but are impaired when larger amounts (5 cc.) are ingested. (Table 9) (Table 10) Cancelling a Geometric Form The results of this test are shownin Table 10. With 2 cc. of marihuana, there was a slight falling off in thesubject's efficiency occurring about three hours after drugingestion. At that time he was 3 per cent less efficient than he had beenan hour previous. With S cc. of marihuana there was a slowing upin the subject's ability to carry out the appointed task, whichwas apparent two hours after drug ingestion (and possiblyearlier). At that time there was only a 4 per cent increment overhis initial score as compared with a 10 per cent increment in theundrugged state and a 12 per cent increment when the 2 cc. dosagehad been administered. He improved only slightly at the three- and four-hour testinginterval, and only at the five-hour interval did he show anappreciable improvement. Apparently, the carrying out of a simple routine task isadversely affected to a slight degree and for a short period oftime as the result of the ingestion of 2 cc. of marihuana whilethe ingestion of S cc. of the drug produces adverse effects whichare more severe and more lasting. Performance Tests Seguin Form Board. For adults of averageintelligence this test is primarily one involving speed ofreaction time. The average time taken by the subjects when theywere not under the influence of marihuana was 12.8 seconds. Thiswas increased to 14.0 and 14.1 seconds under doses of 2 cc. and 5cc. respectively. Thus, ingestion of marihuana in 2 cc. and 5 cc.doses caused a 9 per cent delay in performance time. Form Boards. The time scores for this test remainedpractically the same whether no drug, 2 cc. or 5 cc. of marihuanahad been administered, the average scores in terms of mental agebeing respectively 11.7, 11.7 and 11.9 years. The error scoresalso showed little change as a result of drug ingestion, theaverages in terms of mental age being 9.7 years (no marihuana),9.9 years (2 cc.) and 10.2 years (5 cc.), and what changeoccurred was in a positive direction, that is, there was a veryslight improvement in the subject's performance when he was underthe influence of marihuana. Kohs Block Design. This test correlates more highly withabstract intelligence than do any of the other performance tests.Here the drug had a definitely deleterious effect when it wasadministered in large amounts. The average score was 17.6 whenthe subjects were not under the influence of marihuana and 14.8after they had ingested the drug; that is, under S cc. ofmarihuana there was a 16 per cent loss in score as compared withundrugged results. In general it appears that those functions most closely associated with higher intellectual processes are more impaired bythe drug than are the simpler functions. Memory Tests Rote Memory. As measured by the ability to repeatdigits forward there were no changes in rote memory as a resultof drug ingestion, the average scores under no drug, 2 cc. ofmarihuana, and 5 cc. of marihuana being in each case 7.1. Digits Reversed. Although the giving of digits in reverseorder is always grouped with memory testss this task actuallyrequires something over and above mere recall. It demands amental control not necessary in tests dependent purely upon rotememory. Although simple rote memory, as measured by the abilityto repeat digits forward, was not affected by the ingestion ofmarihuana, the repetition of digits reversed was affectedadversely. In the undrugged state the average for the group was5.4, with 2 cc. the average was 5.0, and with S cc. it was 4.8.The impairment was comparatively small but it seems to have beenrelated to the amount of drug taken. Object Memory. The average scores under no drug, 2 cc. ofmarihuana, and 5 cc. of marihuana were respectively 6.2, 5.6, and5.9- that is, there was a loss of about 9 per cent in thesubject's ability to recall objects which had been exposed to hisvision for three seconds when he took the test under theinfluence of 2 cc. of marihuana, while after the ingestion of 5cc. the impairment was less, being only about 5 per cent. Thisseemingly contradictory result is probably due to the fact thatby the time the subjects took the test under the influence of 5cc. most of them had already had it two times previously. Theloss in terms of absolute number of remembered articles wasslight. Visual Memory. In this test as in the case of digits reversedsomething over and above simple memory function is involved. Acapacity for analysis and synthesis which correlates well withintelligence is required for the successful execution of thistask, and it is this function which is adversely affected by theingestion of marihuana. The average scores were 10.3 (no drug),9.7 (2 cc.) and 7.8 (5 cc.); that is, after the ingestion of 2cc. of marihuana there was a 6 per cent drop in score, whileunder 5 cc. there was a 24 per cent drop. In general one may conclude that simple memory functions arenot affected by the administration of marihuana while the morecomplex memory functions are affected adversely, the extent ofthe impairment being related to the amount of drug taken. Throughout the examination of subjects on individual tests,the same difference was observed in intensity of the effect uponuser and non-user as was noted in group tests. Experiments with Marihuana cigarettes In addition to the testsmade to determine the effect of the ingestion of marihuana onvarious intellectual functions, several experiments were triedwith marihuana cigarettes. The tests used in this part of thestudy were the Bellevue Adult Intelligence Test; the Woody McCallMixed Fundamentals Test, Form I, which consists of thirty-fiveexamples requiring addition, subtraction, multiplication ordivision; a cancellation test in which the subject is required tocross out a specific number (in this instance the number 8)wherever it appears on a sheet covered with rows of numbers; theKohs Block Design Test; and the test for rote, object, and visualmemory. The subjects took the test series and individual tests twice,once without the drug and once after having smoked marihuanacigarettes. They were not given a specific number of cigarettesbut were told to smoke until they felt "high." Thenumber of cigarettes smoked to produce this effect ranged fromtwo to seven. The Mixed Fundamentals and cancellation tests were given asgroup tests and were repeated at half-hour intervals for two anda half hours. In the series given when the subjects were"high," the first test was taken as soon as thecigarettes had been smoked. Time limit on each test was one and ahalf minutes. The Bellevue Adult, Kohs, and memory tests were given asindividual tests and were administered only twice, once beforethe subject had smoked marihuana cigarettes and once after he hadbecome "high" from smoking them. If during the courseof the examination he wanted another cigarette or the examinerhad reason to suspect that he was no longer under the influenceof the drug, more cigarettes were smoked. The number ofcigarettes used during a three-hour testing period ranged fromsix to twelve. In the cancellation, Kohs, and memory tests the subjects wereso divided that half took the tests for the first time beforethey had smoked and half after they had smoked. In the WoodyMcCall Mixed Fundamentals Test more non-users had their firsttests before they had smoked. The Bellevue Adult IntelligenceTest was always given first without the drug during the two orthree days immediately following the subject's admission. Fourweeks later the test was repeated on 10 subjects while they wereunder the influence of marihuana cigarettes. Bellevue Adult Intelligence Test Ten subjects, 5 users and 5non-users, repeated this test under the influence of marihuana.The results are shown in Table 11. (TABLE 11) Since the test taken when the subject was "high" wasalways his second experience with it, some allowance must be madefor practice effect. Without drug the average I.Q. of thesesubjects was 101.6, while after they had smoked cigarettes it was104.4. This increase of only 2.8 points is smaller than one wouldprobably get with repetition occurring after such a short timeinterval. It may be concluded, therefore, that smoking marihuanacigarettes has some negative effect on intellectual functioning,in that the subject benefits less from previous experiences thanhe would if he had not smoked. Woody McCall Mixed Fundamentals Test, Form 1 This test was givento 24 subjects, 10 users and 14 non-users. >From the results which are shown in Table 12 it may beconcluded that when the subject was "high" aftersmoking marihuana cigarettes there was a slowing up in hisability to do simple arithmetic calculations. This lag occurredwithin the first half-hour after smoking and continued for atleast an hour. The deleterious effect was not such as to cause anactual loss in ability but the increments resulting from repeatedpractice were never as great in the drugged as in the undruggedstate. Thus, the initial increment was 10 per cent in the testgiven before smoking and only 4 per cent in the one administeredafter the subject had become "high." The finalincrement at the end of two and a half hours was 20 per centwithout drug, 13 per cent with drug. This test measures the subject's ability to use acquiredknowledge. Under the influence of marihuana cigarettes the capacity forusing such an acquired skill is not lost but is slowed down. Theadverse effect of smoking marihuana in cigarette form occursalmost immediately in contrast to the delayed action of thepills. (TABLE 12) Cancelling 8's Sixteen subjects, 8 users and 8 non-users, tookthis test, the results of which are shown in Table 13. As aresult of smoking marihuana cigarettes the subject worked alittle slower in his execution of a routine task than he did whenhe had not smoked. The increment over the initial score in thetest score made a half-hour after he became "high" wasonly 7 per cent as against an increment of 9 per cent when thecigarettes had not been smoked. His performance was slowed up forone hour after smoking and possibly longer. (TABLE 13) Kohs Block Design Test This test, which measures performanceability, was given to a total of 9 subjects, 6 users and 3non-users. The average score without the drug was 18.5, and aftercigarettes had been smoked 14.7. This difference in score of 3.8points indicates a loss in efficiency of 21 per cent. Memory Tests Rote Memory. Thirteen users and 9 non-users tookthis test. Neither in repeating digits forward nor in giving them inreverse did the subjects show any disadvantageous effects fromthe use of marihuana cigarettes, the average scores before andafter smoking being 6.9 and 7.1 respectively for the digitsforward test and 5.2 and 5.1 for the digits reversed test. Theonly explanation for this deviation from the results obtainedwhen marihuana was taken in pill form is the inability to controlthe dosage when marihuana is given in cigarette form. Object Memory. Thirteen subjects took this test. Object memorywas not impaired by the smoking of marihuana, the average scoresbeing 6.8 before the cigarettes were smoked and 7.1 when thesubjects were "high." Visual Memory. There was an .8point loss (from 10-5 to 9.7) in the average score of the 20subjects, 11 users and 9 non-users, who took this test. Thisrepresents an impairment of about 8 per cent. Effect of Marihuana Cigarettes on Users and Non-Users Thedifference in intensity of effect of marihuana cigarettes on theuser and on the non- user was not the same as the difference inthe effect of the marihuana concentrate on these two groups. Theuser was usually more affected by smoking marihuana than was thenon- user, probably because the nonuser did not smoke as much oras intensely as the user and was not as much under the influenceof the drug. Contents | Feedback | Search DRCNet Library | Schaffer Library | Major Studies | LaGuardiaCommittee Report WT01-B31-29IA031-000652-B041-328http://206.61.184.43:80/schaffer/library/studies/lag/findings.htm 206.61.184.43 19970122130821 text/html 39701HTTP/1.0 200 OKDate: Wednesday, 22-Jan-97 13:08:10 GMTServer: WebSitePro/1.1f (S/N wpo-0deb)Allow-ranges: bytesContent-type: text/htmlLast-modified: Saturday, 28-Dec-96 07:02:32 GMTContent-length: 39483 LaGuardia Committee Report on Marijuana - Findings Contents | Feedback | Search DRCNet Library | Schaffer Library | Major Studies | LaGuardiaCommittee Report The LaGuardia Committee Report on Marijuana FINDINGS Rorschach Test Table 14 gives the Rorschach findings for 45 subjects both inthe undrugged and drugged states. The measurable changes on thetest which occurred during the period of drug intoxication werefew and not far-reaching. They may be considered indications oftendencies rather than of significant alterations of thepersonality. (TABLE 14) When the subjects were under the influence of marihuana(either 3- 6 cc. or cigarettes, the number of cigarettes being atthe discretion of the smoker) there was a slightly freer flow ofassociations than there was when they were in the undruggedstate, an increased productivity which coincided with theimpressions obtained from general observation of the subjectswhen they were "high." Without drug the average numberof interpretations made was 20.0, with drug 23.3. This increasednumber of responses was due primarily to the subject's greaterawareness of small, extraneous details which in his undruggedstate he overlooked. Thus, while 17 per cent of the subjects'answers were small or rare detail responses when no marihuana hadbeen administered, with marihuana this increased to 21 per cent.Coincidental with his increased absorption in the irrelevantthere was a slight decrease in the subject's drive to organizeand synthesize. Whereas without drug 40 per cent of the responsesinvolved the entire blot, with drug this was true of only 36 percent of the interpretations. Under the influence of marihuanathere was a mild tendency for the subject to become preoccupiedwith minutiae rather than to concern himself with the larger,more important aspects of a situation, and this implies somefalling off in meaningful constructive behavior. When the subject had taken marihuana there was some decreasein the objectivity with which he sized up situations. This wasindicated by the fact that without drug 92 per cent of hisinterpretations were good form, that is, they corresponded to theform of the blot, while with drug this percentage fell to 86 percent. The drug had an adverse effect on the individual's criticalfaculty and he was more prone to jump to erroneous conclusionsthan he was when he was in the undrugged state. The only other change that occurred on the Rorschach testafter the ingestion of marihuana was the decrease in thesubject's ability to think in line with the group. This showeditself in the decreased number of popular interpretations made,the drop being from 27 per cent without drug to 20 per cent withdrug. In other words, during the period of drug intoxication anindividual is somewhat less likely to see the obvious and thecommonplace than he is in his normal state. As important, or possibly even more important, than thechanges which occurred on the Rorschach after ingestion orsmoking of marihuana, is the fact that some of the most basicpersonality attributes remained unchanged. Thus it appeared that33 per cent of the subjects in the undrugged state were what isdescribed as introversive, that is, they were individuals whotend to withdraw somewhat from the world about them and dependprimarily on their own inner resources for emotional stimulation;20 per cent were extraversive, depending mainly on theirenvironment for affective satisfaction; 20 per cent wereambivert, showing equal potentialities in both directions; and 27per cent were emotionally constricted to the point where theygave little or no evidence of emotional response of any type.With drug 36 per cent were introversive, 22 per cent wereextraversive, 20 per cent were ambivert, and 22 per cent wereconstricted. Marihuana ingestion or smoking served to dilate theemotional life of only 2 of the subjects and shifted the type of1. In all 3 cases the change was actually a very slight one. Thefact that the emotional trends remain essentially unchanged underthe influence of marihuana was further revealed by the fact thatthe ratio for evaluating the individual's emo tional type, thatis, the ratio of movement to color, remained roughly the samebefore and after he had taken the drug, being 2.3:1.6 when he wasin the undrugged state and 2.9:2.1 when he was in the druggedphase. Although the quantitative changes occurring with marihuanaingestion or smoking were not large, there was a qualitativedifference in the protocols obtained from the subjects in theundrugged and drugged stages. Not only was there a slightincrease in the actual number of interpretations made, but theamount of talking and extraneous comment increased. The subjectplayed around with answers and often repeated them. He seemedanxious to get his every thought clearly across to his audience.More than this, he was much freer in the type of interpretationhe allowed himself. For example, one interpretation on Card II read: "Twodogs. Now wait a minute. I don't want to jump to conclusions butit looks as if the dogs were having intercourse and there was arupture." This response was not repeated when the subjectwas retested in the undrugged state. Nor was this individualunique in showing this qualitative difference. The disinhibitionand lessening of restraint which was a definitely observableeffect of the drug was also reflected in the assured explanationsand lengthy tirades which the subject offered on topics which inhis undrugged state he would undoubtedly feel were beyond him.Thus one subject interpreted Card X as "old bark of trees,roots dried up. It's thousands of years old; it takes thousandsof years to do that. I got to tell you that. I got to cover foryou. You wouldn't know about a thousand years ago. I'm smartnow." In some instances the "cockiness" induced byhis drugged condition produced an entirely new attitude in thesubject. Instead of the customary deferential, almostingratiating approach there was now a confident"know-it-all" manner. The effects of marihuana ingestion on user and non-user wereessentially the same, as indicated by the findings in Table 14,except that on the whole the alterations which did occur weremore marked for the non-user than for the user. Thus, forexample, while the average number of responses given by the userincreased only 11 per cent, those of the non-user rose 26 percent. Again, the user when drugged gave only 6 per cent fewerwhole answers as against a decrease of 15 per cent in the wholeresponses of the non-user in the drugged state. The user showed a29 per cent increase in small detail interpretations, thenon-user 31 per cent. There was only a 2 per cent drop in goodform interpretation by the user as against a 12 per cent drop forthe non-user. Only in the loss of popular interpretations did theuser exceed the non-user, his falling off being as great as 31per cent as compared with 24 per cent for the non-user. While thenumber of subjects in both groups was too small to allow ofdefinite statements, the trend seemed to indicate that theingestion or smoking of marihuana has a greater adverse ordisorganizing effect on the neophyte than on the experiencedsmoker, again, as was the case in the study of mentalfunctioning, suggesting the possibility of psychologicalhabituation. When the protocols obtained from these marihuana users intheir undrugged state are compared with those of the nonusers orwith the norms postulated for average adults of this age level,certain deviating personality traits in these users may be noted.The most striking deviation is the small percentage of users whoshowed an extraversive personality. Only 15 per cent of themarihuana users used in this study responded primarily toemotional stimuli in the world about them as compared with 28 percent of the non-users. While no definite figures are given in the literature for thedegree of extraversion in the general population, it seemsdefinitely more than 15 per cent. Altogether the personalitytypes among the non-users show a much more even distribution thanthose among the users as seen in Table 15. Judging by thepersonality types the majority of marihuana users lack socialease and adroitness and are likely to find it difficult to makegood outgoing social contacts. (TABLE 15) Sixty-two per cent of the marihuana users' interpretationswere determined by the form or outline of the blot. Suchresponses require an objective critical attitude unmodified byemotional factors. However, when this attitude is maintained tothe point where more than 50 per cent of the answers are of thisnature the individual has a constricted affective life the degreeof constriction being in proportion to the increase in forminterpretations Thus, as was previously noted, there was morethan average emotional inhibition evident among the marihuanausers studied in this experiment. Since emotional inhibitionfrequently causes intellectual constriction it is not surprisingto find that the stereotypy in these records was slightly aboveexpectancy, as indicated by the fact that 59 per cent of theresponses were animal or animal detail interpretations ascompared with a norm of from 25 to 50 per cent. Finally the marihuana users (as well as the non-users in thisexperiment) showed a depressive outlook in that more of theirresponses were determined by the gray and black colors than bythe vivid colors. In interpreting this fact it must be borne inmind that the subjects were all prisoners and their depressiveattitude may have been a reflection of their present situationrather than of a basic trait. Goodenough Test (Drawing of a Man) This test is helpful in studying each individual both in thedrugged and undrugged state, but group results are not meaningful(except for one finding given below) because of a lack ofsimilarity both in the drawings obtained in the undrugged stateand in the direction of change which occurred after drugingestion or smoking. However, certain qualitative findingsproved interesting and are therefore reported here. In a numberof cases the identical drawing was produced in the undrugged, 2cc., 5 cc., and cigarette state, but the size of the figureincreased consistently with the amount of marihuana taken. Thisincrease in size may have been a reflection of a physicalsensation induced by the drug, rnay have been due to a tendencyto macrographia which was noted in the writing of some subjects,or may have been the psychological representation of increasedfeelings of confidence and security. With marihuana there was an increase in the percentage ofsubjects who remembered to give their man ears. This again mayhave been due to a heightened awareness of ears because ofphysical or auditory sensations or might denote a greaterreceptivity to what others have to say. In some cases the amount of time consumed in execution of thedrawings was considerably greater when the subject was"high." This additional time was rarely used forelaborating the picture but was caused by the subject's alteredmood. In many instances the laughter and joking in which heindulged kept him from completing the job with dispatch. In othercases depression or nausea slowed him up. Although aware of thedetails which should be included, the subject was often satisfiedto indicate such items by a single line or dash rather thandiscipline himself to the point where he could make a carefulpicture. In some of these cases the drawing had attributes whichresemble the findings sometimes seen in productions ofindividuals in a manic mood. When a person is given a sheet of paper and is asked to draw aman on it, the paper and the figure he draws become the situationhe must manipulate. If the figure is well centered so that thefinished product gives a balanced composition, the subject hashandled the circumstance in adequate fashion. The one consistentfinding for this test was the fact that the subject's ability tohandle situations was not improved by drug ingestion or smoking.In the case of both user and non-user the percentage of balancedcompositions produced in the various drug states did not changefrom the results obtained in the undrugged condition. It is,however, interesting to note that 59 per cent of the marihuanausers made "unbalanced" drawings in the undrugged stateas compared with only 29 per cent of the non-users. It may beinferred from this that fewer users than non-users are inclinedto come out into the center of the scene. This carries with itimplications of poor adjustment and insecurity. Level of Aspiration Test In the undrugged state the majority of the subjects manifestedreactions which are usual in the experience of other experiments,namely, the tendency to place their estimate just a little abovetheir actual performance. This was demonstrated by the fact thatwhile the average performance time needed for carrying out a settask (putting sixteen blocks in a box, red side up) was 23.6seconds, the subjects' average estimate for accomplishing thiswas 21.9 seconds. As their performance improved with practice,the subjects tended to allow themselves less time for the job.Such statements as, "I should do better this time," or"I'll take a chance," were not infrequent. Somesubjects wanted to know the best score ever made, and workedenergetically to attain it. With 2 cc. of marihuana there was a slight increase in theaverage estimated time for the entire group although there was noconcomitant increase in performance time. Under this dosage theestimated time was 23.1 seconds, performance time 23.4 seconds.Although the subject actually took no longer to do the job hethought he would work more slowly and in predicting hisachievement gave himself more time. His attitude during the testwas a much easier, more happy go-lucky one. He occasionallystopped in the middle of the experiment to discuss something withthe examiner or call out to someone passing in the hall. Therethus appeared to be a small loss in drive which, though notrevealed by significant statistical differences, was indicated bythe numerical trend and by the subject's attitude toward thetest. After the ingestion of 5 cc. of marihuana the averageestimated time was 23.2 seconds and the performance time 24.4seconds. Here the relationship between estimated and performancetime was similar to that found in the undrugged phase, that is,there was a 1.2 second gap between them. During this drug phasethe subjects seemed less relaxed than they were under 2 cc., andtheir main interest seemed to be to get back to bed and be leftundisturbed. Under the influence of marihuana cigarettes the trend wassimilar to that found with 2 cc., the difference between theestimated time and the performance time being only 0.3 second. Aswith 2 cc., subjects behavior was generally happy and relaxed. When the group was divided into users and non-users the trendwas the same for both. (TABLE 16) On the whole it appears that small doses of marihuana and ofmarihuana cigarettes tend to lower the individual level ofaspiration, that is, there is a slight lessening in the subject'sdrive and his will to achieve. Larger doses (5 cc.) do notproduce this effect. Frustration Test The results of the frustration experiment indicated nostatistically significant differences between the subject'sreactions before and after he had taken marihuana. Again, afterthe ingestion of marihuana there was a slight trend towardlowering the level of aspiration (Table 17), but the over-allchange was not startling when compared with results on the Levelof Aspiration Test when no frustrating experience was introduced. (TABLE 17) Binet Lines Binet's interpretation of this test was based upon theprinciple that suggestible individuals, once embarked on aparticular form of activity (in this instance, drawing lines ofincreasing length), ale more prone to continue this activity whenthe stimulus is altered than are less suggestible people. Judgingby the results as given in Table 18, small doses of marihuana (2cc. and cigarettes) induced thus type of perseverative behaviorin the users but not in the non- users. In other words, themarihuana user when under the influence of the drug tended tocontinue an activity he had started without being toodiscriminatory or controlled about it. The non-user, on the otherhand, showed a curtailment in activity and responsiveness. Onepossible explanation of this difference in effect on user andnon-user appears to lie in the fact that the drug made the usermore relaxed and easy-going and less controlled in motor activitythan he was in his undrugged state, while the non-user was oftenmore tense and disturbed. As was so often the case in thepersonality tests, the effect on the user of large doses of thedrug (S cc.) was contrary to that of the small ones, probablybecause in many cases he was made physically uncomfortable andintellectually disorganized. (TABLE 18) The lack of consistency in the findings seems to suggest thatthe individual's psychological and physiological "set"toward the drug affects his reaction and behavior. Thus smalldoses, which the marihuana user anticipates with pleasure makehim more easy-going and therefore probably more suggestible thanhe would be in his undrugged state, while large doses have acontrary effect. The non-user, on the other hand, appears to beless suggestible as a result of drug ingestion than he ordinarilyis. Wechsler Vocational Interest Blank The average number of positions chosen by the subjects whenthey were in the undrugged state was 13.2. With 2 cc. ofmarihuana the average was 12.9; with 5 cc., 12.7; and withcigarettes, 11.8. There was a very slight but not statisticallysignificant trend toward a decrease in job interest. However, theabsence of any appreciable change in the number of positionsliked after the ingestion or smoking of marihuana indicates thatno real withdrawal is implied. Analysis of the type of position chosen shows that under theinfluence of marihuana there was no swing to the more feminineoccupations, but in the case of some subjects, especiallymarihuana users, there was a falling off in the popularity ofsome jobs which require considerable activity. For example, underthe influence of 2 cc. of marihuana or of marihuana cigarettesthe jobs of detective, policeman and taxi driver were found amonghis least desired occupations though they were not in this placewhen he was in the undrugged state. The trend was the same for the user and the non-user in boththe drugged and undrugged phase. For the user the jobs ofaviator, gymnasium teacher, newspaper reporter, sailor andsoldier were most frequently chosen; for the non-user aviator,doctor, explorer, forest ranger, newspaper reporter and prizefighter were most popular. Loofbourrow Personal Index: Test I Before taking marihuana, the user and non-user on an averageindicated familiarity with an identical number of words, 65.2.After he had smoked marihuana cigarettes, the user's vocabularyshowed a gain of 6 words, the non-user's 5 words. In both casesthe subject's confidence in his verbal capacity was enhanced bythe use of marihuana. Wechsler Free Association Test In the undrugged state the user and non-user were disturbed bythe same stimulus words, namely "lonely,""passionate," "insult," and "sin."The only differences were the disturbance the user showed inresponse to the words "wish" and "murder" andthe delayed reaction of the non-user to the word"pity." Under the influence of 5 cc. of marihuana or of marihuanacigarettes the user was less disturbed by all these words withthe possible exception of "insult," but there was asharp increase in the agitation aroused by the words"suicide" and "death." It appears that thefeeling of well-being produced by the drug tended to alleviatethe loneliness, guilt, and frustration which the subject felt,but it was also accompanied by a fear of death. This may be tiedup with the anxiety the marihuana user always experiences inregard to the amount of drug he is taking, the always presentfear of his "blowing his top," or it may be areflection of the problems which were most disturbing to him. The non-user, after taking marihuana, was also less disturbedby the words "lonely," "passionate," and"sin." His reaction to "pity" was alsodiminished but he, too, was still upset by the word"insult." The new disturbing stimulus words were notthose which upset the user but those which were more closelyrelated to his own immediate problems namely "honest,""money," and "sex." Since the non-user in ourgroup was generally an individual who had been sent to prisonbecause of stealing or a sex offense, it seems it was theseproblems which the disinhibiting action of the drug brought tothe fore. Pressey X-O Test This test was taken by only 10 subjects, 5 users and 5nonusers. In general, the smoking of marihuana brought about someincrease in the number of words which had an unpleasant meaningto the subject and in the number of things about which he hadworried. There was some decrease in the number of things forwhich the drugged subject thought a person should be blamed. Thenumber of his associations with any one word remained roughly thesame in the drugged and undrugged state. Although less inclined to censure when under the influence ofmarihuana, the subject was nevertheless more readily disturbedand worried. This undercurrent of irritability and anxiety seemedto be a concomitant of the more obvious feeling of generalwell-being which is the predominant effect of the drug. Twopossible explanations can be given here for this finding: thephysiological changes occurring with the smoking -of the druggave the subject a feeling of anxiety, and the disinhibitionwhich occurred at this time released the restraints which hadbeen imposed not only on the happier reactions but on all therepressed unpleasantness as well, and things which the subjecthad repressed because he wished to forget them now came to thefore. This was noted when at least two of the subjects had"crying jags" when drugged, reproaching themselves forwhat they had done to their mothers and wives. Downey Will-Temperament Test: Test I The changes in the subjects' responses on this test showed ashift in their attitude toward themselves as a result ofmarihuana ingestion. On the whole, more subjects appeared tothink better of themselves when they were "high" thanthey did in their undrugged state. This is indicated by the factthat there was an increase in the number of individuals who underthe influence of 5 cc. of marihuana or of marihuana cigarettesbelieved themselves to be careful, cautious, ambitious, accurate,industrious, impulsive, enthusiastic, and possessing superiorcharacters. There was also a decrease in the number whoconsidered themselves suggestible or extravagant. The onlynegative traits which the subject admitted to more frequentlywhen he was "high" than he did in his normal state weresuggestibility, poor memory and aggression. The change inattitude in regard to aggression was most striking among themarihuana users, 88 per cent of whom considered themselvesaggressive after they had had the drug as compared with only 42per cent in the undrugged state. This increase in the feeling ofaggression was not paralleled by the findings of the other testsnor by the behavior of the subjects when they had taken the drug.Like the increased vocabulary noted on the Loofbourrow it canbest be interpreted as an indication of the subject's increasedfeelings of confidence and self-assurance. (Table 19) In general the changes which occurred on this test after thesubject had had marihuana were not consistent for the user andthe non-user or for different amounts of the drug. They merelyserved to indicate that when the subject was under the influenceof marihuana there were shifts in his feelings about himselfwhich reflected a prevailing mood of confidence and self-satisfaction. Thematic Apperception Test Without cigarettes the needs most frequently expressed in thesubjects' stories were "affiliation,""aggression," "sex," "dominance,""succorance," "self-abasement," and"play." These terms may be defined as follows:(1)Affiliation: to be sociable, to make friends, to love.Aggression: to fight, to criticize, to blame, to accuse orridicule maliciously, to injure or kill, sadism. Sex: to seek sexobjects, to court, to enjoy intercourse. Dominance: to influenceor control others, leadership. Succorance: to seek aid,protection or sympathy. Selfabasement: to comply, to surrender,to accept punishment, to apologize, to condone, to atone, todepreciate ego, masochism. Play: to relax tension and alleviatestress by pleasurable and humorously irresponsible activity,motor, verbal or mental. In general the frequency with which all needs were expressedfell off after the subjects had smoked marihuana cigarettes. Themost striking drops were in the need for self-abasement andaggression where the frequency of occurrence changed from 2.4 to1.1 for the former, and from 2.7 to 1.7 for the latter. Contraryto the general trend there was an increase in the need fordominance. When the subjects were not "high" the environmentalinfluences most frequently mentioned in their stories wereillness and death and accepting parents. After smoking marihuanathe general trend was similar to that noted for the"needs," that is there was a falling off in thefrequency with which the subjects used most of the concepts. There was, however, no diminution in the number of times thatillness and death played a part in their tales, the averagenumber being 2.1 before smoking and 2.2 after smoking. Likewisethe awareness of restraint and imprisonment remained constant,occurring 1.1 times before smoking and 1.2 after. Contrary to thegeneral trend there was an increased awareness of an acceptinglove object. This concept appeared in the stories on an averageof .8 time before smoking and 1.2 after. The decrease in the number of times both needs andenvironmental pressures were expressed in the stories given afterthe subjects had had cigarettes was not due to a curtailment inthe length of the story. The tales were often more wordy in thedrugged than in the undrugged state, but their length wasfrequently due to embellishment and repetition, and there waslikely to be less meaningful material. In general the storiesobtained from the subjects after smoking indicated that they hadless capacity for expressing themselves directly and clearly, andalso less concern with self-abasement and aggression. As definedon this test these needs represent a conflict between aggressionagainst the self and against others and appear to stem frominsecurity and feelings of guilt and inadequacy. In the druggedstate the subjects appeared less disturbed by this conflict andhad less need to harry themselves and others. They had a greaterneed for dominance, a desire for leadership. This ties in withthe greater self-assurance demonstrated by other tests and withthe increased awareness of acceptance by a love object found onthis test. It is interesting to note that these subjects showed nofalling off in their awareness of illness and death or ofrestraint and imprisonment after smoking. The frequency of thelatter concept was undoubtedly related to their status asprisoners, while the former ties in with the findings on the FreeAssociation Test where the word "death" remained adisturbing factor even after marihuana had been smoked oringested. (1) Directions for Thematic Apperception Test prepared byRobert W. White and R. Nevitt-Sanford, Harvard PsychologicalClinic, February 1941. FINDINGS ON WOMEN SUBJECTS As in the case with the men, when the female subject was underthe influence of marihuana her basic personality structure didnot change and only some relatively superficial emotionalreactions were different. As a group, the women used in thisstudy showed a somewhat constricted personality, and thisconstriction was not lessened when the subject was"high." The emotional reactions revealed in theRorschach Test showed that the subjects in this particular groupwere primarily extraversive, and this remained unchanged afterthe administration of marihuana. Again, like the men, when underthe influence of the drug the women lowered the achievementlevels they set for themselves. However, they did not show anyincreased self-confidence as did the men, either by an increasein the number of words they claimed to know in the LoofbourrowTest or in their appraisal of themselves as indicated in theDowney Will-Temperament Test. In general, the women exhibited aloss of drive for participation in anything requiring effort.This is inferred from their performance in the Level ofAspiration Test, the Vocational Interest Blank, and the BinetLines Test, as well as from their behavior. BEHAVIOR DURING THE TEST PERIOD OF SUBJECTS UNDER THEINFLUENCE OF MARIHUANA The findings reported here have all been in terms ofobjective, quantitative measures. Some effects of the drug,observable during examinations, cannot be quantified but arenevertheless important to the understanding of the drug action.These effects were reflected in those reactions of the subjectswhich were not directly related to the test situation Behaviorwas somewhat different when the subject had ingested marihuanaconcentrate than it was when he had taken the drug in cigaretteform. With pills gastrointestinal disturbances were morepronounced and drowsiness and fatigue seemed greater and moreenduring. Some individuals were so overcome by fatigue that theyworked for a few seconds only, and then sat with their heads onthe table. If spoken to, they made a great effort to do the workbut rarely continued for very long. When summoned to take thetest, especially toward the end of the day when they were almostinvariably lying on their beds, the subjects were overcome withfatigue and were aroused only with the greatest difficulty. Insome instances there was definite resentment of this disturbanceand the impression was that only the presence of the policeofficer and all the implications in the prison set-up prevented adefinite refusal to continue cooperatively. With both pills andcigarettes many of the men had difficulty in concentrating andmaintaining a fixed goal. Subjects often stared vacantly for longperiods and when addressed came back to the test with a start.Many burst into uncontrollable laughter over a test which intheir undrugged state had evoked no merriment. The laughterfrequently affected the entire group and most markedly those whohad been given marihuana. The behavior of the user and non-user with marihuanacigarettes was somewhat different. The user was pleasantlyexcited at the thought of smoking, selected his cigarettes withthe manner of a connoisseur, and criticized or praised theproduct offered him. His smoking took on something of aritualistic ceremony and was done in a careful and prearrangedfashion which varied slightly from individual to individual. Ingeneral the men first opened the end of the cigarette to examinethe marihuana, then wet the "stick" by inserting it intheir mouths to prevent the paper from burning too rapidly. Whenthe cigarette was ignited the men took several short puffs, atthe same time inhaling as much air as possible. This caused thetip of the "stick" to glow and resulted in a successionof low gasping sounds from the subject The smoke was retained aslong as possible, occasionally causing severe paroxysms ofcoughing. Although eager to be "high" the user wasconsistent in his fear of "blowing his top," and therewas always a point beyond which no amount of talking or cajolingcould make them continue smoking. As a rule, the user liked to smoke in company. He wasgenerally satisfied if one friend, a "kick partner,"could be with him. To this friend he would explain his thoughtsand feelings which to the objective observer were verysuperficial. In trying to make a point, and usually a minor oneat that, the user, when smoking, would talk on endlessly and soonlose his goal. He cracked many "jokes" which wereuproariously funny to him. In some instances "leaping"or involuntary jerking of the arms, head, shoulders or legsoccurred The subject described his sensations as floating,leaping, rocking or most often as being "in thegroove." He was obviously enjoying pleasant physicalsensations and wanted to be left to himself to lie on his bed,listen to soft music and dream or carry on "deep"conversations. The test questions were frequently called a"bring down" in that they forced the subject to facereality and abandon his pleasurable feelings. Several subjectsconcurred in describing part of their drug experience ascomparable to the twilight state between sleeping and waking inwhich the individual floats pleasantly and does not allow outsidestimuli to impinge. Just as strong extraneous sensations willbring the sleeper face to face with reality, so the insistence ofthe examiner that the subject perform certain tasks served todestroy his general feeling of well-being. Aside from the testsituation any unpleasant circumstances can serve as a "bringdown." This "bring down" apparently only resultsin destroying the subject's pleasure but cannot do away with thedisadvantageous effect on intellectual functioning. When testing was completed the subject generally lay on hisbed and dozed or listened to the radio. His drowsiness persistedfor many hours. Most non-users approached the smoking with apprehension. Theywere instructed by the users in the art of lighting and inhaling,but they rarely cooperated to the fullest extent? though this wasundoubtedly unconscious on their part. The effects of marihuana on the non-users were variable. A fewof them enjoyed the results so much that they claimed they wouldcontinue to smoke whenever they had a chance. They described suchsensations as "lying in fur," and "floating inspace." Some became acutely nauseous and could not continuewith their work, while others experienced little or no change infeeling, undoubtedly because they never smoked correctly. When the subjects were "high," particularly in thecase of the non- user, there was a general loss of inhibition andlessening of many social restraints which had previously beenexercised. Thus, all the men talked much more freely, confrontedeach other more directly, and manifested a state of well-being attimes amounting to euphoria. They were much more confiding?talked spontaneously about love and sexual affairs, and in twoinstances exposed themselves and masturbated. Although there was an undeniable increase in overt sexinterest following the ingestion of marihuana, it seems probablethat this interest was not the result of direct sexualstimulation but rather a manifestation of a falling off ininhibiting factors. This sex interest seems to have been dueprimarily to the fact that these men had been imprisoned forvarying periods and had not had access to women. It is not at allcertain that under free conditions or with different subjectsthis behavior would have been manifested. In any case, thebehavior of these prisoners was more like that which any mandeprived of sexual activity for a long period of time woulddisplay under a releasing stimulus and not at all like thebehavior shown at marihuana "tea-pads." Contents | Feedback | Search DRCNet Library | Schaffer Library | Major Studies | LaGuardiaCommittee Report WT01-B31-30IA031-000652-B042-23http://206.61.184.43:80/schaffer/library/studies/lag/sumdis.htm 206.61.184.43 19970122130830 text/html 20025HTTP/1.0 200 OKDate: Wednesday, 22-Jan-97 13:08:20 GMTServer: WebSitePro/1.1f (S/N wpo-0deb)Allow-ranges: bytesContent-type: text/htmlLast-modified: Saturday, 28-Dec-96 07:01:47 GMTContent-length: 19807 LaGuardia Committee Report on Marihuana -- Summary andDiscussion Contents | Feedback | Search DRCNet Library | Schaffer Library | Major Studies | LaGuardiaCommittee Report The LaGuardia Committee Report on Marihuana SUMMARY AND DISCUSSION Under the influence of marihuana changes in personality asshown by alterations in test performance are slight. They are notstatistically significant and indicate only tendencies or trends.Moreover, the drug effect is not always in proportion to theamount taken, nor are the changes consistently in one direction.In many instances the effect of small doses (2 cc.) or ofmarihuana cigarettes is the opposite of the effect of largerdoses (5 cc.) (2) (2) While sufficient experimentation has not been made tovalidate the finding, it should be noted that the personalitychanges produced by 2 cc. or marihuana cigarettes are almostalways in agreement in contrast to the changes resulting from theingestion of 5 cc. The 2 cc. Dosage apparently more nearlyapproximates the amount a person would take if left to his owndevices. The personality changes observed when the subject is under theinfluence of 2 cc. of marihuana or marihuana cigarettesdemonstrate that the subject experiences some reduction in drive,less objectivity in evaluating situations, less aggression, moreself-confidence and a generally more favorable attitude towardhimself. These reactions can be ascribed to two main causes,namely, an increased feeling of relaxation and disinhibition andincreased self-confidence. As the drug relaxes the subject, therestraints which he normally imposes on himself are loosened andhe talks more freely than he does in his undrugged state. Thingswhich under ordinary circumstances he would not speak about arenow given expression. Metaphysical problems which in theundrugged state he would be unwilling to discuss, sexual ideas hewould ordinarily hesitate to mention, jokes without point, areall part of the oral stream released by the marihuana. At the same time that he verbalizes more freely, there is areduction in the individual's critical faculty. This is probablydue both to the intellectual confusion produced by the drug andto the less exacting attitude his feeling of relaxation induces.He holds himself less rigidly to the standards of his undruggedphase and does not drive himself to achieve. He is satisfied withhimself and willing to accept himself as he is. Thisself-satisfaction undoubtedly helps produce the feeling ofself-confidence which allows the subject to come out more freelyin fields which he formerly avoided. This increased confidenceexpresses itself primarily through oral rather than physicalchannels. Physically the subject reports pleasant sensations of"drifting" and "floating" and he allowshimself to become enveloped in a pleasant lassitude. After the administration of larger doses of marihuana (5 cc.)the pleasurable sensations appear to be outweighed by concomitantfeelings of anxiety'and, in some cases, of physical distress,such as nausea. Under these circumstances, for many subjectsthere is little increase in confidence but rather heightenedinsecurity which precludes outgoing reactions and tends to evokegenerally negativistic attitudes to most stimuli. It is important to note that neither the ingestion ofmarihuana nor the smoking of marihuana cigarettes affects thebasic outlook of the individual except in a very few instancesand to a very slight degree. In general the subjects who arewithdrawn and introversive stay that way, those who are outgoingremain so, and so on. Where changes occur the shift is so slightas to be negligible. In other words reactions which are nativelyalien to the individual cannot be induced by the ingestion orsmoking of the drug. Although in most instances the effects of the drug are thesame for the user and the non-user, there are some differencesboth in kind and extent. Where the effects for the two groups arein the same direction they generally are more marked in the caseof the non-user. This is not unexpected in view of the non-user'slack of habituation to the drug action. For the nonuser hispresent experience is a strange, even hazardous one, and theuncertainty and anxiety attendant upon this impairs the sense ofwell-being which the drug produces in the user. Thus the non-userfrequently feels-less secure when he is "high" than hedoes normally and is less well adjusted than he is in ordinarycircumstances. When the productions of the undrugged marihuana user arestudied, certain personality traits which serve to differentiatehim from the non-user and from the "average" individualcan be discerned. As a group the marihuana users studied herewere either inhibited emotionally or turned in on themselves,making little response to stimuli in the world about them. Peoplewith this type of personality generally have difficulty adjustingto others and are not at ease in social situations. Thiswithdrawal from social contacts apparently finds littlecompensatory or sublimating activity elsewhere. These subjectsdid not have a desire or urge to occupy themselves creatively ina manner which might prove socially useful. They showed atendency to drift along in passive fashion and gave a goodportion of their attention to relatively unimportant matters.These men were poorly adjusted, lonely and insecure. As indicatedby their history they seldom achieved good heterosexualadjustment. CONCLUSIONS Under the influence of marihuana the basic personality structure of the individual does not change but some of the more superficial aspects of his behavior show alteration. With the use of marihuana the individual experiences increased feelings of relaxation, disinhibition and self-confidence. The new feeling of self-confidence induced by the drug expresses itself primarily through oral rather than through physical activity. There is some indication of a diminution in physical activity. The disinhibition which results from the use of marihuana releases what is latent in the individual's thoughts and emotions but does not evoke responses which would be totally alien to him in his undrugged state. Marihuana not only releases pleasant reactions but also feelings of anxiety. Individuals with a limited capacity for effective experience and who have difficulty in making social contacts are more likely to resort to marihuana than those more capable of outgoing responses. Family and Community Ideologies Adolph G. Woltrnann, MA At the outset of the study it seemed worth while to supplementthe quantitative data by some qualitative procedures of theprojective type which might throw light on the social reactionsof the individuals who were being studied. One of the methodsthat has shown its possibilities, particularly in its use withchildren, is the play technique in which the individual ispermitted to give free expression to some of his unconsciousmotivations in a way that is not immediately apparent to him. Thelimitation of this technique is the fact that it is highlyinterpretive, but it has the advantage of permitting observationsof the subject's personality reactions in problem situations. Such a study was accordingly carried out on 18 subjects in theearly part of the investigation. METHOD Two situations were studied: one, subsequently to be referredto as the family set-up, in which toys were used to build anapartment or home, and another, subsequently to be known as thecommunity set- up, in which a second variety of toys were used toconstruct a town setting. The Family Set-up The equipment used in this part of the study consisted of abox of household toys of the type available in the ten-centstore, including beds, dressers, chairs, tables, sinks, a stove,a bathtub, a wash basin, a piano, lamps, flower boxes, atelephone, doll sets of a man, woman, boy, girl, and maid, and,in addition, several small wooden slats which were intended to beused as room partitions. The box of toys and materials was presented to the subjectwith the following directions: "Here are a number of toyswhich can be placed in such a manner that a house can be builtfrom them. You are supposed to be this doll (man). Go ahead andbuild yourself a house or apartment. You may use as few or asmany toys as you wish. You may also make believe you are abachelor or a married man with or without a family." The Community Set-up In studying the community set-up the following items wereemployed: eighteen wooden houses, trees, cars, trucks, fireengines, an ambulance, a radio police car, a railroad train,airplanes, and numerous figures representing men, women, andchildren from different walks of life. All these toys were handedto the subject at the same time with the instruction to build atown or city. As in the family set-up, no further help orsuggestions were given. The actual method of handling these materials allows for twoapproaches. In the free method the subject is encouraged to playwith any toy and to create and act out any situation that thenature of the toy suggests to him. No help, clues, or hints aregiven. In the controlled methods either the subject is told tocreate a specific pattern or his responses and reactions to apredetermined particular situation are elicited. Both methodswere used in this study. After the subject had completed either his family or hiscommunity set-up and answered questions regarding certainsituations about which the examiner had questioned him thefollowing points were investigated: ( 1 ) subject's maritalstatus, both real and assumed; (2) type of home he built forhimself (number of rooms, type of furnishing); (3) subject'sassumed occupation; (4) monthly income and rent which he posited;(S) his reaction to attempted burglary; (6) his reaction to hiswife's and his own infidelity; and (7) the attitude he would taketoward civic problems if given a position of responsibility suchas mayor. In addition, the examiner appraised the subject'sneatness and orderliness in his home and community setup. Theexperiment was given first when the subject was undrugged andthen when he was under the influence of marihuana. FINDINGS Results were collated in terms of the type and frequency ofresponses to different situations both before and after takingmarihuana and in terms of number of items (toys) employed in theset- up, as, for example, in the case of the home situation, thenumber of rooms the subject thought necessary for his apartmentand the amount of rent he thought he ought to pay and itsrelation to the income he posited for himself; in the case of thecommunity set- up, the number of times the subject provided forambulances, firemen, and policemen; in the case of the subject'sreaction to burglary, whether he took a passive or a resistantattitude toward the burglary and whether he assumed the burglarhad absconded with most of the property and so on; in the case ofhis attitude toward his wife's adultery, whether he thought heought to divorce her or try for reconciliation; and, when thesubject was unfaithful, whether he thought his wife ought toforgive his delinquency. In most cases comparisons between responses or reactionsshowed little difference in attitude before and after theingestion of marihuana and therefore it would not be tooprofitable in this short summary of the work to present all thedata obtained. However, by way of illustrating the type ofmaterial procured, the following tables are given: (TABLE 20) (TABLE 21) The majority of the patients, though unmarried in real life,assumed families and responsibilities in the play situation, andin a free situation acted out family activities and ideologies.These figures reveal that, on the average, the subjects whenunder the influence of the drug tended to build apartments withsomewhat fewer rooms. The impression of the examiner was thatthis was due primarily to the subject's desire to get throughwith the task as quickly as possible in order to return to hisroom to rest and sleep. (TABLE 22) A "make-believe" sickness or accident necessitatingthe use of an ambulance was the most frequently observed playpattern. When the subjects were under the influence of the drugthe incidence of the ambulance and the police was considerablyless than it was when they were in the undrugged state. (TABLE 23) The most frequent form of passive reaction to his wife'sinfidelity was that the subject would pack up and leave home. Theaggressive reactions consisted of ordering the wife out of thehome in three instances, jailing the wife and lover in oneinstance, throwing the wife out in one instance, killing thelover but leaving the wife unmolested in one instance, andbeating up the lover and leaving the wife unharmed in oneinstance. The following are examples of subjects' responses to theadultery situation. When he was facing the pretended situationbefore taking marihuana, one subject immediately left his house,borrowed money from his employer, and traveled to the West Coast.After he arrived there he proceeded to drink and in due timebecame a derelict on the Barbary Coast. When asked about hischildren he said, "That's closed with the rest of thechapter. Let her ardent lover support the children. I take on anassumed name. Others might get a divorce and custody of thechildren but in my case my home life would be a closedchapter." After the administration of marihuana he stillshowed a passive attitude, but, having assumed the role of apsychologist, he felt obliged to act accordingly. At first heconsidered divorce action, but since that would deprive thechildren of a home, he finally forgave his wife. Then he stoppedin his contemplations, looked at the examiner and said, "Whydo I become altruistic? . . . That's beyond me . . . Maybe Ibecome a martyr . . . I commit an act of martyrdom." Anothersubject, when in the undrugged condition, ordered his wife out ofthe house and later divorced her. In the drugged state customaryprocedures were reversed. The subject went to his parents andremained passively at home while his mother unsuccessfully triedto bring about a reconciliation. The subject's attitude toward adultery did not change in thedrugged state. The data in Table 24 illustrate the fact thatingestion of marihuana generally does not alter the subject'sbasic attitude. (TABLE 24) Practically all the subjects approved of saloons. Gambling wasrejected because it deprives wives and children of money andleads to trouble. A heavy loser may try to recoup his lossesthrough holdups, and fights and homicide may develop fromquarrels. Prostitution was condoned by about 5O per cent of thesubjects both before and after the ingestion of the drug, but theuse of marihuana was frowned upon more often when the subject wasundrugged than when he was in the drugged state. (TABLE 25) SUMMARY AND CONCLUSIONS Eighteen subjects who participated in the marihuana study weresubjected to the play situation with the idea of seeing whetherthe pattern of play or the ideas investigated were materiallyaltered in consequence of the ingestion of the marihuana. Amongthe ideologies which were appraised were: (1) attitude towardfamily set-up; (2) attitude toward different occupations; (3)attitude toward income; (4) attitude toward situations ordinarilycalling for aggression, namely an attempted burglary of his homeand sexual infidelity on the part of his wife; (5) attitudetoward authority. In general the subject's attitude toward family and communityideologies as manifested in play did not change markedly as aresult of the ingestion of marihuana. The subjects (in play) werenot intolerant of infidelity or aggressive toward lawbreakerseither before or after the ingestion of marihuana. On the wholethe initial passive reactions already observed in other parts ofthe study were likewise observed in the play situationexperiment. The only very definite change as a result of theingestion of marihuana was in their attitude toward the drugitself. Without marihuana only 4 out of 14 subjects said theywould tolerate the sale of marihuana while after ingestion 8 ofthem were in favor of this. Another significant manifestation in the play situationpertains to the construction of the community set-up. In generalthe community was less orderly and well organized when thesubjects had had marihuana. It is probable that this poororganization may be ascribed to the generally indifferentattitude and lack of motor coordination already observed in themore controlled studies. On the whole, the experiment with play technique gave lessinformation as to the effect of marihuana on subjects than hadbeen hoped for. This may have been due to the incompleteness ofthe method employed or possibly to the fact that this techniqueis designed to give data about the basic personality of theindividual rather than such alterations in it as might be causedby pharmacological agents. Contents | Feedback | Search DRCNet Library | Schaffer Library | Major Studies | LaGuardiaCommittee Report WT01-B31-31IA031-000652-B042-41http://206.61.184.43:80/schaffer/library/studies/lag/compare.htm 206.61.184.43 19970122130837 text/html 17806HTTP/1.0 200 OKDate: Wednesday, 22-Jan-97 13:08:28 GMTServer: WebSitePro/1.1f (S/N wpo-0deb)Allow-ranges: bytesContent-type: text/htmlLast-modified: Saturday, 28-Dec-96 07:02:41 GMTContent-length: 17588 La Guardia Committee Report - Comparison Between Users andNon-Users Contents | Feedback | Search DRCNet Library | Schaffer Library | Major Studies | LaGuardiaCommittee Report LaGuardia Committee Report on Marihuana Comparison Between Users and Non-Users from the Standpoint ofMental and Physical Deterioration A careful testing of the motor and sensory functions of thenervous system was included in the general physical examinationof each subject. Of motor functions, reflex activity and muscularresponse and coordination were determined; of sensory functions,perception of touch, pain and temperature stimuli; of specializedfunctions, taste, hearing and vision. In the eye, the corneal andlight reflexes were tested and a retinal examination was made. Inthis neurological examination no pathological conditions werefound in any of the subjects. In the psychiatric examination attention was paid to generalintelligence and knowledge in relation to the subject'sbackground, to relevancy of talk in conversation, to orientationas to time, place and situation, to memory of past and recentevents, to ability in simple arithmetic, to judgment in reachingdecisions, and to the presence of abnormal mental content shownby delusions, hallucinations, obsessions, and ideas ofpersecution. There was no evidence of disordered cerebralfunctioning in any of the group. As would be expected, differences in grades of intelligenceand in orderliness in thinking and reasoning were noticeable. TheBellevue Adult Intelligence Test was administered to a total of60 male subjects, 40 marihuana users and 20 nonusers. The averageI.Q. for the user group was 96.7, range 70 to 124, and for thenon-user group the average I.Q. was 104.5, range 93 to 114. Bothgroups may therefore be classified as of average intelligence. When analyzed according to racial distribution the two groupswere even better equated intellectually than the total resultsindicate. For the 28 white subjects examined (13 users and 15non-users) the average I.Q. for the users was 106.1 range 77 to124, and for the non-users the average I.Q. was 106.3, range 96to 114. There were 24 Negro subjects, 19 users and 5 non-users.The average I.Q. for the users was 92.6, range 70 to 112, whilefor the non-users the average I.Q. was 98.8, range 93 to 101.Although the non-users averaged 6.2 points higher than the users,it must be taken into account that the number of Negro non-userstested was small. In any event, the disparity in results wouldnot be considered significant.. The average I.Q. of the 2 PuertoRican users was 91.0, range 72 to 100. Reports on mental deterioration due to toxic, organic orpsychotic factors as given in the literature reveal that in suchcases the individual scores on the Bellevue Adult IntelligenceTest show marked irregularity, depending upon the functionsinvolved in the deteriorative process. As a group, the marihuanausers tested in this study showed very even functioning, and whatlittle irregularity occurred can be explained on the basis oflanguage and racial factors. The physical and psychiatric examinations were of aqualitative rather than a quantitative nature. In the specialexaminations and tests of organ and system function, quantitativemeasurements were obtained for 17 marihuana users. These subjectswere selected for the reason that they had smoked marihuana forthe longest period of time. The figures for years of usage andnumber of cigarettes smoked daily were taken from each subject'sstatement. Marihuana users accustomed to daily smoking for a period offrom two and a half to sixteen years showed no abnormal systemfunctioning which would differentiate them from the non-users. There is definite evidence in this study that the marihuanausers were not inferior in intelligence to the general populationand that they had suffered no mental or physical deterioration asa result of their use of the drug. Addiction and Tolerance A drug addiction is characterized by a compelling urge to usethe drug for the prevention or relief of distressing mental andphysical disturbances which occur when the necessary dose isdelayed or omitted. A drug habit is also characterized by an urgeto use the drug, but this is not compelling. The abstinencesymptoms, which are expressions of nervous states, are notparticularly distressing and do not occur as long as the person'sattention is placed on other matters. Drug tolerance in the narrower sense used here means thatlarger doses than those originally used are required to bringabout the effects desired by the subject. In the case ofmorphine, tolerance develops because of addiction, but in otherinstances tolerance may be present without addiction andaddiction without tolerance. When both are present the mattertakes on greater importance because of the extremes to which theaddict goes to obtain the drug constantly and in increasingquantities. As our group of subjects included 48 users of marihuana,opportunity was afforded for some conclusions concerningmarihuana addiction and tolerance. Practically all of our groupof users stated that they could and often did voluntarily stopthe smoking for a time without any undue disturbance from thedeprivation. In the sociologic study reported by Dr. Schoenfeldit was found that smokers had no compelling urge for marihuana.If "reefers" were not readily available there was nospecial effort made to obtain them from known sources of supply.Dr. Walter Bromberg, Psychiatrist-in-Charge, Psychiatric Clinic,Court of General Sessions in New York, states: "The factthat offenders brought up on marihuana charges do not requestmedical treatment on their incarceration (with its cessation ofdrug supply) argues for the absence of with drawal symptoms.''(1)From interviews with several hundred marihuana users he concludesthat true addiction was absent. (1) Bromberg, W. "Marihuana: a psychiatric study."J.A.MA. 113:4, 1939.=20 The evidence submitted here warrants the conclusion that asfar as New York City is concerned true addiction to marihuanadoes not occur. The evidence concerning acquired tolerance is less clear-cutTolerance develops during the periods when the drug is beingtaken and accounts for the necessity of increasing the dosage tobring about the desired effects. How long the tolerance persistsafter the drug administration is stopped has not been definitelyestablished in any instance. The statements of marihuana usage and time since stoppagegiven by eight of our subjects are summarized in Table 26. (TABLE26) On one or more of the numerous occasions on which marihuanawas administered each of these subjects received what wasconsidered a minimal effective dose. One (J.B.) was given 1 cc.,another (A.B.) 3 cc., the others 2 cc. In all instances thecustomary physical effects, conjunctival injection, dilated andsluggishly reacting pupils, tremors and ataxia, were observed.With these doses the subjects also experienced the sensationdescribed as "high." The only conclusion warranted hereis that if acquired tolerance does occur it persists for alimited period only. Further evidence, though indirect, was brought out by Dr.Shoenfeld's investigation and by personal interviews with our 48users. There is agreement in the statements that among users thesmoking of one or two cigarettes is sufficient to bring on theeffect known as "high." When this state is reached theuser will not continue smoking for fear of becoming "toohigh." When the desired effects have passed off and thesmoker has "come down," smoking one cigarette bringsthe "high" effect on again. This could not be the casehad a steadily increasing tolerance developed. The evidence available then=AD-the absence of any compellingurge to use the drug, the absence of any distressing abstinencesymptoms, the statements that no increase in dosage is requiredto repeat the desired effect in users-=ADjustifies the conclusionthat neither true addiction nor tolerance is found in marihuanausers. The continuation and the frequency of usage of marihuana,as in the case of many other habit-forming substances, depend onthe easily controlled desires for its pleasurable effects.Possible Therapeutic Applications If a drug has well-marked pharmacological actions and lowtoxicity, as appears to be the case with marihuana, aconsideration of special interest is its possible therapeuticapplication. In the older clinical literature marihuana wasrecommended for use in a wide variety of disorders, but in recentyears it has almost disappeared from the materia medica and itwas dropped from the United States Pharmacopeia twenty years ago. In view of the laboratory and clinical findings obtained inthis study the question of the therapeutic possibilities of thedrug was considered. Marihuana possesses two qualities whichsuggest that it might have useful actions in man. The first isthe typical euphoria- producing action which might be applicablein the treatment of various types of mental depression- thesecond is the rather unique property which results in thestimulation of appetite. In the light of this evidence and inview of the fact that there is a lack of any substantialindication of dependence on the drug, it was reasoned thatmarihuana might be useful in alleviating the withdrawal symptomsin drug addicts. At the Riker's Island Penitentiary observations were made on56 inmates who were addicted to morphine or heroin. Two groupswere selected, the addicts in each being matched with those inthe other group as to age, physical condition, duration andintensity of habit, and number of previous attempts at cure. Thesubjects in one group received no treatment or were givenMagendie's solution according to the usual hospital regimen whilethose in the other group were treated with 15 mg. oftetrahydrocannabinol three times daily with or without placebo(subcutaneous water injection). An attempt was made to evaluatethe severity of the withdrawal signs and symptoms. The impressionwas gained that those who received tetrahydrocannabinol had lesssevere withdrawal symptoms and left the hospital at the end ofthe treatment period in better condition than those who receivedno treatment or who were treated with Magendie's solution. Theones in the former group maintained their appetite and in somecases actually gained weight during the withdrawal period. Since psychological factors play a large part in thewithdrawal symptoms of at least a certain proportion of morphineaddicts, there are grounds for the assumption that a drug havingthe properties of marihuana might be of aid in alleviating mentaldistress during the withdrawal period. However, the studies heredescribed were not sufficiently complete to establish the valueof such treatment, and before conclusions can be drawn theproblem must be investigated under completely controlledconditions. PHARMACOLOGICAL STUDY (1) S. Loewe, MD (2) (1) Fromthe Department of Pharrnacology, CorneU University MedicalCollege. (2) Part of the experimental work here reported wasconducted in collaboration with W. Modell SUMMARY 1. This review of the pharmacology of marihuana is centeredaround the chemical and pharmacological identification of theactive principles of hemp. Coordination of chemical andpharmacological investigations as a prerequisite to success inthe search for unknown principles and of the analysis of thestructure-activity relationship of these compounds is discussed. 2. In a survey of the sources of preparations with marihuanaactivity, hemp seeds are disclosed as a heretofore unknown sourceof active substances. 3. Varieties of hemp can be distinguished according togenotypic differences of the content of active principles whichpersist over generations independently of soil and climate. 4. The pharmacological actions of marihuana are analyzed withregard to their specificity and their usefulness as indicators ofspecific components. 5. Sixty-five substances from the new class of cannabinols andrelated classes are reviewed, among which are the essentialcomponents of the marihuana-active hemp oils. The discovery ofthis class, the synthesis of these representatives, and theirstructural elucidation led the way to the discovery of the activesubstances. 6. Quantitative assay procedures are described for the mostimportant marihuana effects that are observed in the animalexperiment. The assay of the ataxia effect in the dog and of thesynergistic hypnotic effect in the mouse with refined proceduresare shown to be reliable expedients for measuring these twomarihuana actions, whereas the areflexia effect in rabbits failedto show the reproducibility required for quantitative purposes. 7. With the aid of these methods the naturaltetrahydrocannabinols are shown to be active principlesresponsible for ataxia in dogs and psychic action in man. Theyare intermediate products between the two ineffective substanceswhich compose the bulk of hemp oil: a labile excretion product ofthe plant, cannabidiol, and a stable end- product, cannabinol.The conversion of cannabidol into active tetrahydrocannabinol bya natural environmental influence has been paralleled byultraviolet irradiation in vitro. 8. Numerous isomers, homologs and analogs of tetra- andhexahydrocannabinol are shown to possess the specific marihuanaaction. The potency varies enormously and is highest in natural,optically active=ADlaevogyrous=ADtetrahydrocannabinols. 9. The significance of many of the structural details of thetetrahydrocannabinol molecule for marihuana activity iselucidated by quantitative determinations of relative potency.Special attention was devoted to a study of the importance ofvariations in the length of the 3- alkyl side chain oftetrahydrocannabinols. In studying methyl to nonyl homologs ofthe original amyl derivative occurring in nature, it was foundthat the maximum potency is not at the amyl, but at the hexylhomolog, and in two out of four homologous series at therepresentatives with still longer side chains. 10. In addition to the ataxia and the psychic action, otherpharmacological attributes of the tetrahydrocannabinols are adecrease in the respiratory and an increase in the pulse rates inthe non-narcotized dog. 11. The synergistic hypnotic action of marihuana in the mouseis to be attributed to the otherwise inert cannabidiol. 12. The corneal areflexia action in the rabbit was muchstronger in impure distillate oils than in pure tetrahydrocannabinols, which leads to the conclusion that this action iseither poorly reproducible or must be attributed to a different,as yet unknown, principle. 13. Only one among the numerous cannabinol derivatives, 7-methyltetrahydrocannabinol, was found to produce a motorstimulant=AD-convulsant=AD-action concomitant with ataxia action.A cannabidiol derivative, tetrahydrocannabidiol, was found tohave specific convulsant action in the dog. A central stimulant (benzedrine) considerably increased the ataxia action of marihuana, whereas a hypnotic (amytal) had no influence. Contents | Feedback | Search DRCNet Library | Schaffer Library | Major Studies | LaGuardiaCommittee Report WT01-B31-32IA031-000652-B042-70http://206.61.184.43:80/schaffer/library/studies/wootton/soma1.htm 206.61.184.43 19970122130850 text/html 98658HTTP/1.0 200 OKDate: Wednesday, 22-Jan-97 13:08:37 GMTServer: WebSitePro/1.1f (S/N wpo-0deb)Allow-ranges: bytesContent-type: text/htmlLast-modified: Saturday, 28-Dec-96 06:45:56 GMTContent-length: 98440 Hashish Fudge - The Times Advertisement and the WoottonReport Contents | Feedback | Search DRCNet Library | Schaffer Library | Major Studies | WoottonReport Hashish Fudge THE TIMES ADVERTISEMENT AND THE WOOTTON REPORT by Steve Abrams 7 April 1993 revised May 10th draft HASHISH FUDGE Soma and the Wootton Report by Steve Abrams In 1967 my organization Soma published afull paged advertisement in The Times which called for reform ofthe law on cannabis. Sixty-five people were persuaded to signthis document, including leading figures in the arts and sciencesand eminent medical men. our proposals for reform stopped shortof outright legalization. However, legalization was clearly along term prospect if they were implemented. The advertisementdeclared the existing law "immoral in principle andunworkable in practice." The advertisement was immediately debated inthe House of Commons, where the Minister of State, Alice Bacon,announced an expert inquiry headed by Baroness Wootton ofAbinger. In January 1969 the so-called "Wootton Report"on Cannabis endorsed the position taken in the advertisement,that "the long asserted dangers of cannabis wereexaggerated, and that the related law was socially damaging, ifnot unworkable."* The Home Secretary of the day, JamesCallaghan (now Lord Callaghan) put up a smokescreen. He denouncedthe Report, claiming its authors had been"overinfluenced" by the "lobby" responsiblefor "that notorious advertisement." However, afterwaiting for a year, he quietly introduced legislation toimplement the recommendations of the Wootton Report. The legislation expired with the 1970 generalelection, but it was immediately reintroduced by the Torygovernment and became law as the Misuse of Drugs Act 1971. Thelaw implemented the unanimous view of the Advisory Committee onDrug Dependence that end users of cannabis should no longer facethe prospect of imprisonment. This was spelled out by the LordChancellor, Lord Hailsham, in his advice to magistrates onsentencing. After a prolonged debate Britain had decided tocondone the use of cannabis. Today the law is scarcely enforcedagainst end users, and the majority of arrests are dealt with bythe procedure of cautioning, without a conviction beingrecorded.** *Home Office Advisory Committee on DrugDependence - Report on Cannabis, 1968, p. 1 ** "The law banning cannabis saleand use is all but unenforced." Times leader, "Overduefor Repeal", 24 July 1992 This interpretation of the history of cannabislaw reform has been consistently denied in the media.* A fullpaged article in The Independent on July 22, 1992("Twenty-five years gone up in smoke") was summarised:"On the 24th July 1967 sixty-five of the famous liberalgreat and good signed an advertisement in The Times calling forcannabis to be legalized and ... nothing happened." LordDeedes, writing in The Telegraph on December 15, 1992 said thesame thing about the Wootton Report. The last public debate on the subject took place in 1969, when Baroness Wootton, then chairman of a sub-committee of the Government's advisory body, recommended a lightening of penalties for possession of cannabis. As a member of the same body, I remember that I thought her arguments persuasive but politically unattainable. We discussed this amicably until Jim Callaghan, the Home Secretary, denounced her proposals in the House of Commons, and that was that. Lord Deedes is at least willing to admit theexistence of the Wootton Report. However, when Lady Wootton diedin 1988, at the age of 91, the work for which she was best knownwas not considered worthy of mention in obituaries, notably inThe Independent and the Guardian.** The Telegraph was the onlynewspaper which got it right: In 1967 her Report on soft drugs caused a considerable furore by its recommendation of more lenient sentences for offences involving cannabis, and was dismissed patronizingly by James Callaghan as "overinfluenced by a lobby in favour of legalizing pot." In 1970, however, Callaghan introduced legislation broadly in line with the Wootton proposals. The press celebrated the twentieth anniversaryof many trivial events of the 'sixties, but there does not seemto have been a single reference in 1989 to the controversy whichdominated the news in January and February 1969. When a longtelevision interview with Lady Wootton was shown posthumously,the subject of drugs was not raised, but a voice-over made theastonishing claim that "in the 'sixties she campaigned forthe legalization of cannabis." *The Times did, finally, print a letter from meon 24 July 1992. It is interesting to compare this letter withanother which Rees-Mogg refused to print in February 1969. Thatletter in included in my article. "Cannabis Law Reform inBritain" in The Marijuana Papers by David Soloman, PenguinBooks, 1970, pp. 69-79 (UK edition only). ** So far as I know, the Wootton Reporthas never been mentioned in The Independent. The authors of thepage published on July 22, 1992, Dina Rabinovich, Emily Greeneand Andrew Brown, listed forty events following on after theadvertisement but pointedly ignored the existence of the Reportand the reduction in penalties under the Misuse of Drugs Act. In a letter to the Times on February 5th,1969 in the aftermath of the Parliamentary debate on the WoottonReport, Lady Wootton and the Chairman of the Advisory Committee,Sir Edward Wayne, noted that none of the members of thesub-committee supported the legalization of cannabis. On theSunday following publication of the Report, Lady Wootton said inan article in The Sunday Times : "Even those who wanted tolegalize (cannabis), even the people who signed the Timesadvertisement, admit that immediate legalization is notpractical."* The Wootton Report did contemplate the eventuallegalization of cannabis, but the so-called "cannabislobby" refused to jump the gun. The 1969 Prospectus of theSoma Research Association, Ltd. said: A Soma delegation gave oral evidence to the sub-committee. We took the view that prohibition appeared to be an ineffective and socially damaging method of controlling the misuse of cannabis. However, we argued that realistic decisions about the long term control and possible legalization of cannabis could not be made on the basis of existing knowledge. Additional research was required, but could not be undertaken because the law prohibited research in which cannabis was smoked. The advertisement said, "The Governmentought to welcome and encourage research into all aspects ofcannabis smoking, but according to the law as it stands, no oneis permitted to smoke cannabis under any circumstances, andexceptions cannot be made for scientific or medicalresearch." Lady Wootton made the same point in her SundayTimes article: "People have not been able to undertakeserious research because smoking is forbidden on allpremises." Research was prohibited because it was anoffence to have charge of premises where cannabis was smoked. Theliability was absolute; guilty knowledge was not required. Noexceptions were judged possible. Cannabis could not even besmoked by a machine on government premises. The law contained aterm which made it impossible to challenge its own premisses ofthe harmfulness of cannabis smoking. The advertisement asserted that cannabis was"the least dangerous of pleasure-giving drugs." Theargument was rehearsed at some length, and those persuaded by itmight well have been inclined to experiment. It came close tosaying that the main danger of cannabis smoking was the prospectof being arrested. But any criticism of an unjust law is likelyto breed disrespect for the law. The text said, "Theprohibition of cannabis has brought the law into disrepute andhas demoralized police officers faced with the necessity ofenforcing an unjust law." * Barbara Wootton, "Time and theDrug Scene," Sunday Times, 12 January 1969. At the 1967 Tory party conference, the ShadowHome Secretary, Quintin Hogg (now Lord Hailsham), denounced theorganizers and signatories of the Soma advertisement. He saidthat the editor of The Times, William Rees-Mogg (now LordRees-Mogg), would never live down the scandal caused by itspublication. Hogg was "profoundly shocked by theirresponsibility of those who wanted to change the law. Theirarguments were "casuistic, confused, sophistical andimmature:" There is no half-way house in this matter. There can be no encouraging the drug up to a point. You either sell it over the counter or in the shops or you prohibit it altogether. Rees-Mogg replied in a Times leader, "TheRight to Dissent," on October 23rd: We believe that people who want to change the law have a right to put their case to the public. We do not accept advertisements from people who want to break the law. But there is a vital difference between wanting the law to be broken and wanting it to be changed. ... Mr. Hogg thinks that the subject of drugs is so dangerous that free discussion cannot be allowed, that those who disagree with him have no right to be heard. Our view would be that his rhetorical approach is more likely to repel than to persuade. In January 1969, following publication of theWootton Report, Hogg wrote in the Daily Express that it wasnecessary to "pursue the addicts of hashish and marijuanawith the utmost severity the law allows." When the reportwas debated in Parliament, on the 27th of January, Hogg insistedthat cannabis was a dangerous addictive drug, the cause ofmadness and mayhem. He opposed any reduction in the maximumpenalty of ten years' imprisonment because, in this event,"the conclusion drawn by the public, by traffickers in thedrug and by potential victims of it would be that the governmentwere on their way to legalizing its use. The penalties under the Dangerous Drugs Act didnot distinguish between supply and use. The maximum penaltieswere one year on summary conviction and ten years on inditement.Reducing the penalties for possession of cannabis would involveputting down the maximum penalty on summary conviction to sixmonths or less. This would mean, in practice, that users ofcannabis would no longer face the prospect of imprisonment. Themain deterrent to consumption would thus be removed and use wouldincrease. The stigma of a criminal conviction would soon belessened. The police would no longer have much incentive toenforce the law and in due course they would be unable to enforceit. Finally, legalization would come, after a generation. The issue of cannabis law reform was raised ata crucial time. In 1967 the drug laws were in disarray. TheDangerous Drugs Act applied to drugs controlled under the UNSingle Convention on Narcotic Drugs, namely heroin, cocaine andcannabis, including their derivatives and analogues. Amphetamineand LSD were subject to more moderate penalties under the Drugs(Prevention of Misuse) Act 1964. LSD had only just become illegaland barbiturates were not controlled at all. Meanwhile somecannabis users were punished more severely than heroin users.Cannabis smoking was regarded as a crime but heroin addiction wastreated as an illness. Doctors had the right to prescribe heroin.The Court might send a cannabis smoker to prison and send aheroin user to a doctor. The formation of Soma was announced in anarticle published in Cherwell, the Oxford student newspaper, onFebruary 1st, 1967. The national press became involved in acontroversy about the prevalence of cannabis at Oxford, arisingout of an article by myself in an anthology, The Book 21 Grass,edited by George Andrews and Simon Vinkenoog.* The publisher soldthe "story" to The People, who brought it out intwo inch headlines on January 29th. This article was quoted atlength by President Clinton's drugs adviser, Professor NormanGrinspoon in his book, Marihuana Reconsidered (Harvard UniversityPress, 1971; pp. 311-312. It was also described in the TimesLiterary Supplement (June 15th, 1967) as "a sane andbalanced piece of writing that does much to implement the ...view that harm rather than good is done by the existing state ofthe law." * "The Oxford Scene and theLaw", The Book of Grass, Peter Owen 1967, pp. 235-42 Following a press conference on February 2nd tolaunch the Book of Grass, an article by Peter Fiddick appeared inThe Guardian, prophetically entitled, "Pot lobby moves intogear." (February 3rd) Follow up articles, debating theprevalence of cannabis smoking at Oxford, appeared The Times, TheTelegraph and the Guardian. There were also several articles inThe Oxford Mail, and the story dominated Cherwell (then edited byJulian Norridge) for the remainder of the term. The page one lead in Cherwell was accompaniedby a double paged spread, "The Pot Plot", a kind of dryrun for the Times advertisement which served as a fact sheet forthe media. "The Pot Plot" was noticed by the popularpress. "Smoke more pot. It's safer than beer," wroteArthur Smith in the Daily Mirror on January 31st. "Make itlegal to take marihuana urges Oxford student" was theheading for an article in the Mail the following day by NicholasLloyd (former Cherwell editor, now Sir Nicholas, editor of theDaily Express). On the 6th of February I took part in atelevision discussion with the Chief Constable of Oxford C. G.Burroughs and a psychiatrist from the Littlemore Hospital, Dr.O'Gorman, on the television program "Today", fromBirmingham. On the same day, The Telegraph printed thefollowing letter from me: May I make myself clear? Drug addiction is extremely rare within the University of Oxford. I do not know of any resident member of the University who is addicted to narcotics such as heroin and cocaine. There are probably a number of addicts to amphetamines and barbiturates, drugs which are widely and indiscriminately prescribed under the National Health Service. There is no reason to believe that the widespread use of cannabis (marijuana or hashish or hemp) constitutes a problem at the University. Cannabis is nonaddictive and there have been no cases at Oxford of disorderly behaviour attributable to its influence. The consensus of informed medical opinion is that cannabis is probably less harmful than alcohol. The civil authorities and the press have indiscriminately confused the non-addictive and relatively harmless herb cannabis with addictive and harmful drugs such as amphetamines and heroin. When challenged on this point they argue that cannabis is indirectly harmful because its use leads to heroin addiction. There is little or no evidence in support of this view. One might as well argue that sex leads to prostitution. The effects of cannabis and heroin are opposite in character. Heroin users are disturbed individuals who need to escape from reality; cannabis has the effect of enhancing reality. My qualified estimate that five per cent of Oxford students use cannabis when it is available has been challenged by authorities who have a strong vested interest in minimising the extent of the situation. Students go out of their way to conceal information from these authorities, but they go out of their way to reveal information to me. My estimate was based on four years direct observation, in the course of which I observed hundreds of people smoking and conducted and cross-checked many careful interviews. Perhaps I have sources of information which are unavailable to the Chief Constable, the proctors and various anonymous university officials. * According to press reports, "moneychanged hands for The People article." Cf. "Our Man inFleet Street", Drugs and Society, vol. 1, no. 3 (December1971, pp. 34-35) and the response, a letter from me, in vol. 1,no. 4, January 1972, p. 37 I was not paid. I had no contract withthe publisher, who sold the story without my permission andagainst my protests, which are documented. I had been playing the numbers game. Five percent of junior members of the university translates to fivehundred Oxford students. I felt no compunction about using theimage of the University to challenge the traditional stereotypeof the anti-social drug taker. Following publication of thePeople lead, an article in The Times said that my claim that"at least 500 undergraduates and a few dozen dons"smoke pot "has been rejected by police, proctors anddons." The Times quoted the view of the SeniorProctor, Dr. Robin Fletcher, that my figures were "grosslyexaggerated." : "The article could create a very badimage of the University. It is unfortunate for a number ofreasons." A similar article in The Telegraph quoted the viewof "a senior member of the university who is concerned withinvestigations into student health problems" : "I wouldbe surprised if the number of people using drugs habitually inthe University is more than about twenty." This official waspresumably D. C. M. Yardley, (now Local Ombudsman) who was Dr.Fletcher's predecessor. The Telegraph stated that Dr. Yardley hadled an investigation of undergraduate drug use the preceding yearand concluded that no more than fifty students were involved. Nomore than thirty took drugs with any degree of regularity. In theCherwell lead on February 1st, Dr. Yardley's view of the dangerof cannabis is quoted: "The nervous system of regular potsmokers is shot to bits. They are mental wrecks." In ThePeople he is quoted: "All but those with the strongest mindswill end up seeking bigger and better 'kicks' from heroin andlike drugs. Within the university and nationally, any move tobring about the acceptance of hemp must be fought." The matter was resolved by the UniversityCommittee on Student Health, which included several heads ofcolleges. I was invited to give evidence to the Committee onFebruary 15th. They accepted my claim that as many as fivehundred undergraduates had used cannabis. I made the point thatthe problem was hardly confined to Oxford and asked the Committeeto press the Home Secretary to institute a government inquiryinto the status of cannabis and LSD. The Chairman of theCommittee was the Head of my college, St. Catherine's, AlanBullock (now Lord Bullock, formerly Vice Chancellor of theUniversity). He told me that my suggestion that the Universitypress for a Home Office inquiry had been accepted and invited meto assist him in drafting the letter to this effect, which wassent to the then Vice Chancellor, Kenenth Turpin on February28th. The first account of the Student Health Reportappeared in a Cherwell exclusive on the 1st of March. On the sameday things looked as if they might be getting out of hand.Cherwell had announced a "happening" in WellingtonSquare, sponsored by International Times. It was to be filmed forGerman television. John Hopkins, the organizer, promised toprovide Suzie Creamcheese of the "Mothers of Invention"pop group on a white horse. The front page of the Oxford Mail forMarch 2nd has a photo of hundreds of students pouring out ofBalliol College and another of them marching along the High.There were signs and banners with legends such as "Deathpenalty for pot" and "God moves in a mysteriousway." The Deputy Chief Constable stated that "more than500 students disorganized the city centre for over twohours."* The Oxford Mail account says that the policetried to clear Wellington Square, whereupon the"happening" reformed as a procession down St. John'sStreet. They moved straight across Beaumont Street and St. Giles,without pausing for traffic, in through Balliol College backentrance (where the police could not follow) and out againthrough the front entrance in Broad Street. The processioncontinued on through the Turl and the High to Carfax. The"happening" was also covered in the national press. TheSun called attention to six undergraduates tied together with aplastic rope crawling along the High Street, insisting they wereclimbing a mountain. The Sun also remarked on the presence of agirl on horseback carrying a sign which said, "Free SuzieCreamcheese!" The Report of the Committee on Student Healthwas published on April 3rd and reviewed in The Times thefollowing day. The Times article says, "At the HealthCommittee's suggestion, the Vice Chancellor of Oxford University,Mr. K. C. Turpin, is to ask the Home Secretary for an urgentnational enquiry into the dangers of drug taking." It saidthe university was concerned at the numbers which might beexperimenting with cannabis. The following article by NicholasLloyd appeared in the Daily Mail: The pot takers. 500 Oxford students use marijuana About 500 Oxford undergraduates smoke marijuana,, says a committee of dons. The Committee was set up to report on the health of students at the university. In a letter to Kenneth Turpin, the Vice Chancellor, it say that an independent claim that about five per cent of the 10,000 students take drugs is probably correct. But it maintains that the situation at Oxford is not exceptional and that a similar proportion of students at other universities take drugs. The committee, headed by Mr. Alan Bullock, Master of St. Catherine's College, says that drug taking is a national problem. It calls for a full investigation into the effects of different drugs and says that public policy could then be based on scientific fact instead of prejudice. On Tuesday students at St. Catherine's College passed a motion by 24 votes to 4 in favour of making marijuana - known as 'pot' - legally available. * In fact the numbers were swelledbecause students from the Oxford Polytechnic, in their "ragweek", joined the proceedings. On the 7th of April, the Home secretary, RoyJenkins, announced the appointment of an investigation led byBaroness Wootton. She was to head a "sub-committee onhallucinogens" of the Advisory Council on Drug Dependence,appointed in December 1966, enacting a recommendation of theSecond Brain Report the previous year. We hoped for something earth shaking from theWootton Committee. We hoped for a published report on cannabisthat would bear comparison with the New York Mayor's Report onMarihuana (the La Guardia Report) of 1944 and the East IndianHemp Drugs Report of 1893-94. The first stage of the campaign hadbeen concluded. The chain of events leading to the appearanceof the advertisement involved an interaction with the affairs ofthe Rolling Stones, the Beatles and the so-called"underground." One of the reasons for raising thesubject of cannabis with urgency in the favourable context of itsuse at Oxford was the need to combat what a Times leader ("ADangerous Press Camapign") soon called "the deliberatesensationalism that underlines the present campaign against"drugs." The Soma advertisement said "The crime atissue is not drug abuse but heresy." Traditionally, the use of cannabis had beenlargely confined to Blacks, Indians and Arabs.* Muslims broadlytolerated the use of cannabis but prohibited alcohol, which is,literally, sacred to Christians, and also to Jews. The new rockmusic could be represented as a fusion of black rhythms andEastern spirituality. The gentle undulations of the music werealso explicitly sexual. For decades the Americans, in particular,had portrayed the use of cannabis as degenerate. The News of the World replied to the article inthe People by accusing the Rolling Stones of abusing drugs.(February 3rd) The same night Mick Jagger appeared with Hogg onthe Eamon Andrews talk show. Jagger told Hogg that he too hadbeen to university, and seemed to get he better of him. Then, Ithought, he got above himself and announced, impulsively, that hewould sue the News of the World for libel. The newspaper panickedand went to the Scotland Yard Drug Squad. The head of the DrugSquad, Chief Inspector Lynch later told me that he refused toact. He said that he was not expected to stamp out cannabis, butto keep its use under control. If he arrested Mick Jagger everylad in the country would want to try some pot. He was, after all,head of the drug squad, not head of the Lynch mob. * The statistics published with the WoottonReport show that 1964, the first year in which white offendersoutnumbered blacks, was also the first year in which a minority(48 per cent) of cannabis offenders were sent to prison. As is well known, the News of the World hadmore success with the local police in West Wittering, where KeithRichards lived. In the subsequent trial, Jagger's counsel,Michael Havers (later Lord Havers, also Mrs. Thatcher's attorneygeneral in the "Spycatcher" case) alleged that thenewspaper used an agent provocateur. The arrests were made onFebruary 12th, but the story did not break until the 19th. Onlythe Telegraph named those arrested, Keith Richards, charged withthe absolute offence of permitting premises to be used forsmoking cannabis, and Mick Jagger, charged with possession ofamphetamine. George Harrison has said that the Beatles were atthe party that was raided, but the police waited until theyleft. Perhaps the beginning of the entire sequence ofevents was the arrest on cannabis charges on December 30th 1966of the aforementioned John Hopkins (Hoppy), a member of theeditorial board of the underground newspaper "InternationalTimes."* The "underground" was a literary andartistic avant garde with a large contingent from Oxford andCambridge. Hoppy, for example, was trained as a physicist atCambridge. The underground had found an enemy in Lord Goodman,Chairman of the Arts Council, who went over the head of the HomeSecretary, Roy Jenkins, and appealed directly to the Director ofPublic Prosecutions to mount a police raid on the Indica bookshopwhere International Times was edited.** Goodman had an animusagainst (Barry) Miles, co-proprietor of the bookshop with PeterAsher, and also a member of the Editorial Board of IT. InDecember 1966 Eric Whitte nominated Miles to serve on the ArtsCouncil Literary Advisory Panel. Goodman had been infuriated whenhis appointment was announced to the press on January 30th, andhad him thrown off.*** Hoppy, who was on bail, organized the greatestof the underground events, the "24 Hour TechnicolourDream" at Alexandra Palace on April 29th, to raise funds forthe defence of the paper. When his trial came up, he insisted onpleading not guilty though he had no defence. He had a previousconviction for possession of cannabis but insisted on a jurytrial, which meant going before a judge of the Crown Court andrisking a longer sentence than one year. Hoppy completed aclassical recipe for self-imprisonment by lecturing the court onthe need to legalize cannabis. Sentencing him to nine monthsimprisonment on June 1st, the Deputy Chairman of Inner LondonSessions, A. Gordon Friend, said: I have just heard what your views are on the possession of cannabis and the smoking of it. This is not a matter I can overlook - You are a pest to society. * Lord Thompson, proprietor of The Times,obtained an injunction to stop the use of the word"Times" in the title. The paper then became"IT" until Max Handley restored its correct name in themid seventies. Incidently the girl in the logo is not Clara Bow.Its Theda Bara. ** According to Tom Driberg. *** Peter Fryer - "A Map of theUnderground", Encounter, October 1967, pp. 9-10 A sympathetic account of the casewas published by Clive Goodwin in Tribune and Christopher Loguecontributed a poem "For John Hopkins, imprisoned inWandsworth Jail", which appeared in the New Statesman onJuly 7th. The next day, June 2nd, Hoppy's friends met atIndica. I raised my idea of advertising in The Times.* Miles saidhe thought he knew where the money might be found. He had been toschool with his partner, Peter Asher, who was half of the pop duo"Peter and Gordon", a "one-hit wonder." PeterAsher's sister, Jane, was Paul McCartney's girlfriend. McCartneyhad several times contributed small sums to keep IT going. By theend of the day he had offered to guarantee the cost of theadvertisement, which was #1800. I was not as surprised as I might have been atthis turn of events. I had gone to the meeting thinking about theplight of the Beatles and their record company, EMI. "SgtPepper" had been officially released the preceding day. Ihad purchased a copy from the HMV Shop in Notting Hill on the27th of May and had been listening to it continuously. Earlier inthe year the single Strawberry Fields/Penny Lane suggested thatthe Beatles had become enthusiastic proponents of LSD. "SgtPepper" reinforced this impression. McCartney had also givenan ill-advised interview to Life magazine. The Beatles had"pissed" on their clean image as explicitly as theRolling Stones had "pissed" on a garage forecourt inJune 1965. The establishment was ready to send the RollingStones to prison. Now it looked as if the Beatles would be next.Something had to be done to get them off the hook. Nobody wantedthem arrested, but it was difficult to see an alternative. Iproposed, in effect, to change the issue from LSD to pot and toassociate the Beatles with leading figures in the arts andsciences in a legitimate protest from 'within the system.' It isnot in any way surprising that McCartney was willing to back theadvertisement or that Rees-Mogg was willing to publish it. I went along with Miles to discuss theproject with McCartney. Unless my memory is playing tricks on me,McCartney thrust a copy of Sergent Pepper into my hands and said,"Listen to it through headphones on acid." Theconversation that followed was, however, sedate. McCartney waswell aware of the power of public statements coming from theBeatles. He realized that if they spoke out on too many issues,their influence would be diluted. But pot was going to be anexception. McCartney said that the Beatles and their managerBrian Epstein would all put their names to the advertisement andhe agreed that the project would be left entirely in my hands. Hehoped that his participation in the funding could be kept quiet.It came to the attention of the Evening Standard the next day. Ireceived a call from the Diary, from Max Hastings or JulianNorridge translated from Cherwell. "How could you possiblyknow?" I asked. The source, I was immediately told, was theeditor, Charles Wintour. Later I spoke to McCartney on the phone. Weagreed that Phillip Oates could say in his first"Atticus" in the Sunday Times (eventually published onJuly 9th) that all four Beatles would be among those contributingto the cost of the advertisement. Then, on the eve ofpublication, when I attended The Times to inspect the proofs, theadvertising manager, R. Grant Davidson, got cold feet.Publication had been delayed for a week whilst he checked all thenames. Now he asked for payment in advance. I rang the onlyperson I had met in the Beatles organization, Peter Brown of themusic publishing company, Northern Music (NEMS). He sent roundhis personal cheque for #1800. Someone later told me that he hadbeen reimbursed from a Beatles advertising account. Probably noneof the Beatles was out of pocket. As the advertising manager's caution indicates,the publication of the advertisement was a near thing. Thedeciding factor in persuading the Times to publish and theBeatles to meet the cost was probably the sensational case of theRolling Stones, which began on the 27th of June. The verdictscame on Thursday the 30th. Richards was sentenced to a year inprison on the premises charge and Jagger was given three monthsfor possession of four amphetamine tablets known as 'blackbombers.' Both were first offenders. They were released on bailthe following day. That night there was a spontaneousdemonstration outside the News of the World building in Fleetstreet. No one had cared enough to demonstrate in Fleet Streetsince the first world war, and no one would ever care enough todo so again. The police turned dogs on the demonstrators and sixpeople were arrested. The demonstrations continued into the earlyhours of the morning. The next day, Richards and Jagger werereleased on bail. It being Friday, the members of the undergroundclub, UFO, over a thousand persons in extravagant dress, marchedat midnight from Tottenham, Court Road to the statue of Eros atPiccadilly Circus, where they were joined by several hundredmembers of other West End clubs. I remember Pat Arrowsmith of CNDwringing her hands in anguish, being quite unable to comprehendour tactics. We then formed up and marched to Fleet Street.Again the police turned dogs against us, and one demonstrator wasbitten. On Saturday the News of the World demonstrationscontinued for the third night running. A picture of part of thecrowd, myself among them, appeared on the front page of the Newsof the World. Mick Farren, a future editor of IT and lead singerof the Social Deviants, was beaten by the police and a number ofothers were arrested, including Suzie Creamcheese. Rees-Mogg's celebrated leading article,"Who breaks a butterfly on a wheel?" appeared in TheTimes on the same day, Saturday the 1st of July. My admirationfor it is subject to qualification. The editor did not addressthe issue squarely. He was moved by the spectacle of Jagger inhandcuffs, but said nothing at all about the twelve monthssentence meted out to Keith Richards, who was convicted of beingin control of premises used for the purpose of cannabis smoking.The leader did not question the justice of this charge, which wasan "absolute" offence that did not require guiltyknowledge on the part of the offender. Rees-Mogg did not mentioncannabis at all. The last "event" precedingpublication of the Times advertisement was the famous"Legalize Pot Rally" at Speakers Corner in Hyde Park onSunday the 16th of July. This was one of a series of"be-ins" which had been taking place at monthlyintervals at Primrose Hill and Hampstead Heath. "Vastpublicity for legalize pot rally. Steve Abrams appears ontelevision with amazing regularity," wrote InternationalTimes. In the event, several thousand people turned up, manywearing flowers and bells and many smoking pot openly. Most ofthe national newspapers gave "flower power" a doublepaged spread the next day. I presided at the meeting and introduced AlanGinsberg. When a policeman asked him to stop playing hisharmonium, which went against the by-laws, he was filmed givingthe policeman a flower. I decided to break up the meeting intosmall groups. I remember Stokely Carmichael, Alexis Korner,Carolyn Coon, Spike Hawkins, Clive Goodwin and Adrian Mitchellspeaking simultaneously, each mounted on a soap-box andsurrounded by a few hundred people. I was surprised to findmyremarks used in a schools program on "The Right toProtest" that seemed to be repeated on television mostafternoons. Everyone had a good time in Hyde Park. No one wasarrested. We had struck another blow against the image of theunkempt and violent drug addict. The aim of the advertisement was to influencethe Wootton subcommittee on hallucinogens. They had restrictedthemselves to pharmacological and medical studies on bothcannabis and LSD. We wanted them to report on cannabis alone, toemphasize the social aspect of its use and to make specificrecommendations for law reform. Crude attempts were made to discredit theprofessional competence of the sub-committee. Followingpublication of the Report on Cannabis, Quintin Hogg was quoted inThe Times, on January 9th, 1969: "A less suitable committeeis impossible to imagine. Half the subcommittee are doctors andthere is not a judge, or anybody practising at the criminal bar,among them." The eleven members of the sub-committee were K.J. Barraclough, a stipendiary magistrate and Chairman of thePoisons Board; Dr. Thomas Bewley, a psychiatrist in charge of theaddiction clinic at Tooting Bec Hospital, the Secretary and laterPresident of the Society for the Study of Addiction; PeterBrodie, Assistant Commissioner of Scotland Yard in charge of theC.I.D., also Vice President of Interpol; Dr. P. H. Connell, apsychiatrist at the Maudsley Hospital; Dr. J. D. P. Graham,professor of pharmacology; Dr. C. R. B. Joyce, Head of theDepartment of Pharmacology at London Hospital Medical College,later Director of Research at Ciba, Switzerland; Sir AubreyLewis, Emeritus Professor of Psychiatry at the Maudsley; Dr.Nicholas Malleson, a psychiatrist, Reader in Student Problems andHead of Student Health at London University, also the mostexperienced LSD therapist in Britain; H. W. Palmer of the GlaxoPharmaceuticals Company; Timothy Raison, Editor of New Society,later Tory MP, Minister of State for Home Affairs; MichaelSchofield, a sociologist who had conducted several studies forthe Home Office; and Baroness Wootton, a distinguished socialscientist, a serving magistrate, Governor of the BBC, veteran ofseveral Royal Commissions. I decided that Dr. Malleson was the key memberof the subcommittee. Had it been a jury, he would probably havebeen the foreman. I approached him and offered to rewrite thetext of the advertisemnt until it satisfied him. In return, Iasked to use his name privately in soliciting signatures. I hadmet Michael Schofield as a fellow member of the committeepreparing a Report on Drugs and Civil Liberties for the NationalCouncil on Civil Liberties (NCCL). I asked him to sign theadvertisement. The sub-committee met 17 times between April1967 and July 1968. At the first meeting the plan was to reportto the main committee in October. The report was to be restrictedin scope and to treat both cannabis and LSD. Before theadvertisement appeared, the committee limited its enquiries topharmacological and medical questions. According to Michael Schofield, thesub-committee were not favourably disposed to begin with. At thefirst meeting one member said that research was not necessary andthat all the sub-committee had to do was to work out ways to"stop the spread of this filthy habit." During theearly meetings, six members wanted to take a hard line, four wereundecided and two felt that the penalties for possession were toosevere.* The two liberals were probably Schofield and Malleson.It follows that Lady Wootton took some persuading. If there was a consensus of informed medicalopinion on cannabis, the sub-committee would have to recognizeit. The important thing was to do what could be done to persuadethem to report on cannabis alone and to broaden the scope oftheir enquiry, to give proper consideration to the social aspectsof cannabis use and to make specific recommendations for lawreform. My endeavour in the text of the advertisement was todefine the issues for a public debate. The debate began immediately. The advertisementwas mentioned in Parliament on the day of its appearance. Fourdays later, the headlines were about the savage sentence of fiveyears' imprisonment and a 10,000 fine or an extra year whichJudge Argyle passed on a black man charged with"possession" of cannabis. He did this, he said toexpress his disapproval of the Soma advertisement.** He alsoclaimed that 69 of 70 heroin addicts in Birmingham had"started on cannabis." On the same day, Friday the 28th, the Somaadvertisement was the subject of an adjournment debate in theHouse of Commons proposed by Paul Channon. The Minister of State,Alice Bacon (Later Baroness Bacon), claimed that 97 per cent ofheroin addicts known to the Home Office had "started oncannabis." She seems to have invented this figure. Herspeech was racist in tone and credited cannabis and LSD with theimportation of negro music and Indian spirituality. She comparedMcCartney unfavourably with a now forgotten singer called"Lulu." However, she said that the issues raised in theadvertisement would be considered by the Wootton sub-committee,and she committed the Government to taking their Report intoconsideration in framing new legislation. * Michael Schofield - The Strange Case of Pot,Pelican Books, 1971. Schofield has a chapter about"Reactions to the Wootton Report" but he ignoresCallaghan's assertion that the sub-committee had been"overinfluenced" by the "lobby" responsiblefor the Soma advertisement. He also fails to mention the factthat he was a signatory to the advertisement. ** The man was regarded by the Court as a majorsupplier. Press reports did not specify the quantity of cannabisfound in his possession. The sentence was reduced onappeal. In this debate William Deedes outdid himself.He was under the illusion that hashish is far more dangerous thanmarijuana. Does anyone believe that if we were to end the black market in cannabis leaf by legalizing it, a black market in resin would not begin. That could undermine the nation. That is why I believe that those who sign public announcements assume very grave responsibilities unless they can back what they say with more knowledge than most of us,believe we have. Tom Driberg, who signed the Soma advertisement,read from his father's evidence to the East Indian Hemp DrugsCommission in 1892. I briefed Driberg and Channon and got to sitin the strangers box on the floor of the house during the debate. On Monday the 31st of July, a week followingthe publication of the advertisement, the conviction of KeithRichards was quashed and Jagger's prison sentence (for possessionof amphetamine tablets) was reduced to a conditional discharge.The Soma advertisement had asked for the abolition of thepremises offence and included a plea for the release of all thoseimprisoned for possession of cannabis. Soma was an informal organization when theadvertisement appeared. Later, it was incorporated as the SomaResearch Association, Ltd. There was a very distinguished Boardof Directors, including the most eminent living scientist,Francis Crick, F.R.S., who won a Nobel prize for his discoverywith James Watson of the structure of DNA. The Board includedfour psychiatrists: Professor Norman Zinberg of Harvard, whoseexperiment published in 1968 was the first authorised by the USgovernment and became the strongest affirmation of the relativelyharmless character of cannabis smoking; Dr. Anthony Storr, aleading establishment figure and author; Dr. R. D. Laing, theleading radical analyst of the day; and his colleague at thePhiladelphia Association, Dr. David Cooper. The other directorswere The Revd. Kenneth Leech, the leading authority on drug abusewithin the Church of England, an early advocate of the"legalization" of cannabis; Francis Huxley, the Oxfordanthropologist, and myself. Cooper, Crick, Huxley, Laing andStorr were signatories to the advertisement. Soma had five employees, including Don Aitken,the Secretary and Archivist; Derek Blackburn, Psychologist; andAdam Parker-Rhodes, Pharmacologist. Premises were at 438, FulhamRoad, SW6 and 4, Camden High Street, NW1. Soma had activeresearch and medical programs, the latter in collaboration withthe doctors at an affiliated NHS surgery in Notting Hill. Dr. IanDunbar was Medical Director of Soma and Dr. Sam Hutt was MedicalCorrespondent. Aitken and Blackburn prepared a bibliography ofcannabis. We did the first human experiments with the activeprinciple of cannabis, tetrahydracannabinol (THC), synthesized inour laboratory. We compared the action of the isomers of THC andtried to distinguish euphoria from intoxication by measuring theapparent tridimensionality of visual perception, the extent towhich the world appeared, as it were,"spaced-out." We could work with THC because its structurehad not been determined when the Dangerous Drugs Act was lastrevised. It had not been placed under UN control. Before we madeTHC, we obtained supplies of a purified form of cannabis, thealcoholic extract, which was made available on prescription.Extracts and tinctures of cannabis had been removed from thePharmacopoeia but were still listed in theExtrapharmacopoeia. Dr. Dunbar wrote a prescription for me on the18th of August 1967. I finally encashed it at an obscure branchof Boots in the East End. The prescription came with a letterthat said: "This is an historical document. I suggest youframe it." Later a pop group, the Aynesley DunbarRetaliation brought out a famous LP called "Dr. Dunbar'sPrescription." I put it to the Home Office Drugs Branch thatmost of the distinguished signatories to the advertisement andmany of those who commented on it had openly declared their useof cannabis. For example, the following paragraph ended a letterto The Guardian published on July 8th and shown on television in"What the Papers Say" : ... If anyone remains unconvinced by this mass of expert advice then I can only offer them the evidence of my own experience having smoked marijuana for many years without ill effects whatsoever. Yours faithfully Clive Goodwin 79 Cromwell Road London SW7 The Home Office obtained a legal opinionthat the part of the law which made it an absolute offence tokeep premises for the purposes of cannabis smoking did not applyto the smoking of purified cannabis; that is to say, smokingpreparations based on "extract of cannabis," BPC. Anapproach was then made to the UN drugs control apparatus, whoincreased the nominal UK quota of cannabis imports from 15 kilosper annum to 254 kilos. (Five hundredweight) Ganja was importedfrom India and made up by the botanical firm, Ransoms of Hitchen. One of the early debates was a seventy minutetelevision special on September 1st, 1967, a mock trial in theseries "Your Witness" in which Sir John Foster, Q.C.was to argue the case for cannabis against Leon Brittan. Sir Johndropped out and was replaced by Jonathan Aitken, a signatory tothe advertisement (now a minister in the Government).* Aitkenproposed to call me as a witness. I had in mind smoking pot as Igave evidence and presented myself for cross examination. The BBCresearcher, Esther Rantzen, agreed that this would be goodtelevision, and so I approached Dr. Dunbar for the firstprescription. * Sir John was at a meeting at the House ofCommons in June at which he, Jonathan Aitken, Humphry Berkeley,Tom Driberg and Brian Walden all agreed to sign theadvertisement. He later atoned for withdrawing from theadvertisement and the debate by joining Soma. Indeed, he sentalong his friend Princess Feuzy, who was a subject in ourresearch program. Leon Brittan was fully aware thatextracts and tinctures were controlled separately from cannabisand cannabis resin and that the prohibition on the use ofpremises for smoking cannabis did not apply to these purifiedforms. However, he was also aware that my live appearance wouldundermine his case. He therefore fudged the issue and insistedthat if I appeared the BBC would be liable to prosecution. It wascompromise in the end. I was not permitted to appear live, butthe BBC filmed me smoking at home, passing any risk onto mylandlord. The corporation thus obtained some stock film that wasreused a number of times. On the 10th of October, 1967 Jonathan Aitkenand I successfully argued a cannabis law reform motion againstProfessor Francis Camps and Robert Pitman at the London HospitalMedical College. The next day The Telegraph reported the warningthat Professor Camps had given about the alleged dangers ofcannabis, without noting the fact that his opinion had beenrejected by a large audience of doctors and medical students. I came up against Professor Camps again at aconference on drugs of the Student Humanist Federation atNottingham University on January 5th to 7th, 1968. The problemwas to get in the way of the newspapers reporting his remarks. Mysolution was to announce at the beginning of my talk that I wouldbe speaking under the influence of a prescribed form of cannabis.The Times, The Telegraph and The Guardian reported this event asif it had been a high wire act. On the 21st of November 1967, I had spokenagainst Leon Brittan at a Teach In at Guys Hospital. I did notlike his arrogance or his willingness to pontificate on a subjectof which he knew nothing. Fate was kind to me. After thepublication of the Wootton Report in 1969, I had a uniqueopportunity to flatten him. We debated the Report at BristolUniversity. Leon Brittan recalled the "Your Witness"television program. He told the Bristol Union I had insisted onbeing filmed at home because I knew I could not speak in publicunder the influence of cannabis. I rose to my feet, Leon Brittangave way. I turned to the president of the Union, and beingadvised that smoking was permitted, I resumed my seat, removed anenormous joint from my pocket and lit up. I went through anelaborate pantomime to distract the audience during his speech. Ipretended to be "zonked." Then it was my turn to speak.I was in my best form, and I think the Union voted unanimouslyfor the motion. Afterward, Brittan refused to believe I had beensmoking. He said I had pretended to inhale. Inevitably, the debate that gave me thegreatest satisfaction was at the Oxford Union on October 19th,1967. In my article in "The Book of Grass" I had saidthat the one place in Oxford where cannabis was not smoked wasthe Union society. Now, just months later, the Union voted infavour of changing the law. Dr. Laing and I were opposed by AnnMallalieu and the Revd. John McNicoll. William Paton, theProfessor of Pharmacology, spoke against cannabis from the floor,Earlier in the evening a motion of censure was passed against theProctors, who had suspended Cherwell because of its coverage ofdrugs. Dr. Yardley spoke from the floor in this debate. He and Ihad threshed out this matter on the television program "24Hours" on the 11th. During the Thatcher period, every attempt wasmade to blame the permissive society" of the 1960s on thepolitical left. In fact, the left was left out, at least in 1967.Cannabis was a libertarian issue which became very popular withthe Young Conservatives. When I spoke at a teach-in organized bythe Young Communists League, I faced a hostile audience for thefirst time. Speaker after speaker rose to say that cannabis was acapitalist plot. I was "intent on distracting the workers from their revolutionaryduties." John McNicoll, who also spoke in this debate, hadaccused me, in the Evening Standard diary, of being acrypto-communist. He said I had taken up drugs when lecturing atLeningrad University. Now, with a delicious political instinct,he accused me of being an American. In a long interview withPenthouse magazine, published in December 1968, I said thatthough Tariq Ali and Clive Goodman had signed the Somaadvertisement, "We want nothing to do with theirrevolution." I added: "You can't smokeMarxism." I think the decisive event in the debate aboutcannabis may have been a meeting of the Society for the Study ofAddiction at the premises of the British Medical Association onNovember 7th 1967. The press were barred from this meeting, whichwas attended by officials from the Home Office, senior policeofficers, most of the Advisory Committee and many of the leadingmedical authorities. Dr. Storr and I spoke on behalf of Soma. Wewere opposed by Dr. Cedric Wilson of Liverpool University, whomade a great fool of himself by including gangrene among thesymptoms of chronic abuse of cannabis. He also repeated the claimmade by William Deedes in the House of Commons on 28 July, thatthere were seven million hashish addicts in Egypt and that theGovernment there was at its wits end to know what to do about it.I quoted an article published the preceding year in the U.N.Bulletin on Narcotics, a study sponsored by the Egyptiangovernment, which said there were 180,000 "habitues" ofcannabis in Egypt and that a study of matched groups of users andnon-users did not reveal any significant differences between thegroups. The discussion from the floor was the importantpart of the meeting. One expert after another rose to affirm theinnocuous status of cannabis. They seemed to vie with one anotherin devising new arguments. It may not have reached the height ofa religious revival, but I was left with the feeling that aconsensus had been realized, that the Djinn was well out of thebottle. In November 1967 the reforming Home Secretary,Roy Jenkins, exchanged places with James Callaghan, the disgracedChancellor of the Exchequer, who had devalued the pound. Inopposition, Callaghan had been the paid Parliamentary lobbyistfor the police federation. He was "Sunny Jim, thepoliceman's friend." His agenda was not that of the Labourparty; indeed, it is difficult to find a more destructiveinfluence in the history of that party. Through his opposition tovital trade union reforms, his failure at the Treasury and hispointing up what he called the "permissive society" asthe legacy of his predecessor at the Home Office, he probablycost Labour the 1970 general election. Later his incompetence asprime minister cost Labour the 1979 election, and in 1983 and1987 he intervened against his own party because of hisopposition to nuclear disarmament. Jenkins defended the non-partisan socialreforms of the decade and insisted that Britain was a"civilized society," rather than a permissive one.* Irecall taking part in a Third Program discussion of perhapsunprecedented length (from 8:45 pm until past midnight)on November 9th, 1969, in which Warden Sparrow of All Souls,Michael Foot, Professor Alasdair MacIntyre (a signatory to theadvertisement) and I discussed the question, "Is BritainCivilized." Bernard Levin was in the Chair. I am nowinclined to the view that Britain has over the past quartercentury become intolerant of dissent and especially ofdissenters, that it has many and various means of denying themthe "oxygen of publicity", so that the question mightseem to be not whether Britain is a "civilized"society, but whether, as a prime minister seemed to imply, itaspires to be a "society" at all. * Transport House distributed the text ofJenkins' remarks to the Abingdon Constituency Labour Party onJuly 19th, 1969 At the Home Office, Callaghan was intent onsalvaging his popular reputation, and happy to take the low road.He made known his opposition to the Wootton Report. He made anumber of public interventions which could be interpreted asattempts to sabotage the Report, or to dictate terms to theCommittee. He was not obliged to publish the Report, formallysubmitted to him on November 1st, 1968 and he must have realizedthat the publication of an expert report which exoneratedcannabis would do everything to undermine the existinglegislation, since it virtually said that the only reason torefrain from smoking cannabis was the fact that it remained,"for the time being," illegal. There were reports inthe papers that some members of the Committee were prepared toresign if the Report was not published. I was myselfcontemplating a pirated edition of the Report. Printed copies of the Wootton Report weredelivered before Christmas and distributed on January 7th, 1969.The press were advised that Callaghan intended to denounce thefindings and recommendations of the Report. The Wootton Report went further than the Somaadvertisement in affirming the relative harmlessness of cannabis.An often quoted summary (paragraph 29) allied the conclusions ofthe Wootton Report with those of the great reports of 1893 and1944: Having reviewed all the material available to us we find ourselves in agreement with the conclusions reached by the Indian Hemp Drugs Commission appointed by the Government of India (1893-4) and the New York Mayor's Committee on Marihuana (1944) that "the long term consumption of cannabis in moderate doses has no harmful effects." Paragraph 67, introducing the Section onGeneral Conclusion and Recommendations states: The evidence before us shows that: An increasing number of people, mainly young, in all classes of society are experimenting with this drug, and substantial numbers use it regularly for social pleasure. There is no evidence that this activity is causing violent crime or aggressive anti-social behaviour, or is producing in otherwise normal people conditions of dependence or psychosis, requiring medical treatment. The experience of many other countries is that once it is established cannabis-smoking tends to spread. In some parts of Western society where interest in mood-altering drugs is growing, there are indications that it may become a functional equivalent of alcohol. In spite of the threat of severe penalties and considerable effort at enforcement the use of cannabis in the United Kingdom does not appear to be diminishing. There is a body of opinion that criticises the present legislative treatment of cannabis on the ground that it exaggerates the dangers of the drug and needlessly interferes with civil liberty. The Committee proposed that new legislation bedrafted that would distinguish between hard and soft drugs andbetween drug trafficking and drug taking. It proposed that thepenalties for cannabis be reduced to the point where minoroffences would not merit imprisonment. The key recommendation wasto reduce the maximum penalty on summary conviction forpossession to four months imprisonment. The committee alsoproposed to abolish absolute offences (i.e., the liability inrespect to the use of premises) and called for a legal frameworkfor cannabis research and medical treatment using cannabis andits variants. The Government's expert advisors had confirmedthe apparently surreal assertions of the cannabis lobby. Thiscompletely knocked the pins from under any attempt to enforce orjustify the law. It discharged the burden of proof that the"cannabis lobby" had assumed. Whatever was said againstus could also be said against the Advisory Council and againstCallaghan, who had not been bound to publish the Report. Theterms of the debate were now changed. If the Government wanted tosend people to prison for smoking cannabis, they had to show thatits use was harmful and socially damaging. But the further stepof legalizing cannabis depended on amassing proof, over a periodof time, that cannabis was not a social menace. The Report went out of its way to credit theinfluence of the Times advertisement. I quote from an article inthe Guardian diary which was planted with a view to facilitatingCallaghan's denunciation of the Report. It was a set up,illustrated by a photograph. Soft Sell LOBBYISTS are the great unseen, the great unhonoured, not least by Government enquiries. But Steve Abrams' pot-boilers have never been that kind of lobby, and the Wootton Committee isn't that kind of enquiry. The Cannabis report out this morning delivers a rare and specific testimonial: "Our first enquiries were proceeding - without publicity - into the pharmacological and medical aspects when other developments gave our study new and much increased significance. An advertisement in the Times on the 24th of July 1967 represented that the long asserted dangers of cannabis were exaggerated and that the related law was socially damaging, if not unworkable. This was followed by a wave of debate about these issues in Parliament, the Press and elsewhere, and reports of enquiries e.g. by the National Council for Civil Liberties. This publicity made more explicit the nature of some current "protest" about official policy on drugs; defined more clearly some of the main issues in our study; and led us to give greater attention to the legal aspects of the problem. Government spokesmen made it clear that any future development of policy on cannabis would have to take account of the Advisory Committee's report. Accordingly, we decided to give first priority to presenting our views on cannabis." Publication of the Wootton Report provoked anorganized campaign of vilification in the popular press. A famousheadline in The Daily Express described the Report as a"junkies charter." Some people in high places and somevested interests were getting worried. Until then, the issue oflegalizing cannabis had seemed to be a joke. In the Parliamentary debate on the WoottonReport on January 29th, 1969, Callaghan gave his reasons forrejecting, or ostensibly rejecting, the Wootton Report: I think it came as a surprise, if not a shock, to most people when that notorious advertisement appeared in the Times in 1967 to find that there is a lobby for legalizing cannabis. The House should recognize that this lobby exists, and my reading of the Report is that the Wootton sub-committee was overinfluenced by this lobby. I had the same impression as the Rt. Hon. and learned gentleman (Quintin Hogg) that it was compromise at the end; that those who were in favour of legalizing 'pot' were all the time pushing the other members back, so that eventually these remarkable conclusions emerged, that it would be wrong to legalize it but that the penalties should be reduced. The existence of this lobby is something that the House and public opinion should take into account and be ready to combat, as I am. It is another aspect of the so-called permissive society, and I am glad that my decision has enabled the house to call a halt in the advancing tide of so-called permissiveness. Articles in the Evening Standard(February 3rd) and other newspapers said that the Chairman of theAdvisory Council, Sir Edward Wayne and Lady Wootton were bothcontemplating resignation to mark their protest against the HomeSecretary's insulting remarks in Parliament. On February 5th theTimes published a joint letter from them, which said, inpart: We regard this statement as offensive to our distinguished colleagues and to ourselves, and particularly to the eminent medical men who signed our Report, and we particularly deprecate the implication of the emotive word 'lobby' in this context. We would also point out that after hearing the evidence no member of the sub-committee recommended legalization. In October I wrote in the Soma Newsletter (np.3, pp. 4-5) that Callaghan, for all his blustering, had littleoption other than to change the law: The Government is now drafting comprehensive new legislation on psychotropic drugs, including cannabis. The legislation aims at introducing more flexible control of drugs and consolidating the control presently exercised in respect of the Dangerous Drugs Act and the Drugs (Prevention of Misuse) Act. Apparently the new legislation will distinguish between drugs by introducing a two tiered system of penalties for what may, for convenience, be termed "hard" and "soft" drugs. Our understanding is that the problem of whether to classify cannabis as a hard or soft drug has not yet been faced. It is felt, however, that because the Home Secretary has asked the Wootton Committee to continue in its advisory capacity, it will be very difficult to justify the continued classification of cannabis as a hard drug in the context of new legislation. ... It should be recalled that despite his posturing the Home Secretary did not refuse to implement the Wootton Report. He merely refused to legislate unilaterally and immediately on cannabis at a time when new comprehensive legislation was already being planned. The story of implementing the Wootton Report istold in a little noticed passage in the Crossman diaries.(pp.836-7) After the legislation had been through the Home AffairsCommittee, there was an "absolutely outrageous pressleak." This presumably refers to a page one lead in theSunday Mirror on February 1st, 1970 : DRUG LAW SHOCK Jim Changes his Mind. Penalties for 'pot' smokers to be cut. Home Secretary James Callaghan has has had a dramatic change of mind on drugs. He has decided that people who smoke 'pot' should no longer be punished as severely as those using heroin. He has gone further by deciding that the penalties for possessing both hard and soft drugs should be cut. ... Mr. Callaghan only a year ago championed the cause of holding the line against drug permissiveness. ...Last year Mr. Callaghan denounced what he called "a notorious advertisement" in the Times - signed by many public figures including the Beatles - which urged that possessing cannabis should either be legalized, or at most punishable by a fine of not more than #25. Crossman's diary entry for Thursday February26th says that Callaghan had come back to the cabinet to say that"he now proposed not to have any reduction at all in anypenalties on cannabis." Crossman notes that this wasunusual. "One usually only brings things to Cabinet whenthere is disagreement at a Cabinet Committee." As thediscussion continued "it became absolutely clear that theissue was whether to kowtow to public opinion or not." TheCabinet divided. "Every member of the cabinet who had beento university voted one way and everyone else voted theother." Wilson voted with the antis. Having been outvoted bya clear majority, Callaghan published his Misuse of Drugs Bill onMarch 11th. The myth that Callaghan refused to implementthe proposals of the Wootton Report owes its survival to the factthat the labour government was defeated in the general electionof 1970. However, the legislation was bipartisan and it wasreintroduced by Reginald Maudling for the tories. It became lawas the Misuse of Drugs Act 1971. The maximum penalty forpossession of cannabis on summary conviction was reduced by halfto six months. When the Act received the Royal Assent in 1973 theLord Chancellor, Lord Hailsham (formerly Quintin Hogg), advisedthe conference of the Magistrates Association on sentencing.(Times, 12 October 1973) He reasserted the insistence of theAdvisory Council that minor offences did not merit imprisonment.Lord Hailsham told magistrates to treat cannabis users with"becoming moderation." He said: "Set aside yourprejudice, if you have one, and reserve the sentence ofimprisonment for suitably flagrant cases of large scaletrafficking." It must have been difficult for him to setaside his own prejudice long enough to say that, but hedid! Ten years after the Wootton report, Ronald Buttwrote in The Times, without intended irony, that we should begrateful to Callaghan who put his foot down and saved us from thepermissive society by rejecting the Wootton Report. (17 March1979) When he wrote this article Butt should have known that theCriminal Justice Act of 1977 had reduced the maximum sentence onsummary conviction for possession to three months, less than thefour months proposed in the Wootton Report. He should also havebeen aware of the 1978 Report on Sentencing of the AdvisoryCouncil, which proposed a further reduction in penalties, endingthe status of possession of cannabis as an "arrestableoffence" (i.e. one for which a warrant is not required tomake an arrest) and abolishing the residual powers of the courtsto deprive offenders of their liberty. However, the Report notedthat the Courts were already observing this condition inpractice; they no longer imposed prison sentences for simplepossession offences.* Margaret Thatcher was heavily indebted to thetobacco and alcohol lobbies. She sought to use the drugs issuefor political purposes. The wise counsel of civil servants andprofessional advisers was by-passed when a planeload of tame MPsdeparted for a Cooks Tour of American lowlife organized by theU.S. Drugs Enforcement Agency. Thatcher opened the doors to smugglers byreducing the number of customs staff and she spent severalmillion pounds of public money on advertisements for the use ofheroin and cocaine, against the advice of the Advisory Council.But the use of cannabis was so widespread that any attempt tofocus on its dangers would have derailed the entire campaign.Cannabis was not singled out for attention and soon references tocannabis became conspicuous by their absence. There was no way tostress the dangers of narcotics without pointing up the relativeharmlessness of cannabis. On this issue Thatcher was caught in atrap of her own making. Of course she refused to implement thefurther proposals for cannabis law reform made in the 1978 Reporton Sentencing and re-affirmed in the 1982 Report onCannabis." However, she did make a crucial concession,granting Chief Constables discretion to caution offenders ratherthan bring them to trial. This practise has grown and now themajority of offenders are cautioned and thus escapeconviction. * Report on A Review of the Classification ofControlled Drugs and of Penalties Under Schedules 2 and 4 of theMisuse of Drugs Act 1971 (15 December 1978) The Advisory Committee on Drug Dependence wasan ad hoc body. The Misuse of Drugs Act made it a statutory bodyakin to the Poisons Board. It was renamed the Advisory Council onthe Misuse of Drugs. ** Home Office Advisory Council on the Misuseof Drugs - Report of the Expert Group on the Effects of CannabisUse (1982). The Wootton Report was implemented twenty yearsago. Since that time we have had a "half-way house",and possession of cannabis has been virtually"decriminalized." One solicitor, Bernard Simons, whohas dealt with many drugs cases, described the present situationin The Independent on July 22nd: ... For me, twenty-five years ago, it was really important in my life - as a libertarian issue. Today the police rarely prosecute; they're told to administer cautions, and even bringing small amounts into the country doesn't lead to court. In my youth, in Notting Hill, people were stopped and searched all the time. and they had nothing on them. You used to have police raids on parties, where they'd find a bit of cannabis and arrest everyone in the room. Twelve people would appear in court charged with the same bit of cannabis. It doesn't happen any more, certainly not in London - though I can't speak for rural Wales. The police arrest users by accident. If theyare looking for a dealer or a thief and they find some 'dope',they make a charge. The few cases that show up in the statisticsas leading to imprisonment are artefacts; for example, a sentenceserved concurrently for possession of cannabis and another moreserious drug or non drug offence. In some other cases thequantities of cannabis seized are rather large. A decision to legalize cannabis in the contextof EC drug policy would be bolstered by the results of suchresearch as has been done in the past twenty years, mainly inAmerica. However, the decision is likely to depend on the sizeand growth of the market. The media have muddied the waters byexaggerating the extent of cannabis smoking in the 1960s. Aleader and several articles in The Independent have insisted thatcannabis use is currently greater than at any time since the1960s. In fact, official statistics imply a steady growth incannabis use over the past quarter century. The total of cannabisseized in 1967 was 295 kilos and 457 plants. Currently seizuresare running at about 1,000 kilos per week. In twenty-five yearsseizures have increased by two orders of magnitude. Cannabis is normally sold in the form ofhashish at a price of about #30 for a quarter of an ounce. Thatis a week's supply for a user who smokes all day every day. Iassume that a typical user smokes cannabis two or three times aweek and consumes about a sixteenth of an ounce per week. On thisbasis, the current level of seizures alone would be enough tosupport a user population of half a million. But the customs usea notional figure of five or ten per cent for the average levelof seizures.* It is therefore likely that there are severalmillion regular cannabis smokers in Britain, up to ten per centof the population. Probably the market has been saturated.Cannabis is not everyone's cup of tea, and many people do notenjoy its effects or are unable to experience any effect at allfrom taking it. The experience of decriminalization in Holland isthat further relaxation of control does not produce any long termincrease in use. * In the 'sixties the proportion of seizureswas probably lower than it is today, partially because thepenalties did not distinguish users from suppliers. The legalization of cannabis may now be on thecards, but how will it be done? "Legalization" is anextremely vague expression. My personal view has always been thatthe vendor should be the State; that any other solution wouldintroduce a vested interest in maximizing the use of cannabis,and, in one way or another, advertising it. In oral evidence tothe Wootton sub-committee on December 5th, 1967 I said that therecent legalization of gambling had been a disaster because thecrooks who controlled illegal gambling remained in control oflegalized gambling. Yet there is today, in 1993, a strong opinionin favour of legitimizing the existing trade in drugs, much ofwhich is in the hands of organized crime and terroristgroups. Mr. Lucas, a psychiatrist, asked me if Ithought the tobacco companies should sell cannabis to help themto phase out of the production of tobacco. I said that thetobacco companies should not be allowed to sell cannabis and thatI doubted they should even be permitted to sell tobacco. Originally, I hoped that cannabis could be madeavailable through liberal prescribing of standardizedpreparations. Since the 1970s I have supported those who favour arationing system loosely tied to the National Health System. Ithink that prospective users should be required to purchase acannabis licence, which could be obtained from a NHS surgery. Thelicence would allow them to purchase up to the equivalent of oneounce of cannabis per month from a chemists shop. This would makeit a slight nuisance to obtain cannabis. The doctor would not beasked to prescribe the drug, but would be entitled to know hispatient was a cannabis user. All profits from such a scheme couldgo to the NHS. It would be worth a few billions per annum. Inthis way the gangsters are cut out, a small overflow is provided,the forms of cannabis available are standardized and purified,and the profits go to a good cause. Moreover, such a scheme wouldbe reversible. A detailed consideration of alternative licensingsystems was provided in a book, Cannabis : Options for Change,published by the semi-official Institute for the Study of DrugDependence in 1979. Hopefully, the solution of nationalizingcannabis may be the only one which is compatible with the controlrequirements of the UN Single Convention on Narcotic Drugs, towhich Britain is a signatory. The Convention requires all statesto enact laws prohibiting the "possession" of cannabisand providing for deprivation of liberty in suitable cases. Thisconvention was brought in as a result of long pressure from theU. S. Treasury, which acts on behalf of the alcohol lobby inAmerica, and controlled or prohibited cannabis in America in thesame way that it prohibited "moonshine", as taxevasion. The Federal Bureau of Narcotics controlled by H. J.Anslinger, a former commissioner of prohibition and a relative ofHoover's, was part of the U.S. Treasury. It was succeeded by theDrugs Enforcement Authority, which is part of the Department ofJustice. The Wootton Report was followed by similarreports in other countries including the Le Dain Report in Canada and the Shafer Report in America.Following publication of the latter, by a PresidentialCommission, the government looked into the legal status ofcannabis under the Single Convention. Apparently, they obtainedan opinion based on the French text of the Convention that theoffence of possession" had the meaning of the offencedescribed in British law as "possession with intent tosell" as opposed to simple possession. The conclusion seemedto be that cannabis could be legalized, though only with thestate acting as the seller. It will, however, be difficult or impossible toresist a claim from the tobacco industry. For example, onetobacco company pays Lady Thatcher a fee in excess of #1,000,000p.a. to act as a "consultant." Such sums are paid outto protect the public image of an industry which may have killedoff a hundred million people worldwide in the course of thetwentieth century. To the tobacco industry the Single Conventionis a paper tiger. Supplement On the 8th of July 1968, the News of the Worlddevoted its entire pre-tabloid front page to an attack on me.There was a marvelous picture, borrowed from the Sunday Times andretouched, and an arrow pointing at my head. The headline said:This dangerous man MUST be stopped! The article had no content;it attacked my plans to manufacture small quantities of THC forresearch purposes but admitted that the Home Office was aware ofthe project and had no objection to it. Four days later, on the 12th of July, theOxford drugs squad searched the digs of a gentleman named StephenAbraham, who lived with his landlady, Miss Susan Ratcliffe, in ahouse at 88, Sunningwell Road. A roach, a spent cannabiscigarette, was found in the room he occupied with Miss Ratcliffe.The police also found an empty bottle of tincture of cannabis andsome tobacco with a green tinge. Stephen Abraham was an Americanand a member of Pembroke College. He had just taken first classhonours in maths. He smoked dope like a chimney and he too had aprescription (arranged by me) from Dr. Dunbar. I am sorry that Graham Greene (a signatory tothe Soma advertisement) is not alive to read this, to learn aboutthe "other Steve Abrams" I kept in Oxford to getarrested on my behalf.* Steve Abraham beat a strategic retreat toAmerica, but on August 1st, his girlfriend, Miss Ratcliffe, wascharged with the absolute offence of allowing him to smokecigarettes dipped in cannabis tincture in their room. The Courtand the police accepted that Abraham had a legalprescription. The case was heard at Oxford City MagistratesCourt on October 17th, 1968. The Bench of Magistrates, includedMrs. H. Y. Bullock, wife of Sir Alan Bullock, the Head of myCollege, then elevated to the rank of Vice Chancellor. She musthave been aware of the deliberate confusion of identities. Somapaid half the cost of the defence, who were represented by oursolicitor, Martin Polden. Expert evidence for the defence wasprovided by Dr. Ann Robinson, assistant to Professor FrancisCamps at London Hospital. (Dr. Robinson is now Professor ofFerensic Medicine at London Hospital Medical College.) I have no criminal record and have never beencharged with any drugs offence. I was an Advanced Student of St.Catherine's College from 1960 to 1967. I have never met MissRatcliffe and have never been to 88, Sunningwell Road, Oxford. In1968 I lived at 81, Holland Road, London W11 with Jane Firbank,to whom I was then married. The forensic scientist from Aldermaston whogave evidence for the police said that his tests did notdistinguish between cannabis resin and extract of cannabis. Hepromptly concluded that they were the same substance. He insistedthat the product of evaporating the alcohol in tincture ofcannabis (made by adding alcohol to extract of cannabis) was infact cannabis resin, whereas the extract was made by percolatingcannabis leaf (marijuana) in alcohol. It contained only thosecomponents of cannabis that dissolved in alcohol. It was argued in evidence that Abraham wasentitled to be in possession of a bottle of tincture of cannabisbut not to open it. If a fraction of the alcohol that the extractwas mixed with evaporated, that would be a step in the directionof "manufacturing cannabis resin." By the same token,opening a bottle of cough syrup might be construed as a step inthe direction of manufacturing morphine. By pouring the contentsof a bottle of tincture of cannabis, cost 30/onto a tin oftobacco, Abraham was supposed to have, transformed the house intoa "factory" for manufacturing Ireefers', according to areport in The Times. According to The Telegraph, Abrahammanufactured enough cannabis "to supply five hospitals forseven years." That is to say, he used up a bottle oftincture of cannabis, the same amount used by the five Oxfordhospitals over the past seven years. This case was upheld on appeal by BrianGibbens, the Recorder of Oxford on January 11th, 1969, four daysafter the Wootton Report was published. The decision wascriticised in legal and medical journals for making a nonsense ofthe law and it was ignored outside Oxford. However, theimpression was created that following a campaign in the New ofthe World, I had been convicted (in absentia) of"manufacturing" cannabis resin in Oxford. This may be a great joke, but it got on mycredit records here and in America, and it left the police withan open warrant in my name. I was picked up several times inLondon, the premises of Soma were raided, and I realized that itwas time to pack it in. Callaghan had just published his DrugsBill, so I could claim a victory. There is buried somewhere in the personalcolumns of The Times, probably in January or February 1969 asmall announcement advertising the fact that Steve Abrams is notSteve Abrams &c. On July 24th 1992, twenty-five years after thepublication of the Soma advertisement, a new full pagedadvertisement appeared in The Times, sponsored by the ReleaseLegal Emergency and Drugs Service Ltd., registered charity no.801118. Registered charities are not permitted tocampaign for law reform, but Release, in soliciting contributionsto defray the cost (#17,000) of the advertisement altered theirstationery to remove the designation of their charitable statusand allowed the press, e.g.? the Independent, to describe them asa "soft drugs campaigning group." Prospective contributors and signatories to theRelease advertisement were sent a poster reproduction of the Somaadvertisement, together with advice that affirmed or stronglyimplied that they had published the original as their callingcard, twenty-five years earlier. None of the signatories to theRelease advertisement got to see the embarrassing document towhich their names were appended. I told the organizers of the Releaseadvertisement that they were in breach of copyright incirculating posters of the Soma advertisement, and that they werealso guilty of the additional offence of "passing off."The Director of Release, Michael Goodman, a barrister, and one ofthe "founders" of the organization, Mr. Rufus Harris, alaw clerk, ignored my protestations and authorised the use of aphotograph of me, ostensibly smoking a joint, on the invitationto their 25th anniversary party. Release did come into existence in 1967, but ittook no significant part in the cannabis law reform movement ofthe late sixties. To begin with, Release was a 24 hour referralservice for a group of solicitors who specialised in defendingdrugs cases. Release would have cut itself off from reputablesources of funding had it campaigned for the legalization ofcannabis. The solicitors, who were onto a good thing, would havebeen compromised. The earliest reference to Release in The Timesis in October 1967 and all of the references are to fund raisingstunts arranged by Carolyn Coon or criticisms of the police. Moresurprisingly, perhaps, there is no reference to Release in the"pot people's newspaper" International Times in thesummer of 1967. A complete history of the early work of Releaseis given in The Release Report by Caroline Coon and Rufus Harris(Sphere Books, 1969). This book covers the wider interests of theauthors in the drugs problem but the text contains no referenceto the Wootton Report or to an advertisement in the Times. Theauthors seem to think it wrong to, as James Callaghan said,"look at one drug in isolation." They contentthemselves with a bland and ambiguous injunction, still in use,to "change the drug laws." If this seems tame, it is. Release has agovernment grant of #3,000 per week, covering sixty per cent ofits operating expenditure. In twenty-five years Release has notdone anything adventurous, nor has it published any worthwhileresearch. Now independent action is out of the question. Theorchestrated pre-publicity for the 1992 advertisement, with themedia acting in concert, regurgitating handouts from the HomeOffice Press office was an embarassing confirmation of the extentof news management in the one party state that is Britaintoday. I know that things are hard, and that anorganization like Release must be encouraged to establish itsstreet credibility and to raise money on its own by tapping avein of sympathy among a drug using population of severalmillions and preaching to the converted. I am not happy aboutRelease living on my good will, but I am amused that the HomeOffice now want to get in on the act, to claim that theythemselves inspired the 1967 advertisement. Contents | Feedback | Search DRCNet Library | Schaffer Library | Major Studies | WoottonReport WT01-B31-33IA031-000652-B042-94http://206.61.184.43:80/schaffer/library/studies/wootton/strange.htm 206.61.184.43 19970122130904 text/html 28315HTTP/1.0 200 OKDate: Wednesday, 22-Jan-97 13:08:52 GMTServer: WebSitePro/1.1f (S/N wpo-0deb)Allow-ranges: bytesContent-type: text/htmlLast-modified: Saturday, 28-Dec-96 06:45:35 GMTContent-length: 28097 Wootton Report - Extract from 'The Strange Case of Pot' byMichael Schofield Contents | Feedback | Search DRCNet Library | Schaffer Library | Major Studies | WoottonReport The Wootton Report Extract from 'The Strange Case of Pot' by Michael Schofield(Penguin, 1971). Schofield was a social psychologist who sat on the WoottonCommittee and, dismayed by its reception, which led to theintroduction of the Misuse of Drugs Act, he subsequentlypublished this book. Introduction In the introduction, he writes: 'The original title of this book was to have been 'The Case For And Against Pot.' It was intended to present both sides of the controversy and weight the evidence before coming to a conclusion. But once the myths were cleared, it became obvious that the case for and against was not evenly balanced. By any ordinary standards of objectivity, it is clear that cannabis is not a very harmful drug. But the simple ranging of issues side by side is to superficial an approach for what is a very complex situation - really a social problem, much less a legal problem, and still less a medical problem.' 'The book is divided into three major parts. In the first five chapters I present the basic information about cannabis and compare it with the other illegal drugs. In the next six chapters I try to explain the public attitudes to cannabis and discuss the main controversies. In the last five chapters I attempt to describe the legal and sociological aspects, and end by suggesting a more sensible plan of action.' Chapter 7, The Wootton Report - In this chapter, Schofield discusses the background to theestablishment of the Wootton Committee and then goes on tooutline the committee's recommendations, elucidating each one. Other Reports At first Government committees were only concerned with theopiates, and in particular with heroin addiction. The two reportsof the Interdepartmental Committee under Lord Brain in 1961 and1965 hardly mentioned cannabis. In the first report the committeedecided that cannabis was not within their terms of reference andconcluded: 'In our view cannabis is not a drug of addiction; itis an intoxicant.' In the second report they noted briefly thatthere is 'a risk that young people may be persuaded to turn tocannabis' which was something of an understatement even in 1965. One important recommendation in the second Brain report was toset up a Standing Advisory Committee to keep under review thewhole problem of drug dependence. As this was not a static but achanging problem, it would be useful to bring together a group ofexperts with authority to advise to advise on the social as wellas the medical aspects. This committee was set up in early 1967under the Chairmanship of Sir Edward Wayne, MD, PhD, DSc, FRCP,FRCP(G). Twenty-two other members were appointed, nine of whomwere doctors. A small secretariat was formed to help thecommittee, but there was no money to pay for research and nospecial facilities. Some of the members were doctors treatingaddicts, but most of them had only a limited amount of knowledgeof drugs although all of them have learnt over the years. Without the facilities to initiate or carry out research, thiscommittee cannot be expected to provide new facts or makeimportant discoveries. All that the members can do is to discussthe matter between themselves and listen from time to time towitnesses called to give evidence because they are experts insome particular aspect of drug use. But nearly everyone who givesevidence to this committee does so as the representative of anorganisation which has a special interest in drugs. Conflictingviews will be heard from the representatives of otherorganisations. The function of the committee is essentiallyjudicial and its purpose is to reconcile the conflicting claimsof its witnesses. As there is a wide variety of opinionrepresented among the members, the suggested solutions to thevarious problems of drug dependence are obtained by compromisingbetween opposing views. The reports which are issued from time totime usually consist of an aggregation of existing opinions.including those of the chairman, the committee members, and thewitnesses. A research team of three or four people working fulltime is more likely to produce more penetrating and workablesolutions to the problems of drug use than a committee ofprominent citizens meeting three or four times a year to compileand select from conflicting expert opinions. None the less the committee has been able to give usefuladvice to the Home Office and Ministry of Social Security on thebest way to implement the earlier recommendations of the Braincommittee. Treatment centres for heroin addicts have been set upand special arrangements were introduced to control the outbreakof methedrine injections. Perhaps the most important work hasbeen done in the sub-committees which have met more regularlythan the main committee. There have been sub-committees onrehabilitation (published as a report by HMSO in 1969) and healtheducation (the results were circularised by the Department ofEducation), amphetamines, LSD, and the powers of search andarrest (these reports were published by HMSO in 1970). In April1967 a special sub-committee was appointed to review theavailable evidence on the pharmacological, clinical,pathological, social and legal aspects of cannabis. Afterseventeen meetings under the chairmanship of Baroness Wootton,the sub-committee's report was published in January 1969. The Recommendations (1) We recommend that in the interest of public health, itis necessary for the time being to maintain restrictions on theavailability of cannabis. - Although it is stated in the report that the consumption ofcannabis in moderate doses has no harmful effects, the committeefelt less sure about the mental effects. This recommendation,therefore, is intended to be a temporary measure and should bereviewed from time to time, when more is known about the effectsas a result of medical and social research. Meanwhile the courtsshould recognise that there is considerable variation in thepersonalities and motives of people who use cannabis. (2) Every encouragement, both academic and financial,should be given to suitable projects for enquiry into thecannabis problem. - It follows that if there is a lack of information on animportant and controversial problem, every effort should be madeto provide research facilities. Although three working partieshave been set up by the medical Research Council and an Institutefor the Study of Drug Dependence has been established, progressis very slow. It is inevitable that research into drug use willbe a lengthy business, but it is disquieting that even threeyears after the formation of the Government's Advisory Committee,very few large-scale research projects have even been started. In March 1970, the Home Office issued a list of research ondrug dependence. This list contained ten biochemical andpharmacological studies, mainly concerned with the developmentsof techniques for detecting cannabis in the body. there were nocannabis studies listed under the clinical and treatment section.Five studies were listed under the social and psychologicalsection; three of these (Chapple, 1966; Paton, 1968; Tylden,1968) who had written papers strongly opposed to the use ofcannabis even before starting the research; only one of the fivehas been undertaken by a sociologist. so far the Social ScienceResearch Council has not supported any researches on the use ofcannabis even though it is in the area of sociology that we mostneed information. The Wootton committee found that it was impossible to estimatethe number of people who used cannabis and the guesses seem torange between 30,000 and 300,000. It is clearly impossible tomake sense of statements about the social consequences ofwidespread use of cannabis until there are some reliableestimates of the prevalence of regular users. No detailedinformation is available about the extent of cannabis use byimmigrants. There is an immediate need for sociological andpsychological studies to define the different social groups andto describe the personalities of people who smoke cannabis.People do not hesitate to criticise the young for taking drugs,but in fact no one knows how many adolescents do take cannabis,how many use the drug only occasionally at parties and week-ends,and how many take it regularly. Only a well-planned researchwould show if there are differentiating characteristics betweenusers who take only cannabis and people who used to take cannabisbut have now given up all drug use. (3) The law should progressively be recast to giveParliament greater flexibility of control over individual drugs. - This was one of the few recommendations which the HomeSecretary found acceptable, although it seems likely that he doesnot interpret the 'greater flexibility of control' in the samesense as the Wootton Committee. Mr Callaghan, speaking during thedebate on the Wootton report, said that he would put before theHouse proposals which would give him more power to handle theproblem in a much more flexible manner. He then went on tocriticise the restrictions of the 1964 Drugs Act which in factdoes not apply to cannabis. He wanted the power to bring newsynthetic drugs under the Act as they were developed and becamepopular with users, and he also mentioned the need to havestronger legal control over manufacturers, doctors, chemists, andothers who distribute the drugs. he felt that there was 'a clearrisk that each new fashion of drug taking will find new gaps inthe defences, which will only be plugged too late' and thesolution would be 'to have a single comprehensive code whichwould rationalise and strengthen the Government's powers.'(Quoted from Hansard, 27 January, 1969, column 967). There ismuch substance in Mr Callaghan's remarks about changing fashionsin the drugs scene but this has nothing to do with the Woottonreport which is about cannabis, a drug that is alreadyfashionable and is hardly ever prescribed by medical men. It isdifficult to see what the Home Secretary's call for newlegislation has to do with cannabis unless he feels that one drugis much like another, an attitude of mind that Lady Wootton andher colleagues were most anxious to alter. The Wootton committee suggested changes in the law becausethere is now a better understanding of the reasons why people usedrugs. Criminological studies have cast doubts on theeffectiveness of deterrents and the general law on the treatmentof offenders has been changed considerable. The committee feltthat 'the penalties for cannabis offences have gone unreviewedfor too long'. Their idea of flexibility was that the law shouldbe adjusted according to the dangers of the drug and the way itis misused. (4) The association in legislation of cannabis and heroinand the other opiates is inappropriate and new legislation todeal specifically and separately with cannabis and its syntheticderivatives should be introduced as soon as possible. - There are two reasons for this. Many people agree that theconfusion between cannabis and heroin leads to misunderstandingsand, in some cases, to injustice. The committee also stated quiteclearly that the present penalties for possession of cannabiswere altogether too high. The Government accepted the thirdrecommendation for reasons other than those given by thecommittee, and after some hesitation, the fourth recommendationwas also incorporated into the new (Misuse of Drugs) Bill,although the penalties for possession of cannabis are stillsevere. (5) Unlawful possession of cannabis without knowledgeshould not be an offence. The practicability of distinguishingbetween possession intended for use and possession intended forsupply should be examined. - This brings to notice two of the several difficultiesencountered in a law which is about possession when what we arereally concerned about is the misuse of drugs. Although a recenttest case was taken as far as the House of Lords the resultingdecision was by no means clear because the issues in thatparticular case were complex. The law should make it quitecertain that a person cannot be incriminated, for example, bysomeone putting cannabis in his coat pocket without hisknowledge. The police maintain that is extremely difficult tocatch someone in the act of dealing in cannabis or any otherdrug. The unsatisfactory solution to this problem under the 1965Act was to retain high maximum penalties for the offence ofpossession so that the courts could sentence a man who had beenfound guilty of one offence (i.e. possession) as if he has beenfound guilty of another (i.e. supply). It is a form of justicethat is open to question, it is a bit like the bench saying to amotorist: 'You have been caught exceeding the speed limit and wehave been told that you had been drinking rather heavily;however, we can't prove that you were drunk, so we are going togive you a very heavy sentence for speeding.' The proposals forthe new legislation allow this practise to continue: although thenew offence of 'possession with intent to supply' is introduced,a maximum penalty of five years for the possession of cannabis isproposed. It is difficult to imagine a situation where the simplepossession of cannabis deserves such a severe sentence. The newBill distinguishes between possession and trafficking andincreases the penalty for selling cannabis to a maximum offourteen years. This reflects the public demand for heavypenalties for traffickers which is based on a misunderstanding ofthe role of the dealer. Nevertheless if a man is making money outof selling an illegal substance, it is reasonable to expect himto be dealt with more severely than someone who is merely usingthe drug. (6) Possession of a small amount of cannabis should notnormally be regarded as a serious crime to be punished byimprisonment. - This is a very radical recommendation and one which caused alarge amount of adverse comment in the press. But informedopinion is coming round to the idea that prison is not a sensibleway to treat people who wish to use cannabis. What even informedopinion found it difficult to take was the explicit statementthat possession in not a serious crime. But the committee wentstill further in paragraph 90 of the report, where they statethat prison is the wrong place even for those who supply on alimited scale. they do not attempt to define what they mean by alimited scale, but even a fairly strict definition would includeabout nine out of ten of the transactions between users andsellers because the amounts involved are so small. (7) The offence of unlawful possession, sale or supply ofcannabis should be punishable on summary conviction with a finenot exceeding 100, or imprisonment for a term not exceedingfour months, or both such fine and imprisonment. On conviction orindictment the penalty should be an unlimited fine, orimprisonment for a term not exceeding two years or both such fineand imprisonment. - Thus the committee recommended considerable reductions inthe penalties. The penalties for possession under the 1965 Act inforce when the committee reported, the penalties in the new Billand the penalties recommended in the Wootton report aresummarised as follows: Maximum         1965 Act                1970 Bill               Wootton penalties                                                               ReportSummary conviction:Fine                    250            400            100 Imprisonment    12 months               6 months                4 monthsIndictment:Fine                    1,000          unlimited               unlimited Imprisonment    10 years                5 years         2 years Some members of the committee argued strongly against any kindof prison sentence for simple possession, but in the end werepersuaded to agree to a maximum penalty of four monthsimprisonment because this sentence would allow the defendant theoption of going for trial by jury and also because a prisonsentence gives the judiciary the chance to deal with what thecommittee called 'difficult individual cases'. The committee wereaware that a substantial part of the smuggling of cannabis is insmall amounts (paragraph 37) and is not exploited to anysignificant extent by professional criminals (paragraph 38).Therefore they expected that most cases would be dealt withsummarily by imposing a small fine. the reaction to this showedthat it was a most unpopular recommendation. The home secretaryand the opposition spokesman on Home Affairs both said that thisrecommendation would make it appear that Parliament was condoningthe smoking of cannabis. ('If we were to adopt what is proposedor started to take a namby-pampy attitude about it, we shouldneed our heads examined. I range myself wholeheartedly behind theHome Secretary on this issue.' Quentin Hogg in Hansard, 27January 1969, column 957) (8) The existing law which inhibits research requiring thesmoking of cannabis (section 5, Dangerous Drugs Act, 1965) shouldbe amended to allow qualified workers to study its use both byobservation and by laboratory and social experiments. - There has been considerable uncertainty about the smoking ofcannabis for research purposes with the result that no seriousstudy has been made in this country on the effects of smoking onhumans, even in laboratory conditions. As the social factors areeven more important than the pharmacological problems, it isessential that researchers should be free to study thesephenomena by observations and experiments outside as well asinside the laboratory without the risk of prosecution. Althoughthe Home Secretary gave the lack of information as the reason forrejecting many of the recommendations in the Wootton Report, itwas notable that he never mentioned this in the House of Commons.In fact this was one of the earliest and most urgent of thesuggestions made by the full Standing Advisory committee, longbefore the Wootton report was published. Many members realisedthat their work was hindered by the shortage of information thatcould only be obtained by fairly elaborate and lengthy research.It was suggested that a short Bill should be put beforeParliament to make research on cannabis possible without the riskof prosecution. It was thought that such a bill would not arousemuch opposition, but the Home Office advisors to the committeefelt that this plan was not practical. They maintained that for ashort Bill on the subject of research into cannabis could not beconfined to this subject and far-reaching amendments would beadded during its passage through Parliament. so it was decided towait until the Government was ready to introduce comprehensivelegislation into which a special clause would be included toallow bona fide research workers to investigate the effects ofsmoking cannabis. But in fact three years have been lost betweenthe time when the law on cannabis research might have beenchanged and the introduction of this new legislation. It ispossible that much useful information could have been obtained inthat time, information which would have been invaluable duringthe preparation of the new Bill and the subsequent discussion ofvarious proposals. (9) Section 5 of the Dangerous Drugs Act, 1965 (permittingpremises to be used for smoking cannabis, etc.) should beredefined in scope so as to apply to premises open to the public,to exclude the reference to dealing in cannabis and cannabisresin, and to remove the absolute nature of the liability onmanagers. - This recommendation has been partly approved by the HomeSecretary in the proposals for new legislation so that occupiersand managers commit an offence if they knowingly permit a drug tobe used or sold in their premises. This will obviate theliability of the landlord of private premises who would have beenconvicted under the old law even if he was able to show that hedid not know that pot was being smoked in his house. But the HomeSecretary has rejected the suggestion that this should only be anoffence in public premises. (10) The Advisory Committee should undertake, as a matterof urgency, a review of police powers of arrest and search inrelation to drug offences generally, with a view to advising theSecretary of State on any changes that may be appropriate in thelaw, particularly as regards cannabis. - The Wootton committee seemed to think this task was too bigfor them because they felt that the question of police powerscould not be realistically considered in relation to cannabisalone. But there is no doubt that this is a most important issue.There is a growing public concern about the way the police areusing their powers of search and arrest and many youth workerssee this as one of the main causes of the substantialdeterioration in the relations between young people and thepolice. It may be said that this recommendation is a bit timid.In a large numbers of cases, the police search for drugs ingeneral, but this is not true of every case. There must beoccasions when the reasonable grounds for suspicion relate onlyto the use of cannabis; for example, it is the only drug that hasa pungent smell. the very extensive police powers of search andarrest, which may be necessary for the more harmful drugs, aredifficult to justify for cannabis, the possession of which,according to the report, is a relatively minor offence. Thisrecommendation was thought to be 'a matter of urgency' and a newsub-committee under the chairmanship of William Deedes was set upsoon after the Wootton report was published. In an early debateon drugs Mr Deedes said in the House of Commons: 'It makes nosense for the police to go round raiding and stripping youngpeople at parties to find drugs, some of which their elders treatas a staple diet. the posture against the young becomes morallyuntenable.' But his report turned out to be rather adisappointing document, with few positive recommendations. (11) The development of the manufacture of syntheticcannabinols should be kept under review and, if necessary,control should be imposed under powers provided by the Pharmacyand Poisons Act, 1933, and The Drugs (Prevention of Misuse) Act,1964. - Much progress is being made in the pharmacological study ofcannabis and the active ingredient has been synthesised. It ispossible that synthetic pot will be available in large quantitiesbefore long, and this substance is likely to be purer and safer,and perhaps more potent, than the product obtained from theplant. Such a substance would not be covered by the DangerousDrugs Act of 1965, but the proposed legislation would make itpossible to add new products of the pharmacological industry tothe schedule of restricted drugs simply by regulations placedbefore the two Houses of Parliament. (12) Preparations of cannabis and its derivatives shouldcontinue to be available on prescription for purposes of medicaltreatment and research. Provision should be made in legislationfor records to be maintained so that the position can be keptunder review. - The committee did not want to hinder the few doctors who areexperimenting with the use of cannabis in the treatment ofdisturbed adolescents, amphetamine dependence, alcoholism andother conditions which are difficult medical problems. Althoughthere have been few indications of success in this treatment, itis hoped that the new legislation will not interfere with theseexperiments. In summary, the Wootton report found that most ofthe fears about cannabis were groundless. Physically it is muchless dangerous than the other illegal drugs; most people can giveit up readily and without withdrawal symptoms. Most cannabisusers are industrious and law-abiding; there is no evidence thatin Britain it provokes the user to crime other than the crime ofpossessing it. nor is there any evidence to support the widelyheld belief that cannabis is a significant step in the escalationto heroin. It was agreed that cannabis is a potent drug, likealcohol, and that is was necessary to maintain restrictions onits availability for the time being; these restrictions wouldhave to be more severe than they are for alcohol until more wasknown about the long-term effects of the drug. Nevertheless itwas quite inappropriate to make cannabis subject to the samepenalties as heroin under the Dangerous Drugs Act and it waswrong to send people to prison for the possession of a smallamount. Research has been hampered and the law should be changedso as to encourage careful long-term investigations into theeffects of smoking cannabis. When these results are available,the interim recommendations should be reviewed. These mainconclusions were not so very different from the results found inearlier reports including the very thorough investigations madein India and the city of New York, and the more recent studiesmade in Canada and by the President's Commission in Washington.But the publication of the Wootton report was greeted with achorus of abuse from politicians, press and the public. Contents | Feedback | Search DRCNet Library | Schaffer Library | Major Studies | WoottonReport WT01-B31-34IA031-000652-B042-122http://206.61.184.43:80/schaffer/library/studies/ledain/nonmed1a.htm 206.61.184.43 19970122130916 text/html 36024HTTP/1.0 200 OKDate: Wednesday, 22-Jan-97 13:09:04 GMTServer: WebSitePro/1.1f (S/N wpo-0deb)Allow-ranges: bytesContent-type: text/htmlLast-modified: Saturday, 28-Dec-96 07:01:08 GMTContent-length: 35806 Canadian Government Commission - The Commission'sInterpretation of Its Task Contents | Feedback | Search DRCNet Library | Schaffer Library | Major Studies Canadian Government Commission ofInquiry CHAPTER ONE THE COMMISSION'S INTERPRETATION OF ITS TASK The Background of the Commission's Appointment 1. The Commission of Inquiry into the Non-Medical Use of Drugswas appointed by the Government of Canada under Part I of theInquiries Act on May 29, 1969, on the recommendation of theHonourable John Munro, Minister of National Health and Welfare. The concern that gave rise to the appointment of theCommission is described in Order-in-Council P.C. 1969-1112, whichauthorized the appointment, in the following terms: The Committee of the Privy Council have had before them areport from the Minister of National Health and Welfare,representing: 'That there is growing concern in Canada about the non-medicaluse of certain drugs and substances, particularly, those havingsedative, stimulant, tranquillizing or hallucinogenic properties,and the effect of such use on the individual and the socialimplications thereof; That within recent years, there has developed also thepractice of inhaling the fumes of certain solvents having anhallucinogenic effect, and resulting in serious physical damageand a number of deaths, such solvents being found in certainhousehold substances. Despite warnings and considerablepublicity, this practice has developed among young people and canbe said to be related to the use of drugs for other than medicalpurposes; That certain of these drugs and substances including lysergicacid diethylamide, LSD, methamphetamines, commonly referred to as'Speed', and certain others, have been made the subject ofcontrolling or prohibiting legislation under the Food and DrugsAct, and cannabis, marijuana, has been a substance, thepossession of or trafficking in which has been prohibited underthe Narcotic Control Act; That notwithstanding these measures and the competentenforcement thereof by the R.C.M. Police and other enforcementbodies, the incidence of possession and use of these substancesfor non-medical purposes has increased and the need for aninvestigation as to the cause of such increasing use has becomeimperative. During the year or so preceding the appointment of theCommission, members of parliament had called for an inquiry intothe use of drugs. One member spoke of 'the galloping increase inthe use of marijuana and the increasing number of young peopletragically being paraded daily before the courts' and of 'theextreme urgency of dealing properly with these cases'. Inannouncing the Government's intention to appoint the Commission,the Minister of National Health and Welfare spoke of 'the graveconcern felt by the Government at the expanding proportions ofthe use of drugs and related substances for non-medicalpurposes'. The Commission's Terms of Reference 3. The Order-in-Council authorizing the appointment of theCommission sets out its terms of reference as follows; That inquiry be made into and concerning the factorsunderlying or relating to the non-medical use of the drugs andsubstances above described and that for this purpose a Commissionof Inquiry be established, constituted and with authority ashereinafter provided. (a) to marshal from available sources, both in Canada andabroad, data and information comprising the present fund ofknowledge concerning the non-medical use of sedative, stimulant,tranquillizing, hallucinogenic and other psychotropic drugs orsubstances; (b) to report on the current state of medical knowledgerespecting the effect of the drugs and substances referred to in(a); (c) to inquire into and report on the motivationunderlying the non-medical use referred to in (a); (d) to inquire into and report on the social,economic, educational and philosophical factors relating tothe use for non-medical purposes of the drugs and substancesreferred to in (a) and in particular, on the extent of thephenomenon, the social factors that had led to it, the age groupsinvolved, and problems of communication; and (e) to inquire into and recommend with respect tothe ways or means by which the Federal Government can act,alone or in its relations with Government at other levels, in thereduction of the dimensions of the problems involved in such use. The Implications of the Terms of Reference 4. While the Commission's terms of reference make specificmention of the sedative, stimulant, tranquillizing andhallucinogenic drugs, they also require inquiry concerning otherpsychotropic drugs and substances. The Commission understandsdrug to mean any substance that by its chemical nature altersstructure or function in the living organism. The psychotropicdrugs are those drugs which alter sensation, mood, consciousnessor other psychological or behavioural functions. Theseconcepts are further clarified in Chapter Two of thisreport. A number of classifications of psychotropic drugs havebeen brought to the Commission's attention. Chapter Two presentsthe classification that has been accepted by the Commission. Italso contains a detailed account of the psychotropic propertiesand medical and non-medical uses of certain of the drugs causingthe greatest public concern. It is clear to the Commission thatit would not be appropriate to confine its attention to theso-called 'soft drugs' such as marijuana, hashish and LSD. The'hard drugs' such as the opiate narcotics, of which heroin is anexample, have marked psychotropic effects. The amphetamines or'speed' drugs which are popularly considered as hard drugs appearto be increasing in their non-medical use. Moreover, both thestructure of present Canadian drug laws and the nature of thedrug controversy make it impossible to consider the 'soft drugs'without reference to the amphetamines and the opiates. Indeed,the opiate narcotics have been and are an important referencepoint in, establishing the public perspective for the non-medicaluse of many other drugs. The Commission believes that it hasproperly focused its primary attention in the initial phase ofits inquiry on the non-medical use of drugs such as cannabis, LSDand amphetamines by young people. However, we have had a growingconcern for the facts and implications of the use of drugs suchas alcohol and tobacco by people of all ages. These two drugs,both of which are psychotropic, remain the most popular drugs innon-medical use among both young people and adults. Adultsgenerally seem unwilling to accept the fact that alcohol andtobacco are drugs, and often find it difficult to view thenon-medical drug use of youth with reference to and in thecontext of the socially acceptable use of drugs by adults. 5. Two broad categories in which the use of psychotropic drugscan be classified are: (a) medical and non-medical use, and (b)legal and illegal use. While the distinction between legal andillegal use is simple and derives directly from the law, it isdifficult to find a satisfactory definition of medical andnon-medical drug use. Medical use of drugs is taken bythe Commission to be use which is indicated for generallyaccepted medical reasons, whether under medical supervision ornot; all drug use which is not indicated on generally acceptedmedical grounds is considered to be non-medical use. Thus,the occasional use of aspirin to control the pain of an ordinaryheadache is considered to be medical use, while the dependent useof large quantities of barbiturates obtained through one or moreprescriptions is not. Clearly, non-medical use is not to beequated with illegal use. The use of alcohol by adults isgenerally non-medical but it is legal, whereas the use ofmarijuana is both non-medical and illegal. 6. The commission is invited to marshal the present fund ofworld knowledge concerning the non-medical use of psychotropicdrugs and substances. Taken literally, this task is impossible,with the time and resources available to the Commission. Theworld literature on all the psychotropic drugs and substances isvery extensive. There are over 40,000 items on alcohol alone atRutgers University, a major centre of alcohol studies. There areestimated to be over 2,000 items on cannabis. Experts in thefield have testified to the extreme difficulty of keeping abreastof the literature, particularly because of its multi-disciplinarycharacter. There are only a few sources of comprehensiveinformation on this continent: the Addiction Research Foundationof Ontario is by far the best equipped in this country; theNational Institute of Mental Health in the United States providesa computerized data retrieval service. In Geneva, the WorldHealth Organization of the United Nations possesses extensivebibliographical resources. Collecting the available data and information is only onestage. It is also necessary to establish and apply criteria ofscientific validity to such data and information. In manyinstances, the Commission is obliged to rely heavily on the workof experts who have themselves sifted and critically evaluatedthe available literature. It must form its judgements on thebasis of the materials which they have identified as mostrelevant and reliable. The Commission cannot carry out acomprehensive bibliographical work for the whole range ofpsychotropic drugs and substances. It must try to seize upon theessentials in the present fund of knowledge as they bear upon theareas of concern and the issues in this inquiry. 7. The Commission is required to report on the current stateof medical knowledge concerning the effect of psychotropic drugsand substances. This it has attempted to do in an interimfashion, in Chapter Two, entitled 'The Drugs and Their Effects'.The effects contemplated by paragraph (b) in the terms ofreference are presumably the physiological and psychologicalones, including their behavioural manifestations. The term'medical' is rather too narrow as a reference to the expertisewhich is in the determination of drug effects since these are acomplex result of many factors, including the expectation of theuser and the social setting in which the drug is taken. In itsinterim brief to the Commission, the Canadian Medical Associationstressed the multi-disciplinary character of the study requiredfor a proper understanding of non-medical drug use. We have,therefore, interpreted the word 'medical' to refer broadly to allscientific knowledge concerning the effects of drug use. Thelanguage of paragraph (b) of the terms of reference suggests thatit was not intended that the Commission would itself undertakeoriginal research into the effects of non-medical drug use.Although we do not exclude the possibility of some clinical orexperimental work, particularly with respect to the effect ofcertain drugs on psychomotor functions, it is our opinion thatwith the time and resources at our disposal, and having regard tothe research currently being conducted by such organizations asthe Addiction Research Foundation and the National Institute ofMental Health, we should confine ourselves to carrying out acritical review of the existing knowledge and ongoing research,as well as attempting to identify research priorities and therole which the federal government can play in relation toresearch. 8. The remaining paragraphs in the terms of reference dealwith the extent and the causes of non-medical drug use. Theyreflect a broad concern to understand the reasons for theincrease in such use. They invite the Commission to attempt toplace this phenomenon in a proper social and philosophic context.We cannot help feeling that this is one of the most importantaspects of our task: one on which there is a compelling need foran understanding of current Canadian attitudes. This is impliedby the allusion in paragraph (d) of the terms of reference to'problems of communication'. To understand the factors underlyingnon-medical drug use and the problems for which government actionmay be indicated, it is necessary to consider not only theeffects, extent, and causes of such use, but the range of socialresponse and attitude which such use has elicited fromgovernment, other institutions and individuals. For non-medicaldrug use and the social response to it are interacting andmutually conditioning phenomena. Methods of Inquiry 9. The Commission has used a variety of methods of inquiry.Because of the profound social significance of the non-medicaldrug use phenomenon and of the importance of personal and publicattitudes to it, the Commission decided early to conduct publichearings in all of the provinces. It has attached particularimportant to these hearings. They have been used to foster thewidest possible public discussion. In order to encourage theparticipation of young people, it was decided to hold some of thepublic hearings in more informal settings than may have beencustomary for such commissions in the past. In addition to thepublic hearings, the Commissioners have collectively andindividually held numerous private hearings, have consulted withexperts in several fields related to non-medical drug use, andhave read extensively in the scientific and legal literature. TheCommission has also received many communications, written andoral, from Canadians in all walks of life. 10. At the beginning of September, 1969, the Commission wroteto over 750 individuals and organizations inviting them to submitbriefs or to make oral submissions. In particular, the Commissionsolicited briefs from: federal and provincial governmentdepartments; law enforcement authorities, educationalinstitutions and associations; members of university facultiesand departments; medical and pharmaceutical institutions andassociations, addiction research foundations; street clinics andother innovative services; correctional and welfareorganizations; bar associations; youth organizations; studentorganizations; and a wide variety of other organizations andindividuals having an evident concern or point of contact withthe phenomenon of non-medical drug use in Canada. The Commissionreceived a gratifying response to this invitation, and despitethe relatively short time available in some cases for thepreparation of briefs, individuals and organizations made a verycommendable effort to prepare submissions for the public hearingswhich began in the middle of October. 11. A list of the organizations and individuals who have beenidentified with submissions to the Commission in the initialphase of this inquiry is contained in Appendix A to this report,Fifty-five organizations have been represented at the publichearings at which they have submitted written briefs; twenty havebeen represented by oral submissions; forty-five have madewritten submissions to the Commission without appearing at apublic hearing. Thirty two individuals have submitted writtenbriefs and 45 others have made oral submissions at publichearings. In addition, there have been numerous oral submissionsand interventions by members of the public who have attended thehearings. The Commission has also received several hundredletters from individuals, and a selection of these letters orexcerpts from them is included in the Report as Appendix B. Weemphasize that this selection is not intended to convey theweight of opinion in this correspondence, but simply to reflectsomething of the range of response. 12. In the initial phase of this inquiry, the Commission hasheld public hearings in the following centres: Toronto - October16, 17 and 18; Vancouver - October 30 and 31; Victoria - November1; Montreal - November 6, 7 and 8; Winnipeg - November 13 and 14;Ottawa - December 12 and 13; Halifax - January 29 and 30; St.John's - January 31; Fredericton - February 19; Moncton -February 20; Sackville - February 20; and Charlottetown -February 21; Kingston - March 5. A special word may be appropriate concerning the nature of thepublic hearings. They have been conducted in a rather informalmanner. There has been a considerable degree of audienceparticipation. People have felt free to comment on formalsubmissions, and there has been a great deal of informal exchangeamong persons attending the hearings. On the whole, response tothis style of hearing has been favourable, although there hasbeen some criticism from one or two organizations who haveexpressed the opinion that we should not have permitted questionsand critical comments from members of the public. Because of thenature of the phenomenon which it is required to investigate, theCommission is convinced that it has been essential to attempt toestablish a true public forum for discussion of theissues. Most organizations have reacted favourably to this kindof inquiry. In addition to the more traditional settings ofhotels and public buildings, the Commission has held publichearings at universities and from time to time in coffee housesthat have become centres of the new youth culture. Informal hearings have been held in the followinguniversities: York University; the University of Toronto; theUniversity of British Columbia; the University of Montreal;McGill University; Sir George Williams University; the Universityof Manitoba; the University of Winnipeg; the University ofOttawa; Carleton University; Dalhousie University; MemorialUniversity; the University of New Brunswick; the University ofMoncton; Mount Allison University; the University of PrinceEdward Island; and in the following coffee houses: 'The PennyFarthing' in Yorkville, Toronto; 'The Bistro' in Vancouver, andthe 'Back Door' in Montreal. The hearings in these more informal settings have given theCommission direct and vivid contact with the opinions andattitudes of young people in Canada. All the Commission hearingshave been recorded on tape, and in addition there has been astenographic record. In many ways it is a matter of regret thatan audio-visual record could not have been made, but the natureof the subject matter is such that the Commission felt obliged toprotect individuals appearing before it from undue publicity. Themedia have cooperated with the Commission in respecting itsrequest that members of the public should not be photographedwhile making submissions. In many cases, the submissions havebeen of a highly personal nature, and the hearings would havebeen much inhibited if they had been photographed. At the sametime, the Commission has been intensely aware of the fact that itwas listening to an unusual social commentary. Opinions andfeelings have poured forth in the hearings with greatspontaneity, particularly in the more informal settings. TheCommission has been deeply impressed, and on several occasions,moved by the testimony which it has heard. It has been struck bythe depth of feeling which this phenomenon and the socialresponse to it have aroused. As a result of the initial phase ofits inquiry, the Commission is more than ever convinced that theproper response to the non-medical use of psychotropic drugs is aquestion which must be worked out by the people of Canada,examining it and talking it over together. It goes to the rootsof our society and touches the values underlying our wholeapproach to life. It is not a matter which can be confined to thediscrete consultation of experts, although experts obviously havetheir role, and a very important one, to play. 13. A word should be said about the protection of witnesses.The terms of reference of the Commission empower it to taketestimony in such manner as to safeguard the anonymity ofwitnesses. The Order-in-Council authorizing the appointment ofthe Commission provides: That the said Commissioners may, if they deem the sameexpedient, cause a record to be made of the evidence which shallbe given or produced before them, or any part of that evidence,as to the matters to be inquired into and reported upon and maydirect that the oral evidence of witnesses, before them, or anysuch witness, shall be taken in shorthand by a shorthand writer,approved and sworn by the said Commissioners or one of them, andmay direct that the oral evidence of any such witness may be sogiven and recorded, whether under oath or otherwise, without adisclosure of the identity of that witness, and that any evidenceso recorded shall be certified by the person or persons takingthe same in shorthand, as correct. The notices which the Commission has published of its hearingshave given prominence to this readiness to take evidence givenprivately and anonymously, and many witnesses have availedthemselves of this opportunity. The Commission has also receiveda number of anonymous submissions through the mail. At the sametime, concern has been expressed from time to time that thepublic hearings might be used for law enforcement purposes. As aresult of an understanding at the outset of this inquiry with theofficers of the R.C.M.P., the Commission has been able to assurethe public that its hearings would not be exploited for lawenforcement purposes. It has every reason to believe that thisunderstanding has been respected. Although there have beenrumours from time to time that law enforcement personnel havetaken advantage of the hearings for purposes of investigation, noevidence of this has been brought to the attention of theCommission, despite public statements by the Chairman that anysuch instances should be reported to him. The Commission has been very impressed by the candour withwhich people of all ages have come forward and spoken from adepth of conviction, and feeling about the phenomenon ofnon-medical drug usage and its relation to other aspects ofsocial and cultural change today. 14. Altogether, it is estimated that nearly 12,000 Canadianshave attended the hearings up to the end of February. TheCommissioners have travelled some 17,000 miles, and in the monthsahead they will continue to move back and forth across thecountry until every province and major city have been visited, aswell as many of the smaller communities. 15. The Commission has had the benefit of a wide range ofadvice from experts in the field of non-medical drug use. It isonly possible here to mention some of those who were particularlyhelpful. The Commission has had several sessions with officers of theR.C.M.P, and has received the fullest cooperation from the Forcein its attempt to understand the lessons of law enforcement inthis field. In addition to the public submission of the Force,each Division prepared a brief, and the Commission has had theadvantage of private hearings with officers from each Division.Moreover, research consultants of the Commission have beenpermitted to observe law enforcement by the Force at first hand.The Commission has also received a number of writtencommunications from the Force in addition to its formalsubmissions. We can not speak too highly of the cooperation thatwe have received from the R.C.M.P., who went to particulartrouble, on relatively short notice in the initial stages of theinquiry, to give the Commission the benefit of their experience.Whatever view one may take of law enforcement policy in thiscontroversial field, we feel obliged to record our respect forthe highly professional manner in which the R.C.M.P. have soughtto per-form their duty in relation to this inquiry. We lookforward to their continued cooperation as we deepen our study ofthe problems of law enforcement and the administration of justicein the field of non-medical drug use. The Commission has also received a great deal of valuableassistance from addiction foundations, notably the AddictionResearch Foundation of Ontario, the Narcotic Addiction Foundationof British Columbia, and OPTAT (Office de la Prevention et duTraitement de l'Alcoolisme et des Autres Toxicomanies). From theoutset of its inquiry the Commission has had the benefit offrequent consultation with members of the Ontario Foundation, andthe Commission's research staff have made extensive use of thebibliographical and documentary resources of the Foundation. The Commission has also consulted with many other experts, inCanada and the United States. It plans to consult with many more,including experts outside North America, in the ensuing year. Forthe present, it would like to make special mention of theassistance which it has received from Dr J. Robertson Unwin, DrLionel Solursh and Mr Wilfred Clement, whose intimate knowledgeof the Canadian drug scene from a scientific, yet deeply humanperspective, has made their observations and advice invaluable.The Commission should also record its indebtedness for advicereceived in the early stages of the inquiry from Dr Helen Nowlisof the University of Rochester, Samuel Pearlman of the CityUniversity of New York, Dr Daniel Glaser of the New York StateNarcotic Addiction Control Commission; members of the NationalInstitute of Mental Health, and Department of Justice in theUnited States. The Role of the Interim Report 16. We have had some difficulty in determining what should bethe role of our interim report. In particular, we have beensomewhat perplexed as to how far we are justified in coming toconclusions and making recommendations at this time. But we arerequired by our terms of reference to render an interim report,and we assume that something more is expected than a simplereport of progress. We believe that what is expected, at the veryleast, is a report, which conveys our initial understanding ofthe subject matter of the inquiry and makes such recommendationsas we feel are urgent and for which we believe we have asufficient basis at this time. We hope it will serve to put thephenomenon of non-medical drug use in some perspective, toidentify the issues, and to provide the basis for furtherconsideration and discussion by the people of Canada. Further, byidentifying certain attitudes, hypotheses, and tentativeopinions, the interim report will serve, we hope, as a soundingboard, eliciting further evidence and opinion, and indicating tous wherein our definition of the issues and our preliminaryopinions may require revision. 17. The function of the final report will be to complete thepicture begun by the interim report and to report upon the systemof social response which we recommend for the phenomenon ofnon-medical drug use. The inquiry between the interim report andthe final report will test the definitions of issues and thehypotheses reflected in the interim report, add necessaryinformation with respect to the effects, the extent, and thecauses of non-medical drug use, as well as the role played by thevarious aspects of social control and response, and lay thefoundation for specific recommendations concerning these variousaspects. The interim report is primarily concerned with astatement of the issues and applicable principles, and the finalreport is to be concerned with the detailed application of theseprinciples to the development of a satisfactory system of socialresponse. We recognize, however, that the urgency of some of theproblems involved in non-medical drug use and the time requiredto develop adequate resources to cope with them may indicate theappropriateness of certain recommendations at this time. This isparticularly true with respect to preparations and organizationfor which considerable lead time is required. In such cases itmay be sufficient to indicate the general direction which certainresponses should take, leaving it to further study andconsultation in the ensuing year to settle matters of detail. 18. Chapter Two on the effect of the drugs is offered at thistime for two reasons. First, we have been profoundly impressed byrepeated assertions of the need for more reliable information,and we hope that this chapter will serve a useful purpose asmaterial for drug education. Secondly, we feel that it is anindispensable basis for the development of public understandingof the issues. In effect, in Chapter Two we disclose our initialassumptions concerning the effects of the drugs. Our object is to identify the body of reliable and generally acceptedknowledge, and to determine where the important uncertainties andgaps exist. We certainly concur in the impression which othershave conveyed of a field of knowledge bedevilled by controversy,conflicting professional opinion, and uncertainty. Some observersquestion whether it is possible, in view of the intense feelingson this subject, ever to come to agreement on what should beaccepted as scientifically known. Erich Goode in his article,'Marijuana and the Politics of Reality', observes that 'themultitude of results from the many marijuana reports forms a seaof ambiguity into which nearly any message may be read'. He makesthe point that whether a particular drug effect is good or baddepends on one's subjective point of view - the implications ofthe effect in term's of one's own system of values. Goode sees nopossible reconciliation of these 'differential evaluationsof the same "objective" consequences', and heconcludes that 'the essential meaning of the marijuana issue isthe meaning which each individual brings to it'. The AddictionResearch Foundation of Ontario makes the same point in itspreliminary submission to the Commission. It puts the matter thisway: However, after all possible information has been acquired andverified scientifically, the final steps in the formulation oflegislation or governmental policy will be based upon valuejudgements. Even the classification of the effects of drug use as'beneficial' or 'adverse' is a process of evaluation with respectto subjective standards. The response to non-medical drug use is profoundly a matter ofattitudes. At the same time we must make every effort toascertain what should be accepted as scientific knowledge of the'objective' effects. It is intolerable that the process ofsubjective evaluation should take place in ignorance of theobjective facts. At the same, we would do well to heed Goode'scaution that there is an inevitable tendency to select andemphasize those views of 'objective' facts which support our ownsubjective evaluation. And as Goode points out, with specialreference to the La Guardia Report on marijuana, the variousfindings can be used to support conflicting points of view. Arewe to conclude that the task is hopeless? We think not. We cancertainly make progress by attempting to identify what should beaccepted scientifically concerning the 'objective' effects, bypointing out the important areas of scientific controversy or lackof scientific knowledge, and by making explicit the valuejudgements underlying the conflicting views as to how the effectsshould be subjectively characterized. We believe it is helpful toclarify the issues of the debate. Staff and Research 19. The members of the Commission and their staff are listedin Appendix C. The Commission is carrying out its task with asmall nucleus of full-time staff and with research consultants ona part-time basis for special aspects of its study. TheCommission's Research Associates, Dr Charles Farmilo and Dr RalphD. Miller, are concentrating on psychopharmacologicalresearch into the effects of the drugs. Dr Miller is the author,with the assistance of Dr Farmilo, of Chapter Two on 'The Drugsand Their Effects'. Research that has been commissioned so farincludes survey research to determine the extent and patterns ofnon-medical drug use in Canada, as well as Canadian perceptionsof and attitudes towards this phenomenon, and legal studies, bothdoctrinal and empirical, of the various problems involved in theregulation of non-medical drug use. The section of Chapter Fivedealing with the law is based in part on preliminary work byProfessor Paul Weiler and John Hogarth. Research is only part of the work that is involved in aninquiry of this kind. Special mention should be made of theadministrative staff who have had to work under particularpressure because of the requirement of an interim report,impinging concurrently with the organization and conduct of thepublic hearings. We would like to express our appreciation of thework of Mr James J. Moore, Executive-Secretary of the Commission,who has had the general direction of operations and who has alsoparticipated in the writing of the report; Mr Jack Macbeth, whohas been of great assistance in the organization of hearings andthe preparation of the report; Mrs Vivian Luscombe who hassupervised the secretarial staff of the Commission; Mr C. WilliamDoylend, the Ottawa Office Manager, and other members of theadministrative, secretarial and research staff. Contents | Feedback | Search DRCNet Library | Schaffer Library | Major Studies Canadian Government Commission ofInquiry WT01-B31-35IA031-000652-B042-149http://206.61.184.43:80/schaffer/library/studies/ledain/nonmed2.htm 206.61.184.43 19970122130942 text/html 52266HTTP/1.0 200 OKDate: Wednesday, 22-Jan-97 13:09:19 GMTServer: WebSitePro/1.1f (S/N wpo-0deb)Allow-ranges: bytesContent-type: text/htmlLast-modified: Saturday, 28-Dec-96 07:00:58 GMTContent-length: 52048 Canadian Government Commission - Drugs and Their Effects Contents | Feedback | Search DRCNet Library | Schaffer Library | Major Studies Canadian Government Commission ofInquiry CHAPTER TWO : THE DRUGS AND THEIR EFFECTS INTRODUCTION 20. The primary purpose of this chapter is to review inpreliminary fashion the current scientific knowledge of certainpsychotropic drugs used non-medically in Canada. In addition,this section will introduce a few basic concepts which may behelpful to the understanding of some of the potentials andlimitations of the scientific method as applied to the study ofhuman behaviour and drugs.* Psychopharmacology, the branch ofscience specifically concerned with these issues, can be definedas the study of the interaction of drugs with ongoingpsychological and behavioural activity. A certain amount of the current controversy and lack ofcommunication regarding the 'drug problem' has been attributed tothe multitude of meanings that the term 'drug' has to differentpeople, and to the often arbitrary way in which our societydefines, and endeavours to solve, the problems arising from man'spersistent use of chemical substances to alter his existence. Tosome people the word 'drug' means a medicine used in theprevention, diagnosis, of treatment of an abnormal orpathological condition. In other situations, it is often used torefer only to illegal or socially disapproved substances. Someindividuals employ the word in a manner suggesting dependence oraddiction, regardless of whether it refers to some chemicalsubstance or to other preoccupations such as television, music,books, or sports and games. Some consider alcohol, tea and coffeeas drugs, while to others these are simply normal beverages notto be confused with the more foreign and unfamiliar substancesviewed as drugs. Furthermore, the terms 'drug' and 'narcotic' aregiven special meanings in legal areas. * A glossary of technical terms, as used in this report, ispresented at the end of this volume. Even scientists frequently disagree as to the precisedefinition of the term 'drug'. Modell164 has suggested a comprehensive pharmacologicaldefinition of drugs which the Commission has adopted. As noted inChapter One, a drug is considered to be any substancethat by its chemical nature alters structure or function in theliving organism. Modell observed that: Drug action is therefore a general biological phenomenon ...pharmacologic effects are exerted by foods, vitamins, hormones,microbial metabolites, plants, snake venoms, stings, products ofdecay, air pollutants, pesticides, minerals, synthetic chemicals,virtually all foreign materials (very few are completely inert)and many materials normally in the body. While this interpretation may be too broad for certainpractical purposes, it provides some perspective into theubiquitous nature of our internal and external chemicalenvironment, and the complexity of the question of human druguse. The Commission's primary concern is focused on the use andeffects of drugs taken for their psychotropic or psychoactive propertiesas defined by their capacity to alter sensation, mood,consciousness or other psychological or behavioural functions. 21. The use of psychoactive drugs seems to be an almostuniversal phenomenon and has apparently occurred throughoutrecorded history, in almost all societies. Some scholars havesuggested that this use of drugs may have been among the earliestbehavioural characteristics distinguishing man from the otheranimals. Blum, in the United States Task Force Report (1967),has stated:27 Mind-altering drug use is common to mankind. Such drugs havebeen employed for millennia in almost all cultures. In our workwe have been able to identify only a few societies in the worldtoday where no mind-altering drugs are used; these are small andisolated cultures. Our own society puts great stress onmind-altering drugs as desirable products which are used in manyacceptable ways (under medical supervision, as part of the familyhome remedies, in self-medication, in social use [alcohol, teaparties, coffee klatches, etc.] and in private use [cigarettes,etc.] ). In terms of drug use, 'the rarest or most abnormal formof behaviour is not to take any mind-altering drugs at all.... Ifone is to use the term 'drug user', it applies to nearly all ofus. TheRole of Science 22. It has been suggested that the potential role of sciencein the solution of the 'drug problem' is to provide informationto better enable individuals and society to make informed anddiscriminating decisions regarding the availability and use ofparticular drugs. Unfortunately, considerable disparity oftenexists between the need for such information and the capacity ofscience to acquire and communicate it. Helen Nowlis has noted: 172 There are many reasons why the 'facts' invoked innon-scientific discussions of drugs are often not facts at all.They may be second or third-hand quotations of statementsattributed to scientists. There is a readiness on the part ofmany to accept as 'scientific fact' any statement made by, orattributed to, someone labelled as scientist, whether it is astatement based on research, on uncontrolled observation, ormerely on personal opinion. While science may be able to serve as a useful guideline andsource of information, science itself is not a policy-makingprocess, but merely a practical system designed to explore andtest notions of a certain abstract nature. Even though the aim ofscience is to maximize objectivity, the interpretation andapplication of scientific data is usually a subjective ventureregardless of the controls maintained in the formal analyses. Thepractical use of such information in the social sphere oftenentails economic, legal, philosophical and moral issues which arenot amenable to scientific analysis as we know it today. Even though considerable progress has been made in advancingour knowledge of biology, science has provided only a minimalunderstanding of the essential nature of psychological andbehavioural functions and their relationship to underlyingphysiological processes. Consequently, psychopharmacology todaymust be content with exploring the interaction of chemicals(often with certain identified physical characteristics) with alargely unknown largely unknown human psychobiological system ofenormous complexity. TheClassification of Drugs 23. Drug classifications, based on a variety of differentconsiderations have been developed and there appears to be littlegeneral agreement as to the optimal scheme for ordering theuniverse of biologically active substances. For example, drugsmight be organized according to chemical structure,clinical-therapeutic use, potential health hazards, liability tonon-medical use, public availability and legality, effects onspecific neural or other physiological systems, or influence oncertain psychological and behavioural processes. Theclassification systems developed from these different approachesmay show considerable overlap, although there are often strikingincongruities. For example, some drugs which appear very similarin chemical structure may be quite different in pharmacologicalactivity and vice-versa. The most useful organization depends onthe intended use of the classifications. Since our major concern here is with the effects ofpsychologically active substances, our interim drugclassification system is based primarily on general psychologicaland pharmacological considerations. In Table I eight majorclasses are presented along with some examples of drugs from eachgroup. While the categories are not considered to be exhaustive,the general system is applicable to the majority of drugs usedfor their psychological effects. Since the effects of drugsdepend on a vast number of psychological and physiologicalcomponents, many of which seem unpredictable, these categoriesare to some extent based on a typical reaction by an averagesubject to a common dose. Large variations in any of variousfactors can greatly alter the effects and may reduce thereliability of the descriptions. CLASSIFICATION OF MAJOR PSYCHOACTIVE DRUGS I - Sedatives and Hypnotics (a) Barbiturates - e.g., Verpnal* (barbital) Seconal* (secobarbital) Nembutal* (pentobarbital) Minor tranquilizers - e.g., Librium* (chlordiazepoxide) Valium* (diazepam) Doriden* (glutethimide) Mittown* (meprobamate) Others - e.g., bromides, alcohol (ethanol), paraldehyde, chloral hydrate,antihistamines (e.g., Gravol*), anticholinergics (e.g., datura stramonium, atropine,scopolamine [Sominex* and Compoz*]) II - Stimulants (a) Amphetamines - e.g., Benzedrine* (amphetamine) Dexedrine* (dextroamphetamine) Methedrine* (methamphetamine) Others - e.g., Ritalin* (methylphenidate), Meratran* (pipradol), Preludin*(phenmetrazine), cocaine, ephedrine, caffeine (coffee, tea andcola drinks), nicotine (tobacco), khat III - Psychedelics and Hallucinogens (b) LSD (lysergic acid diethylamide-25, lysergide) Cannabis (marijuana, hashish) THC (tetrahydrocannabinol) Mescaline (peyote) Psilocybin DMT (dimethyltryptamine) DET (diethyltryptamine) DOM (STP, dimethoxymethamphetamine), MDA (methylenedioxyamphetamine ) MMDA (methoxymethylenedioxyamphetamine ) LBJ (methylipiperidylbenzilate) PCP (Sernyl*, phencyclidine) IV - Opiate Narcotics (a) Opium (e.g. Paregoric*, Pantopon*) Heroin (diacetylmorphine) Morphine Codeine (methoxymorphine) Synthetics -e.g., Deremol* (pethidine) Alvodine* (piminodine) Dolophine* (methadone) V - Volatile Solvents (b) Sources: Glue, gasoline, paint thinner, nail polish,nail polish remover, lighter and cleaning fluid, spray cans, etc. Active agents: Toluene, acetone, benzene, naphtha,trichloroethylene, ether, chloroform, amyl nitrate, nitrousoxide, freon, etc. VI - Non-Narcotic Analgesics (a) Aspirin* (acetylsacylic acid) Phenacetin* (acetophenetidin) VII - Clinical Anti-Depressants (c) Monoamine oxidase (MAO) inhibitors - e.g., Nardil* (Phenezine) Tricyclics - e.g., Trofanil* (Imipramine) VIII - Major Tranquillizers (c) Phenothiazines - e.g., Largactil * (chlopromazine) Rauwolfia alkaloids, (snake root) - e.g., Serpasil* (reserpine) Butyrophenones - e.g., Haldol* (haloperidol) Thioxanthenes - e.g., Taractan* (chlorprothixene) (a) Used medically and non-medically. (b) Little or no medical use. (c) Wide medical use, and little or no non-medical use * Registered Trade Name 24. The sedatives and hypnotics (e.g., alcohol,barbiturates, 'sleeping pills' and minor tranquillizers)generally decrease central nervous system (CNS) arousal (althoughsome psychological stimulation may result at low doses). Most ofthese drugs are used medically to reduce anxiety and tension, toproduce general sedation and, at higher doses, sleep. Theanticholinergic substances (e.g., belladonna alkaloids) are oftenused as sedatives at low doses although larger amounts mayproduce excitation and delirium. 25. The stimulants (e.g., amphetamines or 'speed','diet' and 'pep pills', caffeine, and cocaine) generally suppressappetite, increase activity, alertness, tension and general CNSarousal, and, at higher doses, block sleep. Tobacco (nicotine andcoal tars) is usually considered a physiological stimulantalthough a variety of other effects are not uncommon. 26. The third group includes drugs described as psychedelic(mind-manifesting), hallucinogenic (hallucination-producing),psychotomimetic (psychosis-imitating), illusinogenic (illusion-producing),and psychodysleptic (mind-disrupting). While these termsrefer to somewhat overlapping effects alleged to occur with thedrugs in this class, the various labels emphasize differentcharacteristics which are neither synonymous nor necessarilymutually exclusive. Probably none are entirely adequate asdescriptive terms. These drugs may produce profound alteration insensation, mood and consciousness at doses which result incomparatively light physiological activity . LSD and marijuanaare examples from this group. The medical value of these drugs isthe subject of considerable current controversy. 27. The drugs in the fourth category have, traditionally beenreferred to as narcotics or opiates, and are derivatives of, orpharmacologically related to, products of the opium plant. Thebest known examples are heroin, morphine and codeine. The word'narcotic' has been used inconsistently in scientific as well aslay language and has been the subject of considerabledisagreement in legal matters (for example, marijuana, cocaine,and other non-opiates are frequently controlled under lawsregulating narcotics, in spite of the fact that they arepharmacologically different from this group). The use of the term'opiates' is generally more specific, although its applicationhas not always been limited to these drugs. Consequently, thespecific term opiate narcotics is suggested to reduceambiguity. These drugs are used medically mainly for theirpain-relieving effects. 28. The fifth group is an aggregate of chemically diversesubstances perhaps best described on a physical basis as volatilesolvents. They are usually inhaled and include the vapour ofsuch common materials as glue, gasoline and lacquer thinner. Someof these drugs have been called deliriants althoughdelirium is only one of many potential effects and is clearly notrestricted to these substances. Many are quite similar in effectto the sedative group and might be considered in a sub-class ofthat category. Others may have slight psychedelic orhallucinogenic effects. Most of these substances have no knownmedical use although several have been employed as clinicalanaesthetics. 29. The non-narcotic analgesics (e.g., Aspirin* andPhenacetin*) are primarily used to reduce aching pain and tolower fever. In some instances they may also serve as mildsedatives. 30. The clinical anti-depressants (e.g., Tofranil* andNardil*) are used medically to improve mood in severely depressedpatients. These drugs are rarely used for non-medical purposessince they have little effect on normal mood states. 31. The final group, the major tranquillizers, areprimarily used to reduce the symptoms of severe psychosis (e.g.,schizophrenia). Largactil* and reserpine are examples. Whilethese have initiated a widespread revolution in chemo-therapy inpsychiatry, they are rarely involved in non-medical use. * Throughout this chapter an asterisk indicates a registereddrug trade name. PsychologicalConsiderations 32. The general effect of most drugs is greatly influenced bya variety of psychological and environmental factors. Uniquequalities of an individual's personality, his past history ofdrug experience, his attitudes towards the drug, his expectationsof its effects and his motivation for taking it are extremelyimportant and in some instances may completely obscure thetypical pharmacological response to a drug. These factors areoften referred to collectively as the person's mental 'set'. 'The'setting' or total environment in which the drug is taken mayalso be a factor of major significance. A few drinks of alcohol may produce drowsiness and fatigue insome situations, while the same individual under differentcircumstances may be psychologically stimulated and aroused bythe same dose. It appears that the set and setting may be ofgreater significance with the psychedelic-hallucinogenicsubstances than with the other drugs, and it has been suggestedthat psychological factors may often be the primary components indetermining the quality or character of the psychedelic drugexperience. The so-called placebo effect is a striking example ofthe importance of set and setting in determining the drugresponse. A placebo, in this context, refers to apharmacologically inactive substance which elicits a significantreaction, entirely because of what the individual expects ordesires to happen. In certain individuals in some settings aplacebo substance may have surprisingly powerful consequences.The placebo effect is specific to the individual and the setting,and not to any chemical properties of the substance involved.Therefore, in spite of an apparent 'drug effect', the placebo isnot considered a drug since it does not alter function 'by itschemical nature'. Placebos have been reported in therapeutic situations tosignificantly relieve such symptoms as headache and a variety ofother pains, hay fever, colds, seasickness, neuroses, and anumber of gastrointestinal complaints.97 Some scientists havesuggested that the bulk of medical history may actually have beena history of the placebo, since many 'effective cures' of thepast have been shown to be without relevant directpharmacological action, and are today of no value as therapeuticagents. To control for the influence of such psychological factors indrug research, testing is usually done under at least twoconditions: an assessment is made using the actual drug ofinterest, and a separate measurement is taken after a placebo isgiven under identical circumstances. By comparing these twoconditions some of the effects of set and setting can often becontrolled and the actual drug effect uncovered. PharmacologicalConsiderations 33. In studying how drugs affect the body, pharmacologistsgenerally divide the analysis into several processes: 1. Administration: how does the drug enter the body? 2. Absorption: how does the drug get from the site ofadministration into the physiological system of the body? 3. Distribution: how is the drug distributed to variousareas in the body? 4. Action: how and where does the drug produce whateffects? 5. Physiological Fate: how is the druginactivated, metabolized, and/or eliminated from the body? Different routes or modes of administration can haveconsiderable influence on the latency, duration, intensity andthe general nature of the drug effect. Many drugs are wellabsorbed from the stomach and intestines after ingestion whileothers are poorly taken up or may be destroyed by the gastricjuices. Certain drugs may be injected, with a hypodermic syringefor example, just under the skin (subcutaneous or S.C,), into themuscle (intramuscular or I.M.), or into a blood vein (intravenousor I.V.). The effects are generally most rapid and intense afterintravenous injection and, consequently, this mode ofadministration can be quite dangerous in inexperienced hands. Inaddition, certain volatile substances can be rapidly andefficiently absorbed from the lungs by inhalation. 34. The action of a drug is in many cases terminated bychemical changes which it undergoes in the body, Certain organs(often the liver) metabolize or 'break down' the originalsubstance into other chemicals which are usually (but not always)less active and more easily eliminated from the body. Some drugsmay be excreted unchanged in the urine, faeces, or breath. Actionis not always terminated by excretion, however, and the effectsof some drugs greatly outlast the actual presence of the chemicalin the body. Numerous physiological factors alter absorption,distribution, action and fate, and must therefore be taken intoconsideration in the study of drug effects. The details of cellular physiology are largely unknown andwith rare exceptions there is little information as to themechanism by which any particular drug changes the activity ofthe nervous system. At the simplest level, it appears that a drugalters the functioning of the living cell by entering into somesort of chemical combination with substances already present.Even if this molecular process were well understood, it would notprovide a straightforward basis for predicting the overalleffects of the drug on a group of interacting cells, or, athigher level, on the total nervous system (comprising billions ofcells) and associated psychological and behavioural processes. 35. The importance of dose. One of the basic principlesof pharmacology is that specific statements about drug effectscan not be made without consideration of the quantity or dose ofthe drug involved. With all drugs, the response differs both inthe intensity and the character of the reaction, according to theamount of the drug administered. The relation between the doseand the intensity of an effect is often referred to by scientistsas the dose-response or dose-effect relationship. Although the magnitude of the effects of some drugs mayincrease in a rather uniform (monotonic) fashion as dose isincreased, other drugs, particularly the sedatives, may show a bi-phasicresponse and actually produce behaviourally opposite effectsat some doses compared to others. Low doses of alcohol may, incertain instances, be somewhat stimulating, while higher dosesgenerally have a strong sedating effect. Scopolamine (abelladonna alkaloid) may produce sedation at low doses, andexcitation, delirium and hallucinations with larger quantities.Very toxic doses of this drug can again produce sedation, comaand even death. For every drug there is a dose low enough so as to produce nonoticeable reaction, and at the opposite extreme, some degree oftoxicity or poisoning can be produced by any substance if enoughis taken. The concept of a poison, in fact, really refers to thequantity of a drug which exceeds the body's capacity to cope withit without damage. No drug can be designated either safe,beneficial, or harmful without consideration of the dose likelyto be consumed. Chlorine, for example, which is present in mosturban drinking water in concentration so low as to have little orno pharmacological effect on humans, is intended to poisonharmful bacteria. The same substance, highly concentrated ingaseous form, was developed during World War I as an extremelypotent respiratory poison. Even the concept of a psychotropicdrug implies some notion of the range of doses likely to beconsumed, since almost any drug can, in high quantities, affectpsychological function. In many instances, however, considerablephysical toxicity or poisoning develops before significantpsychological effects occur. It is usually essential to study a drug's effect over a rangeof doses in order to obtain an adequate understanding of thenature of the response. It is also important to consider doseswhich have some relevance to existing or potential patterns ofuse if social implications are to be inferred from experimentalfindings. 36. The importance of time. Another importantpharmacological concept is the time-response relationship orthe relation between the time which has elapsed sinceadministration and the effect produced. Such a temporal analysismay be restricted to immediate or short-term (acute) effects of asingle dose, or on the other extreme, may involve the long-termeffects of persistently repeated (chronic) use of a drug. The intensity and often the character or quality of theoverall drug effect may change substantially within a shortperiod of time. For example, the main intoxicating effects of alarge dose of alcohol generally reach a peak in less than anhour, then gradually taper off. An initially stimulating effectmay later change to one of sedation. With some drugs, an initialstate of tension or anxiety may later turn into one of relaxationand sense of well-being, or vice-versa, as a function of time. It may also be important with some drugs to consider thelong-term consequences of chronic use. Usually such effects cannot be readily predicted from what is known of the immediateresponse. For instance, while there is little doubt that thesmoking of a few tobacco cigarettes has no lasting detrimentaleffect on lung or cardiac function, there is increasingscientific evidence that long-term heavy use of this substancehas serious consequences. As another example, the clinicalpicture of the chronic alcoholic involves psychological andphysiological disturbances which do not develop with moderatedrinking. In simple terms, it is essential to ask: 'How much?';'How often?'; and 'For how long?' (as well as 'By whom?') whendiscussing the long-term reaction to repeated drug use. 37. Main effects and side effects. It is highlyunlikely that any drug has only a single action on a particularbehavioural or physiological function. Most drugs can produce analmost unlimited number of effects on the body, each with asomewhat unique dose-response and time-response relationship. Therelative strength of the different responses to a drug generallyvaries with the amount taken, and a particular effect which isprominent at one dosage level may be quite secondary at another. In a therapeutic or clinical setting, one is usuallyinterested in a single or perhaps a small number of the manypossible effects. Those which are desired are generallyconsidered 'main effects' whilst the other unwanted butconcurrent drug responses are labelled 'side effects'. Thisdistinction between main and side effects is a relative one anddepends on the purpose or the anticipated use of the drug. Aresponse which is considered unnecessary or undesirable in oneapplication may, in fact, be the main or desired effect inanother. For example, in the clinical treatment of severe pain,the analgesic (pain-reducing) properties of morphine areconsidered the main effect, and the psychological euphoria andthe intestinal constipation also produced are undesirable sideeffects. To the 'street addict', however, the euphoric propertiesare the main effects, and the analgesic and constipating effectsmay be irrelevant or undesired. Certain opiate compounds such asparegoric are used in treatment of diarrhoea and, in thisinstance, the constipating effect of the drug is desired and theother responses are considered side effects. It is universal thatdrugs have undesirable and toxic side effects if the dose issufficiently increased. 38. Drug interaction. Even in cases where theindividual effects of different drugs are well known andreliable, if several substances are taken at the same time, tileinteraction may produce a response which is quite unpredictableon the basis of the knowledge of the individual drugs alone. Lesscommonly, a particular interaction effect may be anticipated. Ifthe drugs normally have similar properties, they may often havean additive effect if taken together, resulting in a generalincrease in responses similar to that produced by a larger singledose of either one. There are also instances in which one drugmay potentiate the action of another, and the two togetherproduce a greater effect than would be expected by merely addingthe individual reactions. Furthermore, some drugs haveantagonistic effects, and one may counteract or inhibit certainnormal responses to the other. Toleranceand Dependence 38a. Tolerance is said to develop when the response to thesame dose of a drug decreases with repeated use. With mosttolerance-producing drugs, effects of original intensity can beretained. to a certain extent, if the dose is increased. Theextent of tolerance, and the rate at which it is acquired, dependon the drug, the individual using it, and the magnitude andfrequency of administration. The body does not lose sensitivityto all aspects of the reaction to a particular drug with equalrapidity, or to the same degree. Some of the effects of a drugmay 'drop out' sooner than others with repeated use. Tolerance tothe effects which are reinforcing or rewarding drug use (i.e.,'main effects') is usually reflected by a tendency for users toincrease dose. Most aspects of tolerance dissipate withabstinence from the drug. A moderate degree of tolerance to most effects of alcohol andbarbiturates develops and a heavy drinker may be able to consumetwo to three times the alcohol tolerated by a novice. Littletolerance develops to the lethal toxicity of these drugs,however, and a heavy user of sedatives is just as susceptible todeath by overdose as is a non-tolerant individual. Opiatenarcotics, such as morphine, are capable of producing profoundtolerance, and heavy users have been known to take up to tentimes the amount which would normally produce death. By contrast,no noticeable tolerance develops to cocaine (a short-actingstimulant). The exact mechanisms by which the body adapts, or becomestolerant, to different drug effects are not completelyunderstood, although several processes have been suggested.Certain drugs (e.g., barbiturates) stimulate the body'sproduction of the metabolic enzymes which inactivate them. Inaddition, there is evidence that a considerable degree of centralnervous system (CNS) tolerance may develop to certain drugsindependent of changes in the rate of absorption, metabolism orexcretion. An individual tolerant to alcohol, for example, can berelatively unaffected by a large dose even though the resultinghigh level of alcohol in his blood may accurately reflect themagnitude of his intake. It is uncertain as to whether thisrepresents some general molecular adaptation to the drug at thelevel of the individual nerve cell, or perhaps a specificresponse by the central nervous system to counteract the sedatingeffects and maintain normal function. Learning factors oftenappear to play an important role in changing the individual'sresponse to a drug after experience with it. Effects whichinitially may be strange or frightening may later be acceptedwithout reaction or concern, or perhaps, even be desired. Thereis evidence that people may learn to control some drug effects,or otherwise come to function normally in the presence of certainresponses which might originally have been distracting, orotherwise disrupting of behaviour. A phenomenon often referred to as 'reverse tolerance' has beennoted with some drugs (notably the psychedelics) in which thedesired effects may be achieved with smaller doses afterexperience with the drug. Both learning and pharmacologicalmechanisms have been suggested to underly this process. In many instances, after an individual becomes tolerant to theeffects of one drug, he will also show tolerance to others withsimilar action. This is called cross-tolerance. Forexample, a heavy drinker will normally show a reduced response tobarbiturates, tranquillizers and anaesthetics, as well as toalcohol. 39. Physical dependence is a physiological state ofadaptation to a drug, normally following thedevelopment of tolerance, which results in a characteristic setof withdrawal symptoms (often called the 'abstinence syndrome'),when administration of the drug is stopped. These symptomsmay be of an intense nature after persistent heavy use, and withsome sedatives and opiate narcotics, may include tremors,vomiting, delirium, cramps and, in severe cases with some drugs,convulsions and death. There are generally no overt signs ofphysical dependence if the drug level is kept high enough toavoid the withdrawal syndrome. In a sense, the body comes todepend on the drug for 'normal' functioning after adapting to itspresence, and when the drug is absent, considerable disruption ofessential physiological processes occurs until readjustmentdevelops. The withdrawal syndrome may also he elicited withoutabstinence, by the administration of a substance whichspecifically antagonizes or blocks certain effects of theoriginal drug. Withdrawal symptoms can be prevented or promptly relieved bythe administration of a sufficient quantity of the original drugor one with similar pharmacological activity. The latter case, inwhich different drugs can be used interchangeably in preventingwithdrawal symptoms, is called cross-dependence. As anexample, barbiturates and tranquillizers can be used in treatingthe abstinence syndrome associated with chronic alcoholism. Often the recovery phase associated with different drugs ischaracterized by a rebound phenomenon dominated by activityopposite to that produced by the drug. For instance, withdrawalfrom the sedatives generally results in symptoms of acute andtoxic hyperactivation and physiological arousal, while thepattern following intense stimulant (e.g. 'speed') use usuallyinvolves sedation, depression and sleep. Although physical dependence can develop with such commondrugs as alcohol and barbiturates, it is not a factor in thedrug-taking behaviour of the vast majority of regular users. Inthe few individuals who become physically dependent on theseparticular drugs, serious social, personal and physiologicalconsequences of drug use usually precede the physical dependence.Therefore, although physical dependence is a serious medicalproblem in a minority of sedative users, the abstinence syndromeitself is not the cause of major public health problems. Thepotent opiate narcotics, by contrast, tend to produce verypronounced tolerance and physical dependence early in the historyof regular use. These features then soon become an integral partof the particular drug problem presented by the opiate narcotics.However, with these and other drugs, psychological factors in thedependence are often more significant in the long run. 40. Psychological dependence (also often calledbehavioural, psychic or emotional dependence, and habituation) isa much more elusive concept and is difficult to define in asatisfactory manner. A World Health Organization paper69 definespsychic dependence thus: 'In this situation there is a feeling ofsatisfaction and a psychic drive that require periodic orcontinuous administration of the drug to produce a desired effector to avoid discomfort.' A major problem with this definition isthe difficulty in operationally defining and objectivelyidentifying the characteristics of the dependence in a practicalsituation. By contrast, some scientists224 have identified behaviouraldependence as repeated self-administration of a drug. Thisapproach seems far too broad for most purposes since it onlyindicates that the drug is in some way reinforcing or rewardingto the user, and merely restates the observation that he takesthe drug. Extreme instances of psychological dependence are easier toidentify and may be characterized by an intense craving for, orcompulsion to continue the use of, a drug with obviousbehavioural manifestations. In many instances, psychologicalaspects may be considerably more important than physicaldependence in maintaining chronic drug use. The major problemwith opiate dependence is not the physical aspects, sincewithdrawal can be successfully achieved in a few weeks, but thegreat likelihood that the individual will later return to chronicuse due to psychological dependence. In most instances of even regular non-medical use of drugs,such intense psychological dependence probably does not occur.However, more subtle psychological and social factors usuallyhave persisting effects in maintaining the behaviour of drugconsumption. In talking about dependency in any context, whether dealingwith drugs or not, it would seem useful to specify what it isthat is being depended upon and for what reasons, and to identifythe consequences of its presence or its absence. The significanceof dependency changes considerably if the entity is relied upon,for example, for the maintenance of life (e.g., insulin for thediabetic) or for the escape from an unpleasant or intolerablesituation (e.g., privacy), or perhaps for a feeling of well-beingor satisfaction with life. In one sense psychological dependencemay be said to exist with respect to anything which is part ofone's preferred way of life. In our society, this kind ofdependency occurs regularly with respect to such things astelevision, music, books, religion, sex, money, favourite foods,certain drugs, hobbies, sports or games and, often, otherpersons. Some degree of psychological dependence is, in thissense, a general and normal psychological condition. A statement in the preliminary brief of the Addiction ResearchFoundation of Ontario reflects the complexity of interpreting thequestion of dependency:4 It should be recognized, however, that dependence is notnecessarily bad in itself, either for the individual or forsociety. The question to he evaluated, therefore, is not whetherdependence can occur, but whether dependence in a given caseresults in physical, psychological or social harm. 41. The concept of addiction. The term 'addiction' hashad a variety of meanings, and a consensus as to the properdefinition seems unlikely, even in scientific circles. Often ithas been used interchangeably with dependence (psychologicaland/or physiological), while at other times it appears to besynonymous with the term 'drug abuse'. The classical model of theaddiction- producing drug was based on the opiate narcotics, andhas traditionally required the presence of tolerance, andphysical and psychological dependence. However, this approach hasnot been generally satisfactory since only a few commonly useddrugs (e.g., alcohol and other sedatives), in addition to theopiates, seem to fit the model at all. It is clearlyinappropriate for many other drugs which can cause seriousdependency problems. For example, amphetamines can produceconsiderable tolerance and strong psychological dependence withlittle or no physical dependence, and cocaine can producepsychological dependence without tolerance or physicaldependence. Furthermore, in certain medical applications,morphine has been reported to produce tolerance and physicaldependence without a significant psychological component. Recognizing the problems with the concept of addiction, theWorld Health Organization (WHO) proposed the following:69 It has become impossible in practice, and is scientificallyunsound, to maintain a single definition for all forms of drugaddiction and/or habituation. A feature common to theseconditions as well as to drug abuse in general is dependence,psychic or physical or both, of the individual on a chemicalagent. Therefore, better understanding should be attained bysubstitution of the term drug dependence of this or that type,according to the agent or class of agents involved.... It must beemphasized that drug dependence is a general term that has beenselected for its applicability to all types of drug abuse andthus carries no connotation of the degree of risk to publichealth or need for any or a particular type of drug control. The WHO committee presented short descriptions of variousdifferent types of drug dependence which may occur in someindividuals and situations. The list identifies drug dependenceof the morphine type, the barbiturate - alcohol type, the cocainetype, the cannabis (marijuana) type, the amphetamine type, thekhat type, and the hallucinogen (LSD) type. Details of thesevarious kinds of drug dependence are discussed separately laterin this chapter. For reasons analogous to those presented above, it is furthersuggested here that the term dependent rather than the ambiguousdescription 'addict' be used to refer to aft individual who hasdeveloped drug dependence of either the physical or psychologicalforms. ScientificMethods 42. The role of statistics. Statistics can be helpfulin collecting and handling numerical or quantified information,interpreting data, and making inferences or generalizations fromit. The simplest use of statistics is to describe or summarizecertain abstract characteristics of a group or sample. Forexample, the average height of players on a basketball teamprovides a shorthand description of the group. The numerical meanis a common index of the average. Considerably more informationcould be communicated if some idea of the variability of heightswithin the team were known. The range of measures, for example,is a crude index of the variance of 'spread' in the distributionwithin a group. A second function of statistics is to provide a system forinference about some population on the basis of a smaller groupor sample selected from that population. For example, the meanI.Q. of a group of 50 students randomly selected from a schoolwith 500 individuals might provide a reasonable estimate of theaverage intelligence of the entire student population of thatschool. The success of such generalization or extrapolationdepends on the relative size of the sample and the accuracy orfidelity with which the group studied represents the overallpopulation of interest. Any bias in sampling which reduces thesimilarity between the selected group and the population to whichthe results are to be generalized reduces the validity of suchextrapolation. Statistics may also assist in distinguishing between thedifferences in measurements resulting from random variation andthe variance due to the factor which is being studied. Byobtaining an estimate of the natural variability in a population,it may be possible to distinguish, with some confidence, betweena 'real effect' associated with a particular condition ortreatment, and the difference which might be expected by chancealone. The phrase 'statistically significant' is used to indicatean effect considered significantly greater than that likely dueto chance. However, statistical techniques alone can only indicate anassociation between different variables and can not actuallyidentify cause and effect. Such causal inferences must be basedon an overall consideration of the research design. In manylaboratory experiments, the stimulus and its response may bereadily identified, but in less tightly controlled social studies(e.g., surveys) and clinical observations, it is often verydifficult or impossible to positively identify the causalvariable in a complex pattern of associations among differentcharacteristics of the sample. For example, the demonstrationthat persons who are heavy users of tranquillizers also tend tobe regular alcohol drinkers does not necessarily indicate thatone causes the other. It may well be that a third factor (e.g.,the desire to avoid or escape anxiety and tension) may beresponsible for both behaviours. Interpretation of the datagenerally requires considerations beyond that involved in thestatistical analysis. 43. Experimental methods. Details of research designwould not be appropriate here, although some simple notions as toelementary requirements for adequate experimental techniques inpsychopharmacology may be worthwhile. A major goal of scientificresearch is to eliminate or control all factors, other than thoseto be studied, which can influence or bias measurement. As discussed above, the subjects of the study must besufficiently similar to the general population of ultimateinterest to allow generalization from the data. Extrapolationfrom one animal species to another, from one human society toanother, or from one social group to another is oftenquite tenuous and must be viewed with extreme caution. Variablessuch as age, sex, and social class often exert considerableinfluence on psychological measures, and must be taken intocareful consideration. Unless there is some reason why a particular dose level is of singularsignificance, more than one dose should be studied. If thepurpose of the experiment is to allow inferences of a generalsocial nature, then the dose, mode of administration and thegeneral circumstances of the study must be relevant to thepattern of use in the general population. In order to determine the effect of a particular treatment, itis necessary to have a reference or control condition forcomparison, which has been treated identically to theexperimental condition except for the factor under analysis.These data may be obtained from a separate group of controlsubjects, which is sufficiently similar to the experimentalgroup, or from the same subjects studied at a different time. Dueto the great variation between individuals in response to drugs,the latter approach is often most efficient, although it issometimes inappropriate or impractical. Using subjects as theirown controls requires special statistical techniques for handlingthe data, since repeated experience in the situation will affectthe subject's subsequent performance through such mechanisms asgeneral adaptation, practice and other learning variables, andoften fatigue. Care must be taken to control or eliminate the possibleeffects of the subject's and researcher's expectations andbiases. Since set and setting play an important role indetermining drug effects, an inactive placebo substance should betested in a control situation under conditions which areidentical to those present when the drug is studied. Sometimes,however, if the subject has had previous experience with theexperimental drug, he may soon realize whether he was given theactive drug or an inactive substance despite his initial lack ofinformation, and consequently the placebo control may not becomplete. An experimental design in which the subject is notinformed as to which treatment is being investigated is called a single-blindstudy. Since the scientist's bias and expectations can also influencethe subject's performance and the interpretation of his behaviour(as well as the later data analysis), the validity of themeasurements can often be further increased it the researcher isalso unaware of which treatment condition is in effect at thetime of the experiment. A study in which neither the subject northe researcher knows which of the experimental treatmentvariables are operating is called a double-blind design.There are certain circumstances where a double-blind isinappropriate or impossible, although it is often the mostefficient way to acquire specific information about drug effectsin an experimental situation. AReview of Selected Drugs 44. The remainder of this chapter is devoted to a shortcritical review of the scientific literature pertaining to theeffects of certain psychoactive drugs. Barbiturates, alcohol,minor tranquillizers, amphetamines, LSD, cannabis, opiatenarcotics, and volatile solvents are discussed. In these interimreviews an attempt has been made to concentrate on humanpsychopharmacological studies rather than on animal experimentsor general social reports. Although original scientific sourceswere sought and used as often as possible, it wasfrequently necessary at this interim stage to rely on reviewsprepared by others. There has been no attempt to be exhaustive in the referencespresented in the text. These citations often indicate a typicalexample chosen from among numerous sources which would have beenappropriate. The bibliography at the end of this chapter containsa broader representation of some of the materials used inpreparing the summaries. Contents | Feedback | Search DRCNet Library | Schaffer Library | Major Studies Canadian Government Commission ofInquiry WT01-B31-36IA031-000652-B042-178http://206.61.184.43:80/schaffer/library/studies/ledain/nonmed2a.htm 206.61.184.43 19970122130956 text/html 22723HTTP/1.0 200 OKDate: Wednesday, 22-Jan-97 13:09:47 GMTServer: WebSitePro/1.1f (S/N wpo-0deb)Allow-ranges: bytesContent-type: text/htmlLast-modified: Saturday, 28-Dec-96 07:00:47 GMTContent-length: 22505 Canadian Government Commission - Barbiturates Contents | Feedback | Search DRCNet Library | Schaffer Library | Major Studies Canadian Government Commission ofInquiry BARBITURATES 45. The term 'barbiturate' generally refers to drugs which arederivatives of barbituric acid. Barbital, the first drug of thisclass to be synthesized, was introduced into medicine in Germanyin 1903. Barbiturates rapidly gained a wide usage astranquillizers, sedatives and hypnotics (sleep inducers) whichcontinues to this day. In the past half-century, over 2,000different barbiturates have been synthesized, although less thana dozen make up the bulk of current use. Among these areamobarbital (Amytal*), pentobarbital (Nembutal*), phenobarbital(Luminal*), and secobarbital (Seconal*). These drugs arefrequently referred to as 'barbs', 'nemmies', 'goof balls','yellow jackets', 'red devils', 'downers' or 'sleeping pills'. The barbiturates are often classified by the duration of theirsedative or hypnotic action at a standard dose. Since thesimilarities among these drugs exceed the differences, they willbe discussed in general terms as a group. 46. Barbiturates are among the most widely used psychoactivedrugs (medically and non-medically) in our society, and are thetoxic agents in thousands of accidental or intentional deathsannually in North America. In addition, the barbiturates haveconsiderable potential for producing psychological andphysiological dependence, and are probably second only to alcoholin frequency of drug-induced debilitation in modern society.While a considerable body of research exists into the manymedical applications of these drugs, there has been relativelylittle careful investigation of non-medical use. Although the medical and non-medical use of barbituratesappears to be widespread across age groups and social class, thechronic use of these drugs, as with alcohol, seems to beprimarily an adult practice. Good epidemiological data in thisarea are not available. Since prescription control is onlypartially effective and possession of these drugs for personaluse without medical authorization is not a criminal offence and,perhaps, because the users do not appear to form any homogeneous,cohesive or easily recognized minority, the usual medical and lawenforcement statistics are of little assistance in assessing theextent of non-medical use. 47. It has been frequently said that in Canada, the supply ofbarbiturates lawfully manufactured or imported greatly exceedsthe requirements of legitimate medical use. It appears that manycurrent non-medical users were initiated into barbiturate use formedical reasons. Numerous medical users develop dependence andcontinue use long after the original medical purpose orprescription is absent, and there are indications that mostchronic barbiturate users obtain the drugs through legitimatechannels.98 Since many physicians do not adequately maintain ormonitor prescription records, a patient may be able to arrange anincrease in the frequency and/or quantity of drug prescribed. Inaddition, many chronic barbiturate (and other prescriptiondrug) users obtain 'legitimate' prescriptions from a number ofdifferent doctors simultaneously, without the physicians'awareness.79 Because of these patterns, the distinction betweenmedical and non-medical use of barbiturates is often particularlydifficult. Essentially all of the medical and non-medicalbarbiturate supply in Canada is legitimately and professionallymanufactured; 'home-made' versions have not been identified. MedicalUse 48. Barbiturates are commonly used in medical practice todayand it would seem likely that many households have had first-handexperience with them. Most of the medical uses are based on thesedative, hypnotic, and anti-convulsant effects of the drugs.Barbiturates are widely prescribed where a general depression ofnervous system activity is desired. In low doses, they are widelyused as day-time sedatives or tranquillizers. The hypnotic effectof these drugs is familiar to thousands of Canadians who usebarbiturates in higher dose in the form of the common sleepingpill. Barbiturates are also often administered alone, and inconjunction with other drugs, as anaesthetics in surgical andrelated medical situations; but they are poor analgesics if usedalone. The anti-convulsant effects of certain barbiturates havebeen very important in the treatment of acute convulsionsassociated with drug dependence withdrawal symptoms, variousneurological disorders (including epilepsy), and poisoning due tothe overdose of such stimulants as strychnine, nicotine andcocaine. Other medical applications include diagnosis and attemptedtherapy of certain psychiatric disorders. In these instances thedrug is usually administered intravenously in a dose adjusted tokeep the patient in a semi-conscious state in which inhibitionsare reduced and various suppressed and emotionally chargedmaterial may be released. This procedure is essentially that usedin the so-called 'truth serum' application in criminalinvestigations. This effect, then, is really just a carefullymonitored dose-response to ordinary short-acting barbituratesand, while this procedure frequently results in informationdifferent from that communicated normally, there is littleevidence that it really exposes the 'truth' as such. Administration,Absorption, Distribution and Physiological Fate 49. In crystalline form, barbiturates are odourless, white oryellow powders, with a slightly bitter taste. They are availableas powders, elixirs, injections, suppositories, capsules ortablets (both in sustained and delayed release forms). They arefrequently marketed for medical use in mixtures with other drugs,such as other sedatives or tranquillizers, analgesics, belladonnaalkaloids (e.g., atropine or scopolamine), various stimulants(e.g., amphetamine or caffeine), vitamins and variousgastrointestinal agents. Barbiturates are usually administered orally for both medicaland non-medical purposes and are readily and efficiently absorbedby the stomach, small intestine, and rectum. Absorption is morerapid on an empty stomach than if the drug is taken immediatelyafter eating. Both intramuscular and intravenous injections arealso effective, but they are more prone to physiologicalcomplication and are generally avoided except for specialpurposes. While most chronic dependent users take barbituratesorally, those who are experienced with self-injections (e.g.,opiate narcotic or amphetamine dependents) may use theintravenous route. After absorption into the bloodstream, barbiturates areinitially distributed rather uniformly throughout the body, withthe latency of the psychological response being partly a functionof the facility of the particular drug in entering the brain. Thebody eliminates barbiturate activity in several ways. Mostbarbiturates are broken down or metabolized in the liver intorelatively inactive substances which are excreted by the kidneyin the urine, along with various quantities of the unaltereddrug. Temporary binding of drug molecules by plasma and tissueprotein soon after distribution, plus the affinity of certainbarbiturates for body tissue fats, may further shorten theinitial central nervous system (CNS) effects (and possiblyprolong other more subtle reactions). The preceding factors ofmetabolism, excretion, and distribution are largely responsiblefor the differences in potency and duration of action among thedifferent barbiturates. Acute and chronic barbiturate use can beidentified from blood and urine samples. 198 PsychologicalEffects 50. Many of the psychological and behavioural effects of hypnoticdoses of barbiturates are quite similar to the alcoholinebriation syndrome and consequently do not need muchelaboration. While the drug user may be able to discriminatebetween the alcohol and barbiturate states subjectively, it isextremely difficult to tell the difference from the user'sbehaviour. Although high doses invariably produce behavioural sedation,drowsiness, and sleep, the effects of mailer quantities may bequite unpredictable. As with alcohol and other sedatives,barbiturates may initially produce behavioural excitation,stimulation and lack of inhibition (especially at low doses),rather than sedation, depending on the situation and theindividual. In certain persons, sedation is not produced until aconsiderable quantity has been administered, whereas otherpsychological and behavioural effects may be quite pronounced.The user may become happy, pleasant, euphoric or 'mellow' on oneextreme, or possibly hostile, suspicious, aggressive and violenton the other. Emotional depression, self-pity, and withdrawal arealso not uncommon, and barbiturate-related suicides arefrequently reported. Although low-dose effects are often erratic,moderate to high doses generally slow down reaction time, impaircomplicated mental functions, and produce a lessening ofinhibition, a reduction in emotional control, and an impairmentof physical co-ordination as well as a variety of other effectsresembling alcohol inebriation. Acute toxic psychoses are rare.The extreme variability in response, even within the sameindividual over a short period of time, is illustrated byWikler's report.243 After intravenous injection of 0.25 to 1.0gm of amobarbital, asubject may fall asleep if he lies in bed undisturbed, yet he maybe awake and voluble if interviewed by a psychiatrist, or he mayexhibit ataxia on attempting to walk back to his bed, but he may'sober up' promptly when instructed to pose for a motion picturedemonstration of ataxia. 51. Frequent mention is made of a phenomenon called 'drugautomatism', associated with toxic barbiturate overdose,although, many observers have expressed doubts as to itssignificance. In this situation, the individual, in adrug-induced state of confusion or stupor, is said to administeradditional doses of the drug without being fully aware of theprevious administration.148 52. Although it appears certain that driving skills would bediminished by barbiturate intoxication, little directinvestigation has been conducted. Related behavioural studies dosuggest such an effect. Low therapeutic doses may not reducedriving ability, however, if the drug is not taken in conjunctionwith other sedatives such as alcohol.72 53. On the basis of existing evidence it would appear that thelong-term psychological effects of moderate barbiturate use arenegligible for most users. Some of the complications of chronichigh-dose use will be dealt with later. PhysiologicalEffects 54. The short-term effect of moderate to high doses ofbarbiturates is a general depression of neural and muscularactivity. As with psychological and behavioural effects, theresponse to low dose is much more variable. Initially, theelectroencephalogram (EEG) may suggest cortical activation,although this pattern is usually soon replaced by signs ofdrowsiness or sleep. The sleep induced by hypnotic dosesgenerally resembles normal sleep with the exception of a markedreduction in the rapid eye movement (REM) stage, the significanceof which is only beginning to be understood. Drowsiness or'hangover' symptoms may follow acute intoxication or drug-inducedsleep. Although the sedative action of the barbiturates hasfrequently been attributed to their effects on the reticularactivating system of the brain, little is known of the specificdetails, and this action might occur through a variety ofdifferent pharmacological mechanisms. A variety of other transient or temporary physiologicalchanges may occur with moderate barbiturate use; the majority ofthese apparently reflect a general 'slowing down' ofphysiological activity (in the respiratory, cardiovascular andother systems) normally occurring with behavioural sedation, andare of little clinical significance. After even chronicnon-medical use there is generally a fairly complete recovery ofpsychological and physiological capabilities following withdrawalinstances of permanent psychological or neurological disorder, orof irreversible liver or kidney damage are rarely reported. Thisis a rather surprising picture in light of the vast number ofdisabilities attributed to chronic alcoholism and the generalpharmacological similarities between alcohol and thebarbiturates. It may be significant to note here that personsphysically dependent on barbiturates seem to be more likely tomaintain a reasonable state of nutrition than do chronicalcoholics. The toxic or poisoned state induced by barbiturate over-doseis characterized by coma, a general shock syndrome (e.g., weakrapid pulse, low blood pressure and cold sweaty skin) and mayresult in death due to respiratory arrest, cardiovascularcollapse or kidney failure. If the over-dose is not fatal, atemporary jaundice due to impaired liver function is likely tofollow and skin reactions may result. Some of these responseswill also occur to normal doses in individuals allergic to orabnormally sensitive to the barbiturates. Because of the welldocumented additive or potentiating effects (as well ascross-tolerance) among the sedatives, users of related drugs,such as alcohol, must be especially attentive to dose levels. Toleranceand Dependence 55. Tolerance to some of the effects of barbiturates can bedemonstrated, although the degree and rate of toleranceacquisition varies considerably with the dose, frequency ofadministration and the individual. The potential for tolerance ismuch lower with barbiturates than with the opiate narcotics, andappears to level off at a maximum of 1.0 - 2.5gm. per day. (Anormal sleep-inducing dose might be around 0.1 - 0.3gm.) Whilethis loss of drug sensitivity is quite general and applies toboth sedative and mood effects, no tolerance appears to developto the lethal toxicity level since chronic users are assusceptible to fatal over-doses as are initiates. In other words,the safety margin decreases with increased tolerance. Severalmechanisms operate in producing tolerance. Barbiturates stimulatethe body's production of the metabolic enzymes which inactivatethe drug. Also, some insensitivity to the depressant effectsappears which might reflect a general neurological adaptation.Certain learning processes are also probably involved in changingthe character of the response upon repeated administrations. Mostaspects of tolerance disappear after a few weeks of abstinencefrom the drug. Although barbiturates were not recognized as 'addictive' drugsfor decades after their general medical acceptance and usage, inchronic users, physical dependence may develop along withtolerance. Barbiturate dependence is in some respects similar toopiate narcotic dependence, although barbiturate (and alcohol)withdrawal symptoms are frequently more severe and are morelikely to result in death. The abstinence syndrome followingwithdrawal of the drug in chronic heavy users may begin with areduction in intoxication and an apparent improvement incondition. Within a few hours, however, general physicalweakness, dizziness, anxiety, tremors, hyperactivity, nausea,abdominal cramps and vomiting may occur. These may be followedafter one-and-one-half to five days by muscle spasms and grandmal (epileptic) seizures. Between the third and seventh day,delusions and hallucinations may appear; this psychosis may lastfor days or even months although recovery usually occurs within aweek or two. Death during the convulsive phase occasionallyoccurs. 111, 89 56. The full picture of barbiturate withdrawal only appearsafter heavy chronic use, and the effects of abstinence followingmore moderate consumption are considerably less severe, and maymanifest only a few of the classic symptoms. Many regular usersof therapeutic doses develop neither significant tolerance norphysical dependence. As is the case with alcohol and opiatenarcotics, babies born of mothers physically dependent onbarbiturates are also physically dependent on the same drugs. Psychological dependence also occurs in some users, andanxious or tense individuals may become dependent on even smalldoses in order to function in a manner which they considersatisfactory. Many persons depend upon the hypnotic effects ofthe barbiturates and can not sleep without a pill. In otherindividuals, the drug may be depended upon for a variety ofsubjective effects which the user considers essential to hiswell-being. The problem of psychological and behaviouraldependence on barbiturates has not been adequately explored,however, and remains in the area of clinical impression andconjecture. Barbituratesand Other Drugs 57. Because of the many similarities between barbiturates andother sedatives, they are often used interchangeably. A certainamount of cross-tolerance exists among these drugs, and chronicusers of barbiturates are generally quite resistant to many ofthe effects of alcohol, minor tranquillizers and volatileanaesthetics, as well. This cross-tolerance, however, does notappear to affect the lethal dose, and large quantities of alcoholand barbiturates taken simultaneously (acting in an additivefashion) may produce a toxic or fatal reaction. In addition, thesedative drugs have the capacity to be substituted for each otherin diminishing withdrawal symptoms, and barbiturates arefrequently used therapeutically to reduce the severity ofwithdrawal in alcoholics. Since the sedatives show thiscross-dependence, individuals dependent on one may turn to othersedatives if the supply of the preferred drug is restricted.Consequently, chronic barbiturate dependents are usually heavyalcohol users as well. Such multiple users often refer to thebarbiturate intoxication as a 'dry drunk'. Barbiturates have theadvantage of producing inebriation without the obvious odour ofalcohol. The relationship between barbiturates and the opiate narcoticsis more complicated. These drugs may not show significantcross-tolerance, although barbiturates can be useful in thetreatment of opiate narcotic withdrawal symptoms and mayeffectively reduce the unpleasantness of the abstinence syndrome.The drugs do interact in some sort of complementary way sincebarbiturates are frequently, used by opiate narcotic dependentsto strengthen or reinforce a weak heroin dose or as a substitutein an emergency. Many opiate users, however, avoid barbituratesand consider the barbiturate-dependent person to be at the bottomof the 'addict' community, together with the alcoholics. Barbiturates are often used in conjunction with amphetamines. Dexamyl*, for example, is a combination of dextroamphetamine and amobarbital which supposedly produces stimulation without certain of the irritation or tension-producing effects of the amphetamines. More important clinically, is the frequently noted alternating cycle of sedation and stimulation which many medical and non-medical drug users demonstrate. A stimulant may be used to overcome the drowsy hangover the day after a hypnotic dose of barbiturate. By evening, another sedative dose may be necessary to overcome the insomnia potentiated by the day's amphetamine. This continuing cycle is apparently not at all uncommon among otherwise socially respectable drug users. A somewhat related pattern has been demonstrated by some amphetamine injecting 'speed freaks' who use barbiturates to terminate the stimulant effect or produce sleep after a 'high' of several days' duration. Contents | Feedback | Search DRCNet Library | Schaffer Library | Major Studies Canadian Government Commission ofInquiryWT01-B31-37IA031-000652-B042-201http://206.61.184.43:80/schaffer/library/studies/ledain/nonmed2b.htm 206.61.184.43 19970122131008 text/html 28669HTTP/1.0 200 OKDate: Wednesday, 22-Jan-97 13:09:56 GMTServer: WebSitePro/1.1f (S/N wpo-0deb)Allow-ranges: bytesContent-type: text/htmlLast-modified: Saturday, 28-Dec-96 07:00:39 GMTContent-length: 28451 Canadian Government Commission - Alcohol Contents | Feedback | Search DRCNet Library | Schaffer Library | Major Studies Canadian Government Commission ofInquiry ALCOHOL 59. Alcohol is one of the most widely used psychoactive drugsknown to man; it has apparently been with us since the dawn ofcivilization. Breweries flourished in Egypt almost six thousandyears ago and there is evidence that Stone Age prehistoric manmade alcoholic beverages long before that.223 The use of alcoholhas appeared in varying degrees in most societies throughoutrecorded history and has traditionally played an importantsymbolic as well as pharmacological role in many social,religious and medical practices and customs. Just as the use ofalcohol has been almost universal, so, apparently, has itsmisuse. Consequently, some degree of opposition to 'drink'appears to have arisen in all indulging cultures, althoughattempts to eradicate its use have met with a uniform lack ofsuccess. What is this drug which has been hailed as the 'water of life'and 'nectar of the gods' by some, and damned by others as 'secondonly to war' as a source of human problems? Made up of threecommon elements, carbon, hydrogen and oxygen, ethyl alcohol(C2H5OH) is a colourless, inflammable and volatile liquid. Theword 'alcohol' by itself is usually taken to mean ethyl alcoholor ethanol (common beverage alcohol), although there is avast number of other substances in the aliphatic alcohol family,many of which are highly toxic in even low doses. Although the technique of producing alcoholic beverages byfermenting fruit, grain, vegetables, and other food-stuffs hashardly been a secret over the past few thousand years, the exactprocess by which the drug is generated was first illuminated byLouis Pasteur in the middle of the nineteenth century. Hisinvestigations revealed that alcohol was produced by a singlecelled microscopic plant, one of the yeast fungi, which by ametabolic form of combustion breaks down certain sugars,releasing carbon dioxide (CO2) with ethyl alcohol as aby-product. This production of CO2 is responsible for the 'head'on a glass of beer, and the 'popping' of champagne corks, as wellas the leavening effects of yeast in the rising of bread. Sinceyeast cannot digest starch, mash from cereal grains such asbarley, rye, corn and rice must be malted (i.e., converted tomaltose sugar) prior to fermentation in the production of beer,gin and whisky. 60. Fermentation normally continues until the sugar supply isexhausted. However, as the amount of alcohol in the fermentingsolution increases, the metabolic activity of the yeast is sloweduntil it is finally killed when the alcohol level reaches about14%, thus setting a limit on the maximum strength of natural(undistilled) beverages. The distillation process of boiling offand isolating the more volatile alcohol from the other fluids(mostly water) allows a further increase in ethanolconcentration. Although this technique was used in Middle Easterncultures centuries earlier, the production of 'spirits' bydistillation has been known in Europe for less than seven hundredyears. Today, ethanol can be produced synthetically. In Canada, beer usually contains about 5% alcohol by volume,natural wine 7% to 14%, fortified wine up to 20% and spirits orliquor (distilled) approximately 40% alcohol. In other words, a12 oz. bottle of beer or 3 to 4 oz. of wine contain about as muchalcohol as 11/2 oz. of whisky. 61. The notion of alcohol 'proof' originated centuries agofrom a crude but effective analytic technique designed to assessthe strength of spirits. If gun powder soaked with the beverageexploded on ignition, this was taken as 'proof' that the liquorwas more than half alcohol. 'Proof spirit' in the United Kingdomand Canadian system contains about 57% alcohol, while in theUnited States proof is calculated as twice the per cent by volume(e.g., 80% proof whisky is 40% alcohol).80 Canada has experimented with alcohol prohibition in varyingways since 1878. Although there are currently some 'dry'localities, alcohol is generally legally available across thecountry. An interesting bit of drug history is connected withalcohol law: over 300 years ago the prohibition of liquor salesto Indians was Canada's first alcohol regulation. Some suchdiscriminatory policies are only now being eliminated. 32 62. There was a 15-year period of prohibition in the UnitedStates, ending in 1934. The failure of that programme has beenattributed to the unworkable form of the laws, inadequateenforcement, corruption among public authorities and, perhapsmost importantly, a general lack of public support. During thatperiod, the elimination of legitimate alcohol outlets resulted inhome breweries and distilleries, 'bootleg' liquor or toxicsubstitutes, and smuggling, and created an economic vacuumrapidly filled by organized crime. Many authorities feel thatthis multi-million-dollar illicit market provided the initialcapital for the construction of a network of syndicated criminaland quasilegal business empires which have considerable economicand political strength in North America today. Alcohol is now used by more than three-quarters of theCanadian population over the age of 15. Although most of it isundoubtedly consumed primarily for its pharmacologicalproperties, there is a significant aspect of alcohol usage whichis, in some respects, independent of its immediate drug effects.There are many long-standing customs, traditions andsuperstitions which pervade alcohol use in the Western world.Because it has become an integral part of our culture, the setand setting surrounding alcohol use is substantially differentfrom that associated with other drugs in Canada. 63. Alcohol may have special meanings in various socialcontexts. Alcohol use is often symbolically and pharmacologicallyassociated with the acknowledgment of birth, death, marriage andother contracts, adulthood, friendship, and, to some, it mayimply virility and masculinity. Although it is employed in somereligious ceremonies, many individuals have moral apprehensionsabout alcohol and may approach its use with feelings ofambivalence and guilt. Some reject it outright on grounds ofprinciple, while still others feel that moderate use is morallyacceptable. In many social circles abstinence is frowned upon and'teetotallers' are looked upon with suspicion. On the other hand,it is obvious that considerable alcohol intoxication istolerated, condoned and even encouraged in many situations inNorth American society. When one considers the fact that thesevarious attitudes are ultimately tied to, or interact with, thediverse pharmacological potentials of alcohol in determining theoverall drug effect, the complexity of the psychopharmacology ofthe drug in North America becomes apparent. Because its use is soingrained at all levels of society, there is a tendency for manyCanadians not to even consider alcohol a drug. In a wider context, Jaffe, in The Pharmacological Basis ofTherapeutics observes: 111 The large role that the production and consumption ofalcoholic beverages plays in the economic and social life inWestern society should not permit us to minimize the fact thatalcoholism is a more significant problem than all other forms ofdrug abuse combined. Medical Use 64. Alcohol is currently recognized as an official drug in theBritish and U.S. Pharmacopeias, although the various alcoholicbeverages, as such, are no longer listed for medical use. Alcoholhas been cited over the past few thousand years as a cure fornearly every ailment or disease. Most of the medical benefitswere probably more imagined than real, and many of alcohol'slegitimate pharmacological functions have now been filled by moreeffective drugs, although it still plays a useful role inmedicine. Alcohol is often used as a preservative, solvent, and vehiclefor other drugs, and is contained in tinctures, elixirs, spiritsand many medicinal syrups. It is used to cleanse, disinfect andharden the skin, to cool it during fever, to decrease sweating(and is included in many antiperspirant deodorant), to reduce bedsores, to treat fainting, to temporarily or permanently blocknerves by injection, and to stimulate appetite and digestion. Inconcentrations around 70%, alcohol is an effective antibacterialagent, although it is not satisfactory for disinfecting openwounds since it damages the raw tissue.186 Alcohol is still sometimes recommended as a tranquillizer,sedative, or hypnotic and may also serve as a mild mood stimulantfor some individuals. It is no longer considered a safesurgical anaesthetic, since the dose necessary to produceunconsciousness is often dangerously close to the fatal level.However, the drug does produce mild analgesia (pain reduction) atlower doses. Alcohol is still used in the lay and folk medicineto 'treat' the common cold, although its benefits, if any, areprobably limited to an improvement in mood and increasedrelaxation and rest. Administration, Absorption, Distribution and PhysiologicalFate 65. Alcohol is usually taken orally and is rapidly andcompletely absorbed in the gastrointestinal tract. Someabsorption takes place in the stomach although diffusion into theblood stream is most rapid from the upper intestine and,consequently, the quicker the alcohol passes through the stomachthe shorter the latency of its action. Food eaten before or withalcohol tends to decrease the drug effect by slowing stomachemptying, and a meal before drinking alcohol may reduce the peakalcohol level in the blood by almost one-half compared to thatattained by drinking on an empty stomach. Once absorbed, alcoholis distributed quite uniformly in all bodily fluids, easilyenters the brain, and in pregnant women crosses the placentalbarrier into the foetus. Alcohol temporarily diffuses into fattissue and consequently, a lean muscular individual will normallyexperience a greater pharmacological effect with a given dosethan will a person with much body fat. Approximately 95% of the alcohol in the body is broken down byoxidation in the liver and the rest is excreted unchanged,primarily in the urine and breath. While certain alcoholicbeverages, such as beer, contain some protein and carbohydrates,alcohol itself provides only calories when metabolized and haslittle general food value. Depending on the form of alcoholicbeverage and possible mixers, an ordinary drink may contain 90 to150 calories or more. The rate of disappearance of alcoholfrom the body is quite constant within individuals at a giventime, and the average 150 lb. man can metabolize about 9 ml. (0.3oz) of alcohol per hour. A convenient index of the quantity of the drug in the body isthe blood alcohol level, represented in per cent byweight. Since the amount of alcohol excreted in the breath bearsa fixed relationship to that in the blood, it is possible toaccurately estimate the blood alcohol level from expired air.This principle is utilized in the Breathalyzer tests nowemployed in the enforcement of driving laws. Short-Term Effects 66. Alcohol exerts its more significant effects through thecentral nervous system, usually producing a general sedation ordepression of neural activity over a wide dosage range, althoughin certain circumstances, considerable behavioural andpsychological arousal may result. Little is known as to thespecific mechanism by which alcohol produces itspsychopharmacological action. As with most drugs, alcoholeffects, especially those resulting from low or moderate amounts,depend to a large extent on the individual and the situation inwhich the drinking occurs. A drink or two may produce drowsinessand lethargy in some instances, while the same quantity mightlead to increased activity and psychological stimulation inanother individual, or in the same person in differentcircumstances. Furthermore, a dose which is initially stimulatingmay later produce sedation. In many social settings, alcohol seems to result in alessening of inhibition and a feeling of well being, sociabilityand camaraderie in most individuals. For many people alcoholrelieves tension and anxiety - the common notion that one 'needsa drink' when worried, irritated or upset, reflects a generalacknowledgment of this function. Although alcohol usuallyelevates mood at first, a general lack of emotional control,including anxiety, withdrawal, self-pity and depression may occurlater. Alcohol has been frequently cited as an importantcontributing factor in many suicides. Hostility and aggression are not at all uncommon in somedrinkers, and fights and other forms of violent antisocialbehaviour are often reported to accompany bouts of heavydrinking. It appears that some criminals fortify their courage bydrinking prior to a sortie and alcohol intoxication reportedlyplays a significant role in a large proportion of the violentcrimes (murder, rape and assault against persons and property) inNorth America.18 67. Alcohol does not have a specific aphrodisiac (sexstimulating) effect per se, although the emotionality andgeneral lessening of inhibitions often induced may lead to anincrease in sexual activity and other normally restrictedbehaviour. An increase in desire or opportunity may be neglectedby acute sexual impotence, however. Although delusions, illusions and amnesic 'black outs' mayoccur in some individuals, acute alcohol psychosis (pathologicalintoxication) in normally moderate drinkers is rare. Even so,many persons might sympathize with the Roman philosopher Senecawho, almost 2,000 years ago, observed that, 'Drunkenness isnothing but a condition of insanity purposely assumed'.197 In moderate amounts (e.g., a few drinks) alcohol may increaseor decrease heart rate, produce a 'flushing' or dilation of smallblood vessels in the skin (giving a sensation of warmth), lowerbody temperature, stimulate appetite and the secretion of salivaand gastric juices, increase urination, produce a slowing of theelectroencephalogram (EEG), increase reaction time, reducemuscular co-ordination. In addition, alcohol generally reducesperformance on tests of a wide variety of psychologicalfunctions. Tests requiring a high degree of attention,concentration or vigilance are particularly sensitive to alcoholeffects, and impairment is usually most pronounced on complex andrecently learned tasks. In a few situations, however, a smallamount of alcohol may actually improve performance. In highdoses, alcohol produces drunkenness, disorientation andconfusion, slurred speech, blurred vision, inadequate muscularcontrol, and often induces nausea and vomiting. As an increasingquantity is ingested, there occurs a depression of respiration,general anesthesia and unconsciousness and, rarely, death due torespiratory arrest and circulatory failure. Acute alcoholintoxication is often followed by pronounced 'hangover' symptomscharacterized by nausea, weakness, dizziness, poor coordinationand a variety of aches and pains. Some authorities consider thispost-inebriation phase a form of acute withdrawal syndrome. 68. Effects of alcohol on driving ability are well known -even moderate amounts produce serious impairment in manyindividuals. A recent study of alcohol involvement in fatal motorvehicle accidents in three Canadian provinces presented findingssimilar to those reported regularly across North America.37 Ithas commonly been observed that alcohol is a factor in a largeproportion of all fatal traffic accidents. Approximately 70% ofdrivers killed in single vehicle accidents and 50% of driverskilled in multi-vehicle collisions had been drinking. Among alldriver fatalities, alcohol was detected in the blood of 60 to 70per cent of those considered responsible for their own deaths.Furthermore, more than half of the pedestrians killed in trafficaccidents had recently been drinking, and there are numerousreports that alcohol is a contributing factor in a great numberof industrial accidents as well. A large proportion of the peopleinvolved in such accidents are chronic alcoholics, although themajority are apparently 'social' drinkers. The intensity of the acute effects of alcohol can, to acertain extent, be predicted from the amount of alcohol in theblood, although the relationship between the quantity of alcoholpresent and the central nervous system (CNS) response may varyconsiderably from individual to individual. Recent Federallegislation prohibits driving with blood alcohol level greaterthan 0.08%. Depending on the person, this concentration may beproduced by three or four ordinary drinks, if consumed in a shorttime. While certain individuals might be capable of drivingsatisfactorily with this much alcohol, most persons are probablyimpaired by even lower quantities. Although the Breathalyzer canbe used to assess acute alcohol intoxication, there are no simplemethods of detecting a 'hangover', and there are indications thatthis post-inebriation phase also has severe effects onpsychomotor performance. Long-Term Effects 69. Many authorities differentiate between 'low risk'(moderate) and 'high risk' (heavy) drinking in discussing thelong-term effects of alcohol. For most otherwise normalindividuals, moderate drinking over a prolonged period of timemay produce little significant psychological or physiologicalchange. High risk or heavy drinking (e.g., five or six or moredrinks a day) may lead to a variety of disorders, however, manyof which are subsumed under the general term 'alcoholism'. There is considerable disagreement among authorities asto the proper delineation of the concept of alcoholism -definitions may be as general as 'a family of disordersaccompanying chronic heavy drinking 'with various social andeconomic complications, or may contain more restrictivespecifications of physical dependency or psychological andphysiological harm. Jellinek has described five different typesof alcoholics which differ in degree and kind of psychological,behavioural and physiological involvement.112 In some areas ofNorth America, at least two per cent to five per cent of alcoholusers become alcoholics and many more would be considered problemdrinkers. 70. No group of drug-dependent persons presents a sorrierpicture of psychological and physiological pathology than that ofthe 'skid row' derelict alcoholics. Frequently observed in theseindividuals and many other alcoholics are disorders of thedigestive tract, cardiovascular system, lungs, kidney, pancreasand the nervous system, with sleep disturbance and various kindsof irreversible neurological damage and cerebral atrophy.Considerable attention has been focused on liver disorders inheavy drinkers, and it is well established that alcohol is amajor contributing or causal factor in liver cirrhosis.Alcoholics may develop specific psychotic syndromes, permanentlyimpaired memory, epilepsy, chronic incoordination, sexualimpotence, loss of appetite and a variety of nutritionaldisorders which may result in an increased susceptibility toother diseases and infections.111 In the past, these and numerous other disorders were thoughtto be a direct result of alcohol toxicity, but now many of thesepathologies are considered to be of secondary origin - often afunction of chronic dietary deficiencies, poor personal care andother aspects of the general life style which may accompanyalcoholism. The diet of certain alcoholics may consist of 40-50%alcohol, with periods of weeks or even months of nothing else,and thus may be dangerously low in proteins, vitamins, mineralsand other essential foodstuffs. Proper diet and medical care maybe able to prevent or alleviate many, but not all, of theproblems associated with chronic alcoholism.182 Only a minority of alcoholics are 'down and out' derelicts,and there are many alcohol-dependent persons in all levels ofsociety who function in varying degrees of effectiveness in spiteof the handicap. Psychological and physiological disorders inthese individuals vary considerably as a function of general lifestyle, drinking patterns and perhaps certain inheritedcharacteristics. Many heavy drinkers show little functionalimpairment. Tolerance and Dependence 71. Tolerance to most of the effects of alcohol develops withfrequent use, although it does not occur as rapidly or to thesame degree as with the opiate narcotics. The rate of acquisitionand extent of tolerance depends on the pattern of use, andregular heavy drinkers may be able to consume two or three timesas much alcohol as a novice. In Western culture, some symbolicmasculinity frequently accompanies the development of toleranceand the ability to 'hold one's liquor'. Most intermittent or moderate drinkers show little tendency toincrease dose, although regular heavy drinkers may, in order toobtain the desired psychological effects, ingest quantities whichlead to chronic alcohol toxicity symptoms. In addition to theprobable neurophysiological and metabolic mechanisms involved intolerance, learning to function under the influence of alcoholmay further reduce some of the acute behavioural effects ofintoxication in regular users. Little or no tolerance develops tothe lethal dose, however, and acute alcohol poisoning is a notedcause of death in alcoholics, although nausea, vomiting andunconsciousness usually prevent self-administration of a fataloverdose. In some alcoholics, tolerance later seems to declineand a special response or oversensitivity to certain effects ofalcohol develops. In such individuals even a single drink mayproduce profound loss of control and initiate unrestrictedfurther indulgence. 72. Physical dependence on alcohol occurs in some long-termheavy drinkers after the development of tolerance. Althoughalcoholic hallucinosis, delirium tremens ('DT's), and convulsions('rum fits') were noted and studied in the nineteenth century,until recently there was a lack of consensus as to whether thesesymptoms were essentially the direct result of acute or chronicalcohol toxicity, secondary nutritional deficiencies, or part ofa physical dependence withdrawal syndrome. Isbell et al108 and Mendelson et al156have clearly demonstrated that even when diet is controlled,a characteristic severe abstinence syndrome can occur after onlya few weeks of continual heavy drinking. The quantities ofalcohol ingested in these studies were much greater than thosenormally consumed, however, and with the usual drinking patterns,such physiological dependence does not occur until after 3 to 15or more years of heavy consumption. Some heavy drinkers neverbecome physically dependent on alcohol.112 73. The overall picture of the alcohol withdrawal syndrome isgenerally similar to that noted earlier for barbiturates. Nausea,anxiety, severe agitation, confusion, tremors, and sweating arefollowed by cramps, vomiting and illusions and hallucinations.After several days, delirium tremens may develop and convulsions,exhaustion and cardiovascular collapse may occur. The deliriumtremens stage is fatal in about 10% of cases. Major recovery inthose surviving usually occurs within a week, although certainpsychological symptoms may continue for a longer period.234 Psychological dependence on alcohol seems to occur inmany individuals, and such dependence appears to be generallyaccepted in contemporary North America. A great number of peopleregularly turn to alcohol for relief or aid prior to or afterfacing a stressful situation, to escape worries, troubles orboredom, to relax and enjoy a party, or even to sleep, and manyfeel they do not function as well in certain situations without adrink or two. There would appear to be a strong psychologicalcomponent in the drinking behaviour of the developing alcoholic,as is exemplified in the usually compulsive nature of hisdrinking and his frequent inability to control his use of alcoholin spite of obvious consequences. Alcohol and Other Drugs 74. A certain degree of cross-tolerance and cross-dependenceoccurs among the sedative drugs. Heavy alcohol users are normallyresistant to the effects of barbiturates, minor tranquillizers,volatile solvents and anaesthetics, as well as alcohol, althoughthe cross-tolerance does not significantly affect the lethaldose. Consequently, many over-dose deaths occur due to the mixingof these drugs in chronic users. Barbiturates and minortranquillizers effectively block alcohol withdrawal symptoms andare frequently used in treating alcoholics in the acute phase ofabstinence. Alcoholics are often heavy users of other sedativedrugs as well and may switch from one to another, if it isconvenient or necessary. The use of high toxic alcohols, such asmethyl or 'wood' alcohol, and even automobile anti-freeze, hasbeen reported in derelict alcoholics. In addition, personsdependent on opiate narcotics generally have a history of heavyalcohol consumption. 75. Certain drugs, such as disulfiram (Antabuse*) orTemposil*, which may have little direct pharmacological activitythemselves, have the capacity to inhibit certain stages ofalcohol metabolism in the body and can thereby produce a highlyunpleasant toxic reaction known as the acetaldehyde syndrome whenused in conjunction with alcohol. Such drugs have been used inthe treatment of problem drinkers. Amphetamines, caffeine and other stimulants may reduce thedrowsiness often associated with inebriation, although they cannot fully compensate for most of the effects of alcoholintoxication. Contents | Feedback | Search DRCNet Library | Schaffer Library | Major Studies Canadian Government Commission ofInquiry WT01-B31-38IA031-000652-B042-223http://206.61.184.43:80/schaffer/library/studies/ledain/nonmed2c.htm 206.61.184.43 19970122131019 text/html 13599HTTP/1.0 200 OKDate: Wednesday, 22-Jan-97 13:10:06 GMTServer: WebSitePro/1.1f (S/N wpo-0deb)Allow-ranges: bytesContent-type: text/htmlLast-modified: Saturday, 28-Dec-96 07:00:31 GMTContent-length: 13381 Canadian Government Commission - Tranquilizers Contents | Feedback | Search DRCNet Library | Schaffer Library | Major Studies Canadian Government Commission ofInquiry MINOR TRANQUILIZERS 76. The term 'minor tranquilizers' was introduced into thescientific literature in the 1950s to distinguish the medicinesprescribed to reduce anxiety and tension from the major tranquillizers,like reserpine and chlorpromazine, which are employed (asantipsychotic drugs) in the treatment of severe mental illnesssuch as schizophrenia. Another phrase, often used interchangeablywith the words 'minor tranquilizers' is anxiolytic sedatives. Thisclass of drugs may be defined as substances which reduce anxiety,tension and agitation without other significant effects oncognition or perceptual processes. It seems safe to say that the optimal anxiolytic sedative,which effectively separates anxiety-reducing properties fromthose producing undesired psychological side effects does not yetexist. There are a variety of drugs of several chemical classeswhich approximate these criteria, however: bromides, paraldehyde,chloral hydrate; the newer minor tranquillizers such asmeprobamate (Miltown*), diazepam (Valium*), and chlordiazepoxide(Librium*) and assorted other compounds (e.g., ethchlorvynol,glutethimide) which do not fall into a neat chemicalclassification. Alcohol and barbiturates are also oftenconsidered with the anxiolytic sedatives, although we will keepthem separate in the following discussions since they havealready been covered in previous sections of this report. 77. Most minor tranquillizers fall between alcohol andbarbiturates in sedative action at a therapeutic dose. Thedisparate classes of chemicals have generally similarphysiological action and will be treated as a group, withindividual differences sometimes characterized. The minortranquillizers have tended to replace barbiturates as day-timesedatives in recent years. These drugs and other sedatives arecommonly referred to as 'downers' in the drug argot. In Canada and the U.S.A., well over $500 million is spent eachyear on sedative drugs, to treat a wide variety of symptomsfalling under the category of anixety.131 Although there are nostatistics available to us at this time on the Canadian imports,exports, manufacture, production or sale of minor tranquillizers,many observers feel that the supply greatly exceeds medicalneeds. The distribution route which the drugs follow afterproduction is not known, and a considerable percentage may bediverted for non-medical use. Clandestine manufacture of minortranquillizers does not appear to occur and all such drugsinitially start into the market as lawful materials. As describedin the section on barbiturates, patients may be able to procurelarge quantities of these drugs through legitimate prescriptionchannels. 79. In the U.S., production figures for tranquillizers exceedthose for 'sleeping pills', 'pep pills', and opiate narcoticscombined.77 In additional,178 In 1965 in the U.S.A., some 58 million new prescriptions and108 million refills were written for psychotropes (sedatives,tranquillizers and stimulants) and these 166 millionprescriptions accounted for 14% of the total prescriptions of allkinds written in the United States. 79. Minor tranquillizers are so widely prescribed that theAmerican Medical Association warned doctors aboutoverprescription and outlined ways in which the 'misuse ofsedatives' by 'the prolonged and unsupervised administrationof (tranquillizers) for symptomatic relief often without adequatediagnosis or knowledge of the patient's past experience withmedications, or attitudes towards drugs' is aggravated.8 Evidencein these recent U.S. surveys indicates that the minortranquillizers and other sedatives are more commonly used thanthe stimulants among respondents above age 20. The minor tranquillizers, along with barbiturates, tobacco,and alcohol, are among the most widely used drugs in NorthAmerican society, and are the toxic agents in a large number ofpoisoning cases. Since chronic tranquillizer dependence may bequite frequent, and may involve considerable impairment, thepublic's relative indifference to the hazards of tranquillizerpill-popping is quite alarming. As in the case of alcohol andbarbiturates, much research on medical use has been done, butlittle investigation of non-medical use of tranquillizers hasbeen carried out. Medical Use 80. Minor tranquillizers are widely used in medical practicetoday, and are mainly prescribed for patients suffering fromanxiety, tension, behavioural excitement and insomnia. They arealso used in the treatment of lower back pain, convulsivedisorders and withdrawal symptoms of opiate narcotic and alcoholdependence. Some clinicians feel that chemotherapy of anxiety is asecondary approach (although frequently the most expedient) andthat the minor tranquillizers should be used primarily to relieveimmediate distress, and to aid the patient only until othertreatment procedures become effective. Administration, Absorption, Distribution and PhysiologicalFate 81. Minor tranquillizers are usually administered orally aselixirs or tablets, but are also sometimes injected, forboth medical and non-medical purposes. They are generally rapidlyabsorbed by the stomach, intestine and rectum, and the absorptionis most rapid with an empty stomach. Once absorbed, the drugs aredistributed quite uniformly throughout the body, with the latencyof response dependent on the particular chemical class. Some aremetabolized, or otherwise chemically altered (usually in theliver), and excreted into the urine, while others are eliminatedunchanged. The factors of distribution, metabolism, andexcretion, are primarily responsible for differences in potencyand duration of action of the different minor tranquillizers. Thedetection of some acute and chronic tranquillizer use is noteasy, and the methods of detection of the metabolites in urineare highly sophisticated and expensive. Psychological Effects 82. Many of the psychological effects of minor tranquillizersare similar to those observed with alcohol and barbiturates. Aswith these other sedatives, psychological and behaviouralresponses to low doses of minor tranquillizers are quitevariable. There may be a sedation in some instances and, inothers, an increase in activity. Studies reveal that complexinteractions between the type of drug and the level of anxietyoccur, even within the same pharmacological group; the drugs mayimpair or improve performance, depending on dose and the degreeof anxiety present.131 Normal doses usually provide relaxation, a feeling ofwell-being and perhaps some loss of inhibition. With excessiveuse of these drugs the following effects may be observed;disorientation, confusion, memory impairment, trance-likeepisodes, double vision, personality alterations, rage reactionsand other symptoms resembling those of drunkenness. Suchmanifestations are difficult to differentiate from theinebriation caused by barbiturates and alcohol. 83. It appears that driving skills may not be impaired atclinical doses, so long as the user is not already drowsy or hasnot taken other sedatives such as alcohol. At higher doses,driving skills are more likely to be seriously impaired. Onereport states that the accident rate in a group of drivers usingprescribed doses of Librium* was 10 times the general accidentrate for New York State, but it is not clear whether the accidentrate among these drivers who 'needed' a tranquillizer, was sohigh because of, or in spite of, the drug they were taking.167 InCanada it is an offence to drive under the influence of drugs,and the penalties are similar to those for drunken driving,although convictions involving tranquillizers are rarelyreported.. Physiological Effects 84. The response to moderate and high doses of minortranquillizers is a general depression of nervous and muscularactivity and several other bodily functions. Compared with othersedatives, the newer minor tranquillizers may have lessinhibitory effect on the parts of the brain which are responsiblefor arousal and motor control and may have greater musclerelaxant effects. The minor tranquillizers affect the levels ofsome neurohumors in the brain which may be involved in thetension-anxiety states. However, the exact mechanism by whichthese drugs produce their effects is unknown. Side effects observed with these drugs include drowsiness,ataxia, lethargy, skin rashes, nausea, diminished sex interest,menstrual and ovulatory irregularities, blood abnormalities andincreased sensitivity to alcohol. High doses may depressrespiration, produce unconsciousness and coma and can producedeath. There is no clear evidence of permanent irreversibledamage to neurological or other physiological processes even withlong-term non-medical use. The fact that chronic users of minortranquillizers maintain a reasonable diet and are not reported tosuffer from malnutrition, may account for some of the differencesbetween the chronic effects of tranquillizer use and alcoholism. Tolerance and Dependence 85. Tolerance usually develops to most of the effects of theminor tranquillizers on repeated use and the dose must often beincreased in order to obtain the desired effects. No tolerancedevelops to the lethal toxicity, however, and chronic users mustbe especially attentive to the quantities consumed. With one ortwo exceptions, these drugs have been reported to produce bothpsychological and physiological dependence, resembling that seenwith alcohol and the barbiturates. The clinical descriptions of the abstinence syndrome, reportedto follow abrupt withdrawal, after excessive dosages of the minortranquillizers, indicate a marked similarity to one another andto alcohol and barbiturates. The syndrome may be characterized byanxiety, apprehension, tremulousness, muscle twitches, insomnia,headache, fever, loss of appetite, nausea, vomit, abdominalcramps, sweating, tachycardia, fainting, hyperactive reflexes,convulsions, and uncontrolled urination and defecation. Inaddition, delirious states can occur with motor agitation,hallucinations, delusions, disorientation and confusion. Theabstinence syndrome can be very serious, and deaths have beenattributed to withdrawal of meprobamate (Miltown*) andmethyprylon (Noludar*).72 Minor Tranquillizers and Other Drugs Cross-tolerance and cross-dependence exist among the minor tranquillizers and with other sedative drugs. This cross-tolerance does not appear to affect the lethal dose and, consequently, alcohol or barbiturates taken simultaneously with large quantities of minor tranquillizers may act additively and produce toxic or fatal reactions. Heavy users of these drugs may switch among the sedatives, if necessary or convenient, and alcoholics often use barbiturates and tranquillizers to sustain inebriation. Individuals dependent on opiate narcotics often also use large quantities of minor tranquillizers. Contents | Feedback | Search DRCNet Library | Schaffer Library | Major Studies Canadian Government Commission ofInquiry WT01-B31-39IA031-000652-B043-13http://206.61.184.43:80/schaffer/library/studies/ledain/nonmed2d.htm 206.61.184.43 19970122131027 text/html 27740HTTP/1.0 200 OKDate: Wednesday, 22-Jan-97 13:10:18 GMTServer: WebSitePro/1.1f (S/N wpo-0deb)Allow-ranges: bytesContent-type: text/htmlLast-modified: Saturday, 28-Dec-96 07:00:26 GMTContent-length: 27522 Canadian Government Commission - Amphetamines Contents | Feedback | Search DRCNet Library | Schaffer Library | Major Studies Canadian Government Commission ofInquiry AMPHETAMINES 87. Amphetamines are synthetic amines which are in many wayssimilar to the body's own adrenaline (epinephrine). These drugsgenerally evoke an arousal or activating response not unlikeone's normal reaction to emergency or stress. Amphetamines werefirst synthesized in the early part of the century and enteredmedical use by the 1930s. Although a variety of related drugs andmixtures currently exist, the most common amphetamine substancesare amphetamine (Benzedrine*), dextroamphetamine (Dexedrine*),and methamphetamine (Methedrine* or Desoxyn*), with Benzedrine*being the least potent. Generally, if the dose is adjusted, thepsychological effects of these various drugs are similar and,consequently, they will be discussed as a group. Other drugs withsomewhat similar pharmacological properties are phenmetrazine(Preludin*), methylphenidate (Ritalin*) and pipradol (Meratran*).Common slang terms for amphetamines include: 'speed', 'crystal','meth', 'bennies', 'dexies', 'A', 'uppers', 'pep pills', 'dietpills', 'jolly beans', 'truck drivers', 'co-pilots', 'eyeopeners', 'wake-ups', 'hearts' and 'footballs'. The stimulating effects of the amphetamines were widely usedby soldiers during World War II to counteract fatigue. Sincethen, they have been commonly used both medically andnon-medically by vehicle drivers on long trips, night-shiftworkers, fatigued housewives, students studying for exams andothers who must meet deadlines, athletes for increasingperformance, and others for general stimulation, pleasure or fun. 88. In the 1940s, much of the wartime stockpile was dumped onthe world market and in many countries amphetamines wereavailable on a non-prescription 'over the counter' basis.Widespread use followed in most industrialized areas withnumerous unpleasant consequences. Use reached epidemicproportions, for example, in Japan in the 1950s - a country whichhad never had a previous serious drug problem.34 Since this time,amphetamines have been quite uniformly put under governmentalcontrol and in some countries (e.g., Sweden) are currentlyprohibited from medical and non medical applications. Althoughthe popularity of both medical and non-medical rise of thesedrugs spread rapidly in all age groups and social classes inNorth America after the war, heavy use was apparently largelyconfined to delinquents and to members of the criminal-addictpopulation of a few decades ago. The drug was usually takenorally, sometimes injected by heroin addicts, or sniffed. In manyinstances it was used interchangeably with cocaine (a shortactingbut powerful stimulant). Frequent use was made of 'dismantled'Denzedrine inhalers, which were on the unrestricted legal marketat that time. More recently, major concern has developed in many circles fora relatively new amphetamine phenomenon - that of massive dosesused intravenously by persons often referred to as ,speedfreaks'. Although this practice has been most frequently notedamong youthful multi-drug-taking individuals, considerableopposition to such use of amphetamines has developed within the'hip' community. The 'speed trip' is in many respects theantithesis of the experience sought with the psychedelic drugs.Instead of the orientation towards the 'consciousness expansion',personal insight, and aesthetic and religious awareness oftenattributed to the psychedelic drug experience by users, the speedphenomenon is usually characterized by action, power, arroganceand physical pleasure ('kicks'), and regularly leads tosuspicion, paranoia, hostility and often aggression. In additionto these undesirable personality changes, which render 'speedfreaks' highly unpopular in the community, such individualsgenerally present a picture of chronic ill-health unparalleledamong youthful drug users. 89. The message received by the Commission at public andprivate hearings, and in written communications with youthfuldrug users has been mostly negative towards 'speed'. Manyexperienced illicit drug users consider amphetamines extremelydangerous and undesirable, and have expressed surprisinglyhostile attitudes towards these drugs in no uncertain terms.Recently, numerous persons well known to youth, who have hadconsiderable influence on drug attitudes during the past decade(e.g.,, John Lennon and the Beatles, Frank Zappa and the Mothersof Invention, Timothy Leary, and Donovan), have made publicstatements against the use of 'speed' and related drugs. Many physicians have suggested that the supply of amphetamineslegitimately imported and manufactured in Canada greatly exceedsmedical need. As with other prescription drugs which are widelyused, such as the barbiturates and tranquillizers, thedistinction between medical and non-medical use is not alwayseasily made. Medical Use 90. As early as 1935, amphetamines (in doses from 20-200 mg)were found to be a specific treatment for narcolepsy, an uncommonillness which is characterized by sudden attacks of sleep andweakness. Since the 1940s, amphetamines (in doses of 10-50 mg)have been used in the treatment of overactive children who showeddisorders of attention and impairment of learning capacity. Inthe last few years, several investigators have again publishedresults of clinical trials which revealed that amphetamines andmethylphenidate were among the most effective treatments forthese childhood disorders. Psychiatrists have frequently used intravenous injections ofmethedrine (in doses of 15-30mg) for diagnostic purposes.Administered in this fashion, the drug induces a state ofexcitation, elation and increased talkativeness, during which apreviously inhibited patient might reveal information andsymptoms which may be considered important for the understandingof his disorder. He might also express, more freely, previouslysuppressed emotions. It has been observed that some patients witha borderline psychosis show typical psychotic symptoms moreclearly following an injection of amphetamines. At one time, these drugs were used in the treatment ofalcoholism and opiate narcotic dependency, but this practice wasabandoned because amphetamines often produce dependency whentaken for longer than two or three weeks. Since alcoholism is achronic condition, some alcoholics who took this treatment forlong periods of time became dependent on amphetamines andalcohol. 91. Early hopes that amphetamines would prove to be aneffective general treatment for severe depression were soondisappointed. Although these drugs are powerful stimulants andincrease a depressed person's activity, they may also make himmore anxious and agitated, deprive him of sleep, and may fail toelevate his mood or to reverse the fundamental depressiveprocess. In some individuals, these drugs have been effective inrelieving mild depression and chronic fatigue, however. Amphetamines, and some related drugs, have a strongsuppressive effect on appetite. Most so-called 'diet pills'contain amphetamines or similar preparations. However, theappetite suppressing action of amphetamines usually disappearsafter about two weeks, together with the pleasant stimulatingeffects, unless the dose is continuously increased. Amphetamines have also been occasionally used to treat petitmal epilepsy, parkinsonism, pregnancy nausea, asthma, nasalcongestion and sedative poisoning. Many observers feel thatbecause of the risk of dependency and undesirable personalitychange with amphetamines, even the medical use of thesesubstances should be severely restricted. Administration, Absorption, Distribution and PhysiologicalFate 92. Amphetamines are available in a variety of tablets,capsules (both in immediate and delayed release forms), elixirs,injections and, until recently, inhalers. These drugs also appearin powder ('crystal') form on the black market. Amphetamines areavailable commercially combined with such drugs as barbiturates(e.g., Dexamyl*) and other sedatives, atropine, caffeine,vitamins and minerals, thyroid extract, and, on theillicit market, amphetamines are reportedly sometimes added toLSD. One of the most esoteric pharmaceutical combinations hasbeen described as follows:133 'This is a multi-coated tablet ofpentobarbital on the outside to induce sleep rapidly,phenobarbital under a delayed dissolving coating to extend thesleep, and under another coating, an amphetamine to awaken thepatient in the morning.' Amphetamines are usually administered orally and are readilyabsorbed from the gastrointestinal tract. Occasionally bothintramuscular and intravenous injections are used medically. Inthe past, an amphetamine-base inhaler was also available.Non-medical users may employ any of these administration routes,including sniffing 'crystal', although chronic 'speed freaks'prefer intravenous injections. About half of the amphetamine which enters the body isexcreted unchanged in the urine, the remainder being previouslydeactivated or chemically altered in the liver prior toelimination. Although excretion is generally rather rapid, tracesof the drug can be found in the urine up to a week afterwithdrawal. Because of the considerable proportion excretedunchanged, certain individuals have been known to extract andreuse crystals obtained from the urine. (This general practice of'reclaiming' excreted drugs is not new and such procedures havebeen recorded for centuries.) Effects 93. Both the psychological and physiological response toamphetamines vary profoundly with dose, and the effects ofintravenous injections of massive quantities may differgreatly in character from, and bear little resemblance to,responses to low doses administered orally. These effects varycontinuously over the full dosage range, but for clarification inthe following discussions, the use of moderate quantities ofamphetamines will be separated from the discussion of thepractice of high-dose intravenous injection. 94. Moderate dose effects. At typical therapeutic doses(e.g., 5-30 mg), amphetamines produce electrophysiological signsof central nervous system (CNS) activation along with a varietyof adrenaline-like peripheral (sympathomimetic) effects such asincreased blood pressure, pulse-rate and blood sugar, slightdilation of some blood vessels and constriction of others,widening of the pupils, increased respiration rate, depression ofappetite and some relaxation of smooth muscle. Such effects mightlast 3-4 hours. The psychological response varies considerably amongindividuals, but might typically include increased wakefulness,alertness, and vigilance, improvement in concentration and afeeling of clearer thinking, greater responsiveness toenvironmental stimuli, decreased fatigue and boredom, elevationof mood, mild euphoria, a feeling of sociability, increasedinitiative and energy, and increased verbal and other behaviouralactivity. There may be an improvement in some simple mentaltasks, and athletic performance may be increased. In general,improved functioning is most likely to occur when priorperformance was at a subnormal state due to drowsiness, fatigueor boredom. On the other hand, a moderate dose of amphetamines indifferent individuals (or perhaps even in the same individual atdifferent times) might produce irritation, restlessness,insomnia, blurred vision, tremor, nausea, headache, inability toconcentrate, dizziness, heart palpitation, confusion, anxiety,chest pains, chilliness, diarrhoea or constipation, and otheradverse symptoms. In cases of higher dose or hypersensitivity,delirium, panic, aggression, psychosis, hallucinations andcardiovascular abnormalities may occur in some individuals.Although deaths are rare, some have been reported amongathletes.15 95. After continued administration of moderate doses, recoverymay be associated with fatigue, drowsiness and, not infrequently,emotional depression. The increased energy and alertness elicitedby the drug merely postpones the need for rest and clearlyprovides no long-term substitute for it. Many regular users ofstimulants rely on the drug for energy when fatigued and often donot get proper rest for long periods of time. The amphetamine toxic psychosis may be indistinguishable fromschizophrenia.56 While this syndrome is generally associated withhigh-dose use, many of the symptoms have been observed with theuse of more moderate amounts. There does not appear to be anyirreversible physiological damage associated with long-term useof moderate doses of amphetamines although temporary disorders dooccur. 96. Tolerance and dependence with moderate doses. Toleranceto the various drug effects develops at different rates and todifferent degrees - some responses 'drop out' in chronic usesooner than others. The tendency to increase dose depends uponwhich of the potential drug effects is rewarding or reinforcingdrug use. Many individuals, for instance, who use amphetamines tocontrol narcolepsy, may reach a stabilized dose and show verylittle need for increased quantity over a period of years. On theother hand, those using the drug to control appetite generallyincrease their dose. Many psychological effects, such as themood-elevating response, may show a considerable sensitivity totolerance, and individuals who either began using the drug toobtain these effects, or who acquired the taste for them afterinitially using amphetamines for other purposes, generallyshow a marked tendency to increase dose over time. Tolerance tosome of the toxic properties occurs, and certain chronic usersadminister thousands of milligrams intravenously in a day, whileeven a fraction of that quantity would be extremely toxic in anon-tolerant user. As with other drugs, the rate of developmentof tolerance to the different pharmacological effects depends onthe doses used, the frequency of administration and variousindividual factors. No suggestion of physiological dependence onamphetamines occurs with moderate doses; but psychologicaldependence on even low doses is frequently reported, and isconsidered a major hazard in both medical and non-medicalamphetamine use. 97. High-dose effects. The chronic high-doseintravenous amphetamine syndrome has recently been described byseveral authors.124, 71 The cycle or pattern of use usuallybegins with several days of repeated injections (usually ofMethedrine*), gradually increasing in magnitude and frequency.Some users may 'shoot' or 'crank' up to several thousandmilligrams in a single day. Initially the user may feelenergetic, talkative, enthusiastic, happy, confident andpowerful, and may initiate and complete highly ambitious tasks.He does not sleep and usually eats very little. After thefirst few days, however, toxic unpleasant symptoms becomestronger, especially as the dose is increased. These toxiceffects may be similar to those described earlier for lowerdoses, but appear in amplified form. Some symptoms commonlyreported at this stage are: confused and disorganized patterns ofthought and behaviour, compulsive repetition of meaningless acts,irritability, self-consciousness, suspiciousness, fear, andhallucinations and delusions which may take on thecharacteristics of a paranoid psychosis. Aggressive andanti-social behaviour may occur at this time. Severe chest pains,abdominal pain mimicking appendicitis and fainting have also beenreported .207 Towards the end of the 'run' (usually less than a week), thetoxic symptoms dominate; the drug is discontinued, fatiguesets in, and prolonged sleep follows, sometimes lasting severaldays. Upon awakening, the user is usually lethargic, oftenemotionally depressed and ravenously hungry. The user mayovercome these effects with another injection - thusinitiating the cycle anew. Runs are often separated by days orweeks, however, at a time. In certain instances, 'down'drugs, such as barbiturates or tranquillizers, or even opiatenarcotics may be used to 'crash' or terminate a run which hasbecome intolerable or otherwise unpleasant. 98. The immediate effects of the intravenous injection ofamphetamines are a sudden, overwhelming pleasurable 'rush' or'flash' which has been described by users as 'an instant totalbody orgasm'. This effect is qualitatively different from thewarm, drifting sensation associated with the opiate narcotics,but is reported to be initially similar to the 'splash' producedby intravenous cocaine.124 Some users claim that the immediatepleasure of the injection is the prime motivation for the druguse and that other effects are secondary. Some individuals report that sexual activity is prolonged, andmay continue for hours. When orgasm finally comes it may be morepleasurable than normal, although, on the other hand, somedescribe an inability to reach a climax. While only a minority ofusers report increased sexual activity, some people give thisreason as a primary one for taking the drug. 124,23 Some investigators have reported that many users claim thatthey take the drug for euphoria or 'kicks', or because it enablesthem to be more confident and active. In addition, there arereports of 'needle freaks', in whom the use of the hypodermicsyringe has special rewarding connotations. 99. The clinical picture of the chronic 'speed freak', is adistressing one indeed. Continued use of massive doses ofamphetamines often leads to considerable weight loss, sores andnon-healing ulcers, brittle fingernails, tooth grinding, chronicchest infections, liver disease, a variety of hypertensivedisorders, and in some cases, cerebral haemorrhage. 124 Theextent to which these effects are the direct result of the drugor the secondary consequences of poor eating habits, overexertion and improper rest is unclear. Further complications maybe caused by unsterile injections, including hepatitis and avariety of other infections.47 Although some users feel thatcertain of their mental abilities have been impaired byamphetamine use, no clear picture of permanent brain damage hasbeen demonstrated. 100. Heavy use of amphetamines frequently precipitates apsychosis which is indistinguishable from paranoid schizophrenia.In addition, several investigators contend that schizophrenics,and others with borderline psychotic conditions, are more likelyto use the drug intravenously than are other individuals. In onestudy, 41 % of those requiring hospital admission for treatmentof amphetamine disorders were thought to be schizophrenic beforetaking the drug.100 However, there is still no reliableinformation on what proportion of users develop psychoses andwhat the predisposing factors actually are. The majority of acutepsychotic reactions occur towards the end of a run, and suchsymptoms are usually dissipated by a few days rest. 'Speed freaks' are generally unpopular within the multi-drugtaking community and are often shunned. Consequently, theseindividuals may live together in 'flash houses' totally occupiedby amphetamine users. Frequent 'hassles', aggression and violencehave been reported in such dwellings. Heavy users are generallyunable to hold a steady job because of the drug habit and oftenhave a parasitic relationship with the rest of the illicitdrug-using community. There are reports that many users supportthemselves through petty crime.184, 23 101. High-dose dependency. The question of physicaldependence on amphetamines depends on the definition of thewithdrawal symptoms necessary to meet the criterion. While it isclear that withdrawing amphetamine from chronic users does notproduce the dramatic, physically painful and often dangerousabstinence syndrome associated with alcohol, barbiturates, oropiate narcotics, many investigators feel that the fatigue,prolonged sleep, brain wave (EEG) changes, voracious appetite,cardiovascular abnormalities, occasional gastrointestinal cramps,lethargy and, often, severe emotional depression following the'speed binge' constitute a physiological reaction analogous tothe more dramatic withdrawal seen with depressant drugs. 56,207 The tendency for tolerance-producing drugs to manifest a'rebound' type of physiological and psychological pattern uponwithdrawal has been given considerable attention; amphetamineabstinence in chronic users is generally characterized by aprofound sedation, and depression of mood and physiologicalfunction, while drugs such as the sedatives and the opiatenarcotics (all of which produce sleep in high doses) generallyexhibit a withdrawal syndrome of severe and toxic overstimulation(in some instances to the point of convulsions). The fact that amphetamines have, it any, a physically ratherbenign withdrawal syndrome, clearly indicates that a profoundphysical dependence is not a necessary component in an overallsevere drug dependency situation. Subjective psychologicalfactors seem to have considerably greater motivational importancein many instances - especially with chronic high-dose amphetamineuse. 102. 'Speed Kills'. In recent years, the slogan 'SpeedKills' has received much attention, and the idea appears to playa significant role in the attitude that some users and non-usershave towards the drug. One commonly hears the view that onceyou're 'on speed' you have only two to five years left tolive. Some chronic 'speed freaks' incorporate this notion intothe identity they present to others and the image they entertainof themselves. Many observers contend that the chronic use ofintravenous amphetamines reflects a thinly disguised suicidaltendency, as well as an attention and sympathy gaining device.'Hello, I'm Philbert Desanex; I'm a speed freak and I'm going tobe dead by fall', is only a slightly exaggerated caricature ofthe image purposefully projected by some of these individuals. 103. What is the evidence, in fact, that 'Speed Kills' in theliteral direct physical sense? Fatalities due to acute overdoseare rarely reported. We have no reliable knowledge of the extentof intravenous amphetamine use, and although we hear many direpredictions, there is no good information on the long-termprognosis or outcome of such use. It would certainly appear,however, that chronic adherence to this practice is mostdetrimental to the individual and, often, to those with whom heinteracts. Although there is no clear evidence that the life expectancyof 'speed freaks' is lower than others living under similarcircumstances, many investigators suspect this to be so. Whilethere are few cases in the literature of death directlyattributed to chronic amphetamine use, Clement, Solursh and VanAst47 '... have recently become aware of a number of cases ofdeath on the streets (of Toronto) apparently related to high-doseamphetamine abuse. At autopsy, however, pathological evidence ofdeath directly due to amphetamines is rare in such cases'. Aftera thorough review of the literature, Cox and Smart of theAddiction Research Foundation reported: 'Currently there is noevidence available on mortality rates among speed users and it isnot certain that speed itself is a lethal drug. There is noevidence to support or deny that "Speed Kills".60 The slogan was originally borrowed from a highway trafficcampaign of the last decade and it has been suggested that,originally, in adopting this phrase, drug users were referring tothe 'death' of the personality, the 'spirit', or the freedom ofthe individual when he becomes dependent on amphetamines, ratherthan to physical mortality. Amphetamines and Other Drugs As noted earlier, amphetamines are frequently used in conjunction, or in alternation, with a variety of depressant drugs such as barbiturates, alcohol and even heroin. The barbiturate and amphetamine up-down cycle has been described in both youthful and 'respectable' adult users at a variety of doses. Amphetamines intensify, prolong or otherwise alter the effects of LSD and it is reported that the two drugs are sometimes mixed. In addition, it would appear that the majority of youthful speed users have also had experience with a variety of psychedelic and other illicit drugs. Persons dependent on the opiate narcotics also frequently make use of stimulants such as cocaine and amphetamine - either as mixtures of drugs or used separately on different occasions. It is interesting to note that STP (DOM) and the newer MDA, both extremely potent psychedelic-hallucinogenic drugs, are chemically closely related to amphetamine. Contents | Feedback | Search DRCNet Library | Schaffer Library | Major Studies Canadian Government Commission ofInquiryWT01-B31-40IA031-000652-B043-47http://206.61.184.43:80/schaffer/library/studies/ledain/nonmed2e.htm 206.61.184.43 19970122131039 text/html 43134HTTP/1.0 200 OKDate: Wednesday, 22-Jan-97 13:10:27 GMTServer: WebSitePro/1.1f (S/N wpo-0deb)Allow-ranges: bytesContent-type: text/htmlLast-modified: Saturday, 28-Dec-96 07:00:18 GMTContent-length: 42916 Canadian Government Commission - LSD Contents | Feedback | Search DRCNet Library | Schaffer Library | Major Studies Canadian Government Commission ofInquiry LSD 105. One of the most remarkable and controversial drugs knowntoday is d-lysergic acid diethylamide-25, better known as LSD orsimply 'acid'. LSD is capable of producing profound and unusualpsychological changes in almost infinitesimal doses, withrelatively little general physiological effect and, along withother related drugs, has exerted noticeable influence in avariety of aesthetic, scientific, philosophic, religious andsocial areas over the past two decades. LSD is often consideredthe prototype of the drug class we have labelledPsychedelic-Hallucinogens, although there are a great number ofless potent synthetic and naturally occurring substances withsomewhat similar psychopharmacological properties. To date,almost 3,000 articles on LSD have been published in scientificjournals, although many of these reports do not meet adequatescientific standards. 106. LSD was developed in 1938 by Hofmann and Stoll, inSwitzerland, as part of a research programme investigatingpotential therapeutic uses of certain ergot compounds. LSD is asemi-synthetic derivative of lysergic acid, an ergot alkaloidproduced by a parasitic fungus, or 'rust', sometimes found on ryeor other grains. Closely related substances are also produced inthe seeds of certain varieties of morning glory. Most ergotalkaloids are not particularly psychoactive, although some mayhave a variety of powerful, and often toxic, physiologicalactions, and have been used for centuries for medical purposes. 107. Since LSD appeared to be relatively uninteresting,physiologically, in animal studies, it received little attentionuntil Hofmann unwittingly ingested a minute quantity some yearsafter its original synthesis. He subsequently described hisexperience as follows:102 In the afternoon of 16 April 1943, when I was working on thisproblem, I was seized by a peculiar sensation of vertigo andrestlessness. Objects, as well as the shape of my associates inthe laboratory, appeared to undergo optical change. I was unableto concentrate on my work. In a dreamlike state I left for home,where an irresistible urge to lie down overcame me. I drew thecurtains and immediately fell into a peculiar state similar todrunkenness, characterized by an exaggerated imagination. With myeyes closed, fantastic pictures of extraordinary plasticity andintensive colour seemed to surge towards me. After two hours thisstate gradually wore off. To confirm his suspicion that LSD was responsible for thiseffect, Hofmann investigated further: However, I decided to get to the root of the matter by takinga definite quantity of the compound in question. Being a cautiousman, I started my experiment by taking 0.25 mg of d-lysergic aciddiethylamide tartrate, thinking that such an extremely small dosewould surely be harmless, and bearing in mind that the naturalergot alkaloids produce toxic symptoms in man only with dosesexceeding several milligrams. After 40 minutes I noted thefollowing symptoms in my laboratory journal: slight giddiness,restlessness, difficulty in concentration, visual disturbances,laughing. And later: I lost all count of time. I noticed with dismay that myenvironment was undergoing progressive changes. My visual fieldwavered and everything appeared deformed as in a faulty mirror.Space and time became more and more disorganized and I wasovercome by a fear that I was going out of my mind. The worstpart of it being that I was clearly aware of my condition. Mypower of observation was unimpaired. . . . Occasionally I felt asif I were out of my body. I thought I had died. My ego seemedsuspended somewhere in space, from where I saw my dead body lyingon the sofa.... It was particularly striking how acousticperceptions, such as the noise of water gushing from a tap or thespoken word, were transformed into optical illusions. I then fellasleep and awakened the next morning somewhat tired but otherwisefeeling perfectly well. 108. Since various aspects of the experience were thought toresemble symptoms of naturally occurring schizophrenia, manyinvestigators became interested in using LSD as a tool forproducing an artificial or 'model psychosis' in the laboratory.The possibility of gaining insight into psychiatric disorders bythe study of the LSD-induced state stimulated considerableactivity in medical and scientific communities, and the terms psychotomimetic(psychosis-mimicking) and psychotogenic (psychosis-producing)were coined. The subsequent discovery that the LSD experience is,in fact, generally different from natural psychoses has lessenedinterest in this aspect of its use. The descriptive label hallucinogenic(hallucination-producing) has gained wide acceptance, inspite of the fact that true hallucinations do not commonly occurwith LSD. The term illusinogenic (illusion-producing) isprobably more appropriate. In the 1950s the exploration of LSD as an aid to psychotherapybegan. Much of the early work, in Canada, investigating the useof LSD in the treatment of alcoholics, was conducted under thedirection of Dr A. Hoffer at the University of Saskatchewan, In1957, after reviewing the various descriptive names given LSD andrelated drugs, Dr H. Osmond, then Superintendent of theSaskatchewan Hospital, suggested the terms psycholytic (mind-releasing)or psychedelic (mind-manifesting) as more appropriategeneral labels.174 For various reasons the latter has gainedworld-wide usage, although its common application has strayedconsiderably from its original context, and it may now denotegeneral styles of art, fashion and music which are, in somesense, felt to reflect, enhance, or substitute for thepsychedelic drug experience. 109. While LSD has had a rather short, and somewhat stormyhistory, numerous naturally occurring substances with apparentlysimilar psychological effects have been used in the WesternHemisphere for centuries. Perhaps the most widely known aremescaline, from the peyote cactus (lophophora williamsii),psilocybin, one of the active principles in 'sacred mushrooms'(teonanactl), and the Mexican morning-glory 'ololiuqui' (RiveaCorymbosa). In addition, DMT (dimethyltryptamine) and the relatedDET (diethyltryptamine) are found in special snuffs used forcenturies by certain South American Indians. Some of thesebotanical substances were considered divine by the ancient Aztecsand played an important role in religious ceremonies long beforethe Spanish invaded the land. In spite of the Conquistadors'attempts to destroy the culture and its historical and religiousunderpinnings, the sacramental use of peyote spread to theMexican Indians and, later, in the nineteenth century to certainNorth American tribes. Today, peyote is used in religiousceremonies by the Native American Church which has over 200,000Indian members in Canada and the United States. 110. Until recently, psychedelic drugs received little generalpublic attention, even though some had been intensively exploredover the past century by various writers, scientists and'adventurers'. Based on his mescaline experimentation, AidousHuxley106 presented, in his twin volumes The Doors ofPerception and Heaven and Hell, one of the most lucidand perceptive analyses of some of the possible personal,philosophical and social implications of the psychedelicexperience. Non-medical interest in LSD and related drugs began to growduring the 1950s, although such use was apparently largelyrestricted to a few professional, academic, and artisticexperimenters. The drug gained continental notoriety in the early1960s as a result of experimentation by two Harvard Universitypsychology professors, Drs Alpert and Leary, who invited other'explorers' to 'Turn on, tune in, and drop out' of the existingsocial institutions. Their unorthodox religious orientation tothe LSD experience is presented in The Psychedelic Experience128(a manual based on the Tibetan Book of the Dead), whichbecame one of the 'bibles' of the psychedelic drug movement.Another significant influence, with considerably less religiousorientation was writer Ken Kesey's group, the adventures of whichare well documented in The Electric Kool-Aid Acid Test.247 111. Since 1963, the Canadian Government has controlled themedical and scientific use of LSD, and in 1969 the possession ofLSD without governmental authorization was made a criminaloffence. Regulation of the legal supply of LSD has apparently hadlittle effect on 'street' use, however, since essentially all ofthe drug so used has come from clandestine laboratories. Althoughthe constituent chemicals are not readily available and somesophisticated apparatus is necessary for its proper synthesis,LSD can be produced by individuals without extensive training inchemistry. Since it is odourless, colourless and tasteless insolution, and active in almost invisible quantities, effectivelegal control of its transportation, distribution and use hasbeen extremely difficult. In recent years, several new synthetic drugs with effectssimilar to LSD have appeared on the black market. These includeMDA (alphamethyl-3,4-methylene - dioxyphenethylamine), STP or DOM(2,5-ditnethoxy-4-methyl-amphetamine), and PCP or Sernyl*(phencyclidine). MedicalUse 112. There is currently no widely accepted medical use of LSD,although it may be employed experimentally for therapeuticpurposes. There have been numerous impressive reports of LSDsuccesses in the treatment of alcoholics, opiate narcoticdependents, criminals and various psychiatric patients.101, 129LSD has also been used with patients dying of cancer, toalleviate their anxiety and pain, and to help them adjust to theprospects of death.176 Many of these leads have not been followedup with adequate scientific investigation, however, and severalrecent controlled studies have not substantiated the claim thatLSD adds to the effectiveness of conventional psychotherapy.205 113. Two basic forms of psychological treatment with LSD havedeveloped: psycholytic therapy, which uses small ormoderate doses on repeated occasions, sometimes over a period ofseveral months; and psychedelic therapy which calls forhigher doses and a more profound acute effect and is, as a rule,given only once or twice. While some investigators claim thatLSD, itself, is more effective than psychotherapy, others claimthat its usefulness is mainly limited to the removal oftherapeutic 'blocks' which may occur at times in the course ofpsychotherapy, and still others feel that LSD has no usefulcontribution to make to psychiatric treatment. Most clinicianswho have had experience with this form of therapy, stress theneed for a careful selection of patients and for specialqualities and experience in the therapist. More sophisticated scientific investigations of possibletherapeutic uses of LSD are now underway and may help clarifysome of these issues. It seems justified to say at this time,however, that the general medical effectiveness of LSD has notyet been adequately demonstrated. It may well be another decadebefore definitive evidence will be available. Administration,Absorption, Distribution and Physiological Fate 114. LSD is usually taken orally, and may be sniffed inpowdered form or injected in solution. While it is available inordinary capsules or tablets, LSD is often impregnated in suchinnocuous substances as sugar cubes, candies, biscuits, and clothor blotter sections for oral use. It is well absorbed from thegastro-intestinal tract, is distributed in the blood and easilydiffuses into the brain, and in pregnant females crosses theplacental barrier into the foetus. Although only a tiny portionactually reaches the central nervous system, LSD is one of themost potent biologically active substances known and, in someindividuals, exerts a noticeable psychological effect withquantities as low as 20 to 30 micrograms (millionths of a gram).Customary doses are usually around 200 mcg and some individualshave taken up to several thousand micrograms. Taken orally, LSD effects usually occur within an hour but maybe much faster; response to intramuscular injection usuallyappears within ten minutes; and if the intravenous route is used,the latency may be only a few minutes or less. The duration ofthe action depends to a certain extent on the amount taken, andwith a customary dose, major effects usually last 8-12 hours ormore with gradual recovery over a similar period. Essentially allof the LSD in the body is metabolized into an inactive substancein the liver and excreted. PsychologicalEffects 115. The psychological effects of LSD are not readilypredictable, and are determined to a considerable degree byvarious personality factors in the individual, his past historyand experiences, his attitudes, expectations, and motivations,the general setting in which the drug is taken, personsaccompanying the 'trip' and external events occurring during theexperience. While the psychological response is to some extentdose-related, certain effects appear to be relatively independentof dose over a considerable range. Increased quantities oftenseem to affect the duration more than the intensity or quality ofthe 'trip'. 116. Subjective psychological effects of LSD are extremelydifficult to describe and many scientists are quite pessimisticabout the possibility of presenting an objective list ofresponses which in any way communicates the essence of theexperience. The intensely personal nature of the effects furtherlimits description and generalization. Pahnke and Richards177have described several major types of psychological experiencewhich have been reported with psychedelic drugs. The outlinepresented below is based on, but is not identical to, thatproposed by these researchers. While the list is certainly notexhaustive and does not describe necessarily discrete ornon-overlapping categories, it provides a convenient basis forthe discussion of LSD effects. It should be noted that not all ofthe experiences listed happen in all sessions or in allindividuals, although several may occur in varying degrees, insequence or simultaneously, within a 'trip'. 117. First is the psychotic adverse reaction, or'freak-out' which may be characterized by an intense negativeexperience of fear or nightmarish terror to the point of panic,complete loss of emotional control, paranoid delusions,hallucinations, catatonic features, and, perhaps, profounddepression and sense of meaninglessness. Such states are usuallyacute, although pro1onged reactions have been noted. 118. Second is the non-psychotic adverse reaction inwhich the person may experience varying degrees of tension,anxiety and fear, unpleasant illusions, depression and despair.Inappropriate or disordered social behaviour may occur. This kindof reaction may differ from the first in the intensity of theexperience and in the degree of control and 'reality contact'expressed by the individual. Such unpleasant experiences arecommonly labelled 'bad trips' or 'bummers'. 119. Third is the psychodynamic psychedelic experience characterizedby a dramatic emergence into consciousness of material which hadpreviously been unconscious or suppressed. Strong emotionalfeelings can accompany what may be experienced subjectively as areliving of incidents from the past or a symbolic portrayal ofimportant conflicts. Such effects are often sought in LSDpsychotherapy. 120. Fourth is the cognitive psychedelic experience characterizedby an impression of astonishingly lucid thought. Problems may beseen from a novel perspective and the interrelationships of manylevels of meaning and dimensions may be sensed simultaneously.The relationship between this experience and naturally occurringinsight and creativity has been the subject of considerableinterest and speculation. 121. Fifth is the aesthetic psychedelic experience characterizedby a change and intensification of all sensory impressions, withvision often most affected. Fascinating alteration in sensationand perception may occur; synaesthesia or crossing-over ofsensory modalities may be produced (music and other sounds may be'seen'); objects such as flowers or stones may appear to pulsateor 'become alive'; ordinary things may seem imbued with greatbeauty; music may take on an incredible emotional power; andvisions of beautiful colours, intricate geometric patterns,architectural forms, landscapes and 'almost anything imaginable'may occur. 122. The sixth type of psychedelic experience has been calledby such names as psychedelic-peak, cosmic, transcendental, ormystical. Some of the psychological phenomena which are saidto characterize this experience, are: a sense of unity or 'cosmiconeness' with the universe; a feeling of transcendence of timeand space; a deeply felt positive mood of joy, blessedness, love,and peace; a sense of sacredness, awe and, wonder; afeeling of profound theological or religious awareness; a feelingof insight into reality at an intuitive, nonrational level; anawareness of things which seem logically contradictory andparadoxical; and a belief that the experience is beyond words,non-verbal and impossible to describe. The full peak experience,in its entirety, does not occur in the majority of individuals,is usually transient, and does not last for long in its fullintensity, although it may have persisting effects on attitudesand behaviour. 123. With few exceptions, little general information can begiven as to the relative frequency of occurrence of these varioustypes of psychedelic drug reaction, since the response is largelydetermined by such variable factors as the particular individualinvolved, his set and the setting. As is often the case inscience, techniques designed to measure the effects of LSD maygreatly influence or distort the phenomenon under study.Savage198 has pointed out that unless the LSD experience takesplace '. . . in a secure setting, with sufficientemotional support where S (the subject) feels safe to encounterthe bizarre and often powerful manifestations of his own mindunharassed by tests, interpretations, and the coldly precisescientific analytic attitudes, the only result can be confusionand paranoia'. Reports of 'objective' study of LSD's subjective effectsconsiderably in content and often appear to be as much a functionof the individual scientist's conceptual orientation andexperimental methods as they are of the subjects and the drugitself. Some researchers report that LSD experiences in theirsubjects, are definitely unpleasant and anxiety-ridden, and thatsubsequent sessions are uniformly avoided, while other scientistsclaim that anxiety is infrequent and that subjects generallyenjoy the sessions and are eager to participate further.228Experiences in non-supervised and indiscriminate settings areundoubtedly even more variable. 124. It is generally reported that LSD has deleterious effectson performance in tests requiring a high degree of attention,concentration or motivation. It is often difficult to getmeaningful data from such measurements, since subjects frequentlybecome engrossed in the subjective aspects of the drug experienceand lose interest in the tasks presented by the investigators.Psychological tests are often seen as absurd or irrelevant by thesubjects. Performance on standard tests of intelligence,learning, memory and other cognitive functions, as well ascertain psychomotor tasks generally show impairment and sometimeslack of change and, rarely, improvement.205 Certain types ofconduct by some persons under the influence of LSD indicate grossimpairment of judgement. Recall of events occurring during thedrug experience is generally good, however. Effects on drivingskills have not been systematically investigated, althoughavailable related data, and reports by users, as well as certaineye witness accounts, suggest that driving ability is usuallydrastically reduced by the acute effects of LSD. There is noevidence that the drug has been a significant factor inautomobile accidents, however. True hallucinations, where false sensory signals are believedto be physically real, are rarely reported, althoughpseudohallucinations and other perceptual distortions andillusions are frequently noted. One of the most uniformly citedand significant subjective effects is the alteration of ordinarytemporal perception, or time-sense. Moments may seem like hours,and time may seem to be transcended. Pleasant experiences mayextend indefinitely or, on the other hand, bad trips can becomean interminable horror. 125. Current arguments as to whether LSD is truly'consciousness-expanding' as its proponents contend or'consciousness-constricting' as its opponents assert, willprobably not be resolved by science in the near future, since itseems unlikely that such hypotheses can be put to adequateempirical test given the current state of technology. Contentions are often made that LSD can elicit new levels ofspontaneity, insight, problem-solving and creativity.214 Theseclaims are very difficult to assess, since the effects describedare often highly subjective and personal, and are hardly amenableto empirical validation. The problems of studying creativity inthe laboratory are considerable, and little is known of the basicpsychology of such cognitive processes. A generally agreed upondefinition of the concept of creativity has eluded investigatorsso far, and few meaningful tests are available. Studies of theeffects of psychedelic drugs on allegedly creativity-relatedbehaviours have produced inconsistent results. Often performancedoes not reflect the subjective impressions of the drugexperience. Although sophisticated scientific investigation inthis area is only just beginning, it is already obvious that LSDwill not perform the miracle of turning an uninspired anduntalented individual into a creative genius. The question ofmore subtle effects on creative activity in certain individualsmust be answered by future research. 126. Most authorities agree that LSD does not have a specificaphrodisiac or sex-drive stimulating effect. Some users indicatean enhanced appreciation of sexual experience, while many othersreport a total disinterest in sex while on a 'trip'. Someincrease in sexual behaviour may occur as a result of a lesseningof inhibitions and an increase in emotionality, tactileappreciation, and interpersonal contact. LSD has been used in thetreatment of sexual disorders of psychological origin (e.g.frigidity and impotence) although its general usefulness has notbeen clearly demonstrated in this area. 127. An LSD-induced 'bad trip' may range from a mildlynegative or ambivalent experience to an episode of intense terrorand nightmarish panic. Such adverse reactions often seem to focuson the fear of death, fear of permanent insanity, basic sexualconflicts, and fear of legal repercussions in illicit users, ormay be precipitated by an objective 'hassle' or problem of realor imagined significance. Under the influence of LSD, it is oftendifficult to cope with immediate problems which arise, andemotional vulnerability may be increased. 'Bad trips' seem tooccur most often when the individual is poorly prepared, alone,or in an otherwise unprotected or unsupervised setting. While anexperienced 'guide' or therapist can often help prevent oralleviate negative reactions, this is no guarantee against anunpleasant experience. Neither are earlier positive experiences -severe 'bad trips' have been noted in individuals who hadprevious long histories of unequivocally pleasant psychedelicexperiences. Certain tranquillizers can be of assistance inreducing the unpleasantness of the experience, often byterminating the drug effect non-chemical, personalsupportive guidance is most important in treating negativereactions. Although most negative LSD experiences appear to be of shortduration, prolonged psychotic episodes lasting months or evenyears have been elicited by LSD.50 Many investigators contendthat such extreme experiences occur only in individuals alreadypredisposed to psychotic reaction, and are simply precipitated bythe stress of a 'bad trip'. On the other hand, numerous exampleshave occurred in persons without obvious prior pathology, and itwould appear that there is no satisfactory method for predictingwho might suffer a serious adverse reaction. 128. Prolonged psychoses are quite rare in clinical orexperimental settings, even when psychiatric patients are used assubjects. Cohen49 surveyed 44 investigators who had given LSDor mescaline to approximately 5,000 persons a total of about25,000 times, and found that psychotic reactions lasting over 48hours occurred in 0.18 per cent of the psychiatric patientsstudied and 0.08 per cent of the experimental subjects. Therewere four suicides in the patients, all occurring months afterthe LSD experience, and none among the experimental subjects.Whether these deaths can be attributed to LSD use is not certain.Similar incidents of adverse reaction under controlledcircumstances have been reported by others and the use of LSD inmedically supervised settings has been considered by manyinvestigators to be comparatively safe from a psychiatric pointof view.65, 132 These findings do not provide a satisfactory basis forestimating the effects of illicit use, however, since set,setting, purity and quantity of drug, and consequently, thequality of the trip, are all apt to be quite different in thesesituations. The frequency of bad trips among street LSD users isunknown, although many such cases have come to the attention ofmedical authorities and certainly cannot be considered uncommon.Solursh2l3 reports that in one series of street users studiedretrospectively, 'freak-outs' occurred in 24 of 601 'acid trips',Furthermore, impressionistic accounts from individuals in closecontact with the 'drug-scene' suggest that the incidence of 'badtrips' is steadily increasing. Ungerleider229 studied 70individuals who required hospitalization in a Los Angeles Medicalcentre after illicit LSD use. One-third of these admissions werediagnosed psychotic and two-thirds were hospitalized for morethan a month. 129. Usually neither the therapist nor the patient is certainas to the identity, purity or quantity of the drug involved in'street' cases and records are further complicated by the factthat there is considerable discrepancy among reporters as to whatexactly constitutes an adverse reaction. Furthermore, it wouldappear that many 'bad trips' are treated by friends and nevercome to the attention of the medical authorities. In addition topersonal support and assistance in these situations,tranquillizers (and niacinamide) are available legally and on theblack market for such emergencies. Even if some accurate estimatecould be made of the number of negative reactions occurring, itwould not be possible to assess the relative significance of thefigures, since we have little idea as to the overall frequency ofillicit LSD use in the general population. 130. Illicit users of LSD commonly voice the opinion that badtrips are caused by bad drugs and that 'pure acid' is relativelyfree from adverse reactions. These claims are rarely based onchemical analysis, and although contaminants and other drugsreported to appear in black market LSD can undoubtedly affect theexperience, it is uncertain what proportion of the negativereactions can be accounted for by contaminants. It is certainthat well-documented 'freak-outs' have occurred with clinicallypure LSD. 131. Although suicide may be rare among illicit as well asmedically supervised LSD users, a few cases have been documented.Attempts at self-mutilation have also been reported on rareoccasions. Accidental deaths are somewhat more common and anumber of cases of fatality or serious injury have been noted asa result of a loss of critical judgement or attentionalprocesses. For example, some individuals have jumped frombuildings or trees apparently under the delusion that they couldfly or were indestructible. Stories of numerous personswho had become permanently blind while staring at the sun duringLSD trips were generated by a state official in the United Statesand widely circulated in the public media. These reports weresubsequently shown to be a hoax and no such cases are onrecord.170'b' 132. Although fear, panic and aggression may result from a'freak-out', homicides associated with LSD use are rare and onlya few have been documented. Reports of violence occurring whileunder the influence of LSD have generally not been supported,78although there may be some significant exceptions. The majorityof non-drug arrests associated with LSD use seem to be in theorder of 'disturbance of the peace' offences and there is littleevidence that LSD plays a significant role in major crimes. Recurrence of certain aspects of LSD experiences ('flashbacks'or 'echoes') of varying duration and intensity have been reportedover periods ranging from a few months to more than a year afterlast (or only) LSD use.189 The quality of these experiences,which usually last only a few minutes or less, may depend on asmany factors as the original trip. They may be triggered orprecipitated by seemingly irrelevant stimuli or events, by otherdrugs, or may appear spontaneously. We have no good informationas to frequency of these recurrences, although they appear tooccur most often in heavy users and could clearly be unpleasantor dangerous in certain circumstances. 133. The possible religious significance of psychedelic drugexperiences has been the subject of heated controversy forcenturies. While many authorities have pointed out basicsimilarities between drug-induced feelings of transcendental ormystical awareness and the satori or kensho of ZenBuddhism, the samadhi of Hinduism or the beatificvision of Christianity, others have been outraged bythe suggestion that such 'instant mysticism' could be producedchemically. It is quite apparent, however, that a considerabledegree of religiosity has pervaded the psychedelic drug movementof the 1960s and has played a major role in the use of such drugsin other cultures. The major theoretical positions and scientific research inthis area have been reviewed by several investigators208, l47 andthese reports provide experimental support for the notion thatdrug-evoked experiences may have religious significance forcertain individuals. Perhaps the most rigorous scientificevidence comes from Pahnke's175 controlled psilocybin experimentwith seminary graduate students conducted in the setting of aGood Friday religious service. He notes that: 'Those subjects whoreceived psilocybin experienced phenomena which wereindistinguishable from, if not identical with, the categoriesdefined by our typology of mysticism.' The religious aspects ofthe psychedelic experience apparently depend a great deal on theindividual, his values and expectations, and the settinginvolved, and do not normally occur with great intensity in mostpersons or in most situations. Masters and Houstonl47 report that6 out of 206 of their subjects attained a mystical experience,while other researchers report no such events and still others, amuch higher incidence. Differences in semantic meaning,definition and criteria may account for part of thesediscrepancies. The 'objective validity' of drug-elicitedreligious experiences, however, is by nature untestable in thescientific sense, and the area will doubtless remain in a stormof controversy. 134. Numerous claims have been made by various LSD users,psychotherapists and scientists that LSD can produce long-lastingbeneficial effects on personality and behaviour. On the otherhand, many observers feel that chronic use of LSD may result in alessening of work output and a deterioration of social behaviour,a general 'amotivational syndrome' in some individuals. Bothtypes of allegation are difficult to evaluate, since fewadequately controlled investigations have been done on thelong-term effects of either medically supervised or non-medicalLSD use. PhysiologicalEffects 135. LSD exerts its most significant physiological effects onand through the central nervous system, although the exactmechanism by which this occurs is not yet known. As a result ofits potent general arousal or activation capacity. LSD mayproduce a variety of autonomic nervous system (sympathomimetic)actions, considered to be of little clinical significance atnormal doses. Commonly reported are: widened pupils, increasedheart rate and blood pressure, sweating, increased bodytemperature, chills, increased blood sugar level, 'goosepimples', flushing of the facial skin, increased urination,headache, and rarely nausea and vomiting. It generally increasesthe activation of the brain (as indicated by the EEG), producesalertness, blocks sleep, decreases appetite, may induce tremorsand reduce coordination, changes respiration patterns, andfacilitates certain simple reflexes.138 In a few instancesconvulsions have occurred. LSD has remarkably low physiologicaltoxicity and, to date, no human deaths have been reported due tooverdose. Although the evidence is not clear, psychologicalindications of minor brain damage may be present in chronic heavyusers of LSD.152 l36. In the past few years, considerable controversy andsensational publicity has arisen around the possibility that LSDmay affect hereditary transmission through chromosomalalterations, produce changes in white blood cells resemblingleukemia and adversely affect the developing human focus.48Relevant studies involving test-tube preparations of human liveanimal and insect experiments, and examinations of illicit LSDusers, have been contradictory to date and provide no clearanswers to these important questions.105 The relationship betweenin vitro (test-tube) and in vivo (living organism)effects is rarely straightforward, and generalizations from onespecies to another are difficult. Furthermore, studying the usersof 'street' drugs gives little information regarding specificcompounds, since such individuals may use a variety of drugs andneither the investigator nor the subject can be sure of thepurity, quantity or identity of substances obtained from theillicit market. In the few controlled studies in whichchromosomes were examined in humans before and after clinicallysupervised administration of known doses of pure LSD, littleevidence of significant change was noted.125,58 The effects ofprolonged regular use of LSD have not been carefullyinvestigated, however, and the presence or absence of alterationsunder such conditions can not be completely predicted on thebasis of present information. Research in this area is complicated by the fact thattemporary or permanent chromosome breakage is not an uncommonresponse to a variety of non-drug experiences, and can beproduced by nuclear radioactivity, many pollutants, X-rays, feverand a number of virus infections. Furthermore, there is evidencethat such frequently used drugs as caffeine and aspirin may causechromosome breaks in certain cells.122 It should be noted thatchromosome damage per se does not necessarily affecteither the individual or his offspring, although the possibilitymust be considered. 137. High doses of LSD administered at certain times early inpregnancy have been shown to produce deformities in the offspringof some animal species and not others. No unequivocal evidence ofsuch teratogenic LSD effects in humans has been reported,although there have been a few widely publicized instances ofabnormalities in babies born of mothers who had used LSD. Whethersuch anomalies occur more frequently in LSD users than in thenormal population is uncertain. Most investigators feel that thepossibility of chromosome or foetal damage in humans forbids theuse of LSD for either medical or non-medical purposes, by womenwho are either pregnant or expect to become so in the nearfuture. Toleranceand Dependence 138. Tolerance to the psychological and physiological effectsof LSD develops on repeated use, although the form ofpsychological tolerance is unusual in several respects. Toleranceto most drugs can be overcome and effects of full intensityobtained by simply increasing dosage. With LSD, often a period ofthree or four days or longer must separate 'trips' if the fulleffects are to be obtained, regardless of dose. A second unusualquality of LSD tolerance is the rapidity with which it developsand dissipates. A reduction in effects may occur after only oneor two consecutive administrations. Furthermore, when LSD is usedintermittently many users report, a 'reverse' tolerance, orincreased sensitivity to the drug and may, after experience, useless to achieve the desired effects. These factors suggest thatthe pharmacological mechanism underlying LSD tolerance may bequite different from those seen with most other psychoactivedrugs. 139. Physical dependence does not develop to LSD, even incases in which the drug has been used more than two hundred timesin a single year.51 Psychological dependence has been reported tooccur in certain individuals who become preoccupied with the drugexperience and feel emotionally depressed and unsatisfied withoutit. Normally, however, LSD use is intermittent and periods ofweeks or months may separate 'trips' in even 'confirmed' users, LSDand Other Drugs 140. It appears that many LSD users will also experiment withother psychedelic drugs. Cross-tolerance occurs among some ofthese substances and an individual who has recently taken LSDwill generally show reduced response to mescaline and psilocybin,but not to cannabis or phencyclidine (PCP). It should be notedthat mescaline and psilocybin are rarely found in Canada and nosuch black market samples have been verified by chemicalanalysis. Other drugs, such as atropine or amphetamines, are reported tobe sometimes added to LSD to intensify, prolong or otherwisealter the experience. Strychnine (a stimulant once commonly usedin medical practice) is rumoured to have also been employed forsuch effects. In spite of such stories, black market productspurported to contain mixtures of LSD and other drugs have rarelybeen found on analysis to be as represented. Such combinationsappear to be infrequent in Canada. Unsuccessful attempts at LSDsynthesis may produce a variety of other ergot alkaloids withpossibly unpleasant or dangerous pharmacological properties inhigh doses. Samples of such concoctions have been obtained fromblack market sources.144 Chlorpromazine (Largactil*), a major tranquillizer, usuallyblocks LSD effects, although in rare instances it paradoxicallypotentiates the original drug response. In addition certainsedatives and niacinamide (nicotinamide) may also reduce some ofthe effects of LSD. - Contents | Feedback | Search DRCNet Library | Schaffer Library | Major Studies Canadian Government Commission ofInquiry WT01-B31-41IA031-000652-B043-83http://206.61.184.43:80/schaffer/library/studies/ledain/nonmed3.htm 206.61.184.43 19970122131057 text/html 92856HTTP/1.0 200 OKDate: Wednesday, 22-Jan-97 13:10:39 GMTServer: WebSitePro/1.1f (S/N wpo-0deb)Allow-ranges: bytesContent-type: text/htmlLast-modified: Saturday, 28-Dec-96 07:00:07 GMTContent-length: 92638 Canadian Government Commission - Cannabis Contents | Feedback | Search DRCNet Library | Schaffer Library | Major Studies Canadian Government Commission ofInquiry CANNABIS 141. Cannabis sativa is an herbaceous annual plantwhich readily grows untended in temperate climates in many areasof the world, including Canada. Although there are severalvarieties (i.e. indica, americana, and africana) most botanistsconsider these to be members of the same species. Indian hemp, asthis plant is sometimes known, has separate male and female formsand may grow to 10 to 12 feet under favourable conditions. The first detailed description of cannabis available todayappeared in a medicinal book prepared by the Chinese Emperor ShenNung around 2737 B.C. Since then, cannabis has been known in theEast by such descriptions as 'the heavenly guide', 'Poor man'sheaven', 'soother of grief' and, in a more moralistic tone, 'theliberator of sin'.223 A United Nations' report 20 years agoestimated that 200 million people in the world used the drug formedical, religious or recreational purposes. 142. What is commonly referred to as marijuana ('grass','pot', 'weed', 'tea', 'boo' or 'Mary Jane') in North America isusually made up of crushed cannabis leaves, flowers, and oftentwigs, and may vary considerably in potency from one sample toanother. Similar preparations are known as bhang and themore potent ganja in India, kif in Morocco and daggain Africa, while the relatively pure resin is called hashish('hash') in the West and much of the Middle East, and charasin India. Hashish is usually prepared by pressing or scrapingthe sticky amber resin from the plant, and may be more than fivetimes as potent on a weight basis as high quality marijuana. Inaddition to these common forms, concentrated cannabis extract isavailable in some countries in an alcohol solution (tincture ofCannabis) designed for medical purposes (e.g., BritishPharmacopoeia). The various forms of the drug are frequently listed under thegeneral term cannabis since they differ primarily in the degreeof potency. It must be stressed, however; that differences in thepreparation, quantities involved, mode of administration andpatterns of use are also important determinants of effect, and itis often essential that these factors be identified in theexamination of individual reports. 143. In many societies, cannabis sativa has been ahighly valued crop. The trunk fibres of the woody plant are usedin the reduction of hemp rope and twine; the seeds are a sourceof a product similar to linseed oil and, until recently, werealso commonly used as bird food; the pharmacological propertiesof the leaves, flowers and resin have been used for thousands ofyears, for both medical and non-medical purposes. Cannabis was apparently brought to the Western hemisphere inthe sixteenth century by the Spaniards and was an important fibreand seed crop centuries later in the British colonies of NorthAmerica. A portion of George Washington's Mount Vernon plantationwas dedicated to the cultivation of hemp and it was reportedthat, 'Virginia awarded bounties for hemp culture andmanufacture, and imposed penalties on those who did not produceit.'31 Although there are conflicting opinions, it would appearthat the psychotropic properties of cannabis may have been littleknown to the colonial farmers at that time.12,120 Hemp was againcultivated in North America during World War II after the majorsupply lines from the East were cut off. These plants wereapparently selected for high fibre content and lowpharmacological activity. 144. When grown under optimal conditions almost all parts ofboth male and females plants, may be potentially psychoactive.The female has traditionally been considered the more efficientproducer of the resin responsible for the pharmacologicaleffects, although recent studies question this conclusion.235Female flowers, prior to pollination, contain the greatestconcentration of resin and, consequently, the flowering tops arehighly valued and are frequently prepared separately from theremainder of the plant. The potency is further affected by theclimate and soil conditions, certain genetic factors, and thetime and method of harvesting and preparation. 145. In recent years, the chemistry of cannabis has come undercareful investigation. Although numerous cannabinols wereconsidered potential candidates in the search for the activeprinciples of cannabis, it appears that certain forms oftetrahydrocannabinol (THC) are the most potent psychoactiveconstituents. Several of these have recently been isolated andsynthesized.155 It would be incorrect to say, however, that theactive ingredient in cannabis has been established, since muchbasic psychopharmacological work remains to be done in this area.Several related synthetics (Synhexyl* or Pyrahexyl*) have alsobeen investigated. Although there are continual reports of THCbeing sold on the illicit market, samples alleged to be THC haveinvariably been found to be some other drug. 146. Frequent cases of cannabis use first came to the regularattention of government and public health officials in NorthAmerica after World War I, although earlier references to suchuse exist. This increase was correlated with an influx of Mexicanworkers into the Southern United States, and subsequent use wasapparently largely confined to ethnic minority groups, with ahigh proportion of urban-dwelling Afro- and Spanish-Americansamong the known users. In addition, cannabis use was often notedamong musicians and others in the fields of entertainment andcreative arts. In the last decade, however, the use of cannabishas spread to quite a different segment of the population andappears to be most prevalent among, although by no meansrestricted to, middle-class youth of high school and college age.In spite of the risk of severe penalties, estimates based on avariety of sources suggest that eight to 20 million NorthAmericans have at least tried cannabis.260 These figures must beconsidered tenuous however, since there is no satisfactory way toassess their validity. 147. Recently the controversy surrounding this drug hasreached epidemic proportions. Usually reliable authorities havepublicly taken diametrically opposed positions regardingcannabis, not only on moral and social policy issues, but on thesupposedly 'hard' scientific facts as well. Although the currentworld literature on cannabis numbers some 2,000 publications, fewof these papers meet modern standards of scientificinvestigation. They are often ill-documented and ambiguous,emotion-laden and incredibly biased, and can, in general, berelied upon for very little valid information. Scientificexpertise in the area of cannabis is limited by the simple factthat there is little clearly-established scientific informationavailable, and preconceived notions often dominate theinterpretation of ambiguous data. The resulting confusion isexemplified by current legislation in many parts of the world,including Canada and the United States, which classifies cannabiswith the opiate narcotics, even though these drugs arepharmacologically different. This rather sorry state of affairs can be attributed toseveral factors. To begin with, governmental restrictions on themedical and scientific use of cannabis in North America have beenso strict over the past few decades that the majority of would-beresearchers have found it more attractive to work in other areas.Secondly, since the widespread use of cannabis in North Americais a relatively new phenomenon, it has not, in the past, beenconsidered a particularly high priority research area from apublic health standpoint. In addition, until recently, there waslittle possibility of standardizing the cannabis substances beingstudied, since little was known about the relevant aspects ofcannabis chemistry. Consequently, there was little basis forcomparing reports, and generalizations were limited. To date, noauthorized experimental research of cannabis effects on humans isbeing conducted in Canada. The observations collected during centuries of relativelyunrestricted cannabis use in regions of the East have rarely beenscientifically documented because most of what we consider modernscience has been, until recently, basically a Western phenomenon.Furthermore, profound cultural, moral and legal differencescomplicate the problem of extrapolating from reports of Easternusage to the North American scene. While there has been a concerted effort, in the followingdiscussions of cannabis effects, to concentrate attention onfairly well documented topics and to avoid areas where theevidence is especially weak, the scanty nature of our currentscientific knowledge of cannabis necessitates a cautious andtentative approach to this interim review. MedicalUse 148. There is no currently accepted medical use of cannabis inNorth America outside of an experimental context. Althoughcannabis has been reported to produce an array of possibly usefulmedical effects, these have either not been adequatelyinvestigated, or can be replaced by using other more readilyavailable and convenient drugs. The natural product's variabilityin potency and instability over time are among the factors whichhave led to its disfavour in Western 20th century medicine.However, recent advances in isolation and synthesis of certainactive principles of cannabis have prompted a second look at someof the potentially therapeutic aspects of the drug.159 Cannabis has been used in the past, is presently used in somecultures, or is currently under clinical investigation, for itsalleged anxiety-reducing, tranquillizing, mood-elevating,appetite stimulating, analgesic (pain reducing) andanti-bacterial effects. It has also been used to reduce fatigueor insomnia (sleeplessness), to ease opiate narcotic withdrawal,and as an aid to psychotherapy in applications analogous to psycholyticLSD therapy or as a clinical antidepressant. In addition,cannabis has often been employed in the past, and is currentlyused illicitly in North America, to reduce the secondary symptomsand suffering caused by the flu and the common cold. Thesevarious alleged therapeutic properties of cannabis have not beenadequately studied in a scientific context, and their generalmedical potential remains a matter of conjecture. Administration,Absorption, Distribution and Physiological Fate 149. Marijuana is usually smoked in hand-rolled cigarettesknown as 'joints', 'J's', 'sticks' or 'reefers', the butt ofwhich is often called a 'roach'. Normally one or two joints issufficient to produce a mild 'high', although this variesconsiderably according to individual factors and the potency ofthe sample. Hashish may vary in colour from very light todark-brown and ranges from a hard waxy substance to a crumbly,powdery consistency. Small pieces of hashish may be placed on thetip of a burning tobacco cigarette and the smoke inhaled off thetop. Ordinary pipes, water pipes (hookahs) and a variety ofspecially made instruments are also employed in the smoking ofhashish and marijuana. In the Middle East and Far East cannabis is often mixed withsuch substances as datura stramonium (Jimson weed),tobacco, nux vomica, and opium, which further complicatesthe interpretation of reports from these areas.107 Samples ofcannabis obtained in Canada generally do not contain other drugs,although they may be 'cut' with relatively inert substances.143There have been no analytical reports to support rumours thatheroin or other opiate narcotics have been found in cannabis inthis country. 150. Cannabis smoke is usually inhaled deep into the lungs andheld there for an extended time, in order to increase absorption.The onset of psychological effects is almost immediate with thesmoking of more potent forms of cannabis, and the peak effectsusually occur within the first quarter-hour followinginhalations. Major effects usually last several hours whilemilder ones may endure for half a day longer. Absorption by the gastro-intestinal tract is effective,although relatively slow. Since the resin is fairly soluble inhot water, cannabis is often used in making tea or otherbeverages - mild bhang drinks, for example, are common inIndia. In some countries hashish is incorporated into butteredcandies called majoon, or other foods. The effects ofcannabis taken orally usually begin after an hour or so, andgradually reach a peak within several hours, then slowly decline.Very high doses may produce some effects lasting more than a day,although the drug is not ordinarily used in such large quantitiesin North America. The effects of oral administration are oftennoticeably different from those of inhalation. It is uncertainwhether this is due to chemical changes from the heat in thesmoked material, effects of the digestive juices or othermetabolic enzymes after oral administration, or differences inrapidity and efficiency of absorption and distribution in the twomethods. On a weight basis, however, smoking seems to be the mosteffective mode of administration. The speed of acquisition, theduration of effects, and the recovery from the cannabis 'high'depends on the rate, quantity, and mode of administration, inaddition to various psychological and physiologicalcharacteristics of the user. 151. While considerable progress is being made in this area,little is known at the present time regarding the metabolism,excretion, and mechanism of action of cannabis. There is evidencethat some metabolites of THC are psychoactive. Techniques arebeing developed which are designed to measure cannabis productsin the urine, blood and saliva, and substantial breakthroughs areexpected in these areas in the near future. Effectsof Cannabis 152. Although the literature is brimming with impressionisticreports of the effects of cannabis, only a small number of thesemeet even the most rudimentary scientific standards. A review ofthose effects which have been unequivocally established andscientifically documented would be a scant summary indeed. Inspite of strong disagreement among extremists on many points inthe cannabis controversy, major governmental reports byindependent- commissions of various backgrounds overthree-quarters of a century have come to some surprisinglysimilar conclusions regarding the use of cannabis. Such reportsinclude the British Indian Hemp Drugs Commission Report(1893-4),107 Mayor La Guardia's Report on The MarijuanaProblem in The City of New York (1944),149 the United StatesPresident's Commission on Law Enforcement andAdministration of Justice: Task Force on Narcotics and Drug Abuse(1967),220 and the Cannabis report (1968), by theBritish Advisory Committee on Drug Dependence, prepared under thechairmanship of the Baroness Wootton of Abinger.5 In many areas in which formal scientific data are notavailable, we shall have to rely on expert opinion, and in suchinstances reference will be made to some of the observationspresented in these aforementioned governmental reports. A generaloverview of the effects of cannabis will be followed by a moredetailed examination of certain selected scientific studies.Primary concern will be given to recent publications. Overviewof Effects 153. Physiological Effects. The short-termphysiological effects of cannabis are usually slight andapparently have little clinical significance. The followingeffects have been established in adequately controlled studies:increase in heart rate, swelling of the minor conjunctival bloodvessels in the membranes around the eye, and minor unspecificchanges in the electroencephalogram (EEG). Also commonly noted,but less well documented, are: a slight drying of the eyes andnasal passages, initially stimulated salivation followed bydryness of the mouth, throat irritation and coughing duringsmoking, and increased urination. Less commonly, nausea,vomiting, diarrhoea or constipation are reported. Thesegastro-intestinal disturbances rarely occur with smoked cannabis,although nausea is not uncommon when large quantities are takenorally. Changes in blood sugar level and blood pressure have beeninconsistently reported. Appetite is usually stimulated. Contraryto popular belief, there is little evidence of pupil dilation. Insome individuals, incoordination, ataxia and tremors have beenobserved and chest pains, dizziness and fainting haveoccasionally been noted, usually at high doses. Physiologicalhangover effects have been described but are rare, even afterconsiderable intoxication. 154. Cannabis has little acute physiological toxicity - sleepis the usual somatic consequence of over-dose. No deaths duedirectly to smoking or eating of cannabis have been documentedand no reliable information exists regarding the lethal dose inhumans. One fatality, however, was reportedly caused bydistention of the bowel during a prolonged bout of grossover-eating under the acute influence of cannabis.134 155. There is little reliable information on the long-termeffects of cannabis use. There are numerous reports from Easterncountries of chronic ill-health among very heavy long-term usersof hashish. Most commonly reported are minor respiratory andgastro-intestinal ailments. These studies rarely provide acontrol group of comparable non-users for a reference standard,and clinical findings are usually confounded with a variety, ofsocial, economic and cultural factors which are not easilyuntangled. Consequently, much important work remains to be donein this area. The British Cannabis report (1968) states: 5 Having reviewed all the material available to us, we findourselves in agreement with the conclusion reached by the IndianHemp Drugs Commission appointed by the Government of India(1893-1894) and the New York Mayor's Committee on Marihuana(1944), that the long-term consumption of cannabis in moderatedoses has no harmful effects. 156. Some observers have suggested that chronic smoking ofcannabis might produce carcinogenic effects similar to those nowattributed to the smoking of tobacco, although no evidence existsto support this view at this time. A meaningful comparison isdifficult to make since the quantity of leaf consumed by theaverage cigarette smoker in North America is many times theamount of cannabis smoked by even heavy users. The presentpattern of use by regular cannabis smokers in North America ismore analogous to intermittent alcohol use (e.g., once or twice aweek), than to the picture of chronic daily use presented byordinary tobacco dependence. However, the deep inhalationtechnique usually used with cannabis might add respiratorycomplications. 157. Recently, there have been conflicting reports that largequantities of cannabis extract, injected into pregnant females ofcertain strains of rodents, may cause abnormalities in theoffspring.85 These disparate results can not be simplyextrapolated to humans and at this time there is no scientificevidence that cannabis adversely affects human chromosomes orcauses deformed children. 158. Psychological Effects. The psychologicaleffects of cannabis vary greatly with a number of factors and areoften difficult to predict. The dose, type of preparation, andrate and mode of administration can greatly influence theresponse, even if the effective doses and peak responses are madecomparable. Furthermore, the psychological effects depend to aconsiderable degree on the personality of the user, his pastexperience with cannabis or other drugs, his attitudes, and thesetting in which the drug is used. Although 'hash' may be many times more potent than marijuana,the effects of these two forms of cannabis, as usually used inNorth America, are often indistinguishable. It has been reportedthat most experienced individuals smoke to attain a certaineffect or level of 'high', and adjust the dose according to thepotency of the substance used. 'Grass' and 'hash' are generallyused interchangeably and great variations in potency of differentsamples are accommodated by the experienced user through a'titration' of dose - i.e., intake is stopped when the smokerreaches a personally comfortable level of intoxication. Suchprecision is generally not possible with oral use, however, dueto the long delay in action, and a 'non-optimal' effect istherefore much more likely to occur with this practice. In someEastern countries, different social norms have evolved around thedifferent forms of cannabis, and the pattern of drug useassociated with bhang drinks may be quite different from thatseen in regular hashish users. Long-term heavy cannabis usersinvariably prefer the more potent ganja or hashish.45, 107 It is often difficult to find descriptions of thepsychological affects of marijuana that are free from valuejudgements. Many effects seem to take on good or bad connotationsdepending on the circumstances in which they occur, the personalattitudes of the individual undergoing the experience, and theorientation of the observer who is recording them. Moreover,since many of the significant psychological effects are intenselypersonal, the laboratory scientist often has little opportunityto make objective measurements, and must rely on subjective,introspective reports, communicated verbally through a languagesystem which is frequently inadequate. 159. Cannabis is one of the least potent of the psychedelicdrugs, and some might object to its being classified with LSD andsimilar substances. It is often suggested that marijuana is amild intoxicant, more like alcohol.132 There is evidence,however, that high doses of cannabis in some individuals mayproduce effects similar, in some respects, to an attenuated LSDexperience. While such effects are rarely reported, many milderaspects of the psychedelic experience regularly occur with acannabis 'high'. The outline of potential reactions topsychedelic drugs presented in the section on LSD include: psychoticand non-psychotic adverse reactions, psychodynamic, cognitive,aesthetic, and psychedelic-peak (transcendental) or religiousexperiences. While analogous experiences may occur in varyingdegrees with cannabis, the quality of the effects is reportedlydifferent, the intensity considerably lower, and the overallresponse more controllable than with the more powerfulpsychedelic drugs. It would be incorrect to say that cannabis inmoderate dose actually produces a mild LSD experience; theeffects of these two drugs are physiologically, behaviourally andsubjectively quite distinct. Furthermore, since nocross-tolerance occurs between LSD and THC the mechanism ofaction of these two drugs is thought to be different.109 160. A cannabis 'high' typically involves several phases. Theinitial effects are often somewhat stimulating and, in someindividuals, may elicit mild tension or anxiety which usually isreplaced by a pleasant feeling of well-being. The later effectsusually tend to make the user introspective and tranquil. Rapidmood changes often occur. A period of enormous hilarity may befollowed by a contemplative silence. Psychological, effects which are typically reported by usersinclude: happiness, increased conviviality, a feeling of enhancedinterpersonal rapport and communication, heightened sensitivityto humour, free play of the imagination, unusual cognitive andideational associations, a sense of extra-ordinary reality, atendency to notice aspects of the environment of which one isnormally unaware, enhanced visual imagery, an altered sense oftime in which minutes may seem like hours, changes in visuallyperceived spatial relations, enrichment of sensory experiences(subjective aspects of sound and taste perception are oftenparticularly enhanced), increased personal understanding andreligious insight, mild excitement and energy, (or just theopposite), increased or decreased behavioural activity, increasedor decreased verbal fluency and talkativeness, lessening ofinhibitions, and at higher doses, a tendency to lose or digressfrom one's train of thought. Feelings of enhanced spontaneity andcreativity are, often described, although an actual increase increativity is difficult to establish scientifically. While mostexperts agree that cannabis has little specific aphrodisiac (sexstimulating) effect, many users report increased enjoyment of sexand other intimate human contact while under the influence of thedrug.93,161 Less pleasant, experiences may occur in different individuals,or possibly in the same individuals at different times. Some ofthese reactions may include: fear and anxiety, depression,irritability, nausea, headache, backache, dizziness, a dulling ofattention, confusion, lethargy, and a sensation of heaviness,weakness and drowsiness. Disorientation, delusions,suspiciousness and paranoia, and in some cases, panic, loss ofcontrol, and acute psychotic states have been reported.Schwarz196 has compiled an extensive catalogue of reports ofadverse symptoms which have been attributed to cannabis in theworld literature. 161. The possibility of psychiatric disorders associated withcannabis use has received considerable attention. Although thereare some well documented examples of very intense and nightmarishshort-term reactions (usually among inexperienced users inunpleasant situations and with high doses), these cases seem tobe relatively rare and generally show a rapid recovery. Althoughmany regular users have had an experience with cannabis which wasin some way unpleasant, 'freak-outs' are apparently rare.Ungerleider230 has reported 1,887 'adverse reactions' tomarijuana in the Los Angeles area. These data are difficult tointerpret since no clear definition of adverse reaction isprovided and no follow-ups were made. By contrast, Unwin inMontreal reports:233 I have seen only three adverse reactions in the past twoyears; all following the smoking of large amounts of hashish andall occurring in individuals with a previous history ofpsychiatric treatment for psychiatric or borderline conditions. The few cases of prolonged psychosis which have been reportedhave usually been attributed to an earlier personalitypredisposition, although this hypothesis is not always easy tosubstantiate. Earlier notions of a specific 'cannabis psychosis'have generally been abandoned since there is little evidence ofsuch a distinct psychiatric entity. Smith206 in San Francisco,reports that he has never observed 'cannabis psychosis' in over35,000 marijuana users seen at the Haight-Ashbury clinic. But arecent psychiatric report described several psychotic reactionsoccurring in American soldiers in Vietnam, who had usedcannabis.218 The psychiatrist believed that the psychoticepisodes may have been related to cannabis use. This emphasizesthe need for caution before any generalizations about theevidence of psychiatric complication with cannabis use are made -particularly in individuals who have consumed large doses ofpotent material under conditions of increased physical andpsychological stress. Such general conditions are, of course, byno means restricted to military operations. 162. There have been a few reports of 'flash-backs' orspontaneous recurrences of certain cannabis effects some timeafter the last use of the drug, although such events areapparently quite rare. In addition, cannabis has also beenreported to have precipitated LSD recurrences in some heavy usersof LSD.123 Only a few adequate laboratory investigations have been madeof the effects of cannabis on normal psychological functioning.Most of the data indicate little change under the conditionstested, although reports of both impaired and improvedperformance have been made. Because of the perceptual, cognitiveand psycho-motor effects often attributed to cannabis, it seemsreasonable to expect that in high doses the drug would impairautomobile driving. Many regular users feel this is so and avoiddriving, while others content that they are more careful and areprobably better drivers when slightly 'high'.93 There is noavailable evidence that cannabis has been a significant factor intraffic accidents. The one study testing cannabis effects ondriving skills found little impairment to be caused by a 'mildsocial high'.61 Some of the studies pertinent to these topicswill be discussed in more detail at the end of this section. 163. A study by Suchman217 suggests a close associationbetween the use of marijuana in some young people and adherenceto what is termed the 'hang-loose' ethic. Central to this notionis the questioning of such traditional patterns of behaviour andbelief as, conventional religion, marriage, pre-marital chastityand the accumulation of wealth. Subscribers to this ethicapparently do not necessarily reject the mores of theestablished order, but are strongly critical of them. In thisstudy, the stronger the student embraced the ethic the morefavourable he was towards marijuana use. Smoking marijuana washighly associated with 'nonconformist' behaviour such asparticipating in mass protests and was more likely to be reportedby those students who were dissatisfied with the education theywere receiving. The 'hang-loose' ethic, while it may representantagonism to the conventional world, does not appear to createapathy and withdrawal. The investigator suggests that the smokingof marijuana is part of the behaviour associated with this ethicrather than the cause of it. A somewhat different view is suggested by McGlothlin andWest154 on the basis of clinical observation. They have describedan 'amotivational syndrome' in some heavy marijuana users inNorth America. It is suggested that such use of marijuana maycontribute to some characteristic personality changes includingapathy, loss of effectiveness, diminished capacity or willingnessto carry out complex long-term plans, endure frustration, followroutines or successfully master new material. The interpretationof these observations is complicated by the fact that suchindividuals are usually involved with other drugs as well ascannabis. Several Eastern studies have suggested that chronic high-doseuse of the more potent preparations of cannabis may havedetrimental effects on the individual. One of the mostcomprehensive reports was that of the Chopras in 1939.45 Aneight-year study was carried out on a sample of 1,238 cannabisusers. With regard to moderate doses, users of relatively mildbhang reported a general feeling of well-being, relief from worryand sharpened appetite. Heavy users were often found to sufferfrom several adverse symptoms. In some instances, cannabis usewas seen as an attempt at self-medication in response to themedisorders rather than as the cause. The researchers report that among the ganja and charas users,a small percentage suffered from serious psychiatric disorder,and minor emotional problems, including impairment of judgementand memory, were observed in the majority of these subjects.According to the authors, a significant proportion of the grouphad pre-existing neurotic tendencies which may have contributedto their problem of drug use. Heavy users were often observed toshow marked inactivity, apathy and self-neglect. The majority ofthose who took small doses of any of the cannabis preparationsfelt that the overall consequences of their drug habit were nilor beneficial, while the majority of those who chronically tookheavy doses, thought the practice harmful. These subjectivejudgements were generally consistent with the clinicalobservations reported. 165. This and other reports from Eastern countries aredifficult to interpret and apply to the Western situation. Tobegin with, no equivalent data are presented from a comparablecontrol group of non-users of similar social and economicbackground (although some comparisons among users are possible)and there is no means of estimating the representativeness of thesample studied. In addition, there are many social and economicfactors which complicate cross-cultural comparisons. The use ofcannabis has a different meaning in Eastern cultures where a longhistory and tradition surrounds its use - than it does in theWest, where it is a relatively recent phenomenon. Often, conceptsof normalcy and deviancy differ considerably from one culture toanother. In addition, the Eastern cannabis user generallyconsumes larger quantities of more potent forms with greaterfrequency than does the Western user. 166. Although the possession of cannabis is a crime, and inobtaining it an individual must normally come in contact withother individuals committing drug offences, there is noscientific evidence that cannabis itself is responsible for thecommission of other forms of criminal behaviour. Chopra andChopra45 suggest that cannabis use may, in fact, actually reducethe occurrence of crime and aggression by decreasing generalactivity. While criminals may be more likely to use cannabis thanother individuals, few crimes committed under the influence ofmarijuana have been documented, and a casual relationship betweenthe drug use and other illegal behaviour has not beenestablished. It may well be that an individual who is inclined tocommit one illegal act (e.g., a drug offence), may also be morelikely than average to transgress in other areas as well. Someobservers feel that the lessening of inhibitions often reportedwith cannabis use might, in certain delinquent individuals,increase the likelihood of asocial behaviour. In a 1967judgement, rendered by Judge G. Joseph Tauro, Chief Justice ofthe Supreme Court of Massachusetts, in the Boston trial of twomen (Leis and Weiss) accused of trafficking cannabis, thefollowing statement appears:54 In my opinion, a proper inference may be drawn from theevidence, that there is a relationship between the use ofmarijuana and the incidence of crime and anti-social behaviour. The brief presented to the Commission by the Royal CanadianMounted Police dealt at considerable length with the allegedassociation of illegal drug use and criminal behaviour in Canada.This evidence is discussed later in the report. The British Cannabis report (1968) states that:5 In the United Kingdom the taking of cannabis has not so farbeen regarded, even by the severest critics, as a direct cause ofserious crime.... The evidence of a link with violent crime isfar stronger with alcohol than with the smoking of cannabis. 167. Tolerance and Dependence. While gross tolerance tothe major effects of cannabis does not seem to occur in humans,there are many more subtle aspects of this situation which haveyet to be clarified. Although there is little tendency forintermittent users to increase dose, certain cannabis effects maybe modified by repeated experiences with the drug. Manyinvestigators have pointed out that in some individuals thereappears to be a 'reverse' tolerance - i.e., smaller doses mayproduce the desired effects after the user has becomefamiliar with the drug. Many individuals experienced little or noeffect the first time they smoked cannabis. Whether this is dueto initially poor smoking technique, some learning orpsychological adaptation process, or perhaps some more molecularpharmacological sensitization, is uncertain. On the other hand, afew individuals appear to be extremely sensitive to the effectsof cannabis at the beginning and may initially report intense,ornate, and perhaps frightening experiences which are rarely, ifever, equalled in subsequent administrations. 168. Investigators have reported that regular users learn todirect or control some of the psychological and behaviouraleffects while subjectively 'high' and may be able to performcertain functions better than non-users given the same dose. Thiswould suggest that some sort of differential selective adaptationor tolerance may develop to some of the initially'uncontrollable' effects.User4 remain sensitive to the rewardingeffects of the drug since there is generally no markedinclination for them to increase dosage. Some users report thatif they stay 'high' for several days in a row the drug experienceloses much of its freshness and clarity and, consequently, theyprefer intermittent use. There are reports of chronic, heavy users from the East whoconsume what would seem to be rather large quantities by Westernstandards.24,30 Whether this reflects some degree of tolerancewith heavy use in these users or differences in desired effectsor general drug-using norms, is not known. 169. Physical dependence to cannabis has not been demonstratedand it would appear that there are normally no adverse physiologicaleffects or withdrawal symptoms occurring with abstinence from thedrug, even in regular users. On the other hand, there have beenseveral reports from the Far East and Middle East, ofirritability, mild discomfort, and certain behavioural symptomsoccurring after withdrawal of the drug in chronic heavy users.24It must be kept in mind that these cases are not clearlydocumented and that the purity of the substances involved is notcertain. Since hashish is smoked with large quantities of tobaccoand other drugs in many Eastern countries, these mixtures couldbe responsible for the minor withdrawal symptoms reported. 170. No controlled research has been done into the effects ofdiscontinued cannabis administration after unusually high dosesof the unadulterated substance have been given over a prolongedlength of time. While such an extreme situation may appear to beof little social significance, it should be noted that physicaldependence on the sedatives (alcohol, barbiturates andtranquillizers) usually occurs in only a small minority of userswho take abnormally large quantities of the drug for extendedperiods of time. 171. The presence or absence of psychological dependence in agiven situation, of course, depends on one's definition of theterm. While many cannabis users in North America seem to take thedrug once or twice a week, in a social context similar to that inwhich alcohol is normally consumed, and readily abstain for weeksor months with no ill effects, there is a small minority of userswho smoke it daily and whose regular routine and sense ofwell-being is disrupted if they are unable to obtain the drug.Most users apparently find the drug pleasant and desirable, andoften will go out of their way to acquire it - even at the riskof criminal penalty. However, the craving and urgency associatedwith opiate narcotic of sedative (or tobacco) dependence do notseem to occur. There are reports from the East that considerablepsychological dependence has occurred in a minority ofindividuals in whom the use of the drug has become a majorcomponent of their existence.107 Cannabisand other Drugs 172. The minority of cannabis users studied in North Americahave had experience with a variety of other psychoactive drugs,alcohol and tobacco being the most frequently mentioned. As mightbe expected, most of those who smoke cannabis first acquired aregular tobacco habit. A link between tobacco smoking and marijuana use has beensuggested by Rowell, who worked closely with the United StatesBureau of Narcotics in the 1930s:191 Slowly, insidiously, for over three hundred years, LadyNicotine was setting the stage for a grand climax. The long yearsof tobacco using were but an introduction and training formarijuana use. Tobacco, which was first smoked in a pipe, then asa cigar, and at last as a cigarette, demanded more and more ofitself until its supposed pleasures palled, and some of thetobacco victims looked about for something stronger. Tobacco wasno longer potent enough. 173. The relationship between cannabis and alcohol use hasbeen the subject of much controversy. Many marijuana users claimthat they have drastically reduced their consumption of alcohol,or quit it, since using cannabis. They often suggest thatcannabis may be a cure for society's alcohol ills. Theconsiderable hostility towards and rejection of alcohol expressedby many cannabis-using youth, however, is clearly not reflectedin the majority of cannabis users. In general, survey studiesfind that those who use alcohol are more likely than'teetotallers' to use cannabis, and most cannabis users still usealcohol. We have no information as to what effects, cannabis hason an individual's drinking behaviour and overall alcohol intake.It is not clear whether cannabis tends to replace alcohol as anintoxicant in the user population or whether the use of thesedrugs is addictive without significant interaction, or if the useof one of these drugs potentiates the use of the other. Itappears that, if used simultaneously, the alcohol effectsdominate and many of the psychedelic aspects of cannabis aresuppressed. For this reason, many cannabis users refuse to mixthe drugs even if they may enjoy one separately. The question of comparing benefits and ills of alcohol andcannabis has become a popular and engaging endeavour. Due to theprofoundly different social connotations and patterns of use, aswell as scientific knowledge of these drugs, such a comparisonmust be made on limited and tenuous grounds. 174. In the United States, the majority of persons studied whohad been dependent on opiate narcotics, had previous experiencewith cannabis (and were usually heavy users of alcohol). InCanada this has less often been the pattern, and it appears thatheavy use of sedatives (alcohol and barbiturates) rather thancannabis has most frequently preceded heroin use.246,215 It has been suggested that the Canadian pattern is becomingmore similar to the United States experience. On this topic, the United States Task Force Report (1967)concludes:220 The charge that marijuana 'leads to the use of addictingdrugs' need to be critically examined. There is evidence that amajority of the heroin users who come to the attention of publicauthorities have, in fact, had some prior experience withmarijuana. But this does not mean that one leads to the other inthe sense that marijuana has an intrinsic quality that creates aheroin liability. There are too many marijuana users who do notgraduate to heroin, and too many heroin addicts with no knownprior marijuana use, to support such a theory. Moreover there isno scientific basis for such a theory. The most reasonable hypothesis here is that some people whoare predisposed to marijuana are also predisposed to heroin useit may also be the case, that through the use of marijuana aperson forms the personal associations that later expose him toheroin. With a similar orientation, the British Cannabis report(1968) states:5 '. . . we have concluded that a risk ofprogression to heroin from cannabis is not a reason for retainingthe control over this drug (cannabis).' 175. Many heavy users of cannabis reportedly also experimentwith a variety of other drugs, including amphetamines as well aspsychedelic substances. Again, marijuana is often the first drug(other than alcohol and tobacco) taken by youthful multi-drugusers. The role of cannabis in the 'progression' to other drugshas not been adequately studied and it is unclear whether itplays a predisposing role, or is often used earlier simplybecause of its wider availability and social acceptance. 176. While no cross-tolerance occurs between cannabis and theother psychedelic drugs or the stimulants, considerable mentionhas been made of 'multi-drug' psychological dependence in whichindividuals may seem to depend on a variety of drugs in general,rather than on any particular chemical substance. 177. Initiation of Cannabis Use. Cannabis users are usually'turned on' for the first time by friends and associates who havehad previous experience with the drug. There is little evidenceof aggressive 'pushers' being responsible for the initiation ofcannabis smoking, although many individuals have reportedconsiderable peer-group pressure to try it. The distribution ortrafficking of cannabis is largely carried out in the same socialmanners and is usually handed from friend to friend, althoughthere are some individuals whose motivation for trafficking isprimarily commercial. Some of the marijuana in Canada is'home-grown' but most apparently comes from Mexico and thesouthern United States. SomeCannabis Studies of Current Significance 178. I. In 1939, after consulting with the New York Academy ofMedicine, Mayor La Guardia of New York appointed a specialscientific committee to investigate the effects of marijuana,both in the community and under laboratory conditions. The finalreport entitled The Marijuana Problem in the City New York:Sociological, Medical, Psychological and Pharmacological Studies149was published in 1944, and is still one of the most widely quotedand comprehensive studies of cannabis. The report provoked considerable controversy, and although ithas been generally well received by the scientific community,certain other individual were quite vociferous in expressingtheir dismay at the committee's conclusions. O.J. Kalant120 ofthe Addiction Research Foundation, has prepared a carefulcritical analysis of the Mayor's report. She observed that:'Judged from a purely scientific standpoint this study deservesneither the extravagant praise nor the vicious attacks to whichit has been submitted.' 179. The field work for the sociological study was undertakenby six specially trained police officers. The squad 'lived' inthe environment in which marijuana smoking or peddling wassuspected. They frequented poolrooms, bars and grills, dancehalls, subways, public toilets, parks and docks. On the basis oftheir observations, the following conclusions were drawn: Thedistribution and use was centred in Harlem. While the cost ofmarijuana was low and therefore within range of most persons, thesale and distribution was not under the control of any singleorganized group. The consensus among users was that the drugcreated a definite feeling of adequacy. The practice of smokingmarijuana did not lead to addiction in the medical sense of theword, did not lead to morphine or heroin or cocaine addiction,and no effort was made to create a market for opiate narcotics bystimulating the practice of marijuana smoking. Marijuana was notthe determining factor in the commission of major crimes, nor wasit the cause of juvenile delinquency. Finally, 'the publicityconcerning the catastrophic effects of marijuana smoking in NewYork City is unfounded.' 180. The clinical studies were conducted with an experimentalgroup of 77 persons - 72 of whom were inmates of various New YorkPrisons. Forty-eight of these subjects had used marijuanapreviously and some had been heavy users of opiate narcotics.Both orally ingested cannabis concentrate and ordinary marijuanacigarettes were administered in various quantities. A feeling of euphoria, occasionally interrupted by unpleasantsensations, was the usual response to cannabis. Also noted wereother common aspects of a marijuana 'high', such as laughter andrelaxation. No signs of aggression occurred, although someindications of anti-social feelings were expressed. Dizziness, alight floating sensation, dryness of the throat, thirst, anincrease in appetite (particularly for sweets), unsteadiness anda feeling of heaviness of the extremities, were among the commonsomatic symptoms noted. Nausea and vomiting occasionally occurredwith oral ingestion. Most effects seemed to increase with doseand were often more pronounced on those who had not previouslyused cannabis. 181. There were 9 cases of psychotic reaction in the prisonersstudied. In 6 instances, acute or short-term adverse reactionscharacterized by '... mental confusion and excitement ofdelirious nature with periods of laughter and anxiety' occurred.Three cases of 'true' psychosis appeared to be associated withthe experiment. 'The precise role marijuana in the psychoticstates of the three unstable persons is not clear.' In the firstsubject 'the psychotic episode was probably related to epilepsy.'In the case of the second and third subjects, the fact that theywere sent back to prison to complete their sentences must beconsidered an important, if not the main factor in bringing onthe psychosis.' None of the nine individuals had been a regularuser of cannabis. The researchers pointed out, however, thatmarijuana can bring on a true psychotic state under certaincircumstances in predisposed individuals. 182. The most consistent physiological effects reported were:a temporary increase in heart rate, an inconsistent increase inblood pressure, and increase in frequency of urination, dilatedpupils, and a moderate increase in blood sugar level and basalmetabolism. Other organic and systematic functions wereunchanged. It should be pointed out that the tests reported werenot conducted under controlled double-blind conditions, and someof these findings have not been confirmed in later controlledstudies. 183. Simple psychomotor functions were only affected slightlyby large doses, and negligibly or not at all by small doses ofmarijuana. More complex functions, hand steadiness, staticequilibrium, and complex reaction time were impaired by both doselevels. Generally, non-users were more affected by the marijuanathan those with previous marijuana experience. Strength of grip,speed of tapping, auditory acuity, 'musical ability' andestimation of short time intervals and linear distances wereunchanged. Placebos were not generally used in this section andthe details of the statistical analysis were not presented. 184. In the section on Intellectual Functioning, a variety ofpsychological tests designed to measure aspects of intelligence,learning, memory and performance were administered. Two doses oforal concentrate were used in most instances. The authorconcludes that marijuana ingestion ... has a transitory ,adverseeffect on mental functioning', with the greatest impairment athigh dose on tasks involving complex functions. No statisticalanalysis was done to distinguish drug effects from statisticalanalysis was done to distinguish drug effects from randomvariation, however, and again, no controlled double-blind designwas used. Furthermore, the author's conclusions are not alwaysconsistent with the evidence which, for example, suggests someimprovement in verbal abilities and certain other functions aftermarijuana ingestion. These data are not discussed. The authornotes that 'indulgence in marijuana does not appear to result inmental deterioration'. Kalant has noted with respect to this section: 120 In summary, the results seem to bear out the conclusion thatbig enough doses of marijuana impair variety of mental functions,while small doses may improve some of them. These conclusions areonly tentative, because the author presents no statisticaltreatment of the data. 185. The 'Emotional and General Personality Structure' ofvarying numbers of users and non-users were studied before andafter several doses of cannabis. The effects of low dose weregenerally pleasant and favourably received by the subjects, whilethe high dose seemed more likely to produce anxiety, distress,and a sense of insecurity. The committee concluded: Under the influence of marijuana the basic personalitystructure of the individual does not change, but some of the moresuperficial aspects of his behaviour show alteration. The newfeeling of self confidence induced by the drug expresses itselfprimarily through oral rather than through physical activity.There is some indication of a diminution in physical activity.The disinhibition which results from the use of marijuanareleases what is latent in the individual's thoughts andemotions, but does not evoke responses which would be totallyalien to him in his undrugged state. 186. A comparison between users and non-users as regards thepossibility of physical and mental deterioration as a consequenceof marijuana use was made on 48 users, some of whom had beensmoking regularly for two to seventeen years. The investigatorsconcluded that: There is definite evidence in this study that the marijuanausers were not inferior in intelligence to the general populationand that they had suffered no mental or physical deterioration asa result of their use of the drug. 187. The therapeutic use of cannabis in the treatment ofopiate narcotic addicts was explored in 56 patients. Tentativeconclusions suggest improved appetite and mood, less severesymptoms and a generally improved clinical picture duringwithdrawal. Again no control group was studied. The Committee reported: From the study as a whole, it is concluded that marijuana isnot a drug of addiction, comparable to morphine, and that iftolerance is acquired, this is of a very limited degree.... Thehabit depends on the pleasurable effects that the drug produces. These views were based largely on interviews with hundreds ofusers, the sociological studies and the laboratoryinvestigations. Some observers have pointed out that theseconclusions may not apply to the conditions of heavy chronic usesometimes reported in Eastern countries. 188. Some individuals have criticized the research for oftenusing high doses of little social relevance - the authors admitthat users, if left to their own devices, tend to approximate thelower doses used in the experiment. Other investigators feel thatmore chronic users of higher doses should have been studied forthe investigation of long-term effects including tolerance anddependence. 189. In summary, although the La Guardia report remains one ofthe more significant contributions to the cannabis literature,the conclusions must be qualified in accordance with the numerousweaknesses in the experimental methodology: blind and placebocontrols were absent and statistical analyses often lacking,reporting was occasionally biased when the data were ambiguous,sample selection may not have been adequate for certainconclusions in the sociological study, and the almost completeuse of prison inmates as subjects in the clinical studies andhospital ward setting may further restrict generalizations. 190. II. Isbell et al109 investigated the effects of variousdoses of smoked and orally ingested tetrahydrocannabinol (THC)ina group of former opiate narcotic addicts who had also hadexperience with marijuana. The drug was compared to an inactiveplacebo control in a single-blind design (i.e., the researchers,but not the subjects, knew which samples were being tested). 191. Regardless of dose and route of administration, THCcaused no significant change in pupillary size, respiration rate,blood pressure, or knee-jerk reflex threshold. Heart pulse ratewas consistently elevated, and swelling of the conjunctival bloodvessels in the membrane around the eyes occurred after the higherdoses. In both physiological and psychological measures, THC (ata standard dose) was found to be two to three times as potentwhen smoked as when taken orally. 192. Patients identified the drug as being similar tomarijuana and some suggested that it was something like LSD orcocaine as well. Euphoria was consistently noted and no mentionwas made in the report of unpleasant adverse reactions.Psychological changes included '. . - alterations in sense oftime and in visual and auditory perception (usually described askeener).' With higher doses, both smoked and orally ingested, '.. .marked distortion in visual and auditory perception,depersonalization, derealization and hallucinations, bothauditory and optical, occurred in most patients. THC, thereforeis a psychotomimetic drug and its psychotomimetic effects aredependent on dose.' Such occurrences may also appear in someindividuals as 'idiosyncratic' reactions at lower doses. It hadbeen noted that the symptoms which Isbell has labelled'psychotomimetic' might be called 'psychedelic' by scientistswith a different orientation. 193. The application of these findings to marijuana use as itoccurs in North America is unclear. Some observers, in both layand scientific circles, have interpreted this report as anindication of the dangers of marijuana, while other scientistsquestion the relevance of these findings in relation to the 'realworld' of marijuana usage.251 194. III. In 1968, Weil, Zinberg and Nelsen 239,240 reportedthe first adequately controlled experiment on cannabis effects inhumans. The primary section of the study is concerned witheffects on nine subjects who were inexperienced with cannabis.The researchers gave two different doses of marijuana (0.5 and1.0gm of 0.9% THC) and an inactive placebo substance in acontrolled 'double-blind' situation - i.e., neither the subjectsnor the researchers knew at the time of the experiment which doseof cannabis or placebo was administered. This procedure greatlyreduces the influence of expectations and bias on the part ofboth subjects and researchers. In addition to the naive subjects,eight chronic marijuana users (who normally smoked daily or everyother day) were tested with the high dose only. No placebo wasused with these subjects since the authors felt that experiencedmarijuana smokers could readily distinguish the placebo from the'real thing', and consequently a true placebo control was notpossible. Subjects took either the drug or placebo by a standardand uniform inhalation method designed to minimize practiceeffects and individual differences in smoking technique.Subsequently, they were tested on a battery of standardpsychological and psychomotor tasks, and certain physiologicalmeasurements were taken in a neutral laboratory setting. 195. The physiological findings were quite straightforward:heart rate was increased moderately, no significant change inrespiration rate occurred, blood sugar level was unchanged(although the timing of the samples may not have been optimal),no change in pupil size was seen and a slight swelling of theconjunctival blood vessels (producing a reddening of themembranes around the eye) occurred. The researchers suggest thatthe near absence of significant physiological effects '... makesit unlikely that marijuana has any seriously detrimental physicaleffects in either a short-term or long-term usage.' 196. The capacity for sustained attention (ContinuousPerformance Test) was unaffected by cannabis in both the naveand chronic user groups, even when a flickering strobe light waspresented to provide distraction. Muscular coordination andattention performance (Pursuit Rotor Test) declined as dose wasincreased in nave subjects, but improved slightly aftermarijuana use in the chronic users. (This improvement wasconsidered a result of practice rather than a drug effect but cannot be properly evaluated due to the lack of a placebomeasurement in the experienced users.) Performance on the DigitSymbol Substitution Test, (a simple test of cognitive functionoften used in I.Q. tests) was impaired in the nave groups,while the experienced smokers started off at a reasonable baseline and actually improved slightly when they were 'high' - atrend which can not be accounted for solely by practice. Atendency to overestimate time was also noted in these subjects.The researchers caution that the differences between users andnonusers in this study must only be considered a trend since thetesting situations were not strictly comparable for the twogroups. 197. Subjects were given five minutes to talk on 'aninteresting or dramatic experience' and the content of the verbalreport was analysed. Marijuana did not impair theunderstandability of the material as measured by the Clozemethod, although judges could consistently distinguish thetranscripts of pre- and post-drug samples in both the naive andexperienced groups. A 'strange' quality in the post-drug sampleswas noted but not easily quantified. The investigators suggestedthat marijuana may temporarily interfere with short-term memory -i.e., the ability to retrieve or remember events occurring in thepast few seconds. They feel that this may explain why manymarijuana smokers, when very 'high', may have troubleremembering, from moment to moment, the logical thread of what isbeing said. Controlled investigation of this hypothesis iscurrently under way. 198. The experienced subjects were asked to rate themselves ona scale from one to ten, with ten representing the 'highest' theyhad ever been. Ratings given were between seven and ten, withmost subjects at eight or nine. This would suggest that thesample was of reasonable potency and the smoking techniqueeffective. On the other hand, with the same dose and smokingtechnique, only one of the naive subjects had, a definitemarijuana 'high'. (Interestingly, he was the one subject who hadearlier expressed an eagerness to 'turn on'.) The researcherspoint out that the introspective report of an individual is theonly way to determine if he is 'high' on marijuana or not. Thereare, as of yet, no known objective signs which allow one toidentify this state. 199. There was no change in mood in the neutral laboratorysetting in either naive or chronic user subjects, as measured byself-rating scales and a content analysis of the verbal sample.There were no adverse marijuana reactions of any kind in any ofthe subjects, although tobacco cigarettes smoked during apractice session, using the standard technique produced acutenicotine reactions in five subjects which 'were far morespectacular than any effects produced by marijuana'. The authorsconclude: In a neutral setting persons who are naive to marijuana do nothave strong subjective experiences after smoking low or highdoses of the drug, and the effects they do report are not thesame as those described by regular users of marijuana who takethe drug in the same neutral setting. Marijuana naive persons dodemonstrate impaired performance on simple intellectual andpsychomotor tests after smoking marijuana; the impairment isdose-related in some cases. Regular users of marijuana do gethigh after smoking marijuana in a neutral setting but do not showthe same degree of impairment of performance on the test as donaive subjects. In some cases, their performance even appears toimprove slightly after smoking marijuana. 200. The New Republic, in an editorial responding tothis report, wrote: 'While pot heads may legitimately ask,"So what else is new?" the study may have a pacifyinginfluence on parents and officials who fear the drug on the basisof unsubstantiated horror stories.'251 While numerous scientistshave expressed similar views, the study does provide a longoverdue empirically adequate beginning to the scientific study ofmarijuana effects on humans. While this study has implicationsextending beyond the laboratory, there has been a tendency in thepopular press to overgeneralize from the results. It would beimprudent to extrapolate the findings into social and legal areasfor which the study was not designed and is not appropriate. 201. IV. Jones and Stone116 in 1969 reported that smokedmarijuana (equivalent to Weil's low dose) compared to a placeboin ten 'heavy users' resulted in: moderately increased heartrate, altered electroencephalogram (EEG), over-estimation of time(but no change in time interval production), no effect on theability to attend to relevant internal cues to the exclusion ofirrelevant external cues (Rod and Frame test), and no effect onthe Digit Symbol Substitution Test (the same measure of cognitivefunctioning employed in the Weil study). A double dose ofmarijuana (comparable to Weil's high dose) produced a deficit invisual information processing - the only test studied with thisquantity of drug. 202. The subjects were asked to rate the low dose and placeboon a scale from 0-100 as to marijuana quality. The mean ratingwere 66 for the low dose and 57 for the placebo, which was not asignificant difference. While this suggests that the dose ofmarijuana used was probably too low to be very effective and mayreduce the significance of the report, it is interesting that thesupposedly inactive 'placebo' (with only a "trace" ofTHC) was given a rating suggesting moderate potency by ten heavymarijuana users in San Francisco. However, it appears that thesubjective effects of the placebo and low dose marijuana, asmeasured by a self-rating subjective symptom check-list, may havebeen different, although no statistics are presented, and thefigure containing this information does not clearly identify theplacebo. At any rate, these findings suggest that at low doses asimple 'highness' dimension may not be easy to quantify reliably.Unfortunately, Weil did not get ratings on his low dose orplacebo, and Jones did not assess the high dose, so areconciliation is not possible with the present data. 203. The researchers also studied a larger dose of marijuanaextract (equivalent to 20 cigarettes) given orally, compared witha placebo and one dose of alcohol (producing blood alcohol levelsof 0.06 to 0.12%). Several tasks were used with the samesubjects. Certain comparisons among the conditions and drugs arepossible, although the use of a single dose and slight variationsin procedure limits the applicability of the findings. 204. The marijuana smoked in low doses produced an'unimpressive' high with a maximum effect at about 15 minutes andlasting about three hours, while the oral administration had alatency of almost two hours, a peak at three to four hours andmild subjective effects lasting eight to ten hours. The oral doseof marijuana occasionally produced nausea and in one casevomiting, and differed from the smoked material on severalsubjective dimensions. The results of the comparisons between theoral marijuana and the placebo were essentially the same as thosediscussed earlier for the smoked material. As a point of reference,the single alcohol dose did not affect performance on the Rod andFrame Test, produced an underestimation of time intervals,decreased rate of information processing, did not affect heartrate, and produced a slowing of the EEG. Little meaningfulcomparison can be made between alcohol and the other treatmentsat a single dosage level, however. 205. The report is ambiguous and many important details ofmethodology and results are excluded in what appears to be apreliminary investigation. It should be noted that this study hasonly single-blind controls and the investigators knew which drugswere administered at the time of the experiment. 206. V. A third recent experimental study of marijuana effectson humans was published by Clark and Nakashima46 in 1968 and ismentioned here since it is now frequently quoted and, also, todemonstrate some of the problems of interpreting inadequatelycontrolled experiments. Several different doses of marijuanaextract (of unknown THC content) were given to 12 marijuana naivesubjects, and the effects recorded on eight psychological testsin 'one control and two or three subsequent sessions'. 207. The study is unintepretable for a variety of reasons,some of which follow: since the control session and the variousdrug doses were given only once, and on separate days, drug anddose effects are indistinguishably confounded with variousfactors of treatment order (including practice and other learningeffects), and natural variations in performance occurring fromone day to the next; the researchers describe no basis,statistical or otherwise, for distinguishing the 'effects' fromrandom variation; they report only trends in the data in one ortwo subjects selected on an unspecified basis, and give noindication of overall group effects; the numerical basis for thefigures presented is unspecified; apparently no placebos weregiven on the 'control' day which was invariably the firstsession, yet the drug is frequently compared with the 'control'in individual subjects; apparently no 'blind' controls wereprovided in either the experiment or later data analysis; and thereport is presented with a strong negative bias in theintroduction and remainder of the article, which is not supportedempirically. The authors infer marijuana-induced impairment onlyon the reaction time and 'digit code memory' tasks, although theyprovide no reliable evidence for the presence or absence ofpositive or negative marijuana effects on these or the othertests studied. Clark concludes that great individual variation exists amongindividuals in response to the drug. While this would seem areasonable observation, effects have not been identified, muchless the variance of their distribution assessed. The greatvariability in the data cannot be attributed solely to the drugfor reasons outlined above. In summary, this study, conducted,financially supported and published by highly accreditedindividuals and institutions, adds nothing but confusion to theexisting knowledge and should encourage scepticism regarding evenmodern 'scientific' information on marijuana. 208. VI. Last year Crancer and associates,61 from theWashington State Department of Motor Vehicles, published thefirst experimental study of marijuana effects on automobiledriving skills. A laboratory driving simulator was employed whichhad been shown previously to validly predict road accidents andtraffic violations on the basis of speedometer, steering,braking, accelerator and signal errors measured during aprogrammed series of 'emergency' situations. This study hasprovoked considerable controversy, some of which may bedissipated if the different sections of the study are examinedseparately. 209. Using a sophisticated methodological and statisticaldesign, the effects of the single dose of marijuana (2cigarettes) were assessed in 36 experienced marijuana smokers whoused cannabis at least twice a month. In terms of total THCadministered, the dose was about 22% greater than Weil's highdose and almost 2  times the standard dose used by Jones.Crancer reports the effects as a 'normal social marijuana high',although this is not quantified in any way and it is not certainhow this relates to the overall pattern of marijuana use in thepopulation. Simulator scores were obtained at three intervalsover a 4  hour period. Control (no treatment) sessions wererun, although no placebo substance was used since theinvestigators felt that a placebo would not be effective withexperienced marijuana users. 210. Overall performance under the single dose of marijuanawas not different from the control. The main study was followedby two 'cursory' investigations. Four subjects were retested withthree times the original drug dose and none showed a significantchange in performance. Furthermore, four marijuana naive subjectswere tested after smoking enough marijuana to become 'high' (allconsumed at least the amount used in the main experiment anddemonstrated an increase in heart rate in addition to subjectiveeffects). No significant change in scores occurred with the drugin these subjects either. The investigators caution that the study does not necessarilyindicate that marijuana will not impair driving. However, we feel that, because the simulator task is a lesscomplex but related task, deterioration in simulator performanceimplies deterioration in actual driving performance. We are lesswilling to assume that non-deterioration in simulator performanceimplies non-deterioration in actual driving. 211. One weakness of this part of the study is that apparentlyno standard and uniform smoking technique was employed and it isnot certain how much of the active principle was actuallyabsorbed. Although a biochemical method for detecting THC in thebody has recently been developed, quantitative measurements havenot been employed in any experimental marijuana studies. Althoughhigher doses were tested in some subjects, this was not done withthe same thoroughness as the main experiment and little can beasserted regarding a dose-response effect of marijuana ondriving. It seems likely that if the dose were pushed high enoughsome impairment would occur, although this has not beenempirically demonstrated. 212. In order to obtain some standard reference point for thisstudy, the subjects were also tested under a single dose ofalcohol, designed to produce a blood alcohol level correspondingto the legal standard of presumed driving impairment inWashington (i.e., 0.10% blood alcohol level). The average numberof errors under alcohol (97.4) was significantly greater thanthat acquired under either the normal or marijuana condition(each averaging 84.5 errors). While it is clear that a meaningfulcomparison of the two drugs cannot be based on a single dose ofeach, the alcohol data were obtained merely to provide a'recognized standard' of impairment. Kalant118 has pointed out that the blood alcohol level ofthese subjects may have been considerably higher than the desired0.10%, and that comparisons between the drugs must be made withcaution due to the single doses used. He also suggests thatalthough it would not have been easy for the subjects to 'fake'good driving performance under marijuana, an anti-alcohol bias,as often seen in marijuana users, could have resulted in poorerperformance in the alcohol condition. If the limitations of the alcohol-marijuana comparison and theweakness of the marijuana dose-effect generalizations arerealized, the over-all study provides interesting tentativeinformation on the effects of a moderate quantity of marijuana ondriving skills. 213. VII. In general, studies of the long-term history ofmarijuana users have been based either on medical or criminalsamples or on subjects selected because of current use. Each ofthese sources of subjects has considerable intrinsic samplingbias - which greatly complicates the interpretation of results.Recently, however, Robins and associates,187 reported the firststudy of the long-term outcome of marijuana use in a group notselected for deviant behaviour. The subjects were 235 Negro menwho had gone to public elementary school in the black district ofSt. Louis, Missouri, in the early 1940s. While thecharacteristics of such a population may have questionableapplicability to present marijuana use in Canada, this generallythorough study should be carefully considered. The data arelargely based on recent retrospective personal interviews andofficial records. Subjects were classified according toadolescent drug use. 214. Persons in this sample who had used marijuana (and noother drug except alcohol) differed significantly fromnon-marijuana users, in that the users had more often: drunkheavily enough to create social or medical problems, failed tograduate from high school, reported their own infidelity orfathering of illegitimate children, received financial aid, hadadult police records for non-drug offences, and reported violentbehaviour. While these findings indicate an association betweenmarijuana use and these other behavioural characteristics in thispopulation, causal variables have not been identified. 215. The heavy use of alcohol in these subjects complicatesthe interpretation considerably. Every marijuana user also usedalcohol, and drinking usually preceded marijuana use. Among thesubjects who used only marijuana and alcohol, 47% had medical orsocial problems attributable to drinking ('the"shakes", liver trouble, family complaints, arrests,etc.') after the age of 25, and 38% of the users met the criteriafor alcoholism. When those subjects who were classified asalcoholics were eliminated from the data (and the remainder ofthe problem drinkers left in) the only statistically significantdifference between the marijuana users and the non-users was withrespect to financial aid received in the past five years.Non-significant trends remained, however, which were generallysimilar to the earlier differences. Subjects who used 'harder'drugs (e.g., heroin, amphetamines and barbiturates) in additionto marijuana were significantly more deviant than the non-users,even after the alcoholics had been eliminated from the sample.Almost one-half of the subjects who had used marijuana also hadused other drugs illegally. The alcoholics, in addition to having a history of earlydrinking, were also more likely to have used marijuana asadolescents. Unfortunately, no record of intensity of earlydrinking or marijuana use was obtained. A possible causalrelationship between marijuana use and problem drinking, orvice-versa, or a possible third set of factors predisposingcertain individuals to both alcoholism and marijuana use cannotbe established or denied on the basis of the present data. Therelationship between marijuana use and the use of harder drugs isalso troublesome. The authors conclude: One small study of the effects of drug use in 76 Negroadolescents can hardly serve to determine the laws of the land.But it may at least make us cautious in too readily supportingthe view that marijuana is harmless, until some better evidenceis available. 216. VIII. The Addiction Research Foundation of Ontario hasrecently conducted a study of 232 confirmed marijuana users inToronto.173 Prisons and court referrals provided about half ofthe subjects and the remainder were volunteers not contactedthrough criminal-legal channels. The majority came frommiddle-class or upper middle-class homes and 16% were students.The average age was 22 (range: 15-42) and males outnumberedfemales 4 to 1. The average duration of marijuana use was 2.7years (range: 1-20). 217. Preliminary observations suggest the followingcharacteristics in this sample: the subjects tended to bemultiple drug users (tobacco and alcohol were used by almost allof the subjects, more than half had tried LSD and speed, andone-third had tried opiate narcotics); most had 'trafficked' inmarijuana, but usually just to friends; cannabis was generallyused about twice a week in the company of friends, accompanied bypassive rather than active behaviour; purported reasons for usewere increased perception and awareness, other psychedeliceffects, improved mood, and conviviality. Almost all subjectsfound the usual effects favourable although about a third had hadat least one unpleasant experience (physiological orpsychological) with the drug; about half had driven a car whileunder the influence of cannabis, and of these subjects, more thanhalf felt that their driving ability was unimpaired by the drug;about half felt that cannabis had improved their lives, whilesome thought it had worsened things; the subjects 'tended to beunderactive physically, engaging in passive pursuits'; aboutone-third subscribed to the belief in the 'protestant workethic', while almost as many rejected it; almost one-third hadcommitted non-drug criminal offences; one-half showed a swellingof the fine conjunctival blood vessels around the eye;nonspecific deviant EEGs were frequently seen; more than halfwere thought by a psychiatrist to be psychologically unstable ordisturbed; and the group as a whole tended to be more imaginativeand creative than what would be expected in the generalpopulation. 218. The researchers stress that their findings demonstrate anassociation, and not necessarily a causal relationship, betweenthe regular use of cannabis and other characteristics in thissample. While some of these results may be attributable to theselection or bias of the sample (e.g., half were contactedthrough criminal correction channels), much of the informationmay have general application. On-going analysis of the datashould further clarify the results, although the lack of acomparable matched control group will undoubtedly precludecertain generalizations since we have little informationregarding the incidence of many of the aforementionedcharacteristics in non-marijuana using individuals of similarsocial, economic and educational backgrounds. Furthermore, thefrequent use of other drugs by these subjects may limitconclusions specific to cannabis use. 219. IX. In response to questions raised in the British Houseof Commons, the Government of India, in 1893, appointed acommission to investigate and report on the cannabis ('hempdrugs') situation in India. The commission was instructed toinquire into the extent to which the hemp plant was cultivated,the preparation of drugs from it, the trade in those drugs, theextent of their use, and the effects of their consumption uponthe social, physical, mental, and moral conditions of the people.The different forms of the drug, especially bhang, ganja, andcharas (hashish), were to be studied separately. The Commission'should ascertain whether, and in what form, theconsumption of the drugs is either harmless or even beneficial ashas occasionally been maintained'. In addition, they were askedto investigate certain economic aspects of the use of hemp (e.g.,tax arrangements and import and export patterns), and also thepotential political, social or religious results of prohibition. TheReport of the Indian Hemp Drugs Commission (1894),107including appendices, comprised seven volumes and totalled 3,281pages. 220. In 1968, Mikuriya,158 in the first thorough discussion ofthis report to appear in the Western scientific literature,suggested that this investigation . . . is by far the most complete, and systematic study ofmarijuana undertaken to date.... It is both surprising andgratifying to note the timeless and lucid quality of the writingsof these British colonial bureaucrats. It would be fortunate ifstudies undertaken by contemporary commissions, task forcecommittees, and study groups could measure up to the standard ofthoroughness and general objectivity embodied in this report ...many of the issues concerning marijuana being argued in theUnited States today were dealt with in the Indian Hemp DrugsCommission Report. Until recently only about a half dozen copies of this reportwere available in North America. In the introduction to a newprinting of the primary volume in 1969, Kaplan121 observed: That this report, which remains today by far the most completecollection of information on marijuana in existence, should havebeen so completely forgotten in an era when controversy over theeffects of the drug and, the wisdom of its criminalization hasincreased to such fervor is almost inexplicable. 221. The Indian Hemp Drugs Commission received testimony from1,193 witnesses of a total of 80 meeting in 30 cities. Over 300medical practitioners were consulted and inquiries were made ofCommanding Officers of all regiments of the Army, Thecommissioners investigated the records of every mental hospitalin British India and evaluated separately each of the 222 casesadmitted during the year 1892, in which some connection betweenhemp drugs and insanity had been suggested (these made up about10 per cent of all admissions) Furthermore, all 81 cases ofcrimes of violence in India purported to have been caused bycannabis over the previous 20 years were investigated andre-examined. In addition, three laboratory experiments wereconducted with monkeys to study the effects of cannabis on thenervous system. 222. In the short time during which the full report has beenavailable to us, we have not been able to prepare, at thisinterim stage, a thorough critical analysis of the document.However, the following quotations, taken from the summary ofconclusions regarding the effects of hemp drugs, provide anoverview of the findings: It has been clearly established that the occasional use ofhemp in moderate doses may be beneficial. In regard to thephysical effects, the Commission have come to the conclusion thatthe moderate use of hemp drugs, is practically attended by noevil results at all. There may be exceptional cases in which,owing to idiosyncrasies of constitution, the drugs in evenmoderate use of hemp drugs in even moderate use may be injurious,excessive use does cause injury. As in the case of otherintoxicants, excessive use tends to weaken the constitution andto render the consumer more susceptible to disease  theexcessive use of these drugs does not cause asthma. . . it mayindirectly cause dysentery ... (and) it may cause bronchitis. In respect to the alleged mental effects of the drugs, theCommission have come to the conclusion that the moderate use ofhemp drugs produces no injurious effects on the mind.... It isotherwise with the excessive use. Excessive use indicates andintensifies mental instability... It appears that the excessiveuse of hemp drugs may, especially in cases where there is anyweakness or hereditary predisposition, induce insanity. It hasbeen shown that the effect of hemp drugs in this respect hashitherto been greatly exaggerated, but that they do sometimesproduce insanity seems beyond question. In regard to the moral effects of the drugs, the Commissionare of opinion that their moderate use produces no moral injurywhatever. There is no adequate ground for believing that itinjuriously affects the character of the consumer. Excessiveconsumption, on the other hand, both indicates and intensifiesmoral weakness or depravity. . . . In respect to his relationswith society, however, even the excessive consumer of hemp drugsis ordinarily inoffensive. His excesses may indeed bring him todegraded poverty which may lead him to dishonest practices; andoccasionally, but apparently very rarely indeed, excessiveindulgence in hemp drugs may lead to violent crime. But for allpractical purposes it may be laid down that there is little or noconnection between the use of hemp drugs and crime. Viewing the subject generally, it may be added that themoderate use of these drugs is the rule, and that the excessiveuse is comparatively exceptional. The moderate use practicallyproduces no ill effects. In all but the most exceptional cases,the injury from habitual moderate use is not appreciable. Theexcessive use may certainly be accepted as very injurious, thoughit must be admitted that in many excessive consumers the injuryis not clearly marked. The injury done by the excessive use is,however, confined almost exclusively to the consumer himself; theeffect on society is rarely appreciable. It has been the moststriking feature in this inquiry to find how little the effectsof hemp drugs have obtruded themselves on observation. As noted earlier in this chapter, any generalizations from oneculture to another must be made with great caution. In thisinstance, extrapolation to the present Canadian situation wouldhave to span three-quarters of a century as well. In spite ofthese clear limitations, the thoroughness of this criticalinquiry commands respect and the report deserves carefulconsideration. Contents | Feedback | Search DRCNet Library | Schaffer Library | Major Studies Canadian Government Commission ofInquiryWT01-B31-42IA031-000652-B043-117http://206.61.184.43:80/schaffer/library/studies/ledain/nonmed4.htm 206.61.184.43 19970122131108 text/html 29298HTTP/1.0 200 OKDate: Wednesday, 22-Jan-97 13:10:58 GMTServer: WebSitePro/1.1f (S/N wpo-0deb)Allow-ranges: bytesContent-type: text/htmlLast-modified: Saturday, 28-Dec-96 06:59:47 GMTContent-length: 29080 Canadian Government Commission - Opiate Narcotics Contents | Feedback | Search DRCNet Library | Schaffer Library | Major Studies Canadian Government Commission ofInquiry OPIATE NARCOTICS 223. The term narcotic has had wide and inconsistent usage inlay, legal and scientific circles. Some use the word tocharacterize any drug which produces stupor, insensibility orsleep; many apply it only to derivatives of the opium plant('opiates'); others consider the term equivalent toaddiction-producing; and in legal matters, 'narcotics' may referto almost any allegedly dangerous drugs (for example marijuanaand cocaine are often considered with opiate compounds innarcotics regulations in spite of the fact that they have littlein common with them). To reduce some of this ambiguity, thespecific phrase opiate narcotic will be used in this report, andwill be restricted to drugs which are derivatives of, or arepharmacologically similar to products of the opium plant papaversomniferum. 224. The earliest unambiguous description of opium to which wehave access was written in the third century B.C., although somescholars have cited references to opiate-like drugs dated morethan 5,000 years ago.29 Many believe that Homer's 'Nepenthe' wasopium. These drugs are obtained from the juice of the unripenedseed pod of the opium poppy plant soon after the flower petalsbegin to fall - no other part of the plant produces psychoactivesubstances. Although 'opium eating' has been known in Asia for thousandsof years, widespread use of the drug did not occur until thedevelopment of the British East India Company's wholesale opiumempire in the eighteenth century. The practice of smoking opiumdeveloped in China soon after American tobacco was introduced tothe Orient. Chinese prohibition of the British opium precipitatedthe 'opium war' in which the world's greatest naval power forcedChina to open its door to the British (opium) trade. 223 225. In 1805, the major active constituent in opium wasisolated - an alkaloid given the name morphine, after the GreekGod of Dreams, Morpheus. In the next half century, various otheralkaloids were discovered, such as codeine and papaverine, bothif which are in general use today. Since then, a variety ofsemisynthetic (e.g., heroin, in 1874) and synthetic (e.g.,methadone, Demerol* and Alvodine*), opiate-like drugs have beendeveloped. These compounds have the potential of producingqualitatively similar actions (at different doses), althoughthere is considerable variability among them in the potency ofthe different opiate effects. Heroin, more potent on a weightbasis than morphine, is usually the choice of the chronic opiatenarcotic user. This drug was originally considered'non-addictive' when put on the market. Those members of themedical and related profession who use these drugs non-medically,as well as others who have become dependent as a result ofmedical use, tend, to use morphine or the synthetics. Because ofthe similarities among these drugs, they will, with a fewexceptions be dealt with as a group. Heroin (and sometimes otheropiate narcotics) is often referred to as 'H', 'horse', 'junk','scrag' or 'smack'. 226. Until the nineteenth century, 'raw' opium was eithersmoked or taken orally. There is a decidedly lower dependenceliability -with these techniques than: with 'practices' whichfollowed and it was not until the isolation of morphine and theinvention of the hypodermic needle that the opiate narcoticsbecame a serious problem in the Western World. Morphine waswidely acclaimed among medical practitioners and was used freely,to treat pain during the American Civil War, sometimes producinga dependency called 'soldiers' disease'. General use of tinctureof opium in many patent medicines (e.g. Paregoric) made the quasi-medical use of opiates a common practice in North America atthat time. On the West Coast, the influx of Chinese labourers,some of whom smoked opium, apparently stimulated non-medical useto some degree. The extent of opiate narcotic problems in thenineteenth century is difficult to ascertain, however, it wouldappear that the use of these drugs was not a major moral issue.In the early part of the twentieth century, some of the problemsof morphine and heroin dependence became apparent, and mostopiate products were removed from the open market in NorthAmerica and non-medical possession was prohibited. 227. Because characteristics fluctuate with social change, adescription of drug users is necessarily tied to a givenpopulation at a given point and time and may have little generalapplication. There is little information on opiate narcotic usersin North America prior to this century, but many researcherscontend that far more women than men made use of these drugs atthat time. Since the general opiate prohibition in the early partof this century, men have become the predominant users. WhileChinese opium smokers were not uncommon a half century ago, thereappear to be very few Orientals in North America using opiatenarcotics today. In recent decades, the use of these drugs inCanada has tended to centre on a few urban areas. Medical andrelated professions represent a frequently noted high-risk groupwith respect to the development of drug dependency. For variousreasons, statistics on the incidence of dependency in this groupare quite inadequate. Many researchers contend that healthprofession dependents constitute a significant proportion of thetotal chronic opiate narcotic using population.28 For many years,the known opiate narcotic users have made up about 0.02 per centof the overall Canadian population. 228. Although many observers do not feel that the non-medicaluse of opiate narcotics is currently a major public healthproblem in Canada, there are numerous reasons for directingattention to this group of drugs. Historically, the popularconception of the 'narcotics addict dope fiend' has establishedan image of the non-medical drug user which persists and intrudesinto almost every examination or investigation of drug use today.Furthermore, the opiate narcotics have played an important roleas a model in much of the past and present drug legislation, andin general crimino-legal approach to the control of sociallycensured drug use. Although many important questions about theopiate narcotics are still unanswered, it is clear that much ofwhat has commonly passed for fact, is fiction, and often bearslittle resemblance to scientific information. MedicalUse 229. Most of the current medical uses for the opiate narcoticswere fairly well understood and established in Europe by themiddle of the sixteenth century, and were probably well known incertain areas long before that time. These drugs are primarilyused in the relief of suffering from pain, in the treatment ofdiarrhoea and dysentery, and to reduce cough. Hundreds of relatedcompounds have been synthesized in attempts to retain theclinical benefits but reduce the dependence liabilities of theopiate narcotics. These efforts have not been very successful,and thus morphine and related drugs are still considered byphysicians to be among the most valuable drugs available to thepractitioner today. Heroin is no longer used medically in NorthAmerica. Administration,Absorption, Distribution and Physiological Fate 230. Opiate narcotics are produced in a variety of tablets andcapsules, elixirs, cough syrups (with codeine), injections,rectal suppositories and, on the illegal market, are alsoavailable in a gummy solid or powdered form. Codeine is oftenmixed with other non-opiate analgesics (e.g. APC & C*;222's*). While the opiate narcotics are well absorbed from thegastrointestinal tract, this route is often erratic andunpredictable compared to injections. Among non-medical users,subcutaneous ('skin popping') and intravenous ('mainlining')injections are commonly used with heroin and morphine. Raw opiumis usually eaten or smoked and the powder is sometimes sniffed('snorted'). Only a minute fraction of the drug absorbed actuallyenters the central nervous system. The duration and intensity ofthe effects vary considerably with the different drugs in thisclass (and as a function of dose), although the major actionmight typically last from three to six hours. These drugs areusually inactivated in the liver and excreted in the urine, oftenalong with small quantities of free morphine. PhysiologicalEffects 231. Pure opiate narcotics produce few significantnon-psychological effects in therapeutic doses. The immediate orshort-term physiological response usually includes a generalreduction in respiratory and cardiovascular activity, adepression of the cough reflex, a constriction of the pupil ofthe eye, and minor reduction in visual acuity, slight itching,dilation of cutaneous blood vessels, warming of the skin, adecrease in intestinal activity (often causing constipation),and, in some individuals, nausea and vomiting. In higher doses,however, insensibility and unconsciousness result. The primarytoxic overdose symptoms are coma, shock and, ultimately,respiratory arrest and death. 232. There appears to be little direct permanent physiologicaldamage from chronic use of pure opiate narcotics. Numerouscomplications are observed, however, if the overall drug usepattern involves adulterated street samples, unsterileadministrations, unhygienic living standards, poor eating habitsand inadequate general medical care - all of which are commonlypart of the criminal-addict behaviour syndrome. Commonly reporteddisorders in street users are hepatitis, tetanus, heart and lungabnormalities, scarred veins ('track marks'), local skininfections and abscesses, and obstetrical problems in pregnantfemales. At one time, malaria was also commonly seen in thispopulation. 233. The general mortality rate among heroin dependents isconsiderably higher than normally expected for their age group.Sudden collapse and death following intravenous injection hasbeen reported in a number of these individuals. Such fatalitieshave often been attributed to overdose resulting from erratic andunexpected variations in the purity of drugs obtained from theblack market. However, there is considerable evidence that manyof these deaths are not merely due to overdose but are aconsequence of partly soluble contaminant substances in thesample and, perhaps, some drug hypersensitivity phenomenon.43 234. The subjective effects of narcotics may vary considerablyamong different individuals and situations. Most personsreportedly do not enjoy the experience and may actively avoid itsrepetition in a controlled or experimental situation, whileothers describe feelings of warmth, well-being, peacefulness andcontentment. Euphoria or dysphoria, nausea, drowsiness,dizziness, inability to concentrate, apathy and lethargy arecommonly noted. Certain individuals, especially when fatigued maybe stimulated into feelings of energy and strength. Higher dosesproduce a turning inward and sleep. Often a pleasant dreamlikestate occurs. Some regular users describe their drug experiencesin near ecstatic, and, often sexual terms (especially the 'rush'of intravenous injection). The potential of the opiate narcotics to relieve sufferingfrom pain depends upon several mechanisms. The major effect isnot on the sensation directly, but on the psychological reactionto it. Often individuals can still feel the pain sensation, andrate its intensity reliably, in spite of the fact that much orall of the negative or unpleasant aspects are absent. In otherwords, they may still feel the pain, but it does not bother themto the same extent. Morphine has little effect on the othersenses and unlike non-narcotic analgesics and sedatives, it canoften control pain at doses which do not necessarily producemarked sedation, gross intoxication or major impairment of motorcoordination, intellectual functions, emotional control orjudgement.110 In addition to reducing the anxiety of pain andtherefore the motivation to avoid it, the opiate narcotics alsotend to decrease other primary motivation associated with sex,food, and aggression. 235. The psychological effects of chronic opiate narcotic useare often rather straightforward extensions of the short-termresponse. In regular users, much of the variability andunpredictability of the immediate response is lessened, partlybecause individuals who find the experience unpleasant tend toavoid additional exposure, and also because many who wereinitially upset by the unusual physiological and psychologicalsensations caused by the drugs learn to tolerate and even seekthem and may no longer be distressed in the situation. While someindividuals who become dependent on the opiate narcotics withdrawfrom regular social activities, and live what might appear to bean immoral, criminal and slovenly existence, others are able tolead an otherwise normal life with little change in work habitsor responsibilities. Possible factors underlying thesedifferences will be discussed later. Toleranceand Dependence 236. Tolerance to the different actions of opiate narcoticsvaries with the magnitude and frequency of administration, andthe response being measured. In chronic use, a considerabledegree of tolerance occurs to the sedative, analgesic, euphoricand respiratory depressant (and, therefore; potentially lethal)effects; less tolerance develops to the constipating andpupil-constricting activity. Consequently, persons who aremotivated by the chronic avoidance of pain or other unpleasantsubjective conditions, or perhaps simply by the positive euphoriceffects of the drug, are likely to increase dose and mayeventually tolerate several times the quantity which would belethal to a normal individual. Occasional use does not producetolerance, however. 237. The degree of physical dependence acquired to these drugsis closely related to the tolerance developed. With low dose orinfrequent use, little dependency occurs and withdrawal symptomsmay be nonexistent, or merely resemble the symptoms of a mildflu. Withdrawal of the drug after chronic high-dose use resultsin a severe and painful pattern of responses which are similar tothose associated with alcohol and barbiturate dependence(although it is not as physically dangerous). Usually less thanhalf a day after the last administration, the dependent begins tofeel irritable, anxious and weak; he sweats and, shivers and hiseyes and nose become watery. A few hours of uneasy sleep mayintervene before he begins the 'cold turkey' phase. The skinbecomes clammy, the pupils dilate, chills, nausea, vomiting, andsevere abdominal cramps occur with uncontrollable defecation;tremors and, rarely, convulsions may develop. While death hasbeen reported, fatalities are much rarer than with sedativewithdrawal. The major symptoms of the abstinence syndromegenerally last several days, and gross recovery usually occurswithin about a week, although complete recuperation may take upto six months .145 Tolerance is eliminated or greatly reducedwith withdrawal. Babies born of dependent mothers are alsophysically dependent on the drug, and may die if withdrawalsymptoms are not recognized and treated soon after birth. Itshould be noted that the different opiate narcotic drugs havevarying dependence-producing potentials, and physical dependenceis rarely seen in opium smokers or users of codeine (althoughstrong psychological dependence may occur). 238. Considerable cross-tolerance and cross-dependence existsamong the opiate narcotics. An intravenous injection of any ofthese drugs, in sufficient dose, can completely eliminate thewithdrawal syndrome in a matter of minutes. Methadone can preventwithdrawal symptoms at doses which provide little psychologicaleffect, and is frequently used in chronic 'maintenance'programmes designed to rehabilitate dependents. Although thesedatives and opiate narcotics do not usually show significantcross-tolerance and dependence, barbiturates can ease the pain ofopiate withdrawal. Nalorphine (Nalline*) antagonizes the effectsof the other opiate narcotics and precipitates the withdrawalsyndrome in dependent individuals. This drug has been used to'test' for dependence in suspected users. 219. ' The role of physical dependence in the overall pictureof chronic opiate narcotic use has been the subject of muchcontroversy and many observers feel that the psychologicalcomponents are the most important. Some investigators argue thatthe fear of withdrawal is often the primary motivating factorbehind continued use, while others emphasize the profound cravingseen in some individuals, or the drug's positive reinforcing orreward potential. Many dependent persons return to the drug atsome time after withdrawal, and some have occasionally been knownto voluntarily undergo withdrawal in order to lose tolerance (foreconomic reasons), and immediately initiate chronic use again, ata less expensive level. This practice suggests that, with someindividuals, psychological factors other than mere avoidance ofthe abstinence syndrome can be dominant in the drug dependence.Whether this motivation is related to the desire to escape oravoid a life that is unpleasant, or emotionally painful ordepressing, or perhaps a more directly hedonistic demand forpleasure or 'kicks', or even a disguised attempt atself-destruction is not clear - no simple answer could beexpected to have much generality or validity. It has frequentlybeen observed that some individuals become dependent on thehypodermic syringe (or 'point') in a way which is, in somerespects, independent of the pharmacological properties of thedrug. Persons showing such conditioning are often called 'needlefreaks'. 240. It is interesting to note that there are only a fewmiddle-aged persons who are dependent on opiate narcotics. Mostindividuals spontaneously lose interest in the drugs before theyturn 45 years of age (barbiturate and alcohol dependents show nosuch decline in use). Whether this is due to psychological orphysiological factors is uncertain. OpiateNarcotics and Crime 241. A consensus exists among medical, law enforcement andresearch authorities, as well as drug users themselves, that fewcrimes of violence are directly produced by the use of the opiatenarcotics. On the other hand, there is a considerablerelationship between crime and opiate narcotic dependence inNorth America and many drug dependent persons have non-drugcriminal records. This apparent paradox can be explained by twoimportant factors. To begin with, both in Canada and in theUnited States, many individuals who become dependent on opiatenarcotics have a prior history of behavioural problems anddelinquency and have continued these practices. The second factoris economical, and is associated with the high cost of heroin onthe black market and the demands made by extended tolerance. Because of the illegal nature of the drug, the cost of a heavyheroin habit may run anywhere from $15.00 to $50.00 a day andhigher, in spite of the fact that the medical-cost of the drugsinvolved would just be a few cents. There are very few legitimateways in which most individuals can afford to meet that kind of anexpense. Consequently, when tolerance pushes the cost of drug useabove what the user can afford legitimately, he is forced into adecision - either quit the drug and go through withdrawal, orturn to easier, criminal, methods of acquiring the necessarymoney. While many users refuse to become involved in suchactivities and stop using the drug, at least temporarily, manyturn to petty crime, small robberies, shoplifting andprostitution. These are the individuals who regularly come to theattention of the law enforcement officials. More affluent personsmay be able to support the habit and continue indefinitelywithout running afoul of the law. Medical profession dependents,for example, apparently have less tendency to commit non-drugoffences - perhaps (in addition to predisposing psychological andsociological factors) because they can often steal with littlerisk or purchase the necessary drugs at low cost. As Jaffe has stated:111 The popular notions that the morphine addict is necessarily acunning, cringing, malicious and degenerate criminal who isshabbily dressed, physically ill and devoid of the socialamenities, could not be farther from the truth. The addict who isable to obtain an adequate supply of drugs through legitimatechannels and has adequate funds, usually dresses properly,maintains his nutrition and is able to discharge his social andoccupational obligations with reasonable efficiency. He usuallyremains in good health, suffers little inconvenience and is, ingeneral, difficult to distinguish from other persons. Good healthand productive work are thus not incompatible with addiction toopiates. However. ... such continued productivity is theexception rather than the rule. TheDevelopment of Dependence 242. There have been a number of popular misconceptions aboutthe pattern of development of opiate narcotic dependence. Rumourshave frequently been heard that marijuana and hashish had beenspiked with heroin to produce opiate addiction in theunsuspecting user. Similar rumours have been heard about 'spiked'LSD. In fact, there are no known documented cases in Canada ofopiate narcotic adulteration of other drugs alleged to be pure.The high price of illicit heroin renders such a hypothesisextremely improbable. Furthermore, it would be highly unlikely,if not impossible, for tolerance and dependence to developwithout the user knowing it. The majority of users, both here andin the United States, were apparently first 'turned-on' by theirfriends and peers. Blum (in the United States Task Force Report)points out:28 There is no evidence from any study, of initiation as aconsequence of aggressive peddling to innocents who are 'hooked'against their will or knowledge. . . The popular image of thefiendish pedlar seducing the innocent child is wholly false. 243. The once popular notion that the opiate narcoticexperience is intrinsically so pleasurable, or that physiologicaldependence develops so rapidly, that most who are subjected to itare promptly addicted is without support. In one experiment,injections of morphine were given to 150 healthy male volunteers.Only three were willing to allow repeated administration and noneindicated that he would have actively sought more. Theinvestigators42 conclude: . . .opiates are not inherently attractive, euphoric orstimulant. The danger of addiction to opiates resides in theperson and not the drug. Lasagna et al 126 also report that the majority of normalpain-free individuals found effects of opiates quite unpleasant.Beecher22 reports that only ten per cent of a normal populationliked the morphine experience. Furthermore, many individuals whodeveloped tolerance and physical dependence in a medicalsituation show little interest in the drug experience itself andtend not to resume use after withdrawal. Even in non-medicalcases, there is evidence that only a small proportion of drugusers who have experimented with opiate narcotics in the streetsbecome physically dependent on them.42 244. Many observers contend that certain, social andpersonality factors predispose some individuals to drugdependence and that otherwise normal individuals rarely, if ever,become chronically dependent. There is considerable evidence thatboth the ready availability of the drug and a social milieutolerating or encouraging drug use (either medical ornon-medical) are also important factors. Although there arenumerous individuals who have gradually worked up from occasional'skin popping' to chronic 'mainline' dependence, there is atpresent, little evidence that a large proportion of the Canadianpopulation is running this particular risk. However, there iscause for apprehension because of the rapidly growing incidenceof heroin use among the young in the United States. Althoughthere are no known methods of predicting the likelihood ofdependence for any individual at this time, the use of opiatenarcotics involves a risk of considerable proportions for anyone. OpiateNarcotics and Other Drugs 245. In the United States, the opiate narcotic offender comingto the attention of the law enforcement officials was oftenreported to have previously and concurrently been a heavy user ofalcohol, barbiturates, tobacco, and marijuana. In Canada, thepattern appears to be much more variable and heterogeneous.Alcohol and barbiturates (and probably tobacco) have apparentlybeen the drugs most often associated with opiate narcotic usehere246, 215, although recent indications suggest that many newheroin users may have experience with marijuana and otherpsychedelic drugs as well. 170a There are reports that LSD isgenerally not popular with regular heroin users, however.41 Someopiate narcotic users also make use of stimulants such asamphetamine and cocaine. Much attention has been and is now being given to the 'stepping-stone' or 'progression' theory of opiate narcotic dependence. Although there is no pharmacological basis for the hypothesis that one drug creates a 'need' for, or necessarily leads to another, there are numerous social factors which might link together the use of various drugs. It may well be that the questions of 'progression' or predisposing experiences can never be definitively answered. Like other characteristics associated with deviant behaviour, they must be continually evaluated anew as the social context changes. Some observations on the possible relationship between marijuana and opiate narcotic use were presented in the previous section on cannabis. Contents | Feedback | Search DRCNet Library | Schaffer Library | Major Studies Canadian Government Commission ofInquiry WT01-B31-43IA031-000652-B043-143http://206.61.184.43:80/schaffer/library/studies/ledain/nonmed7.htm 206.61.184.43 19970122131117 text/html 52958HTTP/1.0 200 OKDate: Wednesday, 22-Jan-97 13:11:07 GMTServer: WebSitePro/1.1f (S/N wpo-0deb)Allow-ranges: bytesContent-type: text/htmlLast-modified: Saturday, 28-Dec-96 06:59:39 GMTContent-length: 52740 Canadian Government Commission - Some Causes of NonmedicalDrug Use Contents | Feedback | Search DRCNet Library | Schaffer Library | Major Studies Canadian Government Commission ofInquiry CHAPTER FOUR SOME CAUSES OF NON-MEDICAL DRUG USE 316. The recommendations of the Minister of National Healthand Welfare which gave rise to the appointment of the Commission,and the Commission's terms of reference, place particular stresson the desire to understand the causes of the non-medical use ofdrugs. We regard our inquiry into these aspects of the phenomenonto be one of our most important functions. The terms of referencespeak of motivation, and they speak of the social, economic,educational and philosophical factors that have led to such use. 317. By cause we understand not merely the immediate, directmotivation for a particular drug experience, but the largersocial significance of the phenomenon - how it relates to variousaspects of life today - family relations, education, work,institutions, and conditions of life generally. In what way is ita response to the problems of modern living? What are itsphilosophical or spiritual implications? What does it say aboutour value structure? How does it reflect the way people thinkabout the future? At this time it is clearly impossible to provide a full andcomprehensive statement of cause in these terms. At best we canhope to convey some of the interpretive themes and to describesome of the characteristics that have struck us as significantthat seem to have the merit of illuminating from one perspectiveor another this complex phenomenon. We seek to do this for avariety of reasons: to report in general some of our reactionsand impressions; to assist in a preliminary way to add to thecommon understanding of a phenomenon that has aroused greatinterest, but that has also caused concern and anxiety, and hasbrought anguish to many parents; to suggest to citizens,especially parents and guardians; avenues of approach that may behelpful to them in understanding with sympathy and perhapsempathy a social fact that is to them strange and bewildering. But we must emphasize the to tentative nature of thesecomments. They are not to be taken as a conceptual framework foran understanding of the changes or responses about which we areconcerned. They do not constitute such a framework for theCommission. They are impressions. We intend to test them asrigorously as possible by intensive investigation. We invitecritical comment from all quarters. In this way the interimreport may serve a useful dialectical function, assisting us inconsultation with our fellow citizens, to arrive at a full andsound understanding of this phenomenon. 318. The first problem we face is how to get at the facts ofmotivation and other related factors. What are we to accept asevidence of these facts? These are very subjective matters. Canwe ever be sure that we know the truth? Whether we can or not, itseems to us that we must rely primarily on what drug usersthemselves say about their personal motivation and other factorspredisposing them to use drugs. These statements must be weighedfor credibility and carefully considered for properinterpretation but they are the primary and best source of anunderstanding of motivation. This was the approach followed byWilliam James in his Varieties of Religious Experience, aphenomenon which has certain affinities with the subject-matterof our inquiry. The best evidence of the experience, thesubjective effects of which may be presumed to be the primarymotivation of cause, comes from the words of those who haveundergone it. This is not to say that insight cannot be gainedfrom the observations and interpretations of psychologists,social philosophers, sociologists and other informed andqualified students of our society. Thus we shall have recourse,in trying to explain this phenomenon, to both the words of drugusers and the interpretations of observers. Finally, we shalloffer our own interpretation, although this can only be atentative one at this time - one that is offered as a basis forfurther consideration and discussion by the people of Canada. 319. Our inquiry has taken several forms: the public hearingof the traditional kind in which briefs have been submitted butin which there has been a full opportunity for questioning anddiscussion by everyone present; private hearings with groups andindividuals; numerous discussions with drug users and variousexperts having not only theoretical insight into the problem butactive points of contact with it through some professionalinvolvement; presentation of evidence regarding law enforcementand correction; and we have heard from experts in the areas ofeducation; medical services; family life and social welfare.Although we intend to inquire further into motivation (as well asextent of use, perception of the problem, and general attitudes)in the surveys to be carried out this year, we do not necessarilyrely on the answers to survey questionnaires as the most reliableevidence of motivation. Motivation is too subtle, complex, andfull of nuance to be adequately elicited through questionnaires.We place as much or more reliance on the impressions derived fromhearing individual drug users speak at length in public andprivate meetings about their experience and what they think to bethe causes. In many ways we are closer here to the art of thenovelist than that of the social scientist. We can only offerhypotheses - the validity and acceptance of which will depend ontheir ability to make sense of this phenomenon - to provide ameaning which is satisfactory to Canadians. It is like theultimate test of any philosophy or religion. But it is importantto emphasize once again that what is recorded here is merely ourfirst impression gleaned from initial contacts during the firstsix months or so of our inquiry. 320. The explanations of motivation and the other relatedfactors vary considerably. They vary between the differentdrug-using populations and they vary within a particularpopulation. It is idle to seek a single, unifying explanation ortheory. This whole area is characterized by bewildering diversityand conflicting impressions, but certain dominant themes do seemto emerge. 321. The motivational patterns underlying drug use also varyto some extent from drug to drug. In the case of cannabis, amajor factor appears to be the simple pleasure of the experience.Time after time witnesses have said to us in effect: 'We do itfor fun. Do not try to find a complicated explanation for it. Wedo it for pleasure.' This is the explanation frequently offeredfor the use of cannabis, particularly by college students andadults in the working world. A mother of four and a teacher said:'When I smoke grass I do it in the same social way that I take aglass of wine at dinner or have a drink at a party. I do not feelthat it is one of the great and beautiful experiences of my life,I simply feel that it is pleasant and I think it ought to belegalized.' A person involved in work with drug users expressed it thisway: 'I think maybe it is time we stopped all the sociologicalnonsense about social milieux, and how your daddy fell off ahorse, and how your mommy burnt the pablum or whatever it is - orwhat kind of sociological trip you want to blast off on, and justsay in front what you mean which is "I get loaded because Ilove to do it".' 322. Many of us think of human behaviour in general as aconsequence of needs that are either inherited or learned. Thereis some tendency to think of behaviour such as drug use as aconsequence of pathological need patterns. However, we feel itwould be a serious error, at least as far as cannabis use isconcerned, to think of use as symbolic of or manifesting apathological, psychological or even sociological state. Simplepleasure, similar to that claimed for the moderate use ofalcohol, or food, or sex, is frequently offered as the generalexplanation for most current drug use. This is particularly trueof the growing number of adult users (who share perhaps littleelse but their taste for cannabis with the members of the 'hip'culture). It is no doubt true that for some the use of drugs is areflection of personal and social problem. But the desire forcertain kinds of psychological gratification or release is notpeculiar to the drug user or to our generations. It is an old anduniversal theme of human history. Man has always soughtgratifications of the kind afforded by the psychotropic drugs. 323. They will vary with the particular drug used and, to someextent, with the personality of the user. In the case of cannabis,the positive points which are claimed for it include thefollowing: it is a relaxant, it is disinhibiting; it increasesself-confidence and the feeling of creativity (whether justifiedby objective results or not); it increases sensual awareness andappreciation; it facilities concentration and gives one a greatersense of control over time; it facilitates this way makes iteasier to accept others; it serves a sacramental function inpromoting a sense of spiritual community among users; it is ashared pleasure; because it is illicit and the object of strongdisapproval from those who are, by and large, opposed tosocial change, it is a symbol of protest and a means ofstrengthening the sense of identity among those who are stronglycritical of certain aspects of our society and value structuretoday. 324. Those who have used cannabis are not unanimous in itspraise, although clearly the vast majority am to regard it aseither a harmless pastime or the source of real advantages andgain. Those who have used the drug and then criticize it tendmost often to say it can dominate a weak personality; it can taketoo much time; it can become an excuse for procrastination; itlessens the ability to persevere with unpleasant, boring orroutine tasks. 325. Often a cannabis user has said, 'We can't explain it toyou. Why don't you try it?' It has been implied that there issomething ineffable about the experience, although this is moreoften the case when speaking of the effects of LSD. Sometimes onewonders if what is being conveyed is not a certain sense ofexclusiveness, a smugness of the initiated. But we prefer tobelieve that it is the subtle and multifaceted aspect of itspsychological and social significance for the average user thatmakes words seem inadequate to convey the whole of its meaning.Indeed, many users have insisted that the makers of cannabis areable to communicate without the use of words; that they recognizeand understand one another and share important assumptions andattitudes. Whether this silent communication is more than theknowledge of a common experience is not clear. But users speak ofa sense of affinity, a larger consciousness, of which they aremade to feel a party by the drug experience. 326. Thus there is unquestionably a strong suggestion ofcommunity, of cultural solidarity, among cannabis users. Andthere is a definite tendency to proselytize, to encourage othersto take up the practice. It may be partly due to the illicitstatus of the practice which makes users want to increase thenumbers involved and thus the concern of society about itspresent policy. But there is also a definite impression that thecannabis user seeks to convert others to what he sincerelybelieves to be a superior outlook and life style. The smoking ofcannabis becomes a rite of initiation to a new society and valuesystem. These are aspects of cannabis use, particularly among theyounger, more idealistic members of our society, which meritserious consideration in any attempt to measure its potential forgrowth. 327. We gather from the statements of cannabis users that thedrug is predominantly used in groups to enhance, enrich and easesocial intercourse. However, the statements of LSD users implythat their experience is much more. LSD is spoken of as a veryprofound experience, not to be lightly entered into. With some itis never to be repeated; with others, its profound character, thesense of venture into the unknown, the very real risks of adverseeffect, make it a practice which seems likely to remain fairlyrestricted. It is cheaper than psychoanalysis but appears tocarry with it some of the same implications- the promise ofgreater, self-knowledge and self-acceptance but at the same timeuncertainty as to the personality that will emerge. Except for arelatively few devotees, LSD is not a regular experience havingsocial or communal significance. It is rather a venture intoself-discovery which sometimes takes on turning pointsignificance for the subject. The self-revelation experienced mayor may not become a basis for attitudinal change. It is thus afoundational experience rather than a casual one, as is the caseof cannabis. 328. It is with reference to LSD that the most serious claimsfor spiritual significance are made, Timothy Leary has spoken interms of a new quest for religious truth and experience. 'It'sthe same old pursuit. The aims of our religion are those of everyreligion of the past: we work to find the God within, thedivinity which lies within each person's body.'1 Users frequentlyspeak of the LSD experience in mystical terms. There is repeatedtestimony to a feeling of oneness with others - of a loss of thesense of personal identity in a sense of being a part ofeverything that is around one. There is a pantheistic sense ofaffinity and identification. 329. While pleasure, curiosity, the desire to experiment, andeven the sense of adventure, are dominant motivations in druguse, there is no doubt that a search for self-knowledge andself-integration and for spiritual meanings are strongmotivations with many. We have been profoundly impressed by thenatural and unaffected manner in which drug users have respondedto the question of religious significance. They are notembarrassed by the mention of God. Indeed, as Paul Goodman hasobserved, their reactions are in interesting contrast to those ofthe 'God is dead' theologian. It may be an exaggeration to saythat we are witnessing the manifestations of a genuine religiousrevival, but there does appear to be a definite revival ofinterest in the religious or spiritual attitude towards life. Asone drug user put it: 'The whole culture is saying, "Whereis God?" I don't believe in your institutions, but now Iknow it's there someplace.' Another witness said, 'I just findthat a lot of people are becoming a lot more aware of what'shappening and joining in on a universal cause, a cosmic sort ofjoyousness and people are getting interested in spiritual thingsas well, because this is what our generation and the previousgenerations have lacked.' 330. Drug use is by no means indispensable to the new outlook.Some people are fortunate enough to be what users call a natural'turn on'. It is conceded that you can be 'turned on' withoutdrugs - vital, human, and aware of all your senses, enjoyingauthentic, non-exploitative human relations, and alive to beautyand the possibilities of the moment. Indeed, there is an activedoctrine of transcendence which sees drug use as a catalytic ortransitional thing to be abandoned as soon as it has enabled youto glimpse another way of looking at things and of relating tolife and people. The doctrine of transcendence carries much hopefor the future. One witness said.- 'I don't do too many drugsanymore because I have gone beyond them. They have taught me thelesson and there isn't so much need for them any more. I meanit's still fun to get stoned but there's a lot more to it. Thereis more to it than just fun. After you have learned the lesson,you have fun in virtually anything.' 331. Many users have stated that the insights gained throughdrug use have carried over and remained with them, continuing toshape their attitudes and outlook and style of relating when theywere not using drugs. In other words the drug has been a means ofdiscovering a new way to be more relaxed and self-accepting, moreaccepting and indeed loving, more appreciative of the intensityand value of being human in the moment, less anxious about timeand specific goals. In listening to these statements one can nothelp feeling that this discovery was often made in other ways inthe past - through traditional religious experience, forinstance. Modern drug use would definitely seem to be related in somemeasure to the collapse of religious values - the ability to finda religious meaning of fife. The positive values that youngpeople claim to find in the drug experience bear a strikingsimilarity to traditional religious values, including the concernwith the soul, or inner self. The spirit of renunciation, theemphasis on openness and the closely knit community, are part ofit, but there is definitely the sense of identification withsomething larger, something to which one belongs as part of thehuman race. 332. Young drug users are highly critical of many aspects ofour modern life. In this they are perhaps not much different,than the critical minority that one finds in each generation. Butone has its own unique history and has lived through a formativeperiod unlike any other. What are the distinguishing features ofthat background? In what way is it truly different from the onewhich shaped the outlook of previous generations of young people?The distinguishing marks would seem to be: a generalizedmiddle-class affluence, a very rapid rate of technologicalchange; the oppressive, almost foreboding character of certainproblems or menaces which cast a serious doubt about man'sability to survive - nuclear power, overpopulation, environmentalpollution, racial hostility and the widening gap between wealthand poverty. All these and other aspects of the human predicamenttoday impart a distinctive character to the outlook and responseof our youth. An example of the criticism of the economic systemis the following statement by a university student: I think it is essential that there should be some manner bywhich we could break down the economic system. We still needproductivity. But you can get away from the economic basis, fromthe competitive basis on which people, once they have gone intosomething, have to beat you down. You have this aspect of wantingto share which we should develop. You should be willing to sharetogether. But you can still have productivity withoutcompetition. 333. To this point we have been concerned largely with thestatements and interpretations of drug users themselves. We turnnow to interpretation - our own and that of other commentators.Present-day affluence plays a curious role. Without it therecould not be the freedom for speculation and experiment - theluxury of cultivating the inner self. At the same time it repels.It is both taken for granted and repudiated. There is a love-haterelationship. The drug-taking minority of this generation cannotbe inspired by the goals of their fathers. They do not feel thesame urgency to achieve material success and do not seekself-fulfilment that way. It may be that they see no way ofachieving their own sense of personal identity in attempting torepeat, probably with less success, what their fathers havealready done. There is reason to believe that young people fromless comfortable circumstances are more strongly motivatedtowards traditional career patterns and material success. Butthere would seem to be more than merely trying to find a roledifferent from that of one's father. The materially moresophisticated young people, those more familiar with materialwell-being and less anxious about their ability to maintain it,think they see a future in which it will be impossible to avoid.They envisage a society which will be obliged to assure asufficient amount of material security to everyone in order tomaintain itself politically and economically. They thereforeconclude that it is a goal for which it is now unnecessary toplan or to which it is futile to devote a significant amount ofones time and energy. 334. There is also a strong impression that young people are,as it were, unconsciously adapting time when there will be muchless work to go around. The rapid rate of technological changeand the pervading threat of work obsolescence makes them veryuncertain about their own occupational future. They seem tosuspect that a high proportion of them may have to learn to livehappily with relatively little work. Those of us who arewell-established in work tend to talk glibly of a future in whichthere will be increasing leisure. Little thought or practicaleffort has been devoted to the problem of how to fill thatleisure in constructive and satisfying ways. The exploration ofthe inner self, the expansion of consciousness, the developmentof spiritual potential, may well be purposes to which youngpeople are turning in anticipation of a life in which they willhave to find sustaining interest in the absence of externaldemands and challenges. 335. Young people speak often of a desire to overcome thedivision of life into work and play, to achieve a way of lifethat is less divided, less seemingly schizophrenic, and moreunified, They seem to be talking about the increasingly rareprivilege of work that one can fully enjoy - of work that is likeone's play. They claim to he prepared to make considerablerenunciations or sacrifice of traditional satisfactions likestatus and material success for work in which they can takepleasure. Indeed, one of their frequent commentaries on the oldergeneration is that it does not seem to enjoy its work, that itdoes not seem to be happy. This is said sadly, evensympathetically. It is not said contemptuously. The young say, ineffect, 'Why should we repeat this pattern?' The use of drugs formany is part of a largely hedonistic life style in whichhappiness and pleasure are taken as self-evidently valid goals ofhuman life. 336. Role rejection is an important theme of the culturalreaction that is associated with much of contemporary drug use.One young person suggested that letting one's hair grow was inpart at least a rejection of the manhood role. Young people donot deny the historic validity or necessity of these roles forthe older generation nor the positive achievements which must becredited to them; they simply say that they are no longerrelevant or desirable. The role which many reject is that of theachievement-oriented male, committed, body and soul to the bigcorporation, and feeling increasingly the need to give proofs ofhis masculinity. Some have spoken of drugs as dehabituating,desophisticating, and deconceptualizing - as helping thepersonality to break out of old moulds. They speak of a releaseor recovery of child-like innocence - the essential perspectiveof the artist. 337. There can be no doubt that there is a search forauthenticity in thought, in stance, in personal relations. Thedrug becomes a means of dissolving the mask, of escaping frompretence, affectation and stereotyped reaction and attitude,although their place may be taken by other stereotypes - acultist enthusiasm which expresses itself in knowing smiles and aprivate language. What happens under LSD is far from clear, butusers speak of blowing holes in the conscious mind through whichbits of the subconscious emerge, to be always accessible in thefuture. It is the language of self-discovery - the eternal searchfor the main-springs of one's personality - the attempt to findliberation from psychological burdens, from 'hang ups', as theyare popularly called. These human desires, these goals, are not new: they may besummed up as the attempt to become a 'real person'. This has beena goal of religious or spiritual concern down through thecenturies; the attempt to pull together the dispersed orfragmented pieces of the self. It is often expressed as thesearch for an identity. 338. There is in man a powerful and long-term tendency toattempt to weave the experience and perceptions of the individualinto a logically consistent whole, centred when possible on asingle cosmological principle or theme. In such a whole, manseeks for a meaning to life in the broad sense, for goals towardswhich to direct himself and the means by which he can reasonablyhope to attain these goals. Through such a structure man hopes tofind the nature of his own relationship to existence in generaland to his fellows. When such a synthesis of experience isavailable, not only to an individual but in a form that can beshared and accepted by some large numbers of people, it canbecome the ideological basis for social life and, as such, serveas a unifying principle for a society. Such syntheses ofexperiences were achieved by minds such as those of Saint ThomasAquinas, John Calvin and Karl Marx. In the absence of suchsyntheses, man and society suffer. The responses that are made byman in periods of ideological vacuum often appear strikinglysimilar. For instance, there seem to be striking parallelsbetween the orientation of the stoics and cynics at the time ofthe collapse of the Greek world, and the response of the 'BeatGeneration' and the 'Hippies'. In both instances the individualseems to withdraw from his society and to seek reality withinhimself. 339. Are there special elements in the present human situationthat impose particular stresses and burdens that would accountfor the increasing dependence of old and young on drugs? In thiscontext we repeatedly encounter the term 'alienation'. The use ofthis term has been discussed by Kenneth Keniston in these words:2 Although formal discussions of alienation itself are largelylimited to the last 150 years, the theme of alienation - ofestrangement, outcastness and loss - is an archetypal theme inhuman life and history.... The ambiguous concept of alienationhas in recent years become increasingly fashionable and, partlyas result, increasingly devoid of any specific meaning. More andmore the term is used to characterize whatever the authorconsiders the dominant maladies of the twentieth century; andsince views differ as to what these maladies are, the meaning ofalienation fluctuates with each writer. . . . Writers like Fromm,Kahler and Pappenheim use 'alienation' to describe a variety ofconditions ranging from separation of man from nature to the lossof pre-capitalist work relationships, from man's defensive use oflanguage to his estrangement from his own creative potential, andfrom the worker's loss of control over the productive process tothe individual's feeling of social or political powerlessness. Ofcourse, the purpose of such writers is to suggest that all ofthese different phenomena are connected, that all result fromsome characteristic of modern society. In the testimony we have heard, the term 'alienation' is mostoften used to refer to the estrangement of many young people andadults from the institutions, processes and dominant economic,social and political values of our society; to this inability tothink of a good and meaningful life being available to them inthe society; to their sense of inability to affect or influencethe course that society will follow or the great issues of peaceand war, poverty, pollution and others. 340. Many of our modern youth are undoubtedly suffering fromtoo great self-expectation. This is partly the result ofexaggerated paternal expectation - parents confusing their ownaffluence (which may be as often the product of an aggressiveacquisitiveness as innate intelligence) with the inheritedcharacteristics which they are capable of passing on. It is alsopartly the result of a sense of wider opportunity reflected inuniversal education. More is possible; more is expected. Theredevelops a disquieting gap between expectation and ability. DrVivian Rakoff said: 'We use drugs to find out how far we can go,rather than as a device for passivity. Drugs can be a spuriousway to fill the gap between aspiration and capacity.' 341. Witnesses appearing before the Commission have sometimesreferred to the word 'anomie' to express one of thepossible 'causes' of the non-medical use of drugs. Whether thesespeakers referred to the literal 'Anomie' or to some other stateof confusion or estrangement closer to 'alienation' is not easyto determine. But, in fact, and in any case, the Commission wastold that a certain anomie in which the Canadian society livesdoes call for a response, a reaction: self-search, integration,new values, evasion, etc. Literally, anomie means 'normlessness'.This state, well described by the French sociologist, EmileDurkheim (especially in relation to suicide), does not oftenresult from the total absence of norms but emerges from theco-existence of conflicting norms, rendering the aiming towardsprecise goals very difficult; contradicting values are expressingthemselves through co-existing norms. The Commission thinks that the concept of anomie and theexistence of anomie situations may be part of the explanationthat it will be trying to discern, in the course of its mandate.However, anomie and alienation are used all encompassingly as twoof the 'causes' of nearly all social problems, theseconcepts will have to be treated carefully, and critically. Theterm 'anomie' is neither specific nor very useful operationally(it cannot account for a specific problem. e.g., How is it thatall people living under anomic conditions do not resort todrugs?) 342. Contemporary drug use is also associated with a loss offaith in reason and a new emphasis on emotion. As one young highschool student put it, 'Young people today want to learn feelingsmore than facts.' Paul Goodman has described the loss of faiththus:3 There is a lapse of faith in science. Science has not producedthe general happiness that people expected, and now it has comeunder the sway of greed and power; whatever its beneficent past,people fear that its further progress will do more harm thangood. And rationality itself is discredited. Probably it is moresignificant than we like to think that intelligent young peopledabble in astrology, witchcraft, psychedelic dreams, and whateverelse is despised by science; in some sense they are not kidding.They need to control their fate, but they hate scientificexplanations. Keniston has spoken of a 'cult of experience' and declares:4 Central to this cult is a focus on the present - on today, onthe here-and-now. Thus, rather than to defer gratification andenjoyment for a distant future, immediate pleasure andsatisfaction are emphasized. Rather than reverence for thetraditions of the past, experience in the present is stressed.Psychologically, then, such human qualities as control, planning,waiting, saving, and postponing on the one hand, and revering,recalling, remembering and respecting on the other, are equallyde-emphasized. In contrast, activity, adventure, responsiveness,genuineness, spontaneity and sentience are the new experimentalvalues. Since neither the future nor the past can be assumed tohold life's meaning, the meaning of life must be sought withinpresent experience, within the self, within its activity andresponsiveness in the here-and-now. 343. This emphasis on feeling, and immediate experiencereflects itself in an interest in the arts and in nature. Manyyoung people speak of a heightened appreciation of the beautiesof nature. This is related to the aesthetic repugnance they feeltowards many of the physical aspects of modern urban life. Onestudent said that he did not feel any desire for drugs fortwo weeks when he was on a canoe trip in the Canadian north. Thedrugs may often be an attempt to escape from a pervading urbanugliness into a world of interior beauty. 344. We suspect that much contemporary drug use simply servesthe purpose of relieving the stress and tension which mostpeople, young and old, experience in modern living. Certainlythis is a dominant function of alcohol and nicotine which arestill the most prevalent drugs in all age groups, (see ChapterThree). It is also true of the large quantities of barbituratesconsumed by adults. In the vast majority of cases it is idle tolook beyond the relief of tension for an explanation. This is thepleasure or gratification most generally sought by the druguser.5 Chemical comforts are extremely varied in their chemicalnature, but what they do have in common is their ability toproduce pleasure. In this it can be noted that people only becomedependent on substances which they report produce pleasure andthe dependency potential of any substance, drug or food, may bepredicted by seeing how much pleasure it gives to the patient.The pleasure they produce is reduction of tension, in addition toany other social or physical effects they might have. 345. Some commentators have identified a degree of strain thatis peculiar to the impact of communications in our age. Kenistonhas referred to it as 'stimulus flooding and psychologicalnumbing'. Dr Paul Christie, the superintendent of the QueenStreet Mental Health Centre in Toronto has spoken of 'chronicconfusion'. As Keniston puts it: 6 One of the conditions of life in any modern technologicalsociety is continual sensory, intellectual, and emotionalstimulation which produces or requires a high tendencytowards psychological numbing the quantity, intensity andvariety of inputs to which the average American is subjected inan average day probably has no precedent in any other historicalsociety.... The problem arises, however, because the shells weerect to protect ourselves from the clamours of the inner andouter world often prove harder and less permeable than we hadoriginally wanted.... Thus, in at least a minority of Americans,the normal capacity to defend oneself against undue stimulationand inner excitation is exaggerated and automatized, so that itnot only protects but walls off the individual from inner andouter experience ... the feeling and fear of psychologicalnumbing leads to a pursuit, even a cult, of experiences for itsown sake. 346. Many observers tend to characterize the psychologicalpredisposition to the use of methamphetamines ('speed') asone of deep depression. Wilfrid Clement, who has had extensiveclinical experience with 'speed freaks', has expressed theopinion that 'we are faced with major generalized socialdepression as a reaction to our technological society'. Both MrHerb Tookey and Mr Barry Luger, who have had a great deal ofcontact with the 'speed' community through their work with TheTrailer in Toronto (see Chapter Six), have emphasized thisdepression. Tookey says, 'The methedrine user is usuallychronically depressed with a passive-dependent personality.'7 Thedepression seems to come from the feeling of powerlessness andinability to cope with various environmental problems and thedemands of modern life. Luger puts it this way: 'Most potentialspeed freaks are depressed because of their past environmentaland institutional problems and see no positive experiences in theforeseeable future. They were not able to cope with the problemsat home, at school or with their middle-class group.'8 Thedepression, Tookey says, is 'often manifested behaviourally by alack of goal orientated behaviour. The methedrine user hasconsiderable difficulty in constructing and carrying out longrange plans (i.e. getting and maintaining a job, going to school,etc.)' The feeling of being able to cope is very important.'Coupled with chronic depression', says Tookey, 'is episodicangry agitation which appears to result from, feelings ofimpotency, rejection, inferiority, and lack of control over theenvironment.'9 The 'speed freak' can be seen as a casualty of the increasingcomplexity of the demands for adaptation and survival in atechnological society. Says Tookey, 'The "speed freak"usually hits poor interpersonal skills and invariably is unableto make the discriminations necessary to deal with a complextechnological society.'10 Clement sees the problem as one ofadaptation in a time of rapid change and contrasts the 'speedfreak' with what he calls the 'super-adaptive' youth. Clementexpresses the view that the 'speed freak's' depression relates tohis perception of his peers and their relative ability to copewith the demands on them - not only the demands of theeducational system but also the demands of social adaptation.They experience anxiety about their function and identity in thefuture. They can see peers able to tolerate the speed andbewildering demands of modern life. The sight of the'super-adaptive' peer fills the average young person with a senseof inadequacy. The contrast in abilities is shown most clearly inafter-school activity - in response to the demands ofsociability. The desire for a supportive, reinforcing community is a strongmotivation for the use of speed. 'For the vast majority', saysTookey, 'the speed community provides a very strong, thoughanonymous identity. Paradoxically, identity is found by losingpersonal identity to the group. "I'm a speed freak".'11The speed freak community has few moral standards but it shows arough loyalty to its members. John Bradford, President ofRochdale College, said, 'One reason why kids use speed is thatthey are trying to imitate a life style they're not part of anddon't understand.' He was referring to the life style of the'heads' - the users of psychedelics. 347. Many young people profess to have little belief in thefuture - to find it difficult to visualize a future forthemselves. In one small group we met with during our hearingsone of the women said, 'Very few in our generation believe we aregoing to live to be forty.' There was general agreement in thegroup, with this statement. Paul Goodman in his article, 'TheNew Reformation', has emphasized this point: 'Again and againstudents have told me that they take it for granted they will notsurvive the next ten years. '12 348. There is also a suggestion that this emphasis onexperience in the present reflects a reaction against theconstraints on the personality produced by the habit-forming,role-imposing, conformity of modern society. It is a reactionagainst role and rule - an attempt to find spontaneity, variety,and unstructured expression in personality and experience. Thisreflects again the importance of the dehabituating effect of thedrugs - their capacity to break down moulds into which behaviourand personality are threatened with confinement by the variouspressures towards conformity. Benjamin DeMott has written veryperceptively of this reaction in an article entitled 'TheSixties: A Cultural Revolution'. He emphasizes that it iscommon to all age groups. DeMott sums up this new longing andreaching out which cuts across all age groups as: 13 The will to possess one's experience rather than be possessedby it, the longing to live one's own life rather than be lived byit, the drive for a more various selfhood than men have knownbefore. ... Young, old, black, white, rich and poor are pursuingthe dream of a more vital experience ... at the root of ouryearning stand the twin convictions: that we can be more, as men,than we're permitted to be by the rule of role and profession,and that the life of dailiness and habit, the life that lives us,precedes us, directs us to the point of suppressing moralconscience and imagination, is in truth no life at all. One witness reflected something of the same emphasis in hisexplanation of the effects of drugs: Marijuana makes a person child-like. LSD and mescaline are aticket to childhood. They are desophisticators, they break downthe conceptual structure through which the person interprets orviews the world. Categories which were always perfectlyacceptable are now of questionable value, things which were nevernoticed or were always taken for granted now jump out to theperson presenting unsolvable metaphysical problems. Every eventhas deep meaning, every thought is profound. 349. This phenomenon can also be viewed from the perspectivesof psychiatry and abnormal psychology. There are many in thepublic who tend to view the non-medical use of drugs assymptomatic of a pathological psychological state. There is nodoubt but that some of those who use drugs such as cannabis orLSD are mentally ill; this is also true of some proportion ofthose who use alcohol and the mental illness is causative to somedegree of their use. However, it is the view of the Commissionthat the majority of drug users do not take drugs as a result ofpathological motivation. Nevertheless it is desirable to drawattention to some of the psychological and psychiatric problemsthat are suggested to be contributing factors underlyingnon-medical drug use. 350. From the psychological point of view, overstimulation andexposure to an overwhelming stressful and complex environment,which requires the individual to perform too many and toodifficult differentiations and to solve problems which surpasshis coping ability, are likely to lead to a disturbance ('ajamming') of his capacity to deal effectively with the excessivein-put to his central nervous system. In animals, such situationsproduce pathological states of maladaptive behaviour which areoften referred to as 'experimental neuroses'. In man, it islikely that similar mechanisms prevail, and pathological statesof neurosis or personality disorder, even psychosis, may developunder these conditions. Looking once more at the experimental animal model, it isinteresting that animals whose behaviour has become severelydisturbed through environmentally-produced stress can betemporarily 'normalized' by the administration of tranquillizingdrugs. Animals under these conditions prefer, in fact, water withadded alcohol or tranquillizing drugs to plain water. This suggests that severely disturbed humans, too, may oftenresort to drugs which produce relaxation of 'instant rest' asa temporary escape from intolerable tensions in a world whichoffers less and less natural opportunities to do so. It isnoteworthy and apparently paradoxical, that amphetamines - thestimulating 'speed' drugs - are among the most effective medicalmeans of alleviating states of pathological nervous over-activityin children, and that these drugs can often help such children toregain increased self-confidence and greater powers ofconcentration. Claims for similar effects of 'speed' are oftenmade by the teenager who is plagued by the awareness of his owninadequacy. This may be interpreted as the choice of a different'chemical defence' against the threat of an overwhelmingenvironment - instead of 'instant rest', the young person chooses'instant efficiency'. Thus, the non-medical use of psychotropicdrugs may frequently be an abortive and poorly directed attemptby an emotionally sick person to treat his own condition. Butbecause he does not know precisely how, when and in what dosageto apply these drugs, he not only usually fails in his attemptsbut more often than not makes things worse. 351. In the language of ego psychology, a person's ability tocope with external demands depends on his ego structure; that is,that part of the personality which mediates between inner needsand outer reality. Ego strength, in turn, depends on undisturbedprocesses of growth, development and maturation throughoutchildhood. Since a child is an extremely vulnerable organism,disruptive early experiences may lead to imbalanced developmentand result in a poorly adjusted personality structure. Such amaladjusted person would then be inadequately equipped to dealwith the complex demands of today's world. 352. The Commission has very often been told by young peoplethat they reject all that is traditional conventional andstereotyped, because they consider it to be hypocritical, phony,dehumanizing, threatening, and ugly. As a result, they may,become alienated and some may be plunged into a frantic searchfor an identity which may be acceptable to them by their ownstandards. This search for identity may go in two directions, oneleading to a pathological adjustment - the other simply to anon-pathological parting from conformity. In the pathological outcome, the individual may substitute aspurious identity for an authentic one, for instance, byaccepting his belonging to a drug community as his new identity.Also, by displacing his inner needs, projecting his aspirationsand denying his limitations, the person might settle for adrug-induced illusion of false power, rather than realachievement, and for chemically induced comfort rather than trueresolution of conflicts and tensions. By contrast, in the non-pathological choice, the drug user mayopt exclusively for the inner world of personal experience andgenuine emotional awareness instead of the despised externalhall-marks of success in the world of our present-day society, aswe have often been told by young people. In making this choice,the young individual apparently replaces the prevailing social,technological and scientific values which require consensualverification, with the immanent and immutable values ofemotional, interpersonal, spiritual, creative - but notnecessarily productive - achievement. It might well be reassuringto him that personal experience, emotional awareness,spirituality and creativeness are forever free from the danger ofbeing usurped by dehumanizing automation (the one power theneo-nonconformist hates and fears perhaps more than anythingelse, as we have repeatedly been told). However, this choice ofdeliberate withdrawal and restructuring of his value system isprobably only open to a highly differentiated, sensitive andintrospective person. 353. Many others who reject today's society probably do so formore personal and less philosophical reasons - for instance,because of unresolved conflicts with their parents and withauthority in general. Many also adopt more pathological defences,rather than an orderly withdrawal, as their way of rejecting the'establishment'. Such defences - when induced and sustained bypsychotropic drugs - may consist in the vicarious building of anillusionary world with LSD or in frenzied and aggressiveoverstimulation with the help of 'speed', or in a passive wallingoff and isolation of the self from all contacts, with cannabis. 354. Even more pathological responses may occur as disguisedself-destructive behaviour. For instance, some 'speed' users whoinject almost suicidal doses of methamphetamine into their veinswithout any regard for their safety and health, may actually betrying to test the truth of the youth slogan 'Speed Kills'. Therole of the doomed person who is at once a martyr sacrificinghimself, a hero braving the confrontation with certaindestruction and a gambler playing dice with death, is a rolewhich seems to have a strong seductive pull for some young peoplewho are morbidly hungry for compassion, admiration andexcitement. For these individuals the slogan 'Speed Kills', may,paradoxically, carry more attractive than deterrent power - andthus may not serve the purpose for which it is being promoted. 355. The sick individual who relies on cannabis, speed orother psychotropic drugs, almost as his only means of escape, whouses them always as a crutch, and structures his whole existencearound them as the only providers of pleasure (the 'pothead', the'speed-freak, and the 'acidhead'), is in need of medical andpsychiatric, or psychological treatment. Prolonged counselling,psychotherapy and comprehensive social follow-up care are usuallyrequired. Medically prescribed and supervised drug treatment mayalso be indicated in many cases. On the other hand, the neo-noncomformist who is using drugsbut is not sick in the medical or psychiatric sense, may not needtreatment. If it seems desirable to bring about a change in hisbehaviour, only a philosophical and spiritual reorientation,which would have to touch the cultural roots of his values andexistential attitudes, could achieve this goal. REFERENCES 1. Leary, T. Statement prepared for a Canadian audience in1967. 2. Keniston, K. The Uncommitted Alienated youth in Americansociety. New York: Delta, 1965. 3. Goodman, P. The new reformation. New York Times Magazine,September 14,1969. 4. See reference 2. 5. Holmes, S. J. Keeping perspective re: Chemical comforts.Paper delivered to the College of Family Physicians of Canada,October 2, 1969. 6. See reference 2. 7. Tookey, H. The increasing use of methamphetamine ('speed')among young people. 1969. Mimeo. 8. Luger, D. Basic facts on speed. 1969. Mimeo. 9. See reference 7. 10. Ibid. 11. Ibid. 12. See reference 3. 13. De Mott, B. The Sixties: A cultural revolution. NewYork Times Magazine, December 14,1969. Contents | Feedback | Search DRCNet Library | Schaffer Library | Major Studies Canadian Government Commission ofInquiryWT01-B31-44IA031-000652-B037-119http://206.61.184.43:80/schaffer/library/studies/vlr/vlrintro.htm 206.61.184.43 19970122125217 text/html 5854HTTP/1.0 200 OKDate: Wednesday, 22-Jan-97 12:52:08 GMTServer: WebSitePro/1.1f (S/N wpo-0deb)Allow-ranges: bytesContent-type: text/htmlLast-modified: Saturday, 28-Dec-96 06:48:52 GMTContent-length: 5637 Legal History of American Marijuana Prohibition -Introduction Contents | Feedback | Search DRCNet Library | Schaffer Library | Major Studies The Forbidden Fruit and the Tree ofKnowledge THE FORBIDDEN FRUIT AND THE TREE OFKNOWLEDGE: AN INQUIRY INTO THE LEGAL HISTORY OF AMERICANMARIJUANA PROHIBITION Richard J. Bonnie* & Charles H.Whitebread, II** 1. INTRODUCTION Law may be rooted in fiction as well as fact. Indeed, a publicpolicy conceived in ignorance may be continuously reaffirmed,ever more vehemently, so long as its origins remain obscure orits fallacy unexposed. Yet once a spark of truth ignites thepublic opinion process, the authority of time will not stay theflames of controversy. In stable times the policy may soon bereversed or modified to comport with reality. In volatile times,however, a single controversy may lose its urgency. Fueled byflames generated by related public issues, the fire may spread;truth may again be consumed in the explosive collision ofcompeting cultural ideologies. So it has been with marijuana.' Suppressed for forty yearswithout significant public attention, the "killer weed"has suddenly surfaced as the preferred euphoriant of millions ofAmericans. Hardly a day passes without public exposure topropaganda from one side or the other. Hardly a day passeswithout arrests of newsworthy figures for violations of marijuanalaws. Before legislatures and courts, the law is attacked anddefended with equal fervor. Sociological, medical and policetestimony regarding the drug's effects is delivered feverishly toan attentive public. Yet, apart from some expedient peripheral actions, little hasbeen done. Detailed studies have been commissioned, but there hasbeen no significant reconsideration of basic assumptions. Becausethe marijuana issue has become ensnared in broader socialpolemics, it has been stalemated. Stability and change, defianceand repression, hippieism and middle-Americanism, "law andorder" and protest politics define the cultural milieu ofwhich the marijuana issue is viewed as but a symptom. This Article is motivated by twin concerns: that the flagrantdisregard of marijuana laws bespeaks a growing disenchantmentwith the capacity of our legal system rationally to ordersociety, and that the assimilation of the marijuana issue intolarger social conflicts has consigned the debate to the publicviscera instead of the public mind. Through a historical analysisof the marijuana laws we hope to refocus the debate. Anunderstanding of the origins of the laws might modulate thechallengers' hostile accusations and at the same time promote inlegislators an awareness of their own responsibility. For the purposes both of description and evaluation, law isinseparable from the process by which it is adopted and thevalues it manifests. Accordingly, our history focuses both on thepublic policy formation process and on evolving patterns of ourculture. With respect to policy, formation, marijuana's legalhistory is a significant illustration of the interaction of thepublic opinion, legislative and judicial processes, and, in abroader sense, the relation between folkways and gateways. Withrespect to its value-content, the evolution of marijuana policyreflects quite precisely emerging cultural attitudes towardpluralism, privacy and individual pursuit of pleasure in anincreasingly mechanized and depersonalized technological society. 1Throughout its tumultuous history, the common name of thecannabis drug has been spelled in numerous ways-marihuana,meriguana, marijuana, marijuana. We will use the last spellingbecause it appears most often in modern publications and conformsmore nearly to the Spanish. Contents | Feedback | Search DRCNet Library | Schaffer Library | Major Studies The Forbidden Fruit and the Tree ofKnowledge WT01-B31-45IA031-000652-B037-142http://206.61.184.43:80/schaffer/library/studies/vlr/vlr1.htm 206.61.184.43 19970122125228 text/html 102087HTTP/1.0 200 OKDate: Wednesday, 22-Jan-97 12:52:16 GMTServer: WebSitePro/1.1f (S/N wpo-0deb)Allow-ranges: bytesContent-type: text/htmlLast-modified: Saturday, 28-Dec-96 06:46:57 GMTContent-length: 101868 The Antecedents: Criminalization of Narcotics and Alcohol Contents | Feedback | Search DRCNet Library | Schaffer Library | Major Studies The Forbidden Fruit and the Tree ofKnowledge THE FORBIDDEN FRUIT AND THE TREE OF KNOWLEDGE: AN INQUIRYINTO THE LEGAL HISTORY OF AMERICAN MARIJUANA PROHIBITION Richard J. Bonnie & Charles H. Whitebread, II II. THE ANTECEDENTS: CRIMINALIZATION OF NARCOTICS AndALCOHOL The restrictive public policy with respect to marijuana,initiated in the late twenties and thirties and perpetuated tothe present day, has never been an isolated phenomenon. At eachstage of its development marijuana policy has been heavilyinfluenced by other social issues because the drug has generallybeen linked with broader cultural patterns. Particularly at itsinception, nationwide anti-marijuana legislation and its fate inthe courts were inseparably linked with the earlieranti-narcotics and prohibition experiences. In fact, the facilitywith which marijuana policy was initiated directly related to theastoundingly sudden and extreme alteration of public narcoticsand alcohol policy between 1900 and 1920. In 1906 there were only three dry states, and judicialprecedent abounded for the proposition that the right to possessalcohol for private consumption was an inalienable right. Yet, by1917, twenty states had enacted prohibitionary legislation andmost others were contemplating it. Two years later the eighteenthamendment and the Volstead Act had been enacted, and it was afederal crime to possess alcohol even for the purpose of drinkingit within the home. Similarly, in 1900 only a handful of statesin any way regulated traffic in narcotic drugs-opium, cocaine,morphine and heroin-even though all but heroin had been availablefor a decade or more. Yet, by 1914, all states had enacted sometype of prohibitionary legislation, and the national governmenthad enacted the Harrison Narcotic Act. There were many major differences between the temperance andanti-narcotics movements. The temperance movement was a matter ofvigorous public debate; the anti-narcotics movement was not.Temperance legislation was the product of a highly organizednationwide lobby; narcotics legislation was largely ad hoc.Temperance legislation was designed to eradicate known evilsresulting from alcohol abuse; narcotics legislation was largelyanticipatory. On the other hand, there were striking similarities betweenthe two movements. Both were first directed against the evils oflarge scale use and only later against all use. Most of therhetoric was the same: These euphoriants produced crime,pauperism and insanity. Both began on the state level and latersecured significant congressional action. Both ultimately foundfavor with the courts, provoking interchangeable dissentingopinions. We do not propose to unearth new truths about the events ofthis period. However, we do believe that a familiarity with thepolitical and judicial response to the alcohol and narcoticsproblems is essential to an understanding of the eventualsuppression of marijuana. We believe further that anunderstanding of the relation between public opinion and anysumptuary law is germane to a discussion of the predicament ofcurrent marijuana legislation. Finally, since much of the currentdebate about marijuana is focused on its harmful effects ascompared with those of narcotics and alcohol, the evolution ofpublic policy in those areas is particularly material. A. A Review of the Temperance Movement Although aggressive prohibition campaigns had been mounted inevery state in 1851-69,1 and again in 1880-90, in 1903 only Maine(1884), Kansas (1880) and North Dakota (1889) were completely drystates.2 Ernest Cherrington, the chronicler par excellence of theProhibition movement, blamed the failure of the first thrust inpart on the intervention of the slavery question, which siphonedthe moral fervor of the people from the temperance movement .4The failure of the second campaign he attributed to the inabilityof the prohibition activists to compete politically with growingliquor interests that dominated state and local governments.5 By 1906, however, the progress of the anti-saloon arm of thetemperance movement in local option contests" and theadoption of alcohol prohibition by the people of Oklahoma in aprovision of their constitution ratified upon admission tostatehood 7 signalled a new crusade for state prohibitionarylegislation. The Oklahoma vote so "electrified the moralforces of other states" 8 that by 1913 six additional stateshad enacted statewide prohibition, and half of the remainingstates were contemplating action.9 Perhaps the most significant development during this periodoccurred on the national level. The Supreme Court had earlierdeclared the police powers of the states, under which stateprohibition laws were enacted, impotent to prevent importation ofliquor from a wet state, of which there were still many, into adry state and to stay the sale and delivery of such liquor to thebuyer while in the original package." After a congressional attempt to deal with the decision in1890 aborted in the courts," the buyer of liquor shipped ininterstate commerce still had the right to receive and thereforeto use such liquor. But in 1913 Congress, by the Webb-Kenyon Act,12 filled the gap by prohibiting the shipment of liquor from onestate to another to be used in violation of the laws of thelatter; dry states could thus enforce their prohibition laws Themere passage of this law, according to against imported liquor.13 Cherrington, committed Congress to a policy that recognizedthe liquor traffic as an outlaw trade and indicated congressionaldesire to assist the dry states. 14 By November 1913, the tide had decidedly turned. More thanhalf the population and 71 percent of the area of the UnitedStates were under prohibitionary laws.", Accordingly, theFifteenth National Convention of the Anti-Saloon League ofAmerica unanimously endorsed immediate passage of NationalConstitutional Prohibition, whereupon the National TemperanceCouncil was formed to combine the forces of the varioustemperance organizations toward this end. 16 By April 4, 1917, when a joint resolution was introduced inthe Senate proposing an amendment to the Constitution prohibitingthe manufacture, sale or transportation of intoxicating liquorswithin the United States for beverage purposes, 17 eighty percentof the territory of the United States was dry." Adopted bythe constitutional majorities of both houses on December 18,1917, the eighteenth amendment was ratified by the thirty-sixthstate on January 16, 1919, and became effective on January 16,1920.19 The Volstead Act," passed on October 28, 1919,pursuant to section 2 of the eighteenth amendment, outlawedpossession of intoxicating liquor and therefore wentsignificantly beyond the amendment itself. The National Commission on Law Observance and Enforcement (theWickersham Commission) attributed the passage of the eighteenthamendment not to public opposition to use of intoxicatingbeverages," although this was indeed the view of many of theleaders of the movement, but rather to antipathy to three majorrelated evils: excessive consumption, political corruption andlicensed saloons .22 Excessive use increased with the commercialization ofproduction and distribution, and the expansion of saloons. Publicresentment against the corrupting influence of the large liquordealers in local politics, especially in the larger cities,tended to focus public attention on removing a cancer from thebody politic. Finally, the institution that most strongly arousedpublic sentiment against liquor traffic was the licensed saloon,itself the symbol of intemperance and corruption. Owned orcontrolled by the large brewers or wholesalers, centers ofpolitical activity, homes of commercialized vice, the saloonswere the betes noires of middle-American public opinion. Because public opinion was largely opposed only to thesocio-political consequences of massive liquor traffic, theenforcement of total abstinence under the eighteenth amendmentbecame increasingly difficult. By 1931 it was an accepted factthat the upper and middle classes were "drinking in largenumbers in quite frank disregard of the declared policy" ofthe Volstead Act." The difficulties of securing compliance in such circumstanceswere aggravated by an inadequately designed enforcement strategy,24, public resentment of the lawless tactics of prohibitionagents, 25 and the lack of any sustained attempt at publiceducation.26 For twelve years, however, millions of dollars werespent by federal and state governments in a fruitless effort tosecure compliance with the law. Contemporary legal observers wereparticularly incensed by the dilution of constitutionalprotections, especially those provided by the fourth amendment,which was sanctioned by the courts in response to the "feltneeds" of securing compliance through enforcement alone.27 Although many plans were advanced for changing the prohibitionlaws to mitigate the lawlessness rampant during this period, aslate as 1931 even its most vigorous opponents felt that repeal ofthe eighteenth amendment was politically unfeasible.28 By 1932,however, public opinion had become so inflamed that theDemocratic National Convention included repeal in the partyplatform."' Proposed by Congress on February 20, 1933, thetwenty-first amendment was ratified by the thirty sixth state onDecember 5, 1933. B. Anti-Narcotics Legislation to 1914 For our purposes, the major feature of temperance history isthe responsiveness of the political process to public opinion.Whether or not a majority of Americans ever favored prohibitionand whether or not the thrust of public opinion was everaccurately assessed, the public opinion process was attuned tothe question for half a century. The alleged evils of alcoholabuse were matters of public knowledge; the proper governmentalresponse was a subject of endless public debate; enactment andrepeal of Prohibition were attended by widespread publicparticipation. In contrast, the early narcotics legislation was promulgatedlargely in a vacuum. Public and even professional ignorance ofthe effects of narcotic drugs contributed both to the dimensionsof the problem and the nature of the legislated cure. The initiallegislation was attended by no operation of the public opinionprocess, and instead generated a new public image of narcoticsuse. Only after this creation of a public perception occurred didthe legislative approach comport with what we shall call latentpublic opinion. 1. Narcotics Use at the Turn of the Century: A GrowingProblem Although estimates have varied widely regarding the number ofpersons regularly using cocaine, opium, morphine and heroinduring the pre-criminalization period, a sufficiently accuratefigure can be drawn from a composite of contemporary surveys30conducted between 1878 and 1924 .31 Estimates range from 182,215(1884) to 782,118 (1913). We can safely estimate that there werebetween one-quarter and one-half million Americans addicted tonarcotics around the turn of the century, comprising at least onepercent of the population." This rather large addict population included more females thanmales,33 more whites than blacks," and was confined neitherto particular geographical regions nor to areas of highpopulation concentrations Its most significant characteristic wasits predominantly middle-class composition. Such attributescontrast starkly with the overwhelmingly black, lower-class maleaddict population that today inhabits our major urban centers. Nineteenth century narcotics addiction was generallyaccidental. It is widely believed that medical addicts faroutnumbered "kicks" or pleasure" addicts.37Medical addiction stemmed from many sources. The first wasovermedication. Civil War hospitals used opium and morphinefreely and many veterans returned addicted to the drugs."Overmedication continued long after peace had been restored, dueto the ready availability of these drugs with and sometimeswithout prescription. Since physicians were free to dispensethese drugs as painkillers, persons given morphine first forlegitimate therapeutic purposes often found themselves addicted.39 This problem was exacerbated by the absence of restrictionsupon druggists in refilling prescriptions containing extensiveamounts of morphine and other opiates40 and by the introductionof the hypodermic syringe." The danger of overmedicationincreased in 1884 when cocaine was first introduced into thepractice of medicine, and again in 1898 when an advance in Germanchemistry produced heroin, a partially synthetic morphinederivative. 42 For a time recommended as a treatment for morphineaddiction ,43 heroin was also widely used for medicinal purposes. A second source of accidental addiction was the use andpopularity of patent medicines. Exotically labeled elixirs wereadvertised as general cures for- ills ranging from snake bite tomelancholia. By containing up to thirty or forty percent morphineor opiates by volume, most patent medicines fulfilled theircure-all promises. However, a heavy price was exacted for suchcures. In the absence of a requirement that contents be printedon the label, many an unsuspecting person became addicted withoutever knowing the medicine that worked so well contained dangerousnarcotics.44 Thus, careless prescription, incessant dispensation and hiddendistribution of harmful drugs, the addictive effects of whichwere unknown until too late, fostered a large addict populationwhich continued to increase in the early twentieth century. Theincrease in narcotics consumption, and therefore addiction, iswell illustrated by the fact that 628,177 pounds of opiates werebrought into this country in 1900, three times the amountimported thirty years earlier." Governmental and medicaldefault explains the innocent nature of nineteenth centurynarcotics addiction and therefore its predominantly middle-class,nationwide character. Not all addiction was accidental and private. It has beensuggested that both medical knowledge and governmental regulationoccurred only when each narcotic drug achieved a significantdegree of "street" use. Our research supports thisthesis, especially when "street" use is identified withthe poor and with racial minorities. For example, opium, the drugfirst determined addictive and first identified with "pleasure" use, was the earliest prohibited. Legislation wasfirst passed in the west coast states with newly immigratedChinese populations among whom its use was prevalent. Heroinearly achieved a widespread nonmedical or "street" use,especially in large urban centers among lower-class males."' Nevertheless, addiction, even to opium, was predominantlyinvoluntary until 1900. Professional attention was not focuseddirectly on! Street" use until after two developments hadsignificantly reduced the: possibility of medical addiction.First, the passage of the Pure Food and Drug Act48 in 1906 led tothe demise of the patent medicine industry,: one of the primarycauses of medical addiction. The labeling requirements of theAct, coupled with the later regulation of the production anddistribution of the opiates, protected the public from thedangers of ignorance and virtually put the patent medicineindustry out of business.49 Second, the discovery of newnonaddictive pain killers and anesthetics reduced the likelihoodof post-operative addiction since physicians no longer needed torely so heavily on morphine and opium. preparations to reduce andcontrol pain. 2. State Legislative Response Before 1914 Although many states regulated narcotics indirectly throughtheir general "poison laws" before 1870,50 the firstanti-narcotics legislation did not appear until the last quarterof the nineteenth century. Most of the early legislation focusedprimarily on crime prevention" and public educationregarding the dangers of drug use." The spread of opiumsmoking, especially in the western states with high orientalpopulations,53 provoked legislation in eighteen states between1877 and 1911 designed to eradicate the practice either bypreventing the operation of opium dens or by punishing thesmoking of opium altogether. 54 As the addictive qualities ofopium, cocaine, morphine and later heroin became known, primarilythrough observation of "street" use, concernedphysicians finally began to agitate for stricter regulation thanthat provided by the "poison laws," even though suchlaws included opium and cocaine. Nevada enacted the first lawprohibiting the retail sale of opiates for nonmedical purposes in1877.55 In 1887, Oregon prohibited sale of cocaine without aprescription,"" and seven states followed suit by theturn of the century57 as did thirty-nine more by 1914.58 However,only twenty-nine states had included opiates in theirprohibitionary legislation by 1914.59 With the exception of the Oregon schemes nineteenth centurynarcotic laws did not attempt to restrict or prohibit possessionof narcotics, and were directed solely at distribution and sale.By 1913, only six states had prohibited the mere possession ofrestricted drugs by unauthorized persons .61 Three additionalstates prohibited possession with intent illegally to dispensesuch drugs .62 3. Watershed: The Passage of the Harrison Act The first national legislation designed to regulate narcoticsdistribution, the 1909 "Act to Prohibit Importation and UseOf Opium"' 63 barred the importation of opium at other thanspecified ports and for other than medicinal use. The law furtherrequired the keeping of import records. The main force behind thepassage of this statute was a desire to bring the United Statesinto line with other nations that had signed internationalconventions against the use of the drug. 64 However, as stateanti-narcotics legislation began to take on crusade proportions,pressure was generated for federal regulation of the importationof opium for medicinal purposes and of the interstate trade incocaine, morphine and heroin. Consequently, the Harrison Act,until this year the foundation of federal law controllingnarcotic drugs, was passed in 1914.65 The Harrison Act, a taxing measure, required registration andpayment of an occupational tax by all persons who imported,produced, dealt in, sold or gave away opium, cocaine or theirderivatives. The Act required all legitimate handlers of thesenarcotics to file returns setting forth in detail their use ofthe drugs. Each legitimate handler was required to use a specialorder form in making any transfer of narcotics. Since the Actalso provided that only legitimate users could register and noone but a registered user could obtain the specified form, anytransfer by an illegitimate user was a violation of the Act. Forthose failing to comply with its registration requirements, theoriginal Harrison Act provided penalties of not more than $2,000in fines or more than five years imprisonment, or both. The passage of the Harrison Act was the culmination ofincreasing concern in the medical profession66 about the freedomwith which physicians prescribed and druggists dispensedaddictive drugs, primarily morphine and heroin. During the periodof little or no regulation, the innocent addicts were regarded asvictims of an unfortunate sickness in need of treatment; usuallythey could find a friendly physician or druggist willing tosustain their habits. The passage of the Harrison Act, however,by imposing a stamp of illegitimacy on most narcotics use,fostered an image previously associated primarily with opium thatof the degenerate dope fiend with immoral proclivities. As theregulation of physicians and druggists became more stringent,especially after the Supreme Court held that prevention ofwithdrawal was not a legitimate medical use that a prescriptionto an unregistered person,67 this image fulfilled itself. Alladdicts, whether accidental or pleasure-seeking, were shut offfrom their supply and had to turn underground to purchase thedrugs. Inflated underground prices often provoked criminalactivity and this activity in turn evoked in the public a moralresponse,, cementing the link between iniquity and. drugaddiction.68 The early clinical experiments dealing with narcoticsaddiction were inevitable victims of enforcement of theAct." The concept that underlay the clinical effort-thataddiction was a medical problem to be dealt with by sustainingthe addict cheaply while trying to induce gentle withdrawal-wasantithetical to the attitude provoking the criminalclassification of unlawful possessors of narcotic drugs."Clinics were run .in such cities as New York, Shreveport andJacksonville," but by 1923 all were closed, thus removingstill another legitimate source of supply for the addict. Again,the crimes committed to enable these people to tap I the illicitsources increased public hysteria and misunderstanding 72 aboutthe link between the opiates and crime. Another result of the physicians' resignation to pressure wasthat addicts to the opiates began to commit petty crimes in orderto secure the drugs which could prevent their suffering. Theseinevitable law-induced crimes greatly accentuated the generalpublic belief that opiates had some inherent sinister propertywhich could change normal people into moral perverts andcriminals. In addition to redefining the public conception of narcoticaddiction in a way that would not be seriously challenged forhalf a century, the Harrison Act also provided a strange modelfor the administration of narcotics laws which wouldsignificantly affect future developments' Drafted as a tax lawrather than an outright criminal statute, the Act was intended todo indirectly what Congress believed it could not dodirectly-regulate possession and sale of the opiates. Indeed,congressional caution was justified. A five-to-four decision bythe Supreme Court in the 1903 Lottery Case73 suggested what laterbecame fact-the Court, as self-appointed arbiter of the federalsystem, would plant the tenth amendment in the path ofcongressional regulation of "local" affairs. Thatdirect regulation of medical practice was indeed consideredbeyond congressional power under the commerce clause is clearlyindicated in contemporary opinions. First, in its 1918 decisionin Hammer V. Dagenhart,74 the Court held the Child Labor Actunconstitutional. Second, the Court ultimately upheld theHarrison Act as a valid exercise of the taxing power 75 only by afive-to-four margin. Finally, there is some fairly explicitlanguage about congressional regulation of medical practice insubsequent Harrison Act opinions.76 This indirect regulation of narcotics traffic under thepretext of raising revenue had a number of significantconsequences. First, since the Act could not penalize users oraddiction directly, there was an immediate need for complementaryresidual state legislation in order to deal effectively with thedrug problem. Second, the enforcement of the Act was necessarilyassigned to the Internal Revenue Service in the TreasuryDepartment. The first enforcement agency for the Harrison Act was theNarcotics Division of the Prohibition Unit of the InternalRevenue Service created in 1920.77 This division was incorporatedin the Prohibition Bureau which was created in 1927 .78 In 1930,the enforcement of the narcotics laws was severed from the Bureauof Prohibition and established as the separate Bureau ofNarcotics in the Treasury Department .79 The existence of thisseparate agency anxious to fulfill its role as crusader againstthe evils of narcotics has done as much as any single factor toinfluence the course of drug regulation from 1930 to 1970."Although the impact of the Bureau on the passage of the UniformNarcotic Drug Act and the Marihuana Tax Act will be explained indetail in subsequent sections, it is important here to note thatthe existence of a separate bureau having responsibility only fornarcotics enforcement and for educating the public on drugproblems inevitably led to a particularly prosecutorial view ofthe narcotics addict. Moreover, this creation of the Bureauseparate from the newly created FBI in the justice Departmentunnecessarily bifurcated federal law enforcement operations inthis area. C. The Judicial Role and the Constitutional Framework: The Police Power and Intoxicant Prohibition to 1920 It is not novel to suggest that the fate of contemporaryconstitutional challenges to marijuana prohibition depends inpart on a judicial reading of public opinion as well as on theavailability of a constitutional peg on which to hang an"activist" judicial inquiry. Since contextual pressureand analytical conflict were also central elements of the'Judicial response to alcohol and narcotics prohibition between1850 and 1920, it is worthwhile to trace that response. As in today's court battles over marijuana laws, the clashthen was between two polar constitutional concepts-the policepowers of the state and allegedly "fundamental"personal constitutional rights. The conflict opened on stateconstitutional grounds and was continued in the realm of thefourteenth amendment. On the issues of alcohol and"hard" narcotics, the police power was triumphant. Inthe light of the comparisons drawn in current constitutionalarguments among marijuana , alcohol and narcotics, an inquiryinto the long struggle is informative. 1. Phase One: Prohibition of Sale and Manufacture of Alcohol During the first wave of prohibitionist legislation in the1850's, thirteen en states outlawed manufacture" and sale ofintoxicating beverages." The constitutionality of such lawsunder the commerce clause of the Federal Constitution had beenpresaged in the License Case83 in 1847, where in six separateopinions the Supreme Court upheld Massachusetts, New Hampshireand Rhode Island laws regulating wholesale and retail sales ofliquor. Chief Justice Taney's famous dictum stated: And if any State deems the retail and internal traffic in ardent spirits injurious to its citizens, and calculated to produce idleness, vice, or debauchery, I see nothing, in the constitution of the United States to prevent it from regulating and restraining the traffic, or from prohibiting, it altogether, if it thinks proper.84 Armed with this pronouncement, the courts of eight statesrebuffed challenges under their own constitutions." Some ofthese decisions gave scant attention to the constitutionalargument but simply defined the police power broad terms86 andperhaps cited the Taney dictum. However, the rationale and rhetoric of those decisionssquarely rejecting the constitutional objections merit a detailedcomparison with that of two decisions, in New York88 andIndiana89, declaring the statutes void. Even the opponents of the laws acknowledged the potentialpublic evils of intemperance90crime, pauperism and vice-theeradication of which was the objective of prohibitionarylegislation. Yet they argued that the means employed toaccomplish this end-prevention of sale was beyond the policepower. Alcohol had admittedly beneficial use91 and was harmfulonly when abused.92 In order to eliminate it from channels ofcommerce, thereby depriving its owners of a -fundamental incidentof ownership-the right to sell93 -a more pernicious character hadto be shown. 94 Accordingly, the public benefit did not justifythe restriction of private rights. The criminalization of sale ofalcohol beverages constituted a deprivation of"property" without due process;95 or, failing that, itconstituted an infringement of the inalienable right of 1ife,liberty And the pursuit of happiness rooted in the precepts ofnatural justice that the people reserved to themselves when theyentered into the social compact.96 New York, in Wynehamer v.People,97 accepted .the due process argument, at least withrespect to alcohol lawfully acquired, and Indiana endorsed theinalienable rights argument in Beebe v. State.98 The virtues of judicial restraint were vehemently defended inthe decisions rejecting these arguments: The courts uniformlyrefused to interfere with the discretionary exercise of thepolice power in the absence of a specific constitutionalprohibition. The Vermont Supreme Court view was typical: The legislature in passing the law in question doubtless supposed that the traffic and drinking of intoxicating liquors went hand in hand ... and that, by cutting off the one, the other would also fall with it. Whether the drinking of intoxicating liquors tends to produce intemperance and whether the intemperance is a gangrene, tending to corrupt the moral health of the body politic, and to produce misery and lamentation; and whether the law in question is well calculated to cut off or mitigate the evils supposed to flow directly from intemperance and indirectly from the traffic in intoxicating liquors, were questions to be settled by the lawmaking power; and their decision in this respect is final and not to be reviewed by us.99 Under this view, societal self-protection, the essence of thepolice power, is broadly defined.100 So long as the legislaturedetermines that the use of alcoholic beverages exerts an adverseeffect on public, health, safety or morals, the courts mayquestion neither the factual determination nor the means employedto restrict that use. In answer to the argument that the courtshave a special obligation to review the relation between meansand ends where personal liberties are curtailed, these courtsdisavowed any power "to annul a legislative Act upon highergrounds than those of express constitutional restriction,"101 or, after assuming for sake of argument the existence of suchpower, they declined to exercise It.102 In response to theargument accepted by Judge Comstock in Wynehamer v. New York-thatprohibition of sale of legally acquired alcohol was a deprivationof property without due process of law-most courts distinguishedWynehamer on its facts,103 held that no essential"property" right had been violated,"" orconstrued "due process" to refer only to due procedureand not to the "power ... to create and define anoffense." 105 Two polar conceptions of the scope of 'Judicial review clashedover a subject of intense public interest. The immediate questionwas settled in favor of the constitutionality of prohibitingmanufacture and sale of alcoholic beverages; in fact, the Indianacourt itself disavowed its contrary decision in Beebe three yearsafter rendering it.106 However, the jurisprudential dialogue107had merely begun. Today, Wynehamer is regarded as the initialstep, on the road to the vested rights conception of due process.Similarly, Beebe is the philosophical ancestor of all challengesto prohibition of intoxicants alcohol, narcotics, andmarijuana.108 With the passage of the fourteenth amendment, the SupremeCourt was called upon to determine whether prohibitionaryexercises of the state police powers were now limited by federallaw. The battle fought in the 1850's on state constitutionalgrounds was refought in the 1870's and 80's on federalterritory-with the same outcome. In a series of cases culminatingin Mugler v. Kansas,109 it slowly became settled that themanufacturer or seller of intoxicating liquors had noconstitutional rights under either the privileges and immunitiesor due process clauses that could prevent the operation of thepolice power of the state, regardless whether the liquor wasbought or manufactured before passage of the law or even whetherit was manufactured solely for personal use.110 Thus, as a matter of both state and federal constitutionallaw, the courts required no more, and probably less, than thatlegislation be designed to retard a public evil-here pauperismand crime-and be rationally related to that end."' Absent aspecific constitutional limitation, it did not concern the courtsthat such regulations affronted personal liberty and propertyrights. The theoretical Justification of incidental curtailmentof private liberties in the public interest was that thelegislature must conduct the balancing; if the balance isunsound, the law will be repealed. Indeed, the courts wereprobably willing to indulge that presumption as a practicalmatter since the passage of the prohibition laws was preceded byvigorous public debate. In fact, the public opinion process didwork in reaction to these curtailments of private liberty, andmost such laws were subsequently repealed"' in the ensuingdecade. 2. Phase Two: Probibition of Sale of Opium As noted above, the first prohibitionary narcotics legislationwas enacted on the west coast in the 1880's in order to prohibitsale and distribution of opium for nonmedical purposes. Theracial overtonesof this legislation were self-consciouslyacknowledged by the initial Oregon and Nevada decisions.Sustaining the conviction of an alien for selling opium in Exparte Yung Jon,"' the Oregon district court noted: Smoking opium is not our vice, and therefore it may be that this legislation proceeds more from a desire to vex and annoy the "Heathen Chinee" in this respect, than to protect the people from the evil habit. But the motives of legislators cannot be the subject of judicial investigation for the purpose of affecting the validity of their acts. 114 The opium laws were attacked on precisely the same grounds ashad been the alcohol prohibition legislation. The Nevada courthad no trouble in State v. Ah Chew;115 it simply cited theLicense Cases, the Delaware decision sustaining prohibition ofalcohol sale, and distinguished Wynebamer as holding only thatthe sale of lawfully acquired property could not be prohibited.Within this framework, the result was obvious: It is not denied that the indiscriminate use of opium . . .tends in a much greater degree to demoralize the persons usingit, to dull the moral senses, to foster vice and produce crime,than the sale of intoxicating drinks. If such is its tendency, itshould not have unrestrained license to produce such disastrousresults.... Under the police power . . . in the interest of goodmorals, the good order and peace of society, for the preventionof crime, misery and want, the legislature has authority to placesuch restrictions upon sale or disposal of opium a,, willmitigate, if not suppress, its evils to society.116 The Oregon court, in the Yung Jon decision five years later,did not take the easy way out. The court was apparently notdisposed to imply that sale of previously owned alcohol andcigarettes could be prohibited, and thus reject outright theWynebamer conception of due process;117 instead it chose to holdthat sale of opium for nonmedical purposes was not an incident ofownership and, since the law did not prohibit sale for medicalpurposes, no property right was deprived. Not as cautious as hisbrethren, Judge Deady inquired more actively into the nature ofopium before upholding the legislation. Whether a legislative actis "prohibitory" (and by implication whether itviolates the due process clause) "must depend oncircumstances, and particularly the character of the article, andthe uses and purposes to which it has generally been applied inthe community." 118 He then noted that opium was primarily amedicinal drug; that although used in the East for centuries asan intoxicant, that use was new in the United States and confinedprimarily to the Chinese; that it was classed as a poison and wasless easily detected than alcoholic intoxication, "which itis said to replace where law and custom have made the latterdisreputable;" and that its "evil effects" weremanifest upon the nervous and digestive systems, resemblingdelirium tremens. Thus, there was no longstanding regard of opiumas a legitimate article of property except for medical use.Accordingly, the act does not in effect prohibit the dispositionof the drug, but allows it under such circumstances, and on suchconditions, as will, according to the general practice andopinions of the country, prevent its improper and harmful use.119 Thus, whatever the judicial propensity to limit the policepower in the interest of property rights, prohibition of trafficin opium-worse than alcohol and confined to aliens-violated noimplied or express constitutional limitations. 3. Phase Three: Prohibition of Possession of Alcohol to 1915 At this stage of constitutional jurisprudence, criminalizationof possession or consumption of alcohol or narcotics was arguablya deprivation of property without due process of law. The firstwave of prohibition cases had held only that the right to selleven previously acquired liquor was not an essential element ofownership. They had not held that the state could forbid theessential attribute of ownership-the right to use. In fact, manycourts had expressly noted that alcohol was still a legitimatearticle of property.120 Until 1915 the weight of authority was that it was beyond thepolice power to prohibit mere possession of alcoholic beveragesunless the quantity Justified an inference that they were heldfor sale. A few cases so held ;121 many courts so stated indictum, while holding the laws either in conflict with particularconstitutional provisions regarding the "sale" ofliquor"122 or in excess of the power of municipalcorporations;" and many contemporary commentators so stated.124 Although the due process rationale was sometimes employed, 125the preferred approach was "inherent" limitation. Inhis 1904 treatise, Police Power, Ernst Freund premised the"inherent" limitation of noninterference with purelyprivate conduct not on any inalienable natural right but on therequirement that interference be justified on grounds of thepublic welfare."' This and the "practical difficultiesof enforcement, coupled with the constitutional prohibition ofunreasonable searches," 127 would sufficiently deterlegislative abuse. Absent the addition of a natural rights notion, however, thisdecisional frame becomes ambivalent on the dispositive questionin an adjudication questioning such legislative"abuse": Can the mere "policy" ofnonintervention with private conduct a more rigorous judicialinquiry into the relation between the prohibited private acts andthe alleged public evil? If it cannot, the constitutional attackon prohibition of possession is no stronger than that onprohibition of sale. If it can, is not the judicial role subjectto the same charge of usurpation as it would be if the courtsemployed a pure natural rights approach? In any event, when the courts first confronted possessionprohibition, the rhetoric was varied-due process, 128 naturalrights"' and private liberty""-but the approachwas the same-a refusal to accept the legislative findings as tothe relation between private act and public harm and a refusal todefer to the legislative balance of private liberty and publicneed. For example, in one of the leading cases, Commonwealth v.Campbell,"' the Court of Appeals of Kentucky cited Cooley,Mill, and Blackstone for the proposition that [i]t is not within the competency of government to invade theprivacy of the citizen's life and to regulate his conduct inmatters in which he alone is concerned, or to prohibit him anyliberty the exercise of which will not directly injuresociety.132 Noting next that defendant was "not charged with havingthe liquor in his possession for the purpose of selling it, oreven giving it to another" and that "ownership andpossession cannot be denied when that ownership and possession isnot in itself injurious to the public," 133 the courtconcluded that the right to use liquor for one's own comfort, if the use iswithout direct injury to the public, is one of the citizen'snatural and inalienable rights .... We hold that the policepower-vague and wide and undefined as it is-has limits . . . 134 The key to this reasoning, of course, is the court'sinsistence that the injury be direct as measured according to aJudicial yardstick. Although the court devoted little attentionto the question, it implicitly rejected arguments that the onlyway to exorcize the public evils attending excessive use andadequately to enforce prohibitions against sale was to preventany private use at all. The court impliedly held that the positedconnection, albeit rational, was "remote" or"indirect" or "unreasonable" and thereforeentitled to no deference. 135 4. Phase Four: Prohibition of Possession of Narcotics This active 'Judicial role in alcohol cases should be comparedwith the courts' simultaneous refusals to second-guesslegislative "findings" with regard to thecriminalization of possession of opium. In a series of casesdecided in Washington, Oregon and California136 in 1890, 1896 and1911 respectively, courts held that the relation betweennarcotics use and public harm was to be drawn by the legislature. In answer to the argument, accepted in the alcohol cases, thatdespite the absence of explicit constitutional limitations thepolice power of prohibition was inherently limited to acts which"involve direct and immediate injury to another," 137the courts replied in predictable fashion: The state may preventa weak man from doing injury to himself if it determines thatsuch injury may cause the individual to become a "burden onsociety;" "' the state could find that excessive use ofopium, an active poison, would debase the moral and economicwelfare of' the society by causing ill health, pauperism andinsanity;... the state could find that the potential for andevils attending excessive use demand a prohibition also ofnondeleterious moderate use."' Accordingly, in the words ofthe Supreme Court of Washington, [i]t is for the legislature to place on foot the inquiry as tojust in what degree the use is injurious; to collate all theinformation and to make all the needful and necessarycalculations. These are questions of fact with which the courtcannot deal. The constitutionality of laws is not thus to bedetermined .141 The California court had more difficulty with the argumentthat punishment of possession of alcohol had been held beyond thepolice power. Despite its rhetoric regarding the wide bounds oflegislative fact-finding, the court actually made its owndetermination that public injury from private abuse was morelikely with narcotics than alcohol. The lower court had said soovertly: But liquor is used daily in this and other countries as abeverage, moderately and without harm, by countless thousands ...; whereas it appears there is no such thing as moderation in theuse of opium. Once the habit is formed the desire for it isinsatiable, and its use is invariably disastrous. 142 The California Supreme Court shied away: We do not understand this to have been intended to declare anestablished or conceded fact. So interpreted, the expressionwould be, perhaps unduly sweeping. But the validity oflegislation which would be necessary or proper under a givenstate of facts does not depend upon the actual existence of thesupposed facts. It is enough if the law-making body mayrationally believe such facts to be established. If the beliefthat the use of opium, once begun, almost ]Inevitably leads toexcess may be entertained by reasonable men-and we do not doubtthat it may-such belief affords a sufficient 'Justification forapplying to opium restrictions which might be unduly burdensomein the case of other substances, as, for example, intoxicatingliquors, the use of which may fairly be regarded as lessdangerous to their users or to the public. 143 What the court said is unobjectionable. What it did not say,however, is significant. This reasoning implies that if thelegislature should determine that the potential for excessive useof alcohol-and consequently for the public evils of pauperism,crime and insanity-is great enough to prohibit all use, thatjudgment would have to stand. Probably not intending so tosuggest, the court really held that it thought that opium use wasmore likely adversely to affect the public welfare than alcoholuse; accordingly, paternal criminal legislation was"reasonable" in the former case and not in the latter,even though they were identically "Indirect." Ithelped, perhaps, that the legislature was not telling the and hiswhite, middle-class colleagues that they shouldn't smoke opium,and that the objective was merely to prevent a few "HeathenChinee" from hurting themselves through their stupidity andfrom spreading their nasty habit to the whites."' The only astounding thing about the opium possession cases isthat there was at least one dissenting opinion. In the Washingtoncase, Ah Lim v. Territory,145 judge Scott, for himself andanother judge, insisted on either a more conclusive demonstrationthat the private act of smoking opium "directly and clearlyaffected the public in some manner" or a more narrowly drawnstatute. He catalogued the alleged public justifications: That smoking or inhaling opium injures the health of theindividual, and in this way weakens the state; that it tends tothe increase of pauperism. That it destroys the moral sentimentand leads to the commission of crime. In other words, that it hasan injurious effect upon the individual, and, consequently,results indirectly in an injury to the community. 146 After noting the insufficiency of all of the 'Justificationsincluding the argument that the moderate desires of some must besacrificed to prevent abuse by others, 147 then concluded: [The Act] is altogether too sweeping in its terms. I make noquestion but that the habit of smoking opium may be repulsive anddegrading. That its effect would be to shatter the nerves anddestroy the intellect; and that it may tend to the increase ofpauperism and crime. But there is a vast difference between thecommission of a single act, and a confirmed habit. There is adistinction to be recognized between the use and abuse of anyarticle or substance.... If this act must be held valid it ishard to conceive of any legislative action affecting the personalconduct, or privileges of the individual citizen. that must notbe upheld. . . . The prohibited act cannot affect the public inany way except through the primary personal injury to theindividual, if it occasions him any injury. It looks like a newand extreme step under our government in the field oflegislation, if it really was passed for any of the purposes uponwhich that character of legislation can be sustained, if at all.148 The sanctity of "the personal conduct or privileges ofthe individual " had suffered first blow. The knockout wasonly a few citizen rounds away. 5. Phase Five: Prohibition of Possession of Alcohol After 1915 The year 1915 was the watershed year for prohibitionists inthe courts. By 1913, the tide had finally turned in the statelegislatures, many of which prohibited possession of more than acertain quantity of alcoholic beverages. The first of thesestatutes to reach the courts was that of Alabama in SouthernExpress Co. v. Whittle.149 Overruling its earlier decision in Eidge v. City ofBessemer,150 one of the leading cases during the earlier phase,the Alabama court swept away all restraints on the police power.So long as the legislation was directed at some legitimatepurpose and was not arbitrary, the court should not interfere.151Whether or not the Supreme Court had so intended, the Alabamacourt, like other state courts, relied heavily on justiceHarlan's opinion in Mugler v. Kansas,152 and gave its legislaturea blank check when exercising police powers: If the right of common law to manufacture an intoxicatingliquor for one's own personal use, out of one's own materials bythe application of one's own personal effort, may be forbidden byappropriate legislation under the police power, as was expresslyruled in Mugler v. Kansas . . . . it cannot be logically orsoundly asserted that the receipt or possession of more than aspecified quantity at one time may not be forbidden by a statute. . . . 153 The alleged sanctity of private conduct gave the court littlepause; this was just I one of a number of instances where ancillary prohibitions of acts and conduct, innocent in themselves, have been sustained and confirmed as an exercise of the police power of the state; and so upon the theory that some valid legislative purpose might be more certainly made effective, or that evasions of the laws might be prevented or hindered of accomplishment.154 Though the Alabama court did not do so, it could have citedthe opium possession cases as authority. Most courts did. The Alabama decision was quickly followed in Idaho155 and innine other states.156 When the Idaho case, Crane v. Campbell,157came before the Supreme Court, Justice McReynolds dealt theknockout blow: As the state has the power . . . to prohibit [sale and manufacture], it may adopt such measures as are reasonably appropriate or needful to render exercise of that power effective. And, considering the notorious difficulties always attendant upon efforts to suppress traffic in liquors, we are unable to say that the challenged inhibition of their possession was 'arbitrary and unreasonable or without proper relation to the legitimate legislative purposes 158 The principle noted by Freund,159 that the police power didnot easily extend to matters of private conduct, was ignored: [I] t clearly follows from our numerous decisions upholding prohibition legislation that the right to hold intoxicating liquors for personal use is not one of those fundamental privileges of a citizen of the United States which no State may abridge. A contrary view would be incompatible with the undoubted power to prevent manufacture, gift, sale, purchase or transportation of such articles-the only feasible ways of getting them. An assured right of possession would necessarily imply some adequate method to obtain not subject to destruction at the will of the State. 160 Given the restrictive interpretation of the privileges andimmunities clause161 and the refusal to extend substantive dueprocess outside the economic area, 162 there was no existingfederal constitutional pigeonhole for "private conduct"as a principle of constitutional limitation. And on the statelevel the courts ignored the "'intrinsic limitation"argument and discarded the direct-indirect yardstick in the wakeof the temperance movement. The commentators were outraged. Again and again the courtswere indicted for interpreting constitutional precepts tocorrespond with public opinion.163 The retreat on the temperancequestion coincided perfectly with the final success of theProhibition movement. And the commentators were quite justifiedin so noting. It was merely icing on the cake when the Supreme Court upheldthe provision of the Volstead Act164 outlawing possession ofintoxicating liquor. The Court predictably rebuffed165 anargument that it was beyond congressional power under section 2of the eighteenth amendment to prohibit possession for personalconsumption of liquor owned before the passage of the Act.166 6. A Postscript on the Police Power: The Cigarette Cases Interestingly, the legislative solicitude for the health ofthe citizenry during the period under discussion also extended tothe prohibition of cigarette smoking in several jurisdictions. In1897, the General Assembly of Tennessee made it a misdemeanor tosell, give away or otherwise dispose of cigarettes or cigarettepaper.167 The Supreme Court of Tennessee upheld the statute underthe police power on the grounds that cigarettes were notlegitimate articles of commerce, being "inherently bad andbad only." 168 The United States Supreme Court affirmed inAustin v. Tennessee,169 primarily on the authority of the alcoholand opium cases, noting that there need be only a rational basisfor the legislative determination that the commodity is harmfulto 'justify its prohibition.170 The Court did not even mentionany objection based on deprivation of property rights or personalliberty. The issue was posed more directly in Kentucky and Illinoiscases171 regarding the validity of local ordinances prohibitingsmoking of cigarettes "within the corporate limits" inone case and "in any street, alley, avenue ... park ... or[other] public place" in the other. Both courts held theordinances unreasonable interferences with personal liberty.172 The argument that the ordinances were calculated to insure thepublic safety by preventing fire hazards was held to be tooremote and the argument accepted in Austin regarding potentialinjury to the smoker's health apparently was not made or at leastwent unacknowledged by both courts. These decisions, rendered in. 1911 and 1914, were probablyconsistent, under a direct-indirect injury to society theory,with Austin and with the alcohol and narcotics cases up to thattime. The post-1915 alcohol possession cases, however, underminedany such distinction. insofar as it authorized a more activejudicial inquiry into the relationship between the privateconduct and the public need. At least at this stage of itsdevelopment it may be fruitless to seek out a "neutralprinciple" beyond common sense regarding the undefinedconstitutional limitations on the police power. Professor BrooksAdams noted in 1913 that the scope of the police power could notbe determined in advance by abstract reasoning. Hence. as, eachlitigation arose, the judges could follow no rule but the rule ofcommon sense, and the Police Power, translated into plain Englishpresently came to signify whatever, at the moment, the judgeshappened to think reasonable. Consequently, they began guessingat the drift of public opinion, as it percolated to them throughthe medium of their education and prejudices. Sometimes theyguessed right and sometimes wrong, and when they guessed wrongthey were cast aside, as appeared dramatically enough in thetemperance agitation .173 And justice Holmes noted: It may be said in a general way that the police power extends to all the great public needs. It may be put forth in aid of what is sanctioned by usage, or held by the prevailing morality or strong and preponderant opinion to be greatly and immediately necessary to the public welfare.174 Whether the development of the Judicial response to exercisesof the police power at the time was the result of the changingpublic opinion or a changing analytical framework, trends in thatresponse were evident. It remains to be seen whether any trendsare evident today to indicate how marijuana users will fare inthe future. Footnotes and References 1 E. CHERRINGTON, THE EVOLUTION OFPROHIBITION IN THE UNITED STATES OF AMERICA 135-45(1920) [hereinafter cited as CHERRINGTON1. 21d. at 176-84. 31d. at 180-81; Safely, Growth of State Power Under FederalConstitution to Regulate Traffic in Intoxicating Liquors, 3LOWAL. BULL. 221, 222 (1917). 4 CHERRINGTON139.  Id. at 181-82. 6 Id. at 280. 7 Id. at 280-81. 8 Id. at 281.  Id. at 284. 10 Leisy v. Hardin, 135 U.S. 100 (1890). 11Four months after Leisy Congress enacted the "WilsonLaw," designed to make all intoxicating liquors subject"upon arrival" to the laws of the state into which theywere sent. Act of Aug. 8, 1890, ch. 728, 26 Stat. 313. In Rhodesv. Iowa, 170 U.S. 412 (1898), however, the Supreme Court heldthat "upon arrival" meant after delivery to theconsignee. Thus the right to receive the liquor and the attendantenforcement problems remained. 12Act of Mar. 1, 1913, ch. 90, 37 Stat. 699. 13 The Act was upheld in Clark Distilling Co. v. Western Md.Ry., 242 U.S. 311 (1917). 14 CHERRINGToN, 285-86. 15 Id. at 320. 115 Id. at 321-22. 17 See H.R. Doc. No. 722, 71st Cong., 3d Sess. 5 (1931)thereinafter cited as WICKERSHAM COMMISSION J. 18 Id. Is Id. at 8. 20 Act of Oct. 28, 1919, ch. 85, 41 Stat. 305. 21 In 1904 Ernst Freund had noted, quoting from an article on"personal liberty" in the Cyclopedia of Temperanceand Prohibition: Even the advocates of prohibition concede that the state hasno concern with the private use of liquor. "The opponents ofprohibition misstate the case by saying that the state has noright to declare what a man shall cat or drink. The state doesnot venture to make any such declaration.... It is not theprivate appetite or home customs of the citizen that the stateundertakes to manage, but the liquor traffic. . . . If byabolishing the saloon the state makes it difficult for men togratify their private appetites, there is no just reason forcomplaint." E. FREuND, PoLicE POWER 484 (1904). 22 WICKERSHAM CommissioN 6-7. 23 Id. at 21. In 1929 President Hoover had devoted a majorpart of his inaugural address to the "disregard anddisobedience" of the eighteenth amendment. He attributed tothe ordinary citizen "a large responsibility" for a"dangerous expansion in the criminal elements."Attempting to generate moral support for the law, he chastisedthe citizenry: No greater national service can be given by men and women ofgoodwill-who, I know, are not unmindful of the responsibilitiesof citizenship-than that they should, by their example, assist instamping out crime and outlawry by refusing participation in andcondemning all transactions with illegal liquor. Our whole missing piece 28 F. BLACK, supra note 27, at 149-50. 29 R. CHilds, MAKING REPEAL WORK 12 (1947). 30 The earliest surveys employ a methodology much lesssophisticated than those conducted after 1914. The later studies,however, suffer from a time lag which inevitably detracts fromaccuracy. In any event, taken together, these surveys adequatelydescribe the contours of the phenomenon under consideration. 31 The earliest attempt at a compilation of addiction figureswas undertaken by O. Marshall in 1878. Marshall, The OpiumHabit in Michigan, 1878 MICH. STATE BD. OF HEALTH ANN. REP. 61-73. From questionnaires sent to doctors,Marshall found 1,313 users of opium or morphine and concludedtherefrom that there were 7,763 addicts in the state. Dr. CharlesTerry later concluded that, if Marshall's figures wererepresentative, total incidence of addiction in the United Statesin 1878 was 251,936. C. TERRY & M. PELLENS, THE OPIUM PROBLEM15 (1928) [hereinafter cited as TERRY & PELLENS]. Marshallwas unable fully to take into account the fact that the incidenceof drug abuse in the cities was much higher than that in therural areas he studied; accordingly, his figures probablyunderestimate the extent of addiction in the state. In a similar study of Iowa in 1884, J. M. Hull found 5,732addicts which, if representative, would reflect a national addictpopulation of 182,215. Hull, The Opium Habit, 1885 IOWASTATE BD. OF HEALTH BIENNIAL REP. 535-45, quoted in TERRY& PELLENs 16-18. In 1900 the author of a Vermont study sent 130 questionnairesto various druggists in an attempt to determine the monthly salesof various drugs. His 116 replies indicate that 3,300,000 dosesof opium were sold every month, or enough for every person inVermont over the age of 21 to receive 11/2 doses per day.Grinnel, A Review of Drug Consumption and Alcohol as Found inProprietary Medicine, 23 MEDico-LEGAL J. 426 (1905),quoted in TERRY & PELLENs 21-23. Perhaps the best pre-1914 estimate was made by Dr. CharlesPerry who, as Health Officer of Jacksonville, Florida, compileddata for that city in 1913. He found that 541 persons, or .81% ofthe city's population, used opium or some preparation thereof in1913. Nationwide, this incidence would be 782,118. 1913JACKSONVILLE, FLA, BD. OF HEALTH ANN. REP., quoted in TERRY& PELLENs 25. A researcher in 1915 found 2,370 registered addicts inTennessee and put the national addict population at between269,000 and 291,670. Brown, Enforcement of the TennesseeAnti-Narcotic Law, 5 Am. J. PUB. HEALTH 323-33 (1915), quotedin TERRY & PELLENs 27-29. The first post-Harrison Act study, and perhaps the mostreliable of all research during this period, was done by LawrenceKolb and A. G. DuMez of the United States Public Health Service.Utilizing previously computed statistics together withinformation regarding the supply of narcotics imported into theUnited States, these authors concluded the addict populationnever exceeded 246,000. KOLB & DUMEz, THE PREVALENCE ANDTREND OF DRUG ADDICTION IN THE UNITED STATES AND FACTORSINFLUENCING IT 1-20 (39 Public Health Reports No. 21) (May 23,1924). At the same time the Narcotic Division of the Prohibition Unitof the IRS estimated that there were more than 500,000 drugaddicts in America. Narcotic Division of the Prohibition Unit,Bureau of Internal Revenue, Release (May 4, 1924), quoted in TERRY& PELLENs 42 n.25. For more recent estimates of drug addiction in America, see W.ELDRIDGE, NARCOTICS AND THE LAW 49-103 (2d rev. ed. 1967); A.LINDESMITH, THE ADDICT AND THE LAW 99-134 (1965); ARTHUR D.LITTLE, INC., DRUG ABUSE AND LAW ENFORCEMENT 1l-21 (1967). 32 But see M. NYSWANDER, THE DRUG ADDICT AS A PATIENT1-13 (1956) (the author suggests that perhaps I to 4% of Americanadult population was addicted in 1890). 33 Of the 1,313 addictsin Marshall's Michigan study, 803 were females and only 510 males. TERRY & PELLENS 11. In the Florida study, therewere 228 men and 313 women. Id. at 25. Of the 2,370 registeredaddicts in the Tennessee study, 784 were men and 1,586 women. Id.at 27. A modern observer has concluded that there were at leastas many and probably twice as many women addicts as men.O'Donnell, Patterns of Drug Abuse and Their SocialConsequences, in DRUGS & YouTH 62, 64 (J. Whittenborn ed.1969). For the last thirty years, male addicts have probablyoutnumbered female addicts by four or five to one. Id. 34 Of the 228 men included in the Florida study, 188 werewhite and 40 black; of the women 219 were white and 94 black.TERRY & PELLENs 25. At that time the white and blackpopulations in Jacksonville were equal. Of those covered in theTennessee study, 90% were white. Id. at 28. 35 The Michigan, Iowa and Vermont studies covered primarilyrural areas. 36 See, e.g., Eberle, Report of Committee onAcquirement of Drug Habits, Am. J. PHARMACY, Oct. 1903, at474-88. "While the increase is most evident with the lowerclasses, the statistics of institutes devoted to the cure ofhabitues show that their patients are principally drawn fromthose in the higher walks of life." Id, quoted in TERRY& PELLENs 23. 37 See, e.g., O'Donnell, supra note 3 3, at 64. 38 TERRY & PELLENs 69. 39Stanley, Morpbinism, 6 J. Crim. L. & CRIMINOLOGY586, 588 (1915). 40 See the resolution of the Narcotics Control Association ofCalifornia, 13 J. CRIM. L. & CRIMINOLOGY 126-27 (1922),calling for stricter laws regulating prescriptions andprescription order forms. 41 TERRY & PELLENs 66. 47 42 Brill, Recurrent Patterns in the History of Drug Dependenceand Some Interpretations, in DRUGS AND YOUTH 18 (J. Whittenborned. 1969). 43 TERRY & PELLENs 76-82. 44 See S. ADAms, THE GREAT AMERICAN FRAUD (1913). 45 TERRY & PELLENs 44. 46 Id. at 84-87. 47 See H. KANE, OPIUM-SMOKING IN AMERICA AND CHINA (1882), inwhich the author supports the contention that by approximately1890 narcotic addiction had become widespread among therespectable and professional classes. He states: The practice [opium smoking] spread rapidly and quietly amongthis class of gamblers and prostitutes until the latter part of1875, at which time the authorities became cognizant of the fact,and finding, upon investigation, that many women and young girls,as also young men of respectable family, were being induced tovisit the dens .... Quoted in TERRY & PELLENs 73. 48Ch. 3915, 34 Stat. 768 (1906). 49 "The peak of the patent medicine industry was reachedjust prior to the passage of the federal Pure Food and Drug Actin 1906." TERRY & PELLENs 75. 50 U.S. TREASURY DEPT, STATE LAWS RELATING TO THE CONTROL oFNARCOtic DRUGS AND THETREATMENT OFDRUG ADDICTION 1 (1931)[hereinafter cited as STATE LAWS]. 51 The first drug legislation enacted in eight states outlawedthe administering Of 2 narcotic drug to any person with theintent to facilitate the commission of a felony. These stateswere California (1872), Idaho (1887), New York (1897), NorthDakota (1883), Pennsylvania (1901), South Dakota (1883), Utah(1876) and Wisconsin (1901). Id. at 1-2. 52 Twenty-two states made such legislation their first lawsconcerning the drug problem. Id. at 2. 53 Id. at 3-4. 54 States with such legislation were Arizona (1883),California (1881), Georgia (1895), Idaho (1887), Maryland (1886),Missouri (1911), Montana (1881), Nevada (1877), New Mexico(1887), North Dakota (1879), Ohio (1885), Pennsylvania (1883),South Dakota (1879), Utah (1880), Wisconsin (1891) and Wyoming(1882). Sec id., Pt. III. 55 Id. at S. 56 Id. at 5, 2 5 1. 57 Arizona (1899), Arkansas (1899), Colorado (1897), Illinois(1897), Mississippi (1900), Montana (1889) and New York (1893).Id., Pt. 111. 58 See id. 59 Id. 60 Id. at 251. 61 California (1909), Maine (1887), South Carolina (1911),Tennessee (1913), Wm Virginia (1911) and Wyoming (1903). Id., Pt.III. 62 Maryland (1912), Ohio (1913) and Virginia (1908). Id. I" Act of Feb. 9, 1909, ch. 100, 35 Stat. 614, aS amended,21 U.S.C. S 173 (1964). This act was revised by Act of Jan. 17,1914, ch. 9, 38 Stat. 275, in the same wave of reform thatproduced the Harrison Act. 64 Hearings on the Importation and Use of Opium Before theHouse Comm. on Ways and Means, 61st Cong., 2d Sess. passim(1910). 65 38 Stat. 785 (1914), as amended, 26 U.S.C. S 4701-36(1964). 66 See, eg., Stanley, supra note 39, at 587; Fixes Blame forDope Fiend Evil, Boston Herald, Jan. 5, 1917. 67 Webb V. United States, 249 U.S. 96 (1919). 68 See Weber, Drugs and Crime, 44 A.B.A. REP. 527 (1919).Kolb, Factors That Have Influenced the Management and Treatmentof Drug Addicts, in NARCOTIC DRUG ADDICTION PROBLEMS 23, _26 (R.Livingston ed. 1958) states: See generally T. Duster, THE LEGISLATION OF MORALITY 3-28(1970). 69 See generally A. LiNDEsmITH, supra note 31, at 135-61;King, Narcotic Drug Laws and Enforcement Policies, 22 LAW &CONTEMP. PROB. 113, 124-26 (1957); King, The Narcotics Bureau andthe Harrison Act, 62 YALE L.J. 736 (1953); Note, NarcoticsRegulation, 62 YALE L.J. 751, 784-87 (1953). 70 For a savage attack on the clinic system by a well-knownsupporter of the law enforcement model of the Harrison Act, seeStanley, Narcotic Drugs and Crime, 12 J. Crim. L. &CRIMINOLOGY 110 (1921). 71 Lindesmith reports that for a brief period of time from1919 to 1923 some forty clinics of this type existed in theUnited States. A. Lindesmith, supra note 31, at 136, 72 The closing of the New York Clinic in 1919 was anespecially potent factor in promoting hysteria about heroin. Morethan 7,400 addicts, about 90 percent Of whom were users ofheroin, were thrown on the streets of the city. Driven to commitcrimes, including those of narcotic violations, many of theseaddicts were arrested. The increased number of arrests was widelyinterpreted as an indication of moral deterioration due tonarcotics instead of evidence of maladministration of what couldhave been a useful law. There were, of course, physicians whodissented both as to the wisdom of closing the clinics and as tothe harmful effect of the drugs. Many of those who persisted inhelping their patients were arrested. Kolb, supra note 68, at 27. 73 188 U.S. 3.21 (1903). 74 247 U.S. 251 (1918). 75 United States v. Doremus, 249 U.S. 86 (1919). The fourdissenters asserted that "the statute was a mere attempt byCongress to exert a power not delegated, that is, the reservedpolice power of the States." Id. at 95. It is interesting tonote, however, that a subsequent congressional attempt toregulate child labor through the taxing power was alsoinvalidated. Bailey v. Drexel Furniture Co., 259 U.& 20(1922). 76 justice McReynolds stated for the Court in Linder v. UnitedStates, 268 U.S. 5, 18 (1925): Obviously, direct control ofmedical practice in the States is beyond the power of the FederalGovernment. Incidental regulation of such practice by Congressthrough a taxing act cannot extend to matters plainlyinappropriate and unnecessary to reasonable enforcement of arevenue measure. The Court also held that the Harrison Act did not apply tomere possession of opium. In reaching this conclusion the Courtpointed out that any congressional attempt to punish as a crimepossession of any article produced in a state would raise the'gravest questions of power. United States v. Jin Fuey Moy, 241U.& 394, 401 (1916). 77 Schmeckebier, The Bureau of Prohibition, in BROOKINGS INST.FOR GOVT RESEARCH, SERVICE MONOGRAPH No. 57, at 143 (1929). 78 An Act to Create a Bureau of Customs and 2 Bureau ofProhibition in the Department of the Treasury, ch. 348, 44 Stat.1381 (1927). 79 Act of June 14, 1930, ch. 488, 46 Star. 585. 80 See generally King, The Narcotics Bureau and the HarrisonAct, 62 YALE L.J. 736 (1953). 81 The primary objective of prohibitionary legislation was tosuppress all traffic in intoxicating beverages. Accordingly, moststates prohibited both manufacture and sale. However, NewHampshire's law, in effect from 1855 through 1903, forbade only,sale. 82 Sixteen states passed prohibitionary legislation for thewhole territory of the state. However, twelve of them hadrepealed this legislation by 1903, and a thirteenth, Maine, hadrepealed its statute before 1884 when prohibition was embodied ina constitutional amendment. E. FREuND, POLICE POWER 202, 203(1904). 83 46 U.S. (5 How.) 504 (1847). 84 Id. at 577. 85 State v. Paul, 5 R.I. 185 (1858); State v. Wheeler, 25Conn. 290 (1856); State v Allmond, 7 De]. 612 (1856); People v.Gallagher, 4 Mich. 244 (1856); Santo v. State' 2 Iowa 165 (1855);Lincoln v. Smith, 27 Vt. 328 (1855); People v. Hawley, 3 Mich.330 (1854); Commonwealth v. Kendall, 66 Mass. (12 Cush.) 414(1853); Jones v. People, 14-111. 196 (1852). 86 State v. Paul, 5 R.I. 185 (1858); Commonwealth v. Kendall,66 Mass. (I 2 Cush.) 414 (1853); Jones v. People, 14 III. 196(1852). 87 State v. Wheeler, 25 Conn. 290 (1856); State v. Allmond, 7De]. 612 (1856); Santo v. State, 2 Iowa 165 (1855); Lincoln v.Smith, 27 Vt. 328 (1855). 88 Wynehamer v. People, 13 N.Y. 378 (1856). 89 Beebe v. State,6 Ind. 501 (1855). 90 Dissenting in People v. Gallagher, 4 Mich. 244 (1856),justice Pratt noted' "That intemperance is a great evil, nosane man can doubt." Id. at 284. The Iowa court asserted: There is no statistical or economical proposition betterestablished, nor one to which a more general assent is given byreading and intelligent minds, than this, that the use ofintoxicating liquors as a drink, is the cause. of more want,pauperism, suffering, crime and public expense, than any othercause-and perhaps it should be said, than all other causescombined. Santo v. State, 2 Iowa 165, 190 (1855). 91 Dissenting in People v. Gallagher, 4 Mich. 244 (1856) ,justice Pratt stated: "Spiritous liquors are necessary inthe prosecution of many of the most valuable arts,' as well asfor mechanical, manufacturing and medicinal purposes." Id.at 260. 92 The Indiana Court noted "as a matter of generalknowledge . . . that the use of beer &c. as a beverage, isnot necessarily hurtful, any more than the use of lemonade or icecream.... It is the abuse, and not the use, of all thesebeverages that is hurtful." Beebe v. State, 6 Ind. 501,519-20 (1855). 93 Justice Pratt reasoned: Liquors, then, whether produced by fermentation ordistillation, do legally constitute property of use and value;and the owner of this species of personal property, when lawfullyacquired, is, upon every principle, . . . entitled to thepossession and use of it. This legally includes the right ofkeeping, selling or giving it away, as the owner may deem proper.This is a natural primary right incident to ownership . . . . People v. Gallagher, 4 Mich. 244, 263 (1856); accord,Wynehamer v. People, 13 N.Y. 378, 396-98 (1856) (Comstock, J.). 94 Said the Indiana Court: [T]he legislature enacted the law in question upon theassumption that the manufacture and sale of beer . . . werenecessarily destructive to the community, and in acting upon thatassumption, in our judgment, has unwarrantably invaded the rightto private property, and its use as a beverage and article oftraffic. . . . We repeat, the manufacture and sale and use of liquorsare not necessarily hurtful, and this the Court has a right tojudicially inquire into and act upon in deciding upon thevalidity of the law in question-in deciding . . . whether it isan indirect invasion of a right secured to the citizen by theConstitution. Beebe v. State, 6 Ind. 501, 520-21 (1855) (emphasisadded). 95 In an opinion often cited as the first to invoke thesubstantive construction of "due process of law," judgeComstock in Wynchamer v. People, 13 N.Y. 378, 392-93, 398 (1856),stated: To say that "the law of the land" or "dueprocess of law", may mean the very act of legislation whichdeprives the citizen of his rights, privileges or property, leadsto a simple absurdity. The Constitution would then mean, that noperson shall be deprived of his property or rights unless thelegislature shall pass a law to effectuate the wrong, and thiswould be throwing the restraint entirely away. The trueinterpretation of these constitutional phrases is, that whererights are acquired by the citizen under existing law, there isno power in any branch of the government to take them away. When a law annihilates the value of property, and strips it ofits attributes, by which alone it is distinguished as property,the owner is deprived of it according to the plainestinterpretation, and certainly within the spirit of aconstitutional provision intended expressly to shield privaterights from the exercise of arbitrary power. 96 The Indiana court held the prohibitionary legislation incontravention of a provision in the state constitution declaringthat "all men are endowed by their Creator with certaininalienable rights; that among these are life, liberty and thepursuit of happiness." Beebe v. State, 6 Ind. 501, 510(1855). Dissenting in People v. Gall2gher, 4 Mich. 244, 258(1856), Justice Pratt conducted an identical natural rightsinquiry without the benefit of Thomas Jefferson's penmanship. 97 13N.Y. 379 (1856). 98 6 Ind. 501 (1855). 99 Lincoln v. Smith, 27 Vt. 328, 337-38 (1855). 100 See State v. Guerney, 37 Me. 156, 161 (1853). 101 State v. Allmond, 7 Del. 612, 639 (1856); see Lincoln v.Smith, 27 Vt. 328, 338-39 (1855). 102 People v. Gallagher, 4 Mich. 244, 255 (1856); State v.Wheeler, 25 Conn. 290, 297-98 (1856). 103 State v. Wheeler, 25 Conn. 290, 297 (1856); State v.Allmond, 7 Del. 612, 642 (1856). 104 State v. Allmond, 7 Del. 612, 692 (1856). 105 State v. Paul, 5 R.I. 185, 197 (1858); Lincoln v. Smith,27 Vt. 328, 360 (1855). 106 Meshmeier v. State, II Ind. 482 (1858). 107 In People v. Gallagher, 4 Mich. 244 (1856), the majoritystated: The legislature has said that . . . no man shall sell liquorsto be used as a beverage, because by so doing, he inflicts injuryon the public; but, says the defendant, irrespective of the evil,this right to sell liquors is a natural right, and you have nopower to pass a law infringing that right. How does he prove it?Not by any adjudged cases; there are none, nor by anything in theconstitution preserving to him this right; but it is to bedetermined by the nature and character of the right. . . . [Themanner in which the determination is to be made is] a questionvery suitable and proper for the discussion and deliberation of alegislative body, but one which cannot be entertained by thiscourt. Id. at 257. judge Pratt replied: If the doctrine is true that the legislature can, by theexercise of an implied discretionary power, pass any law notexpressly inhibited by the constitution, then it is certain thata hundred laws may be enacted by that body, invading directlylegitimate business pursuits, impairing and rendering worthlesstrades and occupations, and destroying the substantial value ofprivate property, to the amount of millions of dollars. . . . Butwho, I ask, believes that the legislature possesses the power, orthat the people, in their sovereignty, ever intended to confer onthat body such unlimited omnipotence? As appears to me, no man ofreason and reflection can believe it. Id. at 277-79 (dissenting opinion). 108 Mere possession or consumption of alcohol was notprohibited during this phase of temperance legislation. Many ofthe courts were careful to allude to this feature and to notethat forfeiture could result only from illegalpossession-possession with intent to sell in violation of thelaw. See, e.g., Santo v. State, 2 Iowa 165 (1855); Commonwealthv. Kendall, 66 Mass. (12 Cush.) 414 (1853). 109 123 U.S. 623 (1887). 110 In Bartemeyer v. Iowa, 85 U.S. (18 Wall.) 129 (1873), theSupreme Court held that the prohibition of traffic inintoxicating drinks violates no privilege and immunity of UnitedStates citizenship; the Court avoided the question whether a lawprohibiting sale of liquor owned before the law was passed was adeprivation of property without due process. Four years later, inBeer Co. v. Massachusetts, 97 U.S. 25 (1877), the Court sustaineda prohibition law against a challenge under the obligation ofcontracts clauses but still deferred consideration of theWynehamer question. In upholding the seizure and forfeiture ofliquors belonging to the petitioner, justice Bradley stated: Ifthe public safety or the public morals require the discontinuanceof any manufacture or traffic, the hand of the legislature cannotbe stayed from providing for its discontinuance, by anyincidental inconvenience which individuals or corporations maysuffer. All rights are held subject to the police power of theState. 97 U.S. at 32. Finally, in Mugler v. Kansas, 123 U.S. 623 (1887), Wynebamerwas slain. The Court sustained a conviction for selling beermanufactured before the passage of the law. The Court even heldthat, in order to make effective its regulations against sale,the State might forbid manufacture for personal use. Id. at 662.The only constitutional inhibitions remaining after Mugleremanated from the commerce power. For a discussion of the gradualelimination of these restrictions by congressional action, seeSafely, Growth of State Power Under Federal Constitution toRegulate Traffic in Intoxicating Liquors, 3 IOWA L. BuLL. 221,229-34 (1917). 111 In Mugler, justice Harlan stated: There is no justification for holding that the State, underthe guise merely of police regulations, is here aiming to deprivethe citizen of his constitutional rights. . . . If, therefore, astate deems the absolute prohibition of the manufacture and sale,within her limits, of intoxicating liquors for other thanmedical, scientific, and manufacturing purposes, to be necessaryto the peace and security of society, the courts cannot, withoutusurping legislative functions, override the will of the peopleas thus expressed by their chosen representatives. They havenothing to do with the mere policy of legislation. 123 U.S. at662. 112 See note 82 supra. 113 28 F. 308 (D. Ore. 1886). The prisoner had been convictedin an Oregon court and was being heard on petition for habeascorpus. 114 Id. at 312. 115 16 Nev. 50 (1881). 116 Id. at 55-56. 117 The Supreme Court rejected it one year later in Mugler v.Kansas, 123 U.S. 623 (1887). 118 Ex parte Yung Jon, 28 F. 308, 311 (D. Ore. 1886). 119 Id. In defining property essentially in terms of habits ofthe community, judge Deady was leaving room for the"natural" rights argument with regard to alcohol andtobacco: True, we permit the indiscriminate use of alcohol and tobacco,both of which are classed by science as poisons, and doubtlessdestroy many lives annually. But the people of this country havebeen accustomed to the manufacture and use of these for manygenerations, and they are produced and possessed under the commonand long-standing impression that they are legitimate articles ofproperty, which the owner is entitled to dispose of without anyunusual restraint. . . . On the other hand, the use of opium,otherwise than as this act allows, as a medicine, has but little,if any, place in the experience or habits of the people of thiscountry, save among a few aliens. Id. at 311-12 (emphasis added). 120 State v. Wheeler, 25 Conn. 290 (1856); Lincoln v. Smith,27 Vt. 328 (1855); Commonwealth v. Kendall, 66 Mass. (12 Cush.)414 (1853); cf. State v. Clark, 28 N.H. 176, 181 (1854)(ordinance that prohibited using or keeping intoxicating liquorsin any refreshment saloon or restaurant, "notunreasonable," since it did not "profess to prohibiteither the use or sale of liquor altogether"). 121 Ex parte Wilson, 6 Okla. Crim. 451, 119 P. 596 (1911);Titsworth v. State, 2 Okla. Crim. 268, 101 P. 288 (1909); Statev. Williams, 146 N.C. 618, 61 S.F. 61 (1908); Ex parte Brown, 38Tex. Crim. 295, 42 S.W. 554 (1897) (alternative holding). Contra,Cohen v. State, 7 Ga. App. 5, 65 S.E. 1096 (1909); Easley TownCouncil v. Pegg, 63 S.C. 98, 41 S.E. 18 (1902). 122 Commonwealth v. Campbell, 133 Ky. 50, 117 SAN,. 383(1909); Ex parte Brown, 38 Tex. Crim. 295, 42 S.W. 554 (1897);State v. Gilman, 33 W. Va. 146, 10 S.E. 293 (1889). 123 Eidge v. City of Bessemer, 164 Ala. 599, 51 So. 246(1909); Sullivan v. City of Oneida, 61 Ill. 242 (1871). But seeTown of Selma v. Brewer, 9 Cal. App. 70, 98 P. 61 (Dist. Ct. App.1908). 124 H. BLACK, INTOXICATING LIQUORS 50 (1892); E. FREUND,POLICE POWER 484 (1904); H. JOYCE, THE LAW RELATING T0INTOXICATING LIQUORS  85 (1910); Rogers, "Life, Libertyand Liquor": A Note on the Police Power, 6 VA. L. Rev. 156,174 (1919). 125 E.g., State v. Williams, 146 N.C. 618, 61 S.E. 61 (1908). 126 F. FREUND, P0LICE: POWER 486 (1904): Under these circumstances it seems impossible to speak of aconstitutional right of private consumption. There seems to be nodirect judicial authority for declaring private acts exempt fromthe police power, and the universal tolerance With regard to themshould be ascribed to policy. Like am, other exercise of thepolice power, control of private conduct would have to justifyitself on grounds of the public welfare. 127 Id. 128 E.g., State v. Williams, 146 N.C. 618, 61 S.E. 61 (1908). 129 E.g., State v. Gilman, 33 W. Va. 146, 10 S.E. 283 (1889). 130 E.g., Eidge v. City of Bessemer, 164 Ala. 599, 51 So. 246(1909); Commonwealth v. Campbell, 133 Ky. 50, 117 S.W. 383(1909). 131 133 Ky. 50, 117 S.W. 383 (1909). 132 Id. at 58, 117 S.W. at 385 (emphasis added). 133 Id. at 63, 117 S.W. at 387. 134 Id. 63-64,117 S.W. at 387. 135 Similarly, in State v. Gilman, 33 W. Va. 146, 10 S.E. 283(1889), the court stated: It can hardly be questioned that the right to possess propertyis [an inalienable] right, and that that right embraces theprivilege of a citizen to keep in his possession property foranother. It is not denied that the keeping of property which isinjurious to the lives, health, or comfort of all persons may beprohibited under the police power. . . . [I]t must, of course, bewithin the range of legislative action to define the mode andmanner in which every one may so use his own as not to injureothers. But it does not follow that every statute enactedostensibly for the promotion of these ends is to be accepted as alegitimate exercise of the police Power of the State . . . . The keeping of liquors in his possession by a person, whetherfor himself or for another, unless he does so for the illegalsale of it, or for some other improper purpose , can by nopossibility injure or affect the health, morals, or safety of thepublic; and, therefore, the statute prohibiting such keeping inpossession is not a legitimate exertion of the police power. Id. at 148-49, 10 S.E. it 284 (emphasis added); accord, Exparte Brown, 38 Tex. Crim. 795, 42 S.W. 554 (1897). In Ex parte Wilson, 6 Okla. Crim. 451, 119 P. 596 (1911), theCourt, after quoting extensively from Commonwealth v. Campbell,noted, "The only conclusion that we can legitimately arriveat is that the act in question is not within a reasonableexercise of the police powers of the state-is unconstitutionaland void." 6 Okla. Crim. at 475, 119 P. at 606 (emphasisadded). Finally, the Alabama Supreme Court stated, in strikingdown a local ordinance prohibiting possession by beverage dealersof alcoholic beverages: [The ordinance] can be justified only, if at all, on theground that it sustains some reasonable relation to theprohibition law in the way of preventing evasions of that law bytrick, artifice, or subterfuge under guise of which that 12W isviolated. But it has no such relation. It undertakes to prohibitthe keeping if) any quantity and for any purpose, howeverinnocent, of intoxicating liquors and beverages in places whichare innocent in themselves. Eidge v. City of Bessemer, 164 Ala.599, 606, 51 So. 246, 249 (1909). 136 Ex parte Yun Quong, 159 Cal. 508, 114 P. 835 (1911); Luckv. Sears, 29 Ore. 421, 44 P. 693 (1896); Ah Lim v. Territory, IWash. 156, 24 P. 588 (1890). 137 Ah Lim v. Territory, I Wash. 156, 163, 24 P. 588, 589(1890). 138 If the state concludes that a given habit is detrimentalto either the moral, mental or physical well being of one of itscitizens to such an extent that it is liable to become a burthenupon society, it has an undoubted right to restrain the citizenfrom the commission of that act; and fair and equitableconsideration of the rights of other citizens make it not onlyits right, but its duty, to restrain him. Id. at 164, 24 P. at590; accord, Ex parte Yun Quong, 159 Cal. 508, 515, 114 P. 835,837 (1911); Luck v. Sears, 29 Ore. 421, 426, 44 P. 693, 694(1896). 139 Ex parte Yun Quong, 159 Cal. 508, 515, 114 P. 835, 837(1911); Luck v. Sears, 29 Ore. 421, 425, 44 P. 693, 694 (1896). 140 But it is urged . . . that a moderate use of opium . . .is not deleterious and consequently cannot be prohibited. Weanswer that this is a question of fact which can only be inquiredinto by the legislature. Ah Lim v. Territory, I Wash. 156, 164, 24 P. 588, 590 (1890).The dissent argued that moderate use by some could not bepunished to prevent excessive use by others. Id. at 172-74, 24 P.at 592-93. 141 Id. at 165, 24 P. at 590. [W]hether [opiums] nature andcharacter is such that for the protection of the public itspossession by unauthorized persons should be prohibited is aquestion of fact and of public policy, which belongs to thelegislative department to determine. Luck v. Sears, 29 0re. 421,426, 44 P. 693, 694 (1896). 142 Ex parte Yun Quong, 159 Cal. 508, 514, 114 P. 835, 838(1911) (quoting lower court opinion) (citations omitted). 143 Id. at 515, 114 P. at 838 (emphasis added). 144 "It must be conceded that its indiscriminate usewould have a very deleterious and debasing effect upon our raceId. at 514, 114 P. at 838. 145 l Wash. 156, 24 P. 588 (1890). 146 Id. at 168, 24 P. at 591. 147 Individual desires are too sacred to be ruthlesslyviolated where only acts are involved which do not clearly resultin an in jury, to society, unless, possibly thus renderednecessary in order to prevent others from like actions which tothem are injurious. Id. at 173, 24 P. at 592. He concluded, however, that thestatute was too broad and that this question need not be reached. 148 Id. at 174-75, 24 P. at 593, 149 194 Ala. 406, 69 So. 652 (1915). 150 164 Ala. 599, 51 So. 246 (1909). 151 It is the peculiar function of the lawmakers to ascertainand to determine when the welfare of the people requires theexercise of the state's police powers, and what are appropriatemeasures to that end, subject only to the power and authority ofthe courts to see, when assured to the requisite certainty, thatthe measures of police so adopted do not arbitrarily violaterights protected by the organic laws. 194 Ala. at 421, 69 So. at656. 152 123 U.S. 623 (1887), quoted in 194 Ala. at 428-33, 69 So.at 659-60. 153 194 Ala. at 433, 69 So. at 660. 154 Id. at 434, 69 So. at 660. 155 Ex parte Crane, 27 Idaho 671, 151 P. 1006 (1915), aff'dsuh nom. Crane v. Campbell, 245 U.S. 304 (1917). 156 Ex parte Zwissig, 42 Nev. 360, 178 P. 20 (1919); Fitch v.State, 102 Neb. 361, 167 N.W. 417 (1918); State v. Brown, 40 S.D.372, 167 N.W. 400 (1918); Liquor Transportation Cases, 140 Tenn.582, 205 S.W. 423 (1918); State v. Certain Intoxicating Liquors,51 Utah 569, 172 P. 1050 (1918); Delaney v. Plunkett, 146 Ga.547, 91 S.E. 561 (1917); State v. Carpenter, 173 N.C. 767, 92S.E. 373 (1917); City of Seattle v. Brookins, 98 Wash. 290, 167P. 940 (1917); Brennan v. Southern Express Co., 106 S.C. 102, 90S.E. 402 (1916) (dictum). 157 245 U.S. 304 (1917). 158 Id. at 307-08 (citations omitted). 159 See text at note 126 supra. 160 245 U.S. at 308. 161 Eg., Slaughter House Cases, 83 U.S. (16 Wall.) 36 (1873). 162 Substantive due process was slowly being watered down evenin the economic area during this time. See, e.g., Muller v.Oregon, 208 U.S. 412 (1908). 163 E.g., Bronaugh, Limiting or Prohibiting the Possession, ofIntoxicating Liquors for Personal Use, 23 LAW NoTEs 67 (1919);Rogers, "Life, Liberty & Liquor": A Note on thePolice Power, 6 VA. L. REV. 156 (1919); Safely, Growth of StatePower Under Federal Constitution to Regulate Traffic inIntoxicating Liquors, 3 IOWA L, Bull 221 (1917); Vance, The Roadto Confiscation., 25 YALE I.J. 285 (1916). 164 Ch. 85, 41 Stat. 305 (1919). 165 Cornell v. Moore, 257 U.S. 491 (1922). 166 This argument was accepted in United States v. Dowling,278 F. 630 (S.D. Fla. 1922). 167, Law of Feb. 11, 1897, ch. 30, [1897] Tenn. Acts 156. 168 Austin v. State, 101 Tenn. 563, 48 S.W. 305 (1898), aff'd,179 U.S. 343 (1900). 169 179 U.S. 343 (1900). 170 The primary issue before the Court was whether the statuteinfringed the exclusive power of Congress to regulate interstatecommerce. Id. at 344. However, before turning to the"original package" questions, the Court first had toconclude that the statute was a legitimate exercise of the policepower, for only then could an indirect interference withinterstate commerce be sustained. Id. at 349. The Court noted onthis point: Cigarettes do not seem until recently to have attracted theattention of the public as more injurious than other forms oftobacco; nor are we now prepared to take judicial notice of anyspecial injury resulting from their use or to indorse the opinionof the Supreme Court of Tennessee that "they are inherentlybad and bad only." At the same time we should be shuttingour eyes to what is constantly passing before them were we toaffect an ignorance of the fact that a belief in theirdeleterious effects, particularly upon young people, has becomevery general and that communications are constantly finding theirway into the public press denouncing their use as fraught withgreat danger to the youth of both sexes. Without undertaking toaffirm or deny their evil effects, we think it within theprovince of the legislature to say how far they may be sold, orto prohibit their sale entirely . . . provided . . . there be noreason to doubt that the act in question is designed for theprotection of the public health. Id. at 348-49; cf. Gundling City of Chicago, 177 U.S. 183(1900) (affirming validity of licensing sale of cigarettes 171 City of Zion v. Behrens, 262 111. 510, 104 N.E. 836(1914); Hershberg v. City of Barbourville, 142 Ky. 60. 133 S.W.985 (1911). 172 In the broad language in which the ordinance is enacted itis apparently an attempt on the part of the municipality toregulate and control the habits and practices of the citizenwithout any reasonable basis for so doing. The ordinance is anunreasonable interference with the private rights of the citizen. . . . 262 Ill. at 513, 104 N.E. at 837-38. The ordinance is so broad as to prohibit one from smoking acigarette in his own home or on any private premises in the city.To prohibit the smoking of cigarettes in [such circumstances] isan invasion of his right to control his own personal indulgences.142 Ky. at 61, 133 S.W. at 986 (1911). By holding that theordinance applied in the home, the Kentucky court avoided thequestion raised in the Illinois case. The reasoning would appearto compel the same result, however. 173 B. ADAMS, THE THEORY OF. SOCIAL REVOLUTIONS 94 (1913). 174 Noble State Bank v. Haskell, 219 U.S. 104, III (1911). CliffSchaffer's Home Page Major Studies of Drugs and DrugPolicy ForbiddenFruit and the Tree of Knowledge - Table of Contents Contents | Feedback | Search DRCNet Library | Schaffer Library | Major Studies The Forbidden Fruit and the Tree ofKnowledgeWT01-B31-46IA031-000652-B037-165http://206.61.184.43:80/schaffer/library/studies/vlr/vlr2.htm 206.61.184.43 19970122125238 text/html 49059HTTP/1.0 200 OKDate: Wednesday, 22-Jan-97 12:52:28 GMTServer: WebSitePro/1.1f (S/N wpo-0deb)Allow-ranges: bytesContent-type: text/htmlLast-modified: Saturday, 28-Dec-96 06:48:21 GMTContent-length: 48841 The Genesis of Marijuana Prohibition Contents | Feedback | Search DRCNet Library | Schaffer Library | Major Studies The Forbidden Fruit and the Tree ofKnowledge THE FORBIDDEN FRUIT AND THE TREE OF KNOWLEDGE: AN INQUIRYINTO THE LEGAL HISTORY OF AMERICAN MARIJUANA PROHIBITION Richard J. Bonnie & Charles H. Whitebread, II III. THE GENESIS OF MARIJUANA PROHIBITION Until the inclusion of marijuana in the Uniform Narcotic DrugAct in 1932 and the passage of the Marihuana Tax Act in 1937,there was no "national" public policy regarding thedrug. However, as early as 1914 the New York City Sanitary Lawsincluded cannabis in a prohibited drug list and in 1915 Utahpassed the first state statute prohibiting sale or possession ofthe drug. By 1931 twenty-two states had enacted such legislation.In the succeeding section, we shall delve into the circumstancessurrounding the passage of several of these early laws and theensuing judicial acquiescence in the legislative value judgmentsconcerning marijuana. We conclude that the legislative action andapproval were essentially kneejerk responses uninformed byscientific study or public debate and colored instead by racialbias and sensationalistic myths. A. Initial State Legislation 1914-1931 As indicated above, the Harrison Act, a regulatory measure inthe garb of a taxing statute, left many gaps unfilled in theeffort to prohibit illegal or nonmedical use of opiates andcocaine. Although Commissioner Anslinger of the Federal Bureau ofNarcotics stated in 1932 that few states had responded to theHarrison Act,1 most states had in fact enacted or reenactednarcotics laws in the period from 1914 to 1931.2 In so doing,twenty-one states had also restricted the sale of marijuana aspart of their general narcotics articles, one state hadprohibited its use for any purpose, and four states had outlawedits cultivation.3 Our objective in this section is to determinewhy these states chose to include cannabis in their lists ofprohibited drugs. The first consideration was the increasing public awareness ofthe narcotics problem. As noted above, the Harrison Actengendered a shift in public perception of the narcotics addict.With ever-increasing frequency and venom, he was portrayed in thepublic media as the criminal "dope fiend." Thishysteria, coupled with the actual increases in drug-relatedcriminal conduct due to the closing of the clinics,4 was thebasis for a good many of the post-Harrison Act narcoticstatutes.5 Other forces such as lurid accounts in the media,6publications of private narcotics associations 7 and theeffective separation of the addict and his problems from themedical profession8 all pressed legislatures into action to dealmore effectively with what was perceived as a growing narcoticsproblem. Despite the increasing public interest in the narcoticsproblem during this period, we can find no evidence of publicconcern for, or understanding of, marijuana, even in those statesthat banned it along with the opiates and cocaine. Observers inthe middle and late 1930's agreed that marijuana was at that timea very new phenomenon on the national scene.9 The perplexingquestion remains-why did some states include marijuana in theirprohibitive legislation a decade before it achieved any noticewhatsoever from the general public and the overwhelming majorityof legislators? From a survey of contemporary newspaper and periodicalcommentary we have concluded that there were three majorinfluences. The most prominent was racial prejudice. During thisperiod, marijuana legislation was generally a regional phenomenonpresent in the southern and western states. Use of the drug wasprimarily limited to Mexican-Americans who were immigrating inincreased numbers to those states. These movements were wellnoted in the press accounts of passage of marijuana legislation.A second factor was the assumption that marijuana, which waspresumed to be an addictive drug, would be utilized as asubstitute for narcotics and alcohol then prohibited by nationalpolicy. This factor was particularly significant in the New Yorklaw, the forerunner of nationwide anti-marijuana legislation.Finally, there is some evidence that coverage of the drug by theGeneva Conventions in 1925 was publicized in this country and mayhave had some influence. 1. Rationale in the West: Class Legislation Geometric increases in Mexican immigration after the turn ofthe century naturally resulted in the formation of sizeableMexican-American minorities in each western state.10 It wasthought then11 and is generally assumed now12 that use ofmarijuana west of the Mississippi was limited primarily to theMexican segment of the population. We do not find it surprising,therefore, that sixteen of these states prohibited sale orpossession of marijuana before 1930.13 Whether motivated byoutright prejudice or simple discriminatory disinterest, theresult was the same in each legislature-little if any publicattention, no debate, pointed references to the drug's Mexicanorigins, and sometimes vociferous allusion to the criminalconduct inevitably generated when Mexicans ate "the killerweed." In Utah, for example, the nation's first statewide prohibitionof marijuana 14 in 1915 was attended by little publicity. Thecombination of increasing Mexican immigration15 and thetraditional aversion of the Mormons to euphoriants of any kind16led inevitably to the inclusion of marijuana in the state'somnibus narcotics and pharmacy bill. Similarly, when the NewMexico and Texas legislatures passed marijuana legislation in1923, the former by separate statute17 and the latter byinclusion,18 newspaper reference was minimal despite coverage inboth states of legislative action.19 The longest of the Santa FeNew Mexican references noted: The Santa Fe representative, however, had better luck with his bill to prevent sale of marihuana, cannabis indica, Indian hemp or hashish as it is variously known. This bill was passed without any opposition. Marihuana was brought into local prominence at the penitentiary board's investigation last summer when a convict testified he could get marihuana cigarets anytime he had a dollar. The drug produces intoxication when chewed or smoked. Marihuana is the name commonly used in the Southwest and Mexico.20 In its only direct reference to marijuana, the Austin TexasStatesman stated: The McMillan Senate Bill amended the anti-narcotic law so as to make unlawful the possession for the purpose of sale of any marihuana or other drugs. Marihuana is a Mexican herb and is said to be sold on the Texas-Mexican border .21 The discriminatory aspects of this early marijuanalegislation, suggested only obliquely by origin and apparentdisinterest in Utah, New Mexico and Texas, are directly confirmedin Montana and Colorado. Montana newspapers gave relatively"full" coverage to a proposal to exclude marijuana fromthe general narcotics law and to create a separate marijuanastatute.22 On seven different days from January 14 to February10, 1929 (the date of the bill's passage), the Montana Standardsuccinctly noted the progress of the bill through thelegislature. The giveaway appeared on January 27 when the paperrecorded the following: There was fun in the House Health Committee during the week when the Marihuana bill came up for consideration. Marihuana is Mexican opium, a plant used by Mexicans and cultivated for sale by Indians. "When some beet field peon takes a few rares of this stuff," explained Dr. Fred Fulsher of Mineral County, "He thinks he has just been elected president of Mexico so he starts out to execute all his political enemies. I understand that over in Butte where the Mexicans often go for the winter they stage imaginary bullfights in the 'Bower of Roses' or put on tournaments for the favor of 'Spanish Rose' after a couple of whiffs of Marijuana. The Silver Bow and Yellowstone delegations both deplore these international complications" Everybody laughed and the bill was recommended for passage.23 The same year, a change in Colorado's marijuana law wasprecipitated by less comic apprehensions of the drug's evileffects. On April 7, 1929, a girl was murdered by her Mexicanstep-father. The story was lead news in the Denver Post every dayuntil April 16, probably because the girl's mother was white. Onthe 16th it was first mentioned that this man might have been amarijuana user. Headlined "Fiend Slayer Caught in Nebraska[;] Mexican Confesses Torture of American Baby," andsubheaded "Prisoner Admits to Officer He is MarihuanaAddict," the story, relates in full the underlying events: "You smoke marihuana?" "Yes " The Mexican said he had been without the weed for two days before the killing of his step-daughter .24 On April 17, the story on the Mexican included the following: He repeated the story he had told the Sidney Chief of Police regarding his addiction to marihuana saying that his supply of the weed had become exhausted several days before the killing and his nerves were unstrung.25 With regard to the legislative news there is no mention at anytime of a bill to regulate marijuana; however, on April 21, theDenver Post noted the Governor had signed a bill increasingpenalties for sale, possession or production of marijuana.26 The reader should note that public perception of marijuana'sethnic origins and crime-producing tendencies often went hand inhand, especially in the more volatile areas of the westernstates. Stories such as the one appearing in the Denver Post,where defendants charged with violent crimes attempted to blametheir actions on the effects of marijuana were primarilyresponsible for the drug's characterization as a "killerweed." In any event, from this brief survey of marijuanaprohibition in the western states, we have concluded that itsMexican use pattern was ordinarily enough to warrant itsprohibition, and that whatever attention such legislative actionreceived was attended by sensationalist descriptions of crimesallegedly committed by Mexican marijuana users. 2. Rationale in the East: Substitution The first significant27 instance of marijuana regulationappeared in the 1914 amendments to the New York City SanitaryLaws. The inclusion by the New York legislature of marijuana inIts general narcotics statute in 1927 was the precursor ofnationwide legislation .28 For these reasons, we have chosen NewYork as the most likely source of information regarding the.rationale for marijuana prohibition in Maine, Massachusetts,Michigan, Ohio, Rhode Island and Vermont, all of which had actedbefore 1931.29 In January 1914 the New York legislature passed its firstcomprehensive statute-The Boylan Bill-regulating the sale and useof habit forming drugs"' and did not include marijuana amongits list of prohibited narcotics. It appears that the Board ofHealth of New York City then amended its Sanitary Code adding"Cannabis indica, which is the Indian hemp from which theEast Indian drug called hashish is manufactured,"31 to theCity's list of prohibited drugs. Violation of this provision ofthe City Sanitary Code was a misdemeanor punishable by a smallfine and/or a jail term of up to six months. On July 29, 1914, anarticle reporting the amendment appeared in the New York Timeswherein the drug was described: This narcotic has practically the same effect as morphine and cocaine, but it was not used in this country to any extent while it was easy to get the more refined narcotics.32 The next day the editors of the Times commented: [T]he inclusion of cannabis indica among the drugs to be sold only on prescription is only common sense. Devotees of hashish are now hardly numerous enough here to count, but they are likely to increase as other narcotics become harder to obtain.33 From these observations, it would appear (1) that there werefew marijuana users at the time; and (2) that use of the drug wasexpected to increase as a direct result of the restriction ofopiates and cocaine. Despite New York City's early classification of cannabis withknown narcotics, New York State did not prohibit sale andpossession of the drug for other than medicinal purposes until1927.34 And this was true despite a great deal of activity on thenarcotics front from 1914 to 1927, when the legislature actedfour different times.35 Throughout all this tumult and in thevariety of narcotics proposals suggested or enacted,36 marijuanaor cannabis was not classified among the restricted drugs untilthe drafting of the 1927 Act. This act37 defined cannabis as a"habit-forming drug," 38 and accordingly punished asmisdemeanors39 the control, sale, distribution, administrationand dispensing40 of cannabis except for medical purposes. Thepenalty provision of the statute did not discriminate among typesof offenses, first or subsequent violations, or the prohibitednarcotic drugs.41 There is no apparent indication in the contemporary commentaryof the reasons for inclusion of marijuana in the New York laws.When the 1927 law was passed, public concern was focused on thegeneral need to reduce narcotic addiction; none of thecommentators were concerned about marijuana.42 While there werenumerous articles in the media dealing with the problems of theopiates, morphine, cocaine and heroin, only four articles aboutmarijuana appeared in the major New York newspaper during theentire period from 1914 until 1927. In 1923 the New York Timesnoted that the "latest habit forming drug ... marihuana,which is smoked in a cigarette" was exhibited at a women'sclub meeting.43 In 1925 the same paper reported that the drug hadbeen banned in Mexico.44 One year later, the paper reported theresults of testing in Panama on the effects of marijuana. Thearticle noted that as a result of these tests the study groupconcluded marijuana smoking was relatively safe; thus, it was"recommended that no steps be taken by the authorities ofthe Canal Zone to prevent the sale or use of marijuana and thatno special legislation on that subject was needed." 45Finally, in July 1927, the Times reported that a Mexican familywas said to have gone insane from eating marijuana.46 Perhaps theclearest indication of the absence of notice given the marijuanasection of the 1927 Act is that none of the articles discussingthe Act after its passage refer to marijuana .47 It is likely, then, that the inclusion of cannabis in thestate law was motivated primarily by the same fear that hadprovoked the Sanitary Law Amendment in 1914. Use, though stillslight, was expected to increase. Throughout the entire New Yorkexperience the main argument was preventive: Marijuana use mustbe prohibited to keep addicts from switching to it as asubstitute for the drugs which had become much more difficult toobtain after the enactment of the Harrison Act, and for alcoholafter Prohibition.48 Accordingly, the passage of the Harrison andVolstead Acts were direct causes of the preventive inclusion ofmarijuana among prohibited drugs. In fact, it has been observedthat marijuana use did increase during this period .49 Another factor that may have influenced the passage of the1927 Act was the Second Opium Conference at Geneva in 1925,50which included Indian hemp within the Convention against Opiumand other Dangerous Drugs, even though the United States hadwithdrawn in 1925 from the League of Nations deliberations oncontrolling and regulating the international traffic in dangerousdrugs.51 3. The International Scene The first mention of marijuana on the international front camewith the preliminary negotiations for the Hague Conference of1912. In preparing for this Conference, which represented anattempt to deal with the international opium traffic, thegovernment of Italy proposed that the production and traffic inIndian hemp drugs be included as part of the agenda of theConference.52 During the Conference itself, there was no mentionof the drug, and the Convention did not include cannabis in itsprovisions. In addition to the Convention, however, the delegatessigned a closing protocol: 2. The Conference considers it desirable to study the question of Indian hemp from the statistical and scientific point of view, with the object of regulating its abuses, should the necessity thereof be felt, by internal legislation or by an international agreement .53 It was not until just before the Geneva Conference of 1925that the proposal was mentioned again. In 1923 the followingresolution was passed by the Advisory Committee on Traffic inOpium and Other Dangerous Drugs of the League of Nations: IV. With reference to the proposal of the Government of the Union of South Africa that Indian hemp should be treated as one of the habit-forming drugs, the Advisory Committee recommends the Council that, in the first instance, the Governments should be invited to furnish to the League information as to the production and use of, and traffic in, this substance in their territories, together with their observations on the proposal of the Government of the Union of South Africa .54 At the 1925 meeting in Geneva, the Egyptians led the way inproposing that hashish be included within the Convention.55 AnEgyptian delegate presented a paper on the effects and use ofhashish in Egypt. Mr. El Guindy's study is so typical of theso-called scientific or empirical evidence that has beenpresented to justify the drug's prohibition that the followingexcerpt must be included. In stating that the real danger ofhashish is that it will produce insanity, the Egyptian delegatepresented the following: The illicit use of hashish is the principal cause of most of the cases of insanity occurring in Egypt. In support of this contention, it may be observed that there are three times as many cases of mental alienation among men as among women, and it is an established fact that men are much more addicted to hashish than women.56 The Egyptian proposal was referred to a subcommittee for studyand later in the Conference this group reported that the use ofIndian hemp drugs should be limited to medical and scientificpurposes. The proceedings contain no record of what medical orscientific evidence might have been brought forward to supportthe inclusion of the Indian hemp drugs in the Convention.57Nevertheless, they were the subject of Chapters IV and V of theConvention.58 4. Conclusion The early laws against the cannabis drugs were passed withlittle public attention. Concern about marijuana was relatedprimarily to the fear that marijuana use would spread, even amongwhites, as a substitute for the opiates and alcohol made moredifficult to obtain by federal legislation. Especially in thewestern states, this concern was identifiable with the growth ofthe Mexican-American minority. It is clear that no stateundertook any empirical or scientific study of the effects of thedrug. Instead they relied on lurid and often unfounded accountsof marijuana's dangers as presented in what little newspapercoverage the drug received. It was simply assumed that cannabiswas addictive and would have engendered the same evil effects asopium and cocaine. Apparently, legislators in these states foundit easy and uncontroversial to prohibit use of a drug they hadnever seen or used and which was associated with ethnicminorities and the lower class. B. Judicial Corroboration Two significant conclusions appear from a study of the fewcases59 involving convictions for marijuana offenses under theinitial wave of state laws. First, the argument regarding aprivate conduct limitation on the police power had been sodiscredited it was not even made. Second, the courts, like thelegislatures, relied on nonscientific materials to support theproposition that marijuana was an addictive, mind-destroying drugproductive of crime and insanity. In only one case was there a serious constitutional challengeto the validity of the legislation. Appealing a Louisianaconviction for possession of five hundred plants of marijuana,the defendant in State v. Bonoa60 argued not that the state couldnot punish mere possession but rather that the statute wasoverbroad, since aside from its use as an intoxicant themarijuana plant was employed in the manufacture of hemp line, inthe preparation of useful drugs and for the production of birdseed for canaries. Defendant's contention was that onlypossession, sale or use for deleterious purposes could beprohibited. The court's reply was that the drug's deleterious propertiesoutweighed its uses, especially since " [t]he Marijuanaplant is not one of the crops of this state." 61 Defendantalso offered the reductio ad absurdum argument that if possessionof the marijuana plant may be prohibited simply becauseintoxicating resin may be extracted from the flowering tops, thenthe possession of corn or grapes may be prohibited becausewhiskey and wine may be made from them, or possession of poppiesbecause opium may be extracted from them. To this the courtreplied that alcohol was less injurious than marijuana and thatboth alcohol and opium were difficult to prepare from thesesources while the marijuana plant was easily converted intotobacco and cigarettes. The court's reasoning is admirable if we accept the basicpremise that the marijuana drug is deleterious. To support thisconclusion the court quoted from Solis Cohen Githens'Pharmacotheraupeutics: The first symptom is usually an exaltation of the mind . . . . The ideas are joyous Sleep follows . . . . When aroused from sleep . . . the mind passes into the same somnolent condition, which lasts for several hours and is followed by a sense of weakness and extreme mental depression. In certain eastern people . . . perhaps because of continued use, the somnolent action is replaced by complete loss of judgment and restraint such as is seen more often from alcohol. An Arab leader, fighting against the crusaders, had a bodyguard who partook of haschisch, and used to rush madly on their enemies, slaying everyone they met. The name of "haschischin" applied to them has survived as "assassin." The habitual use of cannabis does not lead to much tolerance, nor do abstinence symptoms follow its withdrawal. It causes, however, a loss of mentality, resembling dementia, which can be recognized even in dogs.62 The court also quotes Rusby, Bliss & Ballard, TheProperties and Uses of Drugs: The particular narcosis of cannabis consists in the liberation of the imagination from all restraint . . . . Not rarely, in [the depression] state, an irresistible impulse to the commission of criminal acts will be experienced. Occasionally an entire group of men under the influence of this drug will rush out to engage in violent or bloody deeds.63 On these two sources, the entire opinion stands. The allegedlydeleterious consequences-criminal activity and insanity-aresupported only by the mythical etymology of the word"assassin." The marijuana user's purported propensitytoward crime, based on similar and often weaker authority, wasthe primary rationale underlying passage of the Marihuana TaxAct.64 So preposterous is this assertion that even the proponentsof criminalization-including the Cormmissioner of the Bureau ofNarcotics-later implicitly rejected it.65 In any event, the courts were as willing to accept suchevidence as the legislatures. In a Utah case, State v. Navaro,66where the court cited the acknowledged evils of marijuana torepel a vagueness attack,67 it relied on another set of dubiousauthorities. First, the court referred to the case of State v.Diaz68 wherein a defendant in a first degree murder prosecutiontried to disprove the requisite mens rea by showing that he wasunder the influence of marijuana at the time of the offense. Diazhad claimed that "his mind was an entire blank as to allthat happened to him and stated that after smoking the marijuanahe became 'very crazy.' To corroborate his assertion, defendantsummoned a physician whose testimony was summarized in Diaz in apassage quoted in full in Navaro: He stated that [marijuana] is a narcotic and acts upon thecentral nervous system affecting the brain, producingexhilarating effects and causing one to do things which heotherwise would not do and especially induces acts of violence;that violence is one of the symptoms of an excessive use ofmarijuana. That the marihuana produces an "I don'tcare" effect. A man having used liquor and marihuana mightdeliberately plan a robbery and killing and carry it out andescape, and then later fail to remember anything that hadoccurred. 70 Thus an attempt in an adversary setting by an accused toescape criminal responsibility by blaming his offense onmarijuana intoxication became medical authority for thescientific hypothesis that marijuana use causes crime. The second source of support in Navaro for the allegedlydeleterious effects of marijuana was a 1932 article by Hayes andBowery (the latter a member of the Wichita, Kansas, PoliceDepartment) entitled Marihuana .71 Calling for stricter penaltiesfor marijuana use, the authors stated that during theexhilaration phase, the user is likely to have increased sexualdesires72 and to commit "actions of uncontrollable violence,or even murder." 73 For these propositions, they citednewspaper accounts of crimes the causes of which the reporterattributed to marijuana74 and police testimony to the sameeffect.75 For example, the Chief Detective of the Los AngelesPolice Department was quoted as saying: In the past we have had officers of this department shot and killed by Marihuana addicts and have traced the act of murder directly to the influence of Marihuana, with no other motive. Numerous assaults have been made upon officers and citizens with intent to kill by Marihuana addicts which were directly traceable to the influence of Marihuana.76 It should be noted that Hayes and Bowery attributed theviolent impulse to the absence of restraint engendered during theso-called exhilaration phase, while each of the authorities citedby the Louisiana court in Bonoa attributed the same impulse tothe sufferings experienced during the "depression"phase.77 The authors also asserted that habitual use leads to a"loss of mental activity, accompanied by a general dullnessand indolence, like that of chronic alcoholics or opiumcaters," to "destruction of brain tissues" andinevitably to insanity. For this proposition, the authors merelysaid that "seventeen to twenty per cent of all malesadmitted to mental hospitals and asylums in India have becomeinsane through the use of this drug."78 Finally the court cited an article by Eugene Stanley, theDistrict Attorney of New Orleans, entitled Marihuana as aDeveloper of Crimiinals.79 The title conveys the message. We willreturn to Mr. Stanley in the succeeding section.80 The nonchalance with which Utah and Louisiana courts citedsensationalistic, nonscientific sources to support theproposition that marijuana produced crime and insanity suggestshow widely accepted this hypothesis was among decision-makers,both judicial and legislative, prior to 1931. Given theprevalence of this attitude, the noninvolvement of the middleclass, and the precedent established in the earlier alcohol andnarcotics cases, it is not surprising that constitutionalchallenges were either not made or easily rebuffed. Nor is itsurprising that challenges regarding the ambiguity of the word"marijuana" were unsuccessful.81 The courts, like thelegislatures, assumed marijuana caused crime and insanity, andassumed that had public opinion crystallized on the question, itwould have favored the suppression of a drug with such evileffects. Footnotes and References 1 Anslinger, The Reason for Uniform State NarcoticLegislation, 21 GEO. L.J. 52, 53 (1932). 2 STATE Laws 35-327. 3 Id. at 14. 4 For a discussion of the change in the public image ofaddicts and the closing of clinical experiments, see p. 988supra. 5 See TERRY & PELLENS 877-919. 6 See, eg., text at notes 24-25 infra. For somewhat moreclinical discussions, see TERRY & PELLENS 877-919. 7 See Weber, Drugs and Crime, 10 J. CRIM. L. & CRIMINOLOGY370 (1919). 8 A. LINDESMITH, THE ADDICT AND THE LAW 3-3S (1965); King,Narcotic Drug Laws and Enforcement Policies, 22 LAW &CONTEMP. PROB. 113, 120-26 (1957). 9 Hearing on H.R. 6385 Before the House Comm. on Ways andMeans, 75th Cong, 1st Sess. 20 (1937) [hereinafter cited as TaxAct Hearings]. 10 The Bureau of Immigration recorded the entry of 590,765Mexicans into the United States between 1915 and 1930. Of these,upwards of 90% in each year were to be resident in the 22 stateswest of the Mississippi, and more than two-thirds were to residein Texas alone. Information compiled from Tables, ImmigrantAliens, By States of Intended Future Residence and Race orPeoples, published yearly for each fiscal year from 1915 to 1930in COMM'R GEN. OF IMMIGRATION ANN. REP. 11 Tax Act Hearings 20, 3 3. 12 THE MARIHUANA PAPERs at xiv (D. Solomon ed. 1966). 13 Id.at xv. 14 At its 1915 session, the Utah legislature passed an omnibusnarcotics and pharmacy bill which included under it the cannabisdrugs. Ch. 66,  7, 8, [1915] Utah Laws 77. The law forbadesale and possession of the named drugs, and provided for medicaluse under a system of prescriptions and order blanks.Interestingly, clinical treatment of addicts was allowed. Id. at77-80. The law also prohibited possession of opium and marijuanapipes. Id. at 80. Violations were misdemeanors punishable byfines and/or imprisonment for terms up to six months, but thirdoffenders faced prison terms from one to five years. The statutemade no distinction between sale and possession, nor among thevarious drugs. The law was revised in 1927. Ch. 65, [1927]1 UtahLaws 107. 15 See note 10 supra. 16 See THE DOCTRINE AND COVENANTS OF THE CHURCH OF JESUSCHRIST OF LATTER-DAY SAINTS, CONTAINING THE REVELATIONS GIVEN TOJOSEPH SMITH, THE PROPHET  89, at 154 (192 1) (PP, P 5, 7, wineor strong drink) (P 8, tobacco) (P 9, hot drinks) (revelationsgiven through Joseph Smith the Prophet, at Kirtland, Ohio,February, 27, 1833, known as the Word of Wisdom). 17 The statute made importation of cannabis illegal andestablished a presumption of importation whenever a person wasfound to possess the drug. Ch. 42,   1-2, [1923] N.M. Laws58-59. Violations were punishable by fine and/or imprisonmentfrom one to three years. Cultivation, sale or giving awaycannabis except for use by physicians and pharmacists was alsoprohibited, and violations were punishable on first offense byone to three years in prison and on subsequent offenses by threeto five years imprisonment. Id.  3, 4. 18 The Texas general narcotics statute, ch. 150, [1919] Tex.Gen. Laws 277-79, as amended, ch. 61, [1919] Tex. Special Sess.Laws 156-57, similar in format to the Utah statute and theHarrison Act, included "any drug or preparation known orsold under the Spanish name of 'Marihuana........... Id. at 278.Unlike the Utah and New Mexico statutes, Texas prohibited onlyselling, furnishing or giving away marijuana. Except for theexempted medical purposes, such divestment of any of the listednarcotics could have resulted in a fine and/or imprisonment fromone month to one year. Id. at 279. 19 The Santa Fe New Mexican, hometown paper of the bill'ssponsor, made only one mention of marijuana at the time ofpassage, and that was to note that the drug was being smuggledinto the state prisons. Santa Fe New Mexican, Feb. 1, 1923. The Austin Texas Statesman gave heavy coverage to legislativenews at this time because the legislature was in special sessioncalled by the Governor to deal with a budgetary problem. 20 Santa Fe New Mexican, Jan. 31, 1923. The statute was passedon February 27, 1923; during the period from January 20 toFebruary 28, there were only three other references to marijuana.The newspaper first noted the bill in a one sentence report thata ban on sale of marijuana was to be discussed. Id., Jan. 20,1923. Finally, in articles entitled "A Day In TheLegislature," the progress of the bill (H.B. 56) was notedon February 21 and 27 in simple lists of bills enacted. Id., Feb.21, 27, 1923. So inconsequential was the bill that it was noteven mentioned in two stories describing the activities of thelegislature for that session. Id., Feb. 27, 1923, at 1, col. 1. 21 Austin Texas Statesman, June 19, 1923. Despite heavycoverage of legislative news and of narcotics generally, the ElPaso Times made no reference to marijuana between June 10 andJune 25. The Texas Statesman mentioned the "McMillanBill" only two other times, each time without directreference to marijuana. 22 Unlike most states that passed laws early in the 1920'sagainst marijuana use, Montana in 1927 passed a statute whichmerely amended the first section of its general narcotic law,Rev. Code of Mont. ch. 227, S 3186 (1921), to include marijuana.Ch. 91,  1, [ 1927] Mont. Laws 324. The new law, ch. 6, [1929]Mont. Laws 5, made use, sale or possession without a prescriptiona misdemeanor. 23 The Montana Standard, Jan. 27, 1929, at 3, col. 2. 24Denver Post, April 16, 1929, at 2, col. 1. 25 Id., April 17,1929, at 2, col. 1. 26 Id., April 21, 1929. Ch. 95, (1927] Colo. Laws 309,penalized possession, sale, gift, or cultivation of any of thecannabis drugs as a misdemeanor. Offenses carried a fine and/orimprisonment in the county jail for not less than one or morethan six months. The new law, ch. 93, [1929] Colo. Laws 331,increased the penalties for second offenders to one to five yearterms in the penitentiary. 27 Although Commissioner Anslinger stated in the 1937 Tax ActHearings that the District of Columbia had no law regulatingmarijuana, Dr. Woodward of the AMA refuted the Commissioner'sstatement by citing a 1906 provision which limited the sale ofcannabis to pharmacists and regulated sale of the drug by suchpharmacists to the public. Tax Act Hearings 92-93. The D.C.provision, Act of May 7, 1906, ch. 2084,  13, 34 Star. 175, istypical of early attempts to deal with the drug under the generalpoison laws, but it is noteworthy in its treatment of marijuanaseparately from opiates. 28 See pp. 10 30-3 3 infra. 29 In 1913, Maine prohibited the sale of cannabis indicawithout a prescription. STATE LAWS 137. Massachusetts passed asimilar law in 1917, id. at 150, and Michigan forbade possessionin 1929, id. at 161. A 1923 Ohio law prohibited sale orpossession with intent to sell, id. at 242; Rhode Islandprohibited sale in 1918, id. at 263; and Vermont barred salewithout a prescription in 1915, id. at 296. 31 Ch. 363, [1914] N.Y. Laws 1120. The first narcoticslegislation in New York was enacted in 1893. Ch. 661, art. XII,208, 11893] N.Y. Laws 1561. The 1893 law provided that noprescription containing opium, morphine, cocaine or chloral couldbe filled more than once. Two years later, the legislatureenacted a provision requiring that the effect of narcotics on thehuman system be taught in the public schools. Ch. 1041, 1,[18951 N.Y. Laws 972. In 1897, a law was passed making it afelony to possess any narcotic "with intent to administerthe same or cause the same to be administered to another"without his consent. Ch. 42,  1, [1897] N.Y. Laws 21. The firstprovision aimed at the sale of narcotics was passed in 1907 andprovided that the sale or distribution of cocaine without aprescription was unlawful. Ch. 424, @ 1, [ 1907] N.Y. Laws 879.This provision was subsequently amended to provide for thekeeping of records of sales and of transactions between dealers.Ch. 470,  2, [1913] N.Y. Laws 984; ch. 131,  1, [1910] N.Y.Laws 231; ch. 277,  1, [1908] N.Y. Laws 764. 31 N.Y. Times, July 29, 1914, at 6, col. 2. 32 Id. 33 Id., July 30, 1914, at 8, col. 4. 34 Ch. 672, [1927] N.Y. Laws 1695-1703. 35 The 1914 act was amended by the Whitney Act in 1918 whichalso provided for the repeal of the 1914 act. Ch. 639, [1918]N.Y. Laws 2026. In 1921 an act was passed that in effect repealedall the legislation relating to the narcotics problem. Ch. 708,[1921] N.Y. Laws 2496. The measure made no provision for otherlaws on the subject. This surprising move was made in theinterests of economy, N.Y. Times, Jan. 6, 1921, at 1, col. 8, andwith the belief that the drug problem could be better handled bylocal authorities working in concert with federal agencies. Seeid., Jan. 9, 1921, S 2, at 1, col. 7; id., May 22, 1921, S 2, at11, col. 3, An act making illegal the sale of cocaine without aprescription was enacted in 1923. Ch. 130, [1923] N.Y. Laws 160.The possession of opium or cocaine without a prescription wasoutlawed in 1926. Ch. 650,  2, [1926] N.Y. Laws 1198. 36 As late as 1918, a legislative committee that hadexhaustively studied the narcotics problem in New York did notmention the use of marijuana and concluded: "The drugs whichare the sources of the difficulty are cocaine and eucaine withtheir salts and derivatives and opium and its derivatives,codeine, morphine and heroin." JOINT LEGISLATIVE COMM. TOINVESTIGATE THE LAWS IN RELATION TO THE DISTRIBUTION AND SALE OFNARCOTIC DRUGS, FINAL REPORT, NEW YORK SENATE Doc. No. 35 (1918).quoted in TERRY & PELLENs 833. 37 The Act of April 5, 1927, repealed both the 1923 and 1926laws and replaced them with a comprehensive narcotic controlscheme. Ch. 672, [1927] N.Y. Laws 1695. This act containedprovisions relating to the control and use of narcotic drugs andtreatment of addicts; it also exempted certain preparations fromits coverage. The act furnished the model for the UniformNarcotic Drug Act. See pp. 1030-31 infra. Subsequently, in 1929, unlawful sale of narcotics was made afelony and all other violations of the 1927 act were mademisdemeanors. Ch. 377, [19291 N.Y. Laws 881. 38 Ch. 672, S 421(14), [ 1927] N.Y. Laws 1697. 39 Id. S 443, at 1702, 40 Id. 5 423, at 1697. 41 See id.  443, at 1702. 42 See N.Y. Times, Mar. 25, 1927, at 4, col. 6. 43 Id., Jan. 11, 1923, at 24, col. 1. 44 Id., Dec. 29, 1925, at 10, col. 7. 45 Id., Nov. 21, 1926,  2, at 3, col. 1. 46 Id., July 6, 1927, at 10, col. 6. 47 See id., Mar. 25, 1927, at 4, col. 6; id., April 6, 1927,at 13, col. 2. 48 See Simon, From Opium to Hasheesh, Sci Am., Nov. 1921, at14-15. See also N.Y. Times, Jan. 11, 1923, at 24, col. 1. Asimilar argument was made with respect to cocaine: Cocaine in particular is greatly in demand. When prohibitionis in force, persons, especially drinkers from compulsion ofhabit who have been robbed of their daily drink, will naturallyresort to cocaine . . . . Weber, supra note 7, at 372. 49 B. RENBORG, INTERNATIONAL DRUG CONTROL 216 (1947): As the campaign against the illicit traffic in opium,morphine, and cocaine drugs made progress and gradually resultedin diminution of the supplies on the illicit market, a markedincrease in the illicit traffic and the use of Indian hemp drugswas noticed. more particularly on the North American Continent(the problem of marihuana) and in Egypt (the hashish problem). 50 See Second Geneva Opium Conference, Convention, Protocoland Final Act, quoted in W. WILLOUGHBY, OPIUM AS AN INTERNATIONALPROBLEM 534-70 (1925). 51 Id. at 344-46. 52 Wright, The International Opium Conference, 6 Am. J. INT'LL. 865, 871 (1912). 53 Addendum and Final Protocol of The international OpiumConf., The Hague, 1912, quoted in W. WILLOUGHBY, supra note 50,at 492. 54 ADVISORY Comm. ON TRAFFIC in OPIUM AND OTHER DANGEROUSDRUGs, REPORT To COUNCIL ON THE WORK OF THE SIXTH SESSION (1924),quoted in W. WILLOUGHBY, supra note 50, at 374. 55 See W. WILLOUGHBY, supra note 50, at 2 SI. 56 Quoted in id. at 378. Mr. El Guindy concludes by saying:"Generally speaking, the proportion of cases of insanitycaused by the use of hashish varies from 3 to 60 percent of thetotal number of cases occurring in Egypt." Id. at 379. 57 There are no records of these subcommittee hearings, so wecan only surmise that the quality of the evidence might have beenabout as bad as that presented in the floor report of theEgyptian delegation. 58 Geneva Convention of 1925, quoted in W.WILLOUGHBY, supranote 50, at 539. Moreover, the Convention defines Indian hemp asfollows: "Indian hemp" means the dried flowering or fruitingtops of the pistillate plant Cannabis sativa L. from which theresin has not been extracted, under whatever name they may bedesignated in commerce. Id. at 535 59 In an extensive surveyof cases appearing in the FourthDecennial Digest for the years 1926 to 1936, we could find onlyeight cases dealing with marijuana under laws enacted prior tothe Uniform Narcotic Drug Act. In chronological order: Gonzalesv. State, 108 Tex. Crim. 253, 299 S.W.. 901 (1927); State v.Franco, 76 Utah 202, 289 P. 100 (1930); State v. Bonoa, 172 La.955, 136 So. 15 (1931); Santos v. State, 122 Tex. Crim. 69, 53S.W.2d 609 (1932); Baker v. State, 123 Tex. Crim. 209, 58 S.W.2d534 (1933); Horton v. State, 123 Tex. Crim. 237, 58 S.W.2d 833(1933); State v. Navaro, 83 Utah 6, 26 P.2d 955 (1933); People v.Torres, 5 Cal. App. 2d 580, 43 P.2d 374 (Dist. Ct. App. 1935). 60 172 La. 955, 136 So. 15 (1931). 61 Id. at 964, 136 So. at 18. 62 id. at 961-62, 136 So. at 17-18. 63 id. at 962-63, 136 So. at 18. 64 See pp 1055-57 infra. 65 See pp. 1072 infra. 66 see Utah 6, 26 P.2d 955 (1933) 67 Appellant, convicted on an information charging"possession of marijuana," contended that the statueprohibited only possession of the flowering tops and leaves ofthe marijuana plant. The court held that marijuana was thepopular name for the drug, not just the plant, and that theinformation accordingly charged an offense. For this proposition,it cited dictionaries, other state statutes, articles, cases andtexts. It is the court's familiarity with the articles describingthe allegedly evil effects of the drug with which we areconcerned. 68 76 Utah 463, 290 P. 727 (1930). 69 Id. at 469, 290 P. at 729 70 83 Utah at 12, 26 P.2d at 957, quoting 76 Utah at 469-470,290 P. at 729 71 Hayes & Bowery, Marihuana, 23 J. CRim. L. &CRIMINOLOGY 1086 (1932). 72 Id. at 1087, 1089. 73 Id. at 1088. 74 Id. at 1093. 75 Id. at 1088, 1090-91. 76 Id. at 1088 (emphasis added). 77 Compare text at note 72 supra with text at notes 62-63supra. 78 Hayes & Bowery, supra note 71, at 1090. 79 Stanley, Marihuana as a Developer of Criminals, 2 Am. J.Police Sci. 252 (1931),cited in State v Navaro, 83 Utah 6, 14-15,26 P.2d 955, 958 (1933). 80 See p. 1044 infra. 81 E.g., State v. Navaro, 83 Utah 6, 15, 26 P2d 955, 959(1933); State v. Bonoa, 172 La. 955, 959, 136 So. 15, 17 (1931 ).The Texas court was somewhat stricter in a series of casescharging simply sale or possession of "narcotic drugs"without specifying marijuana. On the same day, the court reversedconvictions in Baker v. State, 123 Tex. Crim. 209. 58 S.W.2d 534(1933) (possession); Baker v. State, 123 Tex. Crim. 212, 58S.W.2d 535 (1933) (sale or possession); and Horton v. State, 123,Tex. Crim. 237, 58 S.W.2d 833, (1933) (possession). On the otherhand the Court held that an indictment charging "possessionof marijuana" is sufficient even though it does not allegethat marijuana is a narcotic drug. Santos v. State 122 Tex. Crim.69, 53 S.W.2d 609 (1932). Contents | Feedback | Search DRCNet Library | Schaffer Library | Major Studies The Forbidden Fruit and the Tree ofKnowledgeWT01-B31-47IA031-000652-B037-196http://206.61.184.43:80/schaffer/library/studies/vlr/vlr3.htm 206.61.184.43 19970122125249 text/html 63786HTTP/1.0 200 OKDate: Wednesday, 22-Jan-97 12:52:38 GMTServer: WebSitePro/1.1f (S/N wpo-0deb)Allow-ranges: bytesContent-type: text/htmlLast-modified: Saturday, 28-Dec-96 06:48:10 GMTContent-length: 63568 Passage of the Uniform Narcotic Drug Act: 1927-1937 Contents | Feedback | Search DRCNet Library | Schaffer Library | Major Studies The Forbidden Fruit and the Tree ofKnowledge THE FORBIDDEN FRUIT AND THE TREE OF KNOWLEDGE: AN INQUIRYINTO THE LEGAL HISTORY OF AMERICAN MARIJUANA PROHIBITION Richard J. Bonnie & Charles H.Whitebread, II IV. PASSAGE OF THE UNIFORM NARCOTIC DRUG ACT: 1927-1937 Our conclusions to this point bear summarization. During thefirst two decades of the twentieth century, state as well asnational policy was steadfastly opposed to manufacture, sale andconsumption of narcotics and alcohol except for medical purposes.Constitutional objections ions were uniformly ignored, in thenarcotics cases primarily because the nexus between the privateconduct and public harm was in fact a close one, and in thealcohol cases primarily because the legislation was in responseto full operation of the public opinion process, to which thecourts were willing to defer. We have also found that public opinion had not crystallizedagainst intoxicants generally, although public policy was movingrapidly in that direction. Ultimately, the mere existence of thatpublic policy even in the form of criminal law-was not sufficientto convert a public antipathy toward the evils of commercialalcohol traffic into opposition to moderate use of alcohol. Onthe question of private use, the public policy was unenforceableand eventually abandoned. However, with respect to narcotics, thepublic policy, also expressed through the criminal law,effectively converted narcotics use, in the public view, from amedical problem to a legal-moral problem. Sympathy forunfortunate victims turned into moral indictment. Because otherlaws and medical advances had reduced the number of accidentaladdicts, the number of addicts decreased; in this sense thepublic policy was successful. However, to the extent that thispolice, effectively ostracized a group of users from the rest ofsociety, drove them to criminal activity to sustain their habit,and engendered a moralistic public image, the stage was set formany ensuing problems the consequences of which have onlyrecently become matters of public debate. Ancillary to these developments during this period was theclassification of marijuana in some half the states as anaddictive drug that produced the same evils as the opiates andcocaine--crime, pauperism and insanity. The users, few in number,were primarily Mexicans. But as Mexican immigration increased andthe legitimate supply of narcotics and alcohol disappeared, afear developed, particularly in the western states, thatmarijuana use would increase, particularly among the white youth.As a result, some twenty-two states restricted marijuana use tomedical channels. The private conduct objection havingevaporated, the courts uncritically affirmed the legislativeclassification, accepting on faith nonscientific opinion thatmarijuana was a "killer weed." Even though the public opinion process did not operate on theissue during this period, the decision-makers in all probabilitythought that their actions comported with latent publicattitudes. If indeed marijuana caused crime and insanity, ofcourse the public would oppose its use, as it presumably did useof opium and cocaine. Because the users were few in number andconfined primarily to a suppressed social and economic minority,there was no voice which could be beard to challenge theseassumptions. To put it another way, the middle class hadsuccessfully frustrated alcohol prohibition because the publicopinion process came to reflect its view that the law should notcondemn intoxication. Yet because marijuana use was primarily alower class phenomenon, the middle class was generally unaware ofthe proposed legislation. The public opinion process did not operate and decision-makersremained uninformed about the drug. Quickly and with neitherconsideration nor dissent, the laws were enacted, thusestablishing a deliberative format followed often in thesucceeding debates. Although the groundwork had been laid, denigration of the"loco-weed" was primarily a regional phenomenon until1932. Nationalization ensued in two fell swoops in the 1930's.First, cannabis was included in an optional provision of theUniform Narcotic Drug Act proposed in 1932. Second, Congressenacted the Marihuana Tax Act in 1937. In the following sectionswe shall scrutinize these two watershed developments. A. Origins of the Uniform Law As we have suggested, the Harrison Act's masquerade as arevenue measure required residual state legislation in order toeffectuate full prohibition of the narcotics trade in America.1After its passage most states obediently marched to the tuneplayed in Washington. By 1931 every state had restricted the saleof cocaine and, with the exception of two, the opiates.2Thirty-six states had enacted legislation prohibitingunauthorized possession of cocaine3 and thirty-five prohibitedunauthorized possession of the opiates and other restricteddrugs.4 Eight states also prohibited possession of hypodermicsyringes.5 Perhaps the most significant feature of the stateresponse to the Harrison Act was the sharp increase in penaltiesbetween 1914 and 1931.6 Even those penalties, however, seem lightin comparison with the current penalties.7 On the other hand, some influential legislators thought thatthe Federal Act was sufficient to deal with the problem.8 Andthere was a considerable lack of uniformity regarding theoffenses prohibited and the penalties imposed by the severalstates. Finally, there was little attention devoted todevelopment of enforcement patterns within and among the states.9 With such a variety of state legislation, it is not surprisingthat little data is available on the enforcement of these laws.Since the Uniform Crime Statistics, currently the most reliablesource for enforcement data, were first compiled in 1932, thereare no figures on the number of drug arrests by state authoritiesin the 1920's. One commentator asserts: As of June 30, 1928, of the 7738 prisoners in federal penitentiaries, 2529 were sentenced for narcotics offenses, 1156 for prohibition law violations, and 1148 for stolen-vehicle transactions. Data are not available for approximately the same number in state institutions at this time.10 Despite the significant degree of federal enforcement activityevidenced by the above data, state law enforcement agenciesseldom involved themselves with narcotics.11 Perhaps the bestevidence of the lax enforcement of state narcotic laws from 1914to 1927 is the 1921 call for more effective enforcement of the1917 Massachusetts anti-narcotic law by the Medical Director ofthe Boston Municipal Court: Our laws aiming at the suppression of morphinism could perhaps be better, but, no matter whether they be improved or not, they will not have their maximal efficiency without adequate appropriations for their enforcement. Even with the insufficient funds now available, more could be reached. I understand, for instance, that there is no special police force (white squads) entrusted with the detection and arrest of cases of V.D.L. [Violation of the Drug Law.] and that officers are very much hankered by not being allowed to follow suspected persons outside their particular districts.12 The general lack of uniformity in anti-narcotic legislation,13the weakness of state enforcement procedures, 14 and the growinghysteria about dope fiends and criminality15 converged in severalrequests beginning as early as 1927 for a uniform state narcoticlaw.16 The drafting process of the Uniform Narcotic Drug Act mustalso be viewed against the backdrop of two larger movements: (1) the trend toward the creation and dissemination of uniformstate laws by the National Commissioners on Uniform State Laws, agroup to which each state sent two representatives appointed bythe governor; and (2) the general concern in the late 20's and early 30's aboutcontrolling interstate crime, manifested, for example, in thecreation of the nearly autonomous Federal Bureau of Investigationin 1930. Because the concepts of states rights and narrowly construedfederal power held shelf sway in this period, appeal to theNational Commissioners was the inevitable recourse for thosepressing for uniform and-narcotic regulations. B. Drafting the Law A committee of Commissioners in conjunction with Dr. WilliamC. Woodward, Executive Secretary of the Bureau of Legal Medicineand Legislation of the American Medical Association, prepared andsubmitted at the 1925 meeting of the Commissioners the FirstTentative Draft.17 The Committee report stated: "It occursto your committee that the New York Act should be taken as abasis for framing a Uniform Act, and the draft submitted herewithis largely a copy of the New York Act." 18 It appears thatthe First Draft was drawn up by the Chairman of the Committeealone.19 It was never presented on the floor of the full meetingbut was recommitted for further study. 20 The First Draftincluded the following definitions: (12) "Cannabis indica" or "cannabis sativa" shall include any compound, manufacture, salt, derivative or preparation thereof and any synthetic substitute for any of them identical in chemical composition. (13) "Habit forming drugs" shall mean coca leaves, opium, cannabis indica or cannabis sativa.21 Nowhere in the Committee report or in the Proceedings doesthere appear an explanation of the inclusion of cannabis underthe prohibited or regulated drugs. The Second Tentative Draft was presented in 1928,22 and againthe draft was not discussed at the Conference but recommitted forfurther study.23 The Second Draft was an exact copy of the 1927New York statute.24 It retained cannabis in the class of"habit forming drugs ." 25 The lack of concern on thepart of the Commissioners themselves for the whole narcoticsmatter is reflected in the remarks of the President of theConference in introducing a brief statement to the Conference byDr. Woodward: President Miller: In view of the importance of the act I think it would not be amiss to listen to the Doctor for a few minutes, that he may point out to us why it is important. In some of the states we do not recognize the importance because it has not been called to our attention.26 Moreover, the statements of Dr. Woodward point out that one ofthe major forces supporting the drafting of the Uniform Act wasthe AMA. The doctors not only wanted to protect the public fromdrug addiction but also sought uniformity among state laws"in order that the profession may have a betterunderstanding of its obligations and duties and of its rights inthe use of narcotic drugs. " 27 Two Third Drafts were submitted. The initial one closelyresembled the first two Tentative Drafts and was presented in1929.28 Again, it was recommitted for further study.29 The secondThird Tentative Draft30 was the first to remove cannabis from thedefinition of "habit forming drugs" and to include onlya supplemental provision for dealing with the drug.31 Theexplanation for this change from the first two drafts iscontained in this note following the supplemental section: Note: Because of the many objections raised to the inclusion of cannabis indica, cannabis americana and cannabis sativa in the general list of habit-forming drugs, no mention is made of them in other sections of this act. The foregoing section is presented in order to meet an apparent demand for some method of preventing the use of such drugs for the production and maintenance of undesirable drug addiction. It may be adopted or rejected, as each state sees fit, without affecting the rest of the act.32 Judge Deering, the Chairman of the Committee on the UniformNarcotic Drug Act, recommended recommission for further studybecause the committee had not yet had a chance to consult withthe newly created Bureau of Narcotics. At the time of thisconference (August 14, 1930) no one had yet been appointed tofill the office of Commissioner of the Bureau.33 After receiving suggestions from the newly appointedCommissioner Anslinger, the Committee presented a FourthTentative Draft to the national conference in September 1931.34The section dealing with marijuana was identical to that includedin the 1930 revised version of the Third Tentative Draft.35 Thenational conference directed the Committee to return the nextyear with a Fifth Tentative or Final Draft:36 The Fifth-and final-Tentative Draft was adopted by theNational Conference of Commissioners on October 8, 1932.37 Therewere some major changes in the Uniform Act between the Fourth andthe Fifth Tentative Drafts with regard to the regulation ofmarijuana. Although the marijuana provisions remainedsupplemental to the main body of the Act, any state wishing toregulate sale and possession of marijuana was instructed tosimply add cannabis to the definition of "narcoticdrugs," in which case all the other provisions of the Actwould apply to marijuana as well as the opiates and cocaine.38 Itappears that the change from a supplemental section to a seriesof amendments to the relevant sections of the Act was preferredby the Narcotics Bureau.39 The only opposition to adoption of theFinal Draft came from some Commissioners who objected to tyingthe uniform state law to the terms of the Federal Harrison Act.40This last obstacle to adoption of the Act was overcome by theargument that a number of states had already passed suchlegislation so that the federalism problem should not stand inthe way; the Act was adopted 26-3.41 These floor arguments at thenational conference are a most important indication that no onechallenged or even brought up the issue of the designations ofthe drugs to be prohibited. Moreover, this brief debate confirmsthe notion that the Act received very little attention of any ofthe Commissioners other than those sitting on the committee thatdrafted it.42 Examination of the annual proceedings of the Commissionersimmediately suggests several conclusions about the drafting andproposal of the Uniform Narcotic Drug Act. (1) It was drafted inconjunction with the American Medical Association and, after1930, Commissioner Anslinger of the Federal Bureau of Narcotics.(2) It was not one of the more controversial uniform laws and itwas given little consideration during the full meetings of theCommissioners. (3) Impetus for the legislation, especially theoptional marijuana provisions, came from the Bureau of Narcoticsitself. (4) No scientific study of any kind was undertaken beforethe optional marijuana section was proposed. (5)The first threetentative drafts included marijuana within the general part ofthe Act while the last two (including the one finally adopted bythe Commissioners) made marijuana the subject of a separate,optional provision. (6) The model for all the drafts of theUniform Act was the 1927 New York State statute. C. Passage of the State Laws By 1937 every state had enacted some form of legislationrelating to marijuana, and thirty-five had enacted the UniformAct.43 The process by which a previously regional phenomenonbecame nationwide closely parallels that which characterized theearlier state-by-state developments. The major difference is thatthe Bureau of Narcotics sought to insure passage of the Act ineach state through lobbying and testifying before thelegislatures and by propagandizing in channels of public opinion.The Bureau's role has been overstated, however. The same factorsthat combined to produce the earlier legislation were exacerbatedduring the nationalization period, 1932-1937, and the legislationprobably would have passed just as easily without the efforts ofthe Bureau. Use of the drug was still slight and confined tounderprivileged or fringe groups who had no access either topublic opinion or to the legislators. The middle class had littleknowledge and even less interest in the drug and the legislation.Passage of the Act in each state was attended by littlepublicity, no scientific study and even more blatant ethnicaspersions than the earlier laws. In short, the laws wentunnoticed by legal commentators, the press and the public atlarge, despite the propagandizing efforts of the Bureau ofNarcotics. 1. Use Patterns and Public Knowledge: 1931-1937 As we noted earlier, marijuana use began in this country instates near the Mexican border,44 "marijuana" in factbeing a Mexican label for the cannabis drug. Throughout the1920's marijuana use was confined primarily to theMexican-American community; however, by the late 20's use of thisdrug had spread to many of the larger cities and had become quitepopular among some elements in the Black ghettoes .45 jazzmusicians, dancers and others found the drug a cheap and readilyavailable euphoriant.46 Nevertheless, use still remained slight even in 1934.Commissioner Anslinger himself asserted in 1937: "Ten yearsago we only heard about it [marijuana] throughout the Southwest .. . . [I]t has only become a national menace in the last 3years." 47 Still another commentator has written: Only in the 1920's was there any significant usage even by the Mexican-American communities in border cities, and only in the mid and late 1920's did Negro, jazz musicians and "degenerate" bohemian sub-cultures start smoking marijuana. Even the most lurid Journalists did not claim marijuana "seeped" into society at large until the 1930's and usually the mid-30's.48 As late as 1928, the arrest of one Harlem youth for possessionof a small amount of marijuana was news." Thus, we concludethat the number of users was still small, although it may havebegun to grow around 1935, and that these users were stillconcentrated regionally in the West and Southwest andsocioeconomically within the lower class Mexican-American andBlack communities. At the same time, the overwhelming majority of middle-classAmericans in the 1930's knew nothing of marijuana use-they hadnever seen marijuana and knew no one who used the drug. Prior to1935 there was little, if any, attention given marijuana in majornational magazines50 and the leading national newspapers.51 Thatfew middle class Americans in this period knew anything ofmarijuana or its effects is best illustrated by the fact that theBureau of Narcotics conducted a campaign to alert people to thedangers of marijuana. The Bureau as early as 1932 began arousingpublic opinion against marijuana by "an educational campaigndescribing the drug, its identification and its evileffects." 52 In July 1936, the New York City police wereshown marijuana so that they would recognize it growing or indried, smokeable form .53 Thus, even policemen had to be shownthe plant as late as 1936 to permit effective enforcement of theNew York state law. We may accordingly infer that the level ofpublic familiarity with the drug was quite low indeed.54 What little information filtered to the middle class wasgenerated by sporadic campaigns by local newspapers detailing thepotential evils of marijuana; the accounts, as before, weresensationalistic and tended to exacerbate latent ethnicprejudices. For example, a 1934 newspaper account linked crime inthe Southwest with marijuana smoking Mexican-Americans in theregion.55 In a 1935 letter to the editor of the New York Times, aSacramento, California, reader asserted: Marijuana, perhaps now the most iinsidious of our narcotics, is a direct by-product of unrestricted Mexican immigration . . . . Mexican peddlers have been caught distributing sample marijuana cigarettes to school children.56 The writer went on to demand a quota on Mexicans permitted toenter the country. In testifying in favor of the Marihuana TaxAct, Commissioner Anslinger submitted a letter he had receivedfrom the editor of a Colorado newspaper asking the Bureau to helpstamp out the marijuana menace. After describing an attack by aMexican-American, allegedly under the influence of marijuana, ona girl of his region the writer stated: I wish I could show you what a small marijuana cigaret can do to one of our degenerate Spanish-speaking residents. That's why our problem is so great; the greatest percentage of our population is composed of Spanish-speaking persons, most of whom are low mentally, because of social and racial conditions.57 Again, in the testimony at the hearings on the Marihuana TaxAct the following is excerpted from an article included in therecord: We find then that Colorado reports that the Mexican population there cultivates on an average of 2 to 3 tons of the weed annually. This the Mexicans make Into cigarettes, which they sell at two for 25 cents, mostly to white school students.58 Thus, not only did few middle-class Americans know aboutmarijuana and its use, but also what little"information" was available provoked an automaticadverse association of the drug with Mexican immigration, crimeand the deviant life style in the Black ghettos. Naturally, theimpending drug legislation, as had the earlier state legislation,became entangled with society's views of these minority groups. 2. Role of the Federal Bureau of Narcotics It has become quite fashionable among critics of existingmarijuana legislation to assert that the sole cause of theillegal status of marijuana has been the crusading zeal of theFederal Bureau of Narcotics and especially of its long-time head,Harry J. Anslinger. Some observers have suggested that theBureau's activity was produced by bureaucratic exigencies and theneed to expand;59 others have said the Bureau was on a moralcrusade;60 still others have asserted that the Bureau believedits own propaganda about the link between criminality and dopefiends.61 While much of this may be true, it is clear that theBureau did not single-handedly conjure up the idea of banningmarijuana use. Since many states had already undertaken theregulation of marijuana before the creation of the Bureau in1930, we cannot credit the Bureau alone with the pressure tooutlaw the drug. At the same time, it is certain that the Federal Bureau ofNarcotics' actions quickened the pace of the passage by statelegislators of the Uniform Narcotic Drug Act. The Bureau saw thepassage of state narcotics laws as one of its primary objectives.To this end we have detailed how directly the Bureau was involvedin the creation of the Final Draft of the Uniform Act. Afterapproval of the Final Draft, the Bureau began a significantcampaign in the newspapers and legal journals to boost publicsupport for the Uniform Act.62 By detailing the inability offederal enforcement agencies to deal with the burgeoningnarcotics traffic, the Bureau continued to press for passage ofthe Uniform Act by creating a felt need in the public for suchlegislation.63 Despite the efforts of the Bureau, the Uniform Actwent virtually unnoticed by legal commentators and periodicals,and by the public media. 3. Legislative Scrutiny and Media Coverage The Uniform Act was passed by the legislatures of most stateswith out scientific study or debate and without attracting publicattention. In examining in detail the passage of the Uniform Act inVirginia and some other selected states, it will be clear thatpublic concern over marijuana succeeded the outlawing of the drugand did not precede it. Our methodology to determine the extentof public attention in a given state at the time of the passageof the act was to review the newspapers of larger cities for thetwo weeks before and after passage.64 In Virginia the Uniform Narcotic Drug Act passed the House88-0 on February 16, 1934,65 and was approved 34-0 by the Senateon February 22.66 Although the Act as passed in Virginiacontained no marijuana provisions, the same legislature the nextmonth passed a bill (H.B. 236), prohibiting "use of opium,marijuana [and] loco weed ... in the manufacture of cigarettes,cigars" and other tobacco products.67 This law, whichamended a 1910 Virginia statute prohibiting the use of opium inthe manufacture of cigarettes,68 was the first mention ofmarijuana, or any of its derivatives in the Virginia Code. An examination of the Richmond Times-Dispatch, the newspaperof the state capital and perhaps the most influential newspaperin the state at that time, for the period surrounding theenactment of these two provisions (February 1 to March 15, 1934)shows clearly that little, if any, public attention attendedtheir passage. There is no mention at any time of H.B. 236.69 Asfor H.B. 94 (the Uniform Act), the Times Dispatch reported onFebruary 7 that the bill had been introduced. This announcementwas buried among the list of all bills introduced and referred onFebruary 6.70 In a February 12 article dealing with"controversial" bills before the House and Senate thatweek no mention was made of H.B. 94. On March 6, the newspaperrecorded: "Among the important bills passed were. . . . [fardown the list] the Scott bill, making the State narcotic lawconform to the Federal statute." 71 That is the sum of thepublicity received by the Uniform Act and the statute that firstregulated marijuana in any way in Virginia. In 1936, the legislature passed a separate statute prohibitingthe sale and use of marijuana. This bill-S.B. 289-passed theHouse and Senate unanimously.72 The Act prohibited, except for anarrow medical exception, sale, possession, use and cultivationof marijuana .73 The penalties for violation, interestingly, weremore severe than those for violation of the 1934 Uniform Act.Looking again at the Times-Dispatch for the period from February15 to March 19, 1936, we find only one brief article on the newmarijuana legislation. After the Senate passed the measure onFebruary 29, the following appeared: Among the bills passed by the Senate was the Apperson measure prohibiting the cultivation, sale or distribution of derivatives of the plant cannabis sativa, introduced as an outgrowth of alleged traffic in marihuana cigarettes in Roanoke. It fixes punishment for violation of its provisions at from one to 10 years in the penitentiary, or by confinement in jail for 12 months and a fine of not more than $1,000 or both. Charges that school children were being induced to become addicts of marihuana cigarettes and that the weed was being cultivated in and near the city on a wide scale were laid before the Roanoke City Council last year. A youth who said he was a former addict of the drug testified before the Council that inhalation of one of the cigarettes would produce a 'cheap drunk' of several days' duration.74 No further mention of this statute was made after the Housepassed it or after the Governor signed it into law. In order to determine whether the lack of public attention inVirginia was common to other states when the first prohibition ofmarijuana took place, we have surveyed the leading newspapers ofseveral other states at the times encompassing passage of thelaw. We tried to select states that had not previously regulateduse of the drug under the assumption that more publicity wouldattend initial legislation than an amendment of existing law. In New Jersey, Rhode Island, Oregon and West Virginia, forexample, the major newspapers of Newark, Providence, Salem andCharleston 78 respectively, referred to the Uniform Act only onceand to marijuana not at all. In Kentucky, the Louisville HeraldPost printed only two short references to the Uniform Act,79 oneof which referred to marijuana: [Congressman] Kramer added that boys and girls of school age are being led into the use of habit forming drugs by underworld leaders.......... Muggles" or cigarettes made from marijuana, commonly called loco weed or hemp, are also tabooed under the new state law, it was learned.80 Typical of both legislative and newspaper concern about thenew law is the following Charleston Daily Mail comment: A Narcotic Bill Inconspicuously upon the special calendar of the house of delegates rather far down upon it-is Engrossed S.B. No. 230, lodging specific powers in the hands of state authorities for the control of the traffic in narcotics. It has passed the Senate unanimously. It should pass the House, and its only danger of defeat there is the very real one that it will become lost in the shuffle of adjournment now but a few hours away. The bill goes under the name of the uniform narcotic drug act and it is just that. Identical measures for the control by the states of illicit traffic on drugs have been passed by other states, notably the Southern group. Its passage here would result in a broad territory in which there are corresponding laws .... 81 The editorial nowhere mentions marijuana. The bill itselfpassed in the waning hours of the special session with nosubsequent attention given it. 82 From our survey of these and other states, we have concludedthat with but one exception83 the Virginia experience was thenorm. (1) The laws prohibiting use, sale, possession, anddistribution of marijuana passed unnoticed by the media. Therewas no public outcry for such legislation. (2) Quite often thebill was buried beneath more controversial bills in a busylegislative session. (3) In many states the Act was passed latein the session along with myriad other"uncontroversial" laws. (4) Finally, no state undertookindependent study to determine the medical facts aboutmarijuana-they relied on information supplied by the FederalBureau of Narcotics84 or a few lurid newspaper stories.85 4. Available Medical Opinion In conjunction with the fourth conclusion from our state casehistories of the passage of this Act, we should examine theextent of medical knowledge that might have been available tolegislators had they wanted to conduct an independent evaluationof the dangers of the hemp drugs. There were five influential sources for information about theeffects of marijuana and hemp on humans. None of these wereconducted with the scientific precision characterizing modernstudies of drug effects. However, they each deserve mention hereeither because they deserved attention then or because theyheavily influenced later commentators. The first exhaustive study of the effects of cannabis and theother hemp drugs was done by the British in India. Their IndianHemp Drugs Commission studied cannabis use among the nativepopulation in India in 1893 and 1894,86 and submitted itsconclusions in a 500-page report. The Commission receivedevidence from 1,193 witnesses, including 335 doctors, and studiedthe relevant drug-related judicial proceedings and the intakerecords of every mental hospital in British India. As a resultthey concluded: In regard to the moral effects of the drugs, the Commission are of opinion that their moderate use produces no moral injury whatever. There is no adequate ground for believing that it injuriously affects the character of the consumer. Excessive consumption, on the other hand, both indicates and intensifies moral weakness or depravity. Manifest excess leads directly to loss of self-respect, and thus to moral degradation. In respect to his relations with society, however, even the excessive consumer of hemp drugs is ordinarily inoffensive. His excesses may indeed bring him to degraded poverty which may lead him to dishonest practices; and occasionally, but apparently very rarely indeed, excessive indulgence in hemp drugs may lead to violent crime. But for all practical purposes it may be laid down that there is little or no connection between the use of hemp drugs and crime.87 It is quite clear, however, that the Indian Hemp DrugCommission88 Report was not disseminated in the United Statesuntil 1969 . On the other hand, periodic reports of the Panama Canal ZoneGovernor's Committee to study the physical and moral effects ofthe use of marijuana were available to legislators before thepassage of the Uniform Act. After an investigation extending fromApril to December 1925, the Committee reached the followingconclusions: There is no evidence that marijuana as grown here is a"habit-forming" drug in the sense in which the term isapplied to alcohol, opium, cocaine etc. or that it has anyappreciable deleterious in influence on the individual usingit.89 In 1933, a similar Panama Canal Zone committee reported: Delinquencies due to marijuana smoking which result in trial by military court are negligible in number when compared with delinquencies resulting from the use of alcoholic drinks which also may be classed as stimulants and intoxicants.90 About the time that the final Governor's Committee Report fromthe Canal Zone was completed, a New Orleans physician, Dr.Fossier, completed a study from which he concluded that marijuanawas a highly dangerous drug with habit-forming properties.91 Thispiece would have remained relatively unnoticed due to theobscurity of the journal in which it was published had it notbeen picked up by the New Orleans District Attorney, EugeneStanley, and made the basis for his own article-Marihuana as aDeveloper of Criminals92 which appeared in a law enforcementjournal. Mr. Stanley stated: It is an ideal drug to cut off inhibitions quickly. . . . At the present time the underworld has been quick to realize the value of this drug in subjugating the will of human derelicts to that of a master mind. Its use sweeps away all restraint, and to its influence may be attributed many of our present day crimes. It has been the experience of the Police and Prosecuting Officials in the South that immediately before the commission of many crimes the use of marihuana cigarettes has been indulged in by criminals so as to relieve themselves from the natural restraint which might deter them from the commission of criminal acts, and to give them the false courage necessary to commit the contemplated crime.93 Mr. Stanley's article, based on no empirical data whatsoever,was widely used by courts to corroborate early legislation and bylobbyists to justify the later prohibitive legislation againstthe hemp drugs.94 In 1933 the following colloquy appeared in the Journal of theAmerican Medical Association: Effects of Cannabis To the Editor:-I have been hearing about the smoking of cigarets dipped into or medicated with fluid extract of Cannabis americana. I can find nothing about the use of the drug by addicts. What is its immediate effect? What are its late effects? What is the minimum lethal dose? In what way does it differ from or resemble "muggles" in its action? While in Louisiana I was told that the use of marihuana causes dementia. Is this true' Please omit name. M.D., Illinois. ANSWER.-The effect of Cannabis americana is the same as that of Cannabis indica- and, of the effect of the latter, the books are so full that it is hardly necessary to detail them here. It must suffice here to say that cannabis, at the height of its action, usually produces hallucinations, with or without euphoria, and that these are followed by a deep sleep. Its most marked after-effect is the liability to the establishment of a craving for the drug, the habitual use of which undermines the intellectual qualities and the social value of the victim and leads to general physical deterioration. It is stated that smokers nearly always become imbecile in time. The minimum lethal dose is unknown, no fatalities having been reported in man. In view of the fact that one dose may kill one dog that has no marked effect on another, one must admit the possibility of a lethal effect on man. In view of what has been said, it must be admitted that "marihuana," which is merely another name for Cannabis indica, may cause dementia.95 The reply contains no indication how or where the persons whoanswered the question got their data. It seems clear from thenature of the response that the medical community was quiteuncertain as to the effects of the drug in 1933. In 1934, Dr. Walter Bromberg, senior psychiatrist at BellevueHospital, reported that marijuana was not a habit-forming drugand was far less responsible for crime than other drugs such asalcohol. In this study, Bromberg drew his data from examinationof 2,216 inmates convicted of felonies.96 Dr. Bromberg pointedout that marijuana users tend to be passive in comparison tousers of alcohol and that the hemp drugs should lead to crimeonly in cases of use by already psychopathic types. 97 This then was the extent of medical evidence available tolaymen and legislators alike at the time the Uniform NarcoticDrug Act and the fast prohibitions of marijuana were enacted inmost states. We can conclude the following from our brief reviewof the medical literature. (1) Little was really known about theeffects of marijuana use-there were few studies and what studiesthere were had serious methodological flaws. (2) Even if thestudies we record had been adequate methodologically, theyappeared generally in obscure medical not widely read by laymen.(3) Of these studies, most found marijuana relatively harmlessespecially in contrast to use of alcohol. (4) None of thesestudies were considered in either the formulation or the passageof the Uniform Act in the states examined. And what is moreastounding is that instead of consulting medical opinion,legislators relied on lurid newspaper accounts of marijuana,often provided by defendants in criminal prosecutions whosemotivation was to use marijuana to escape criminalresponsibility. 5. Provisions of the Uniform Narcotic Drug Act andSupplemental Virginia Marijuana Statute Having studied the circumstances surrounding passage of theUniform Act and similar legislation in several states between1932 and 1937, we shall briefly summarize the provisions of thoselaws. (a) Classification and Offenses.-The Virginia legislature madeno changes in the Uniform Act as drafted by the Commissioners anddid not include the supplementary marijuana provisions in passingthat Act.98 In 1936, Virginia passed special marijuanalegislation99. which defined cannabis exactly as did thedefinitional provision of the Uniform Act. Both the specialmarijuana statute in Virginia and the Uniform Act prohibitedpossession, transfer and cultivation of the drug100 but did notrefer to the more specific acts that later came to be separatedand punished more heavily, such as sale to a minor and possessionof more than a certain amount. (b) Penalties.-The Uniform Act contained no specific penaltiesfor its violations; the matter of supplying the appropriatepenalties was left to each state. Virginia punished firstviolations of its Uniform Act by a fine not exceeding $100 and/orimprisonment in jail not exceeding one year, and second andsubsequent offenses by a fine not exceeding $1,000 and/orimprisonment for not more than five years in the penitentiary.101The penalties for violation of Virginia's 1936 marijuana statutewere stiffer than for violation of its Uniform Act. Each offensewas punishable by imprisonment in the penitentiary for from oneto ten years or by confinement in jail for not more than twelvemonths and/or by a fine up to $1,000, in the discretion of thecourt or jury.102 An analysis of penalties for violation of the marijuanastatutes enacted in other states at about the same time indicatesVirginia's penalties were atypically harsh. In New Jersey, forinstance, the penalty for unlawful possession and sale ofmarijuana was that attaching to a high misdemeanor.103 In RhodeIsland the penalty for unlawful possession was a fine of not morethan $1,000 or imprisonment for not more than threeyears orboth.104 For unlawful selling, Rhode Island provided a fine ofnot more than $2,000 or imprisonment for not more than five yearsor both.105 In Kentucky the penalty for a first offense violationwas a fine of not less than $100 and not more than $500 or jailfor not less than thirty days nor more than one year or both. Forsecond and subsequent offenses the statute required imprisonmentin the penitentiary for not less than one nor more than fiveyears.106 Finally, West Virginia penalized a first offender by afine not exceeding $100 or jail for not exceeding one year orboth, and subsequent offenders by fine not exceeding $1,000 orimprisonment in the penitentiary not exceeding five years orboth.107 This comparison indicates that Virginia penalties could bemore severe than the average. Moreover, Virginia did notdistinguish in penalty between possession and sale of the drug,and violation of Virginia's separate marijuana law could be moreheavily penalized than violation of the Uniform Act. Footnotes and References 1. See p. 989 supra 2. STATE LAWS 13. Id at 8. Id. Id at 21 For example, compare ch. 337 [1929] NY Laws 881 with ch. 363 [1914] NY Laws 1120 See Appendix A, Tables II, III For example, in 1921 New York had repealed its general narcotics provision, ch. 708 [1921] NY Laws 2496. See note 35 at 1017-18 supra. Governor Miller of New York at that time stated: Being unable to resolve that conflict of opinion, I have deemed it the safest course to leave the subject to be governed by the Federal statute until such time at least as it shall more clearly appear in what way that statute might be wisely supplemented by the state. 48. REPORT OF THE NEW YORK STATE BAR ASSOCIATION 133 [1925](emphasis original) Commissioner Anslinger felt that the stateshad failed to do their part during this period: Notwithstanding the limited power of the Federal Government,state officers immediately became imbued with the erroneousimpression that the problem of preventing abuse of narcotic drugswas one now [after the Harrison Act] exclusively cognizable bythe National Government, and that the Federal Law alone,enforced, of course, by Federal agencies only, should representall the control necessary over the illicit narcotic drug traffic. Anslinger, The Reason for Uniform State Narcotic Legislation,21 GEO. L.J. 52, 53 (1932). 9 TERRY & PELLENS 969-91. See also 1928 HANDBOOK OF THENATIONAL CONFERENCE OF COMMISSIONERS ON UNIFORM STATE LAWS ANDPROCEEDINGs 77-78 (handbooks hereinafter cited as 19- HANDBOOK]. 10 King, The Narcotics Bureau and the Harrison Act, 62 YALEL.J. 736, 738 n.12 (1953). See also Schmeckbier, The Bureau ofProhibition in BROOKINGS INST. FOR GOVT RESEARCH, SERVICEMONOGRAPH.No. 57, at 143 (1929). 11 See JOINT LEGISLATIVE COMM. TO INVESTIGATE THE LAWS INRELATION TO THE DISTRIBUTION AND SALE OF NARCOTIC DRUGS, FINALREPORT, NEWYORK SENATE Doc. No. 3 (1918): No fixed policy exists for the enforcement of the Statestatutes except in the larger cities of the State but theirenforcement has been left to the desultory or spasmodic effortsof local police officials . . . . Quoted in TERRY & PELLENS 834. See also FT. BECKER,OUTSIDERS 137-38 (1963). 12 Sandoz, Report on Morphinism to the Municipal Court ofBoston, 13 J. CRIM. L. & CRIMINOLOGY 10, 54 (1922) (emphasisoriginal) 13 See STATE LAWS 31-34. 14 Id. at 28. 15 See SPECIAL COMMITTEE TO INVESTIGATE THE TRAFFIC INNARCOTIC DRUGS, U.S. TREASURY DEP'T, REPORT (1919) 16 H. ANSLINGER & W. TOMPKINS, THE TRAFFIC IN NARCOTICS159 (1953). 17. 1925 HANDB00K 977-85. 18 Id. at 975. 19 Id. at 305. 20 Id. 21 Id. at 978. 22 1928 HANDBOOK 323-33. 23 Id. at 75-78. 24 Ch. 672, [1927] N.Y. Laws 1695-1703. 25 1928 HANDBOOK 325. 26 Id. at 76-77. 27 Id. at 77. 28 1929 HANDBOOK 332-40. 29 Id. at 83. 30 1930 HANDBOOK 485-97. 31 The provision, which made an exemption for medicinal orscientific use, read in part as follows: Section 12. (Cannabis Indica, Cannabis Americana and CannabisSativa.) No person shall plant, cultivate, produce, manufacture,possess, have under his control, sell, prescribe, administer,dispense or compound cannabis indica, cannabis americans, orcannabis sativa, or any preparation or derivative thereof, oroffer the same for sale, administering dispensing or compounding. . . . Id. at 493. 32 Id. There is no evidence of what objections had beenraised. The authors feel certain that the dissenters werebirdseed and hemp growers who also objected to the passage of theMarihuana Tax Act. See pp. 1054, 1059 infra. 33 1930 HANDBOOK 126-27. 34 1931 HANDBOOK 390-402. 35 Id. at 398-99. 36 Id. at 127-28. 37 1932 HANDBOOK 95-107. 38 Id. at 326. 39 See Tennyson, Uniform State Narcotic Law, I FED. B. AssnJ., Oct. 1932, at 55; Illicit Drug Traffic, 2 FED. B. ASS'N J.208-09 (1935) (indicating that the simple amendments formarijuana were designed by the Bureau so that other drugs couldbe added in the same way). 40 1932 HANDBOOK 95-107. 41 Id. at 107. 42 From our own computations, the total time spent by all theCommissioners discussing this Act from 1927 to 1932 could nothave exceeded one hour. Moreover, the small number of statespresent at the time of the roll call, as compared with the 48that voted on the Uniform Machine Gun Act the day before,indicates that concern for this Act was less than overwhelming. 43 Tax, Act Hearings 25-26. 44 See H. BECKER, OUTSIDERS 135 (1963). 45 NEW YORK CITY MAYOR'S COMMITTEE ON MARIHUANA, REPORT,reprinted in THE MARIHUANA PAPERS 277-307 (D. Solomon Ed. 1966)[hereinafter cited as LAGUARDIA REPORT]. 46 id. at 292-94. The following exchange from the Hearings onthe Marihuana Tax Act indicates the low cost of the drug in 1937: Mr. Thompson: What is the price of marijuana? Mr. Anslinger: The addict pays anywhere from 10 to 25 centsper cigarette. In illicit traffic the bulk price would be around$20 per pound. Legitimately, the bulk is around $2 per pound. Tax Act Hearings 27. 47 Tax Act Hearings 20. 48 Mandel, Hashish, Assassins and the Love of God, 2 ISSUES INCRIMINOLOGY I49 (1966). 49 N.Y. Times, Oct. 7, 1928,  2, at 4, col. 6. 50 There is only one article even vaguely related to marijuanalisted prior to 1935 Our Home Hasheesh Crop, LITERARY DIGEST,Apr. 3, 1926, at 64. See H. BECKER, OUTSIDERS 141 (1963). 51 From 1923 to 1935 there were only thirteen short articlesrelated in any way to marijuana in the New York Times, eventhough New York City had banned marijuana as early as 1914 andthe state legislature had acted in 1927. 52 BUREAU OF NARCOTICS, U.S. TREASURY DEP'T, TRAFFIC IN OPIUMAND OTHER DANGEROUS DRUGS 59 (1937). See also H. BECKER,OUTSIDERS 140 (1963). 53 N.Y. Times, July 24, 1936, at 6, col. 3. 54 In 1923 the New York Times, in a short article, reported:"The latest habit forcing drug . . . marijuana, which issmoked in a cigarette-was exhibited" at a women's clubmeeting. N.Y. Times, Jan. 11, 1923, at 24, col. 1. 55 N.Y. Times, Sept. 16, 1934,  4, at 6, col. 3. 56 Id., Sept. 15, 1935, s 4, at 9, col. 4. 57 Tax Act Hearings 32. 58 Gomila, Marijuana-A More Alarming Menace to Society ThanAll Other Habit Forming Drugs, quoted in Tax Act Hearings 32-33.See also Gusfield, On Legislating Morals: The Symbolic Process ofDesignating Deviance, 56 CALIF. L. REv. 54, 69 (1968). 59Dickson, Bureaucracy and Morality: An Organizational Perspectiveon a Moral Crusade, 16 SOCIAL PROB. 143 (1968). 60 H. BECKER, OUTSIDERS 137-45 (1963); see T. DUSTER, THELEGISLATION OF MORALITY 17-19 (1970). 61 King, The Narcotics Bureau and the Harrison Act, 62 YALEL.J. 736, 737-39 (1953). 62 E.g., Anslinger, The Reason for Uniform State NarcoticLegislation, 21 GEo. L.J. 52 (1932); Tennyson, Uniform StateNarcotic Law, I FED. B. ASS'N J., Oct. 1932. at 55 (Mr. Tennysonwas Legal Advisor, Bureau of Narcotics). 63 See, e.g., N.Y. Times, Sept. 16, 193 1, at 37, col. 2. 64 It seems that if there were any public concern at all aboutthe Uniform Act and its adoption, it should appear at those timesin mention of the bill, marijuana or narcotic drugs in general.We used the papers of the larger cities under the assumption thatthey would usually contain the fullest and most accurate accountof the business of state legislatures. 65 VA. HOUSE JOUR. 324 (1934). 66 VA. SENATE JOUR. 300-01 (1934). 67 Any manufacturer or manufacturers of cigarettes who shallemploy opium, marihuana, loco weed, or any other sedative,narcotic or hypnotic drug, like chemical or substance, either inthe tobacco used or paper wrappers of cigarettes, cigars, tobaccoor any otherwise undiluted foodstuff or beverage, other than thatadvertised, sold and used as a drug or medicine, shall be guiltyof a misdemeanor, and upon conviction shall be fined not lessthan one hundred dollars nor more than one thousand dollars, orconfined in jail not less than six months nor more than twelvemonths, or both, for each offense. Ch. 268, [1934] Va. Acts ofAssembly 411 (H.B. 236). 68 Ch. 246, [1910] Va. Acts of Assembly 358 (codified asamended VA. CODE ANN. 18.1-345,-346 (Supp. 1970)). 69 On March 11, 1934, the day after the prohibition of use ofopium in cigarettes was amended to include marijuana, theRichmond Times-Dispatch did not mention the action, and anarticle entitled "Bills Passed by Assembly" did notmention any marijuana or narcotic laws. Richmond Times-Dispatch,Mar. 11, 1934, at 4, col. 2. A March 12, six-column article,entitled "Vital Measures Passed in Busy 1934 Assembly"also did not mention either the narcotics legislation or themarijuana amendment. id., Mar. 12, 1934, at 1, col. 2. 70 Id., Feb. 7, 1934, at 4, col. 1. 71 Id., Mar. 6,1934, at 2, col. 5. 72 VA. HOUSE JOUR. 827 (1936); VA. SENATE JOUR. 498 (1936). 73 Ch. 212, [19361 Va. Acts of Assembly 361. 74 Richmond Times-Dispatch, Mar. 1, 1936, at 12, col. 3. 75 The Newark Star Ledger was surveyed from May 20 to June 10,193 3, a period surrounding the passage of the statute, ch. 186,[1933] N.J. Acts 397, on June 5, 1933. On the day of the signingof the bill, there appeared a short article noting that theUniform Narcotic Drug Act had become law. Newark Star Ledger,June 5, 1933, at 2. 76 The statute, ch. 2096, [1934] R.I. Acts101, was approved April 26, 1934. The Providence journal wassurveyed from April 10 to April 28, 1934, and on April 12 thereappeared five sentences on the Uniform Act. providence journal,Apr. 12, 1934, at R. On April 21, the law was described in ashort article summarizing the business of the legislativesession. Id., Apr. 21, 1934, at 7. Neither article mentionedmarijuana. 77 The Salem Oregon Statesman in the period from February 8 toFebruary 28, 1935, had only one article dealing with drugs. SalemOregon Statesman, Feb. 21, 1935, at 2, col. 2. 78 The Uniform Act was passed in West Virginia on March 8,1935. Ch. 46, [1935] W. Va. Acts 179. The Charleston Daily Mail,which carried detailed legislative news, was surveyed from MarchI to March 20, 1935. On March 1, the legislature reconvened undera special calendar including the Uniform Act. During this period,the Act attracted little attention except for an editorial onMarch 7. Charleston Daily Mail, Mar. 7, 1935, at 10, co]. 1. Thebill was mentioned in passing in two other stories on upcominglegislation, and in a report that a federal judge criticized WestVirginia's failure to enact the Act. Id., Mar. 6, 1935, at 6,col. 4. 79 The Louisville Herald Post was surveyed from April 15 toJune 15, 1934. The marijuana section of the Uniform Act becameeffective on June 14, 1934. Ch. 142, [1934] Ky. Acts 562. Theonly reference to the Act was Louisville Herald Post. June 6,1934, at 10. 80 Id. 81 Charleston Daily Mail, Mar. 7,1935, at 10, col. 1. 82 Id., Mar. 11, 1935, at 1, col. 1, reports: "In theconfusion of the closing hours Saturday night the legislaturepassed many bills, many of them unread and unprinted and notunderstood." 83 In Missouri, the passage of the Uniform Act was attended bypressure on the legislature stemming from a hysteria campaign inthe St. Louis Star Times which contained 5 major articles urgingthe outlawing of marijuana and presenting lurid case studies ofthe evils of the drug. These articles were quoted in the Tax ActHearings. See St. Louis Star Times, Jan. 17-Feb. 19, 1935. 84 See, e.g., N.Y. Times, Sept. 16, 1931, at 37, col. 2(recording Commissioner Anslinger's statements on the need foruniform state laws to regulate marijuana). 85 In the Missouri case, the legislature, in response to thescare stories in the St. Louis Star Times, took only 10 days topresent the law, hold quick hearings, and unanimously pass theanti-marijuana legislation. 86 INDIAN HEMP DRUGS COMMISSION 1893-94, REPORT: MARIJUANA (J.Kaplan ed. 1969). 87 Id. at 264. 88 Id. at vi. 89 Quoted in Marijuana Smoking in Panama, 73 THE MILITARYSURGEON 274 (1933). 90 Id. at 279. 91 Fossier, The Marijuana Menace, 84 NEW ORLEANS MEDICAL &SURGICAL J. 247 (1931). 92 Stanley, Marihuana as a Developer of Criminals, 2 Am. J.POLICE Sci. 252 (1931). 93 Id. at 256. 94 See Tax Act Hearings 23-24, 37. 95 100 JA.M.A. 601 (1933). 96 Bromberg, Marijuana Intoxication: A Clinical Study ofCannabis Sativa Intoxication, 97 Am. J. PSYCHIATRY 303 (1934). 97 Id. at 309; see Facts and Fancies About Marijuana, LITERARYDIGEST, Oct. 24, 1936, at 7-8. This presentation begins bydigesting Dr. Bromberg's article for laymen: It is clear from this study [of 2,216 criminals convicted offelonies] that in this region the drug is a breeder of crime onlywhen used by psychopathic types in whom the drug allows theemergence of aggressive, sexual or antisocial tendencies. . . .It is quite probable that alcohol is more responsible as an agentfor crime than is marihuana. The article continues: The following facts stand out in social and medical reports: 1. Marihuana is not a habit-forming drug, as is heroin oropium. 2. It prolongs sensations; it is in high favor as anaphrodisiac. 3. It is the most inexpensive of drugs; marihuana cigarettesusually selling at from three to twenty-five cents each. The article then describes the effects of marijuana: After smoking from one to three "reefers," if onehas not been told what to expect, the first effects of the drugpass almost unnoticed-nothing, perhaps, but a slight twitching ofmuscles of the neck, back or legs. The mind remains calm andclear. Suddenly, without apparent cause, a chance remark . . .sends the subject into a spasm of violent laughter. Becoming calm again, while the drug continues to exert itsweird effects, the smoker finds ideas crowding through his brainwith bewildering rapidity; those around him become slow-dull. Noris the language of his own tongue swift enough to keep pace withhis lightning thoughts. Soon the self-esteem of the smoker begins to grow in likeproportion. . . . Paradoxically, trifling discomforts become unbearable evils;the flare of a match near-by brings a resentment that isimmediately transformed into an overwhelming desire for revenge.But before the "reefer man" could possibly climb to hisfeet, or even reach a hand for a gun or knife, new thoughts havecome crowding in.... Above all other distinguishing effects of marihuanaintoxication is the fact that all normal conceptions of time andspace are lost. As in the split-second dream that seems to last the nightthrough, time seems of interminable length; the clock standsstill for days. Vision, too, takes on new concepts. Inconsiderable distancesbecome tremendous.... Yet, throughout the intoxication, there is constant awarenessthat the strange fancies rushing through the mind are notnatural, but purely the effects of the drug; unlike theopium-cater, he is acutely conscious of those about him. He hasmany of the sensations of the gay "drunk" at the ball. Describing a pot-party: There is little noise; windows are shut, keeping the smell ofsmoking weeds away from what might be curious nostrils. Nor is there any of the yelling, dashing about, playing ofcrude jokes or physical violence that often accompany alcoholicparties; under the effects of marihuana, one has a dread of allthese things. 98 Ch. 86, [1934] Va. Acts of Assembly 81. 99 Ch. 212, [1936] Va. Acts of Assembly 361. 100 Id. 101 Ch. 86, S 20, [1934] Va. Acts of Assembly 90. 102 Ch. 212,  I (c), [ 1936] Va. Acts of Assembly 362. Thepenalty for violation of ch. 268, [1934] Va. Acts of Assembly411, which prohibited the use of marijuana in the manufacture ofcigars and cigarettes, was confinement in jail for from 6 to 12months and/or a fine of from $100 to $1000. 103 Ch. 186,  12, [1933] N.J. Laws 41 1. 104 Ch. 2096, S 14, [19341 R.I. Acts III. 105 Id.  15. 106 Ch. 142, [1934] Ky. Acts 562. 107 Ch. 46,  2 3, [1935] W. Va. Acts 192. Contents | Feedback | Search DRCNet Library | Schaffer Library | Major Studies The Forbidden Fruit and the Tree ofKnowledgeWT01-B31-48IA031-000652-B037-226http://206.61.184.43:80/schaffer/library/studies/vlr/vlr4.htm 206.61.184.43 19970122125302 text/html 44103HTTP/1.0 200 OKDate: Wednesday, 22-Jan-97 12:52:52 GMTServer: WebSitePro/1.1f (S/N wpo-0deb)Allow-ranges: bytesContent-type: text/htmlLast-modified: Saturday, 28-Dec-96 06:47:55 GMTContent-length: 43885 Passage of the Marihuana Tax Act of 1937 Contents | Feedback | Search DRCNet Library | Schaffer Library | Major Studies The Forbidden Fruit and the Tree ofKnowledge THE FORBIDDEN FRUIT AND THE TREE OF KNOWLEDGE: AN INQUIRYINTO THE LEGAL HISTORY OF AMERICAN MARIJUANA PROHIBITION Richard J. Bonnie* & Charles H.Whitebread, II** V. PASSAGE OF THE MARIHUANA TAX ACT OF 1937 The first assertion of federal authority over marijuana usewas the Marihuana Tax Act, passed in 1937. The obvious question,from a historical point of view, is why such legislation wasthought to be necessary, especially after the brushfire passageof the Uniform Act and related legislation in every state in theprevious few years. Enforcement difficulty and public hysteriaare two reasons which have been propounded for the federalaction. We subscribe to a third, one which we rejected withrespect to the uniform acts-Congress was hoodwinked by theFederal Bureau of Narcotics. A. State Enforcement of the Uniform Law One of the primary arguments in support of the Marihuana TaxAct was that the legislation was required to permit andfacilitate adequate enforcement of the Uniform Narcotic DrugAct.1 Initial examination of enforcement statistics after passageof the Uniform Act suggests that marijuana seizures and arrestsin most states rose dramatically. However, we should be careful to note at the outset theinadequacies of most drug statistics, which, especially duringthis period, do not permit conclusive analysis regarding theextent of enforcement. Reporting officials frequently do not differentiate among thedrugs. Different jurisdictions employ different measures ofenforcement-number of arrests, convictions, kilograms of the drugseized, or number of seizures; even where the same measures areused, statistics are often compiled for different time frames. Inaddition, changes in the definitions in the laws-such as a changefrom considering cannabis as only the flowering top of the plantto considering it the whole plant-can wildly distort thestatistics from year to year. To add to the confusion,enforcement agencies can manipulate the data for their own uses;if they must appear to be attacking the drug problem or to needmore resources, they can change radically the statisticalappearance of the enforcement problem by using, for example,arrests as their enforcement measure. Finally, the mere passageof prohibitive legislation will in itself be reflected in theenforcement data. This is especially important for our study ofenforcement patterns in the states before passage of theMarihuana Tax Act. As one commentator has explained: A point that should be obvious but that is sometimes overlooked is that there are no official statistics relating to violations of a drug, law until the drug law is enacted. To compare official preenactment and postenactment data is to compare nothing to something, and naturally drug use will appear to rise.2 For all these reasons, the drug statistics from the period ofthe 1930's must be used somewhat hesitantly to support anycontention about the extent of state enforcement before theenactment of Marihuana Tax Act. With this caveat in mind, weshall proceed, nevertheless, to do so. Although Commissioner Anslinger testified at the hearings onthe Tax Act that state officials frequently asked for federalassistance 3 it appears from the Federal Bureau's own statisticsthat state and municipal agencies were proceeding with vigor tostamp out marijuana use.4 We do not have fully accurate data, butthere are indications that both New York and Louisiana weremoving against marijuana use. In 1934, the New York policediscovered a large field of marijuana growing near the BrooklynBridge. In making a related raid, the police also seized 1,000marijuana cigarettes.5 In 1935, the police burned a marijuanacrop found growing on the grounds of the Welfare Islandpenitentiary.6 Throughout 1936, the narcotics division of the NewYork police found and destroyed several marijuana crops growingin and around the city.7 Fragmentary figures are available on lawenforcement in Louisiana which indicate there were 219 arrests onmarijuana charges in New Orleans alone from 1930 until April of1936.8 In Louisiana as a whole for 1936 over 1,195 pounds of bulkmarijuana were seized.9 This evidence suggests that state authorities in areas wheremarijuana use had become common at all were dealing fairlyeffectively with the trade in the drug. Although some states mayhave hoped that passage of a federal law dealing with marijuanawould reduce the enforcement burden on state and local police andbring additional federal services and money,10 the law cannotreally be justified as filling an enforcement void. Nevertheless,this was one of the most effective arguments advanced byCommissioner Anslinger in the halls of Congress. B. Public Hysteria or Continued Public Ignorance? Some observers have attributed passage of the Tax Act topublic hysteria.11 In support of this contention they show thatthere was a marked increase in the number of titles dealing withmarijuana in the Readers' Guide to Periodical Literature from1936 until 1939, compared with the total absence of articles onthis subject in preceding years.12 It should be noted, however,that only seven articles treating marijuana or hashish appearedfrom 1920 to August 1937, when the Tax Act was passed.13 Withrespect to medical opinion, the AMA Journal presented an articleopposing the enactment of the Tax Act and arguing, as did theirrepresentative at the Tax Act hearings, 14 that existing statelaws were sufficient if properly enforced.15 It seems the national media and medical opinion were far fromhysterical at the time the Tax Act passed. There were a few localnewspaper campaigns against the drug, but they tended to peakabout two years before the passage of the Act and were isolatedinstances of public support for the Uniform Narcotic Drug Act.16Moreover, these atypical state scares did not draw nationalattention. In fact, whatever publicity the "marijuana problem"received during this period was attributable to CommissionerAnslinger and his office, who conducted an active educationalcampaign for federal legislation. They prepared press stories onthe dangers of the drug and traveled around the countrydisseminating propaganda.17 Despite these efforts, however,public knowledge of the marijuana proposals was minimal at best.The New York Times contained nine references to marijuana fromJanuary 1936 until it reported on August 3, 1937,18"President Roosevelt signed today a bill to curb traffic inthe narcotic, marihuana, through heavy taxes ontransactions." As in prior years, marijuana was still not a matter of publicattention, and the so-called "problem" and the federalproposal to cure it went virtually unnoticed by most of theAmerican public. At the same time, however, the"educational" campaign conducted by the Bureau toinform the Congress of the dimensions of the "problem"was highly successful. In this sense, the Bureau itself createdthe "felt need" for federal legislation; the Bureau-andnot public hysteria which it was unable to arouse-was the majorforce behind the Tax Act. We assign to the Bureau theinstrumental role with respect to passage of the Tax Act eventhough we did not do so with respect to the Uniform Act. Sosuccessful were the Commissioner's efforts in the Congress thatthe hearings before the House Ways and Means Committee and thefloor debate on the bill are near comic examples of derelictionof legislative responsibility. C. The Tax Act Hearings Note from Cliff Schaffer: Interested readers may referto the full text of the hearings for the Marihuana Tax Act, andrelated documents, also on this site. Although the Marihuana Tax Act was modeled after the HarrisonAct, marijuana was not simply included in the earlier actprimarily for three reasons. First, the importation focus of theHarrison Act was inappropriate for marijuana because there weredomestic producers.20 Second, since cannabis had been removed from the United StatesPharmacopoeia and had no recognized medicinal uses, the varietyof medical exceptions in the Harrison Act were inapplicable.21Third, even though the Supreme Court had upheld the HarrisonAct's prohibition against purchase by unregistered persons of thedesignated drugs, there was some uncertainty whether the earlier5-4 decision22 would be followed. Accordingly, the Marihuana TaxAct imposed a prohibitive tax of $100 an ounce on the designatedtransactions, rather than prohibit the purchases directly.23 The brief three days of hearings on the Act24 present a casestudy in legislative carelessness. At no time was any primaryempirical evidence presented about the effects of the drug, andthe participating congressmen seem never to have questioned theassumed evils. Furthermore, the only real concerns seem to havebeen that farmers would be inconvenienced by having to kill aplant which grew wild in many parts of the country, and that thebirdseed, paint and varnish, and domestic hemp industries wouldbe damaged by passage of the law.25 Finally, the one witnessappearing in opposition to the bill, Dr. William C. Woodward,legislative counsel of the American Medical Association and anearly and respected participant in the drafting of the UniformNarcotic Drug Act,26 was roundly insulted for his audacity indaring to question the wisdom of the Act. We reproduce in the following few pages some of the dialoguefrom the hearings, to give the reader the flavor of theseramshackle proceedings, and to allow him to understand more fullythe pyramiding of absurdity represented by the amendments of the1950's. From the hearings we extract contemporary perception ofuse patterns and harmful effects of marijuana, the quality ofmedical and other evidence presented, and a short glimpse at howthe witnesses were treated by the committee. 1. Who Were Users? The record of the hearings indicates quite clearly that theFederal Narcotics Bureau was anxious for the committeemen tobelieve marijuana use was a relatively new phenomenon that was onthe increase in America.27 Once again, marijuana use and theMexican minority were closely linked: "The Mexican laborershave brought seeds of this plant into Montana and it is fastbecoming a terrible menace, particularly in the counties wheresugarbeets are grown."28 Again, also, marijuana waspresented as the agent by which the underworld class hoped toenslave American youth.29 The youth of the marijuana users wascontrasted with the increasing age of the usual opiate addict.Perhaps most interestingly for later developments, CommissionerAnslinger succinctly noted that heroin addicts and marijuanausers came from totally different classes and that the use of onedrug was unrelated to use of the other: Mr. Anslinger. This drug is not being used by those who have been using heroin and morphine. It is being used by a different class, by a much younger group of people. The age of the morphine and heroin addict is increasing all the time, whereas the marihuana smoker is quite young. Mr. Dingell. I am just wondering whether the marihuana addict graduates into a heroin, an opium or cocaine user. Mr. Anslinger. No sir; I have not heard of a case of that kind. I think it is an entirely different class. The marihuana addict does not go in that direction30 The hearings shed no more light on who was using the drug andin what numbers. 2. What's Wrong with Marijuana? If the proceedings did not shed light on the patterns ofusage, this in no way was an obstacle to unanimity on the evilsof the drug-insanity, criminality and death. Three major sourceswere relied on to support this consensus (1) a variety of horrorstories from newspapers cited by Mr. Anslinger and others aboutatrocious criminal acts committed by individuals under theinfluence of the drug;31 (2) studies by Eugene Stanley, theDistrict Attorney of New Orleans, linking the drug and thepopulation of the Louisiana jails;32 and (3) some inconclusiveexperimentation on dogs.33 As we noted earlier, the newspaperstories about crimes committed under the influence of marijuanahave two things in common: The reports are unsubstantiated, andmany of the accused invoked their use of marijuana as a defenseto the charge .34 The New Orleans report concluded: "After an exhaustiveresearch on marijuana from its earliest history to the presenttime, this drug is in our judgment the one that must beeliminated entirely." 35 What was this exhaustive research?It appears to have been nothing but quotations from the mosthysterical series of newspaper articles to appear at that time36and reports of the number of marijuana addicts to be found in theprison population.37 The relation of these figures to theconclusion that the drug must be regulated was never established. The Stanley study38 was even less well documented and evenmore outrageous in its description of the effects of marijuanause. "It is an ideal drug to quickly cut offinhibitions." 39 For this proposition Stanley relied on thestory of the Persian "Assassins" who allegedlycommitted acts of terror while under the influence of hashish.Although Stanley included in his list of references the IndianHemp Drugs Commission Report, it is clear he made little effortto catalogue the then available data but contented himself with anumber of bold and undocumented assertions. In reading thehearings, one continues to expect some report of a medical orscientific survey, and instead one finds these two reports by NewOrleans law enforcers. The contrary conclusions of the Canal Zonestudies were not even mentioned. Finally, a scientific study of the effects of marijuana waspresented, but, in keeping with the overall tone of the hearings,this was the most preposterous evidence of all. The TreasuryDepartment presented a pharmacologist who had tested the effectsof the cannabis drugs on dogs. 40 He concluded that"[c]ontinuous use will tend to cause the degeneration of onepart of the brain." 41. One paragraph later, however, this scientist stated:"Only about 1 dog in 300 is very sensitive to thetest."42 Later in the doctor's testimony, after he hadstated over and over the potential evils found from the testingon dogs, he was unable to make the crucial link between a dog'sresponse to the drug and the human response. More incredibly, asthe following exchange points out, the doctor really had noknowledge of what effect the drug had on the dogs, since he wasnot familiar with the psychology of dogs: Mr. McCormack. Have you experimented upon any animals whose reaction to this drug would be similar to that of human beings. Dr. Munch. The reason we use dogs is because the reaction of dogs to this drug, closely resembles the reaction of human beings. Mr. McCormack. And the continued use of it, as you have observed the reaction on dogs, has resulted in the disintegration of the personality? Dr. Munch. Yes. So far as I can tell, not being a dog psychologist .... 43 Dr. Woodward, the sole witness representing the AmericanMedical Association, noted the inadequacy of these medicalstatistics. We include his statement on that point in full: That there is a certain amount of narcotic addiction of an objectionable character no one will deny. The newspapers have called attention to it so prominently that there must be some grounds for their statements. It has surprised me, however, that the facts on which these statements have been based have not been brought before this committee by competent primary evidence. We arc referred to newspaper publications concerning the prevalence of marihuana addiction. We are told that the use of marihuana causes crime. But yet no one has been produced from the Bureau of Prisons to show the number of prisoners who have been found addicted to the marihuana habit. An informal inquiry shows that the Bureau of Prisons has no evidence on that point. You have been told that school children are great users of marihuana cigarettes. No one has been summoned from the Children's Bureau to show the nature and extent of the habit, among children. Inquiry of the Children's Bureau shows that they have had no occasion to investigate it and know nothing particularly of it. Inquiry of the Office of Education-and they certainly should know something of the prevalence of the habit among the school children of the country, if there is a prevalent habit-indicates that they have had no occasion to investigate and know nothing of it. Moreover, there is in the Treasury Department itself, the Public Health Service, with its Division of Mental Hygiene. The Division of Mental Hygiene was, in the first place, the Division of Narcotics. It was converted into the Division of Mental Hygiene, I think, about 1930. That particular Bureau has control at the present time of the narcotics farms that were created about 1929 or 1930 and came into operation a few years later. No one his been summoned from that Bureau to give evidence on that point. Informal inquiry by me indicates that they have had no record of any marihuana or Cannabis addicts who have even been committed to those farms. The Bureau of the Public Health Service has also a division of pharmacology. If you desire evidence as to the pharmacology, of Cannabis, that obviously is the place where you can get direct and primary evidence, rather than the indirect hearsay evidence. 44 Dr. Woodward's testimony clearly manifests the deficiencies ofthe hearings, for at no time did the congressional committee hearprimary sources of competent medical evidence before labelingcannabis the producer of crime and insanity. 3. How Dare You Dissent! Following the testimony of the Treasury Department and itswitnesses, the only witnesses who came forward wererepresentatives of legitimate industries that feared the Tax Actwould damage their businesses, because manufacture of theirproducts required some part or parts of the cannabis plant.45These witnesses were assured that the Tax Act would have littleif any impact on their operations .46 The one witness who opposed the adoption of the Act wasroundly accused of obstructionism and bad faith. Dr. Woodward,one of the chief drafters of the Uniform Narcotic Drug Act,appeared on behalf of the AMA to suggest that, if there was to beany regulation of the cannabis drugs at all, it should be addedto the Harrison Act and not be the subject of this separate, andhe felt inadequately considered, legislative proposal.47 We havealready examined Dr. Woodward's skepticism on the dangers of thedrug. He added to this a thinly veiled attack on the lack ofcooperation the AMA had received from the Federal Bureau ofNarcotics.48 Finally, he advocated either assisting stateenforcement of their existing laws dealing with the drug or atmost including marijuana as a regulated and taxed drug under theHarrison Act. Either because of antipathy to the AMA or because of theaudacity of these suggestions, the Committee members savagelyattacked both Dr. Woodward and the AMA. Witness the followingexchange, starting with the doctor's answer to questions why, hehad not proposed marijuana legislation Dr. Woodward. In the first place, it is not a medical addiction that is involved and the data do not come before the medical society. You may absolutely forbid the use of Cannabis by any physician, or the disposition of Cannabis by any pharmacist in the country, and you would not have touched your Cannabis addiction as it stands today, because there is no relation between it and the practice of medicine or pharmacy. It is entirely outside of the those two branches. The Chairman. If the statement that you have made has any relation to the question that I asked, I just do not have the mind to understand it; I am sorry. Dr. Woodward. I say that we do not ordinarily come directly to Congress if a department can take care of the matter. I have talked with the Commissioner, with Commissioner Anslinger. The Chairman. If you want to advise us on legislation, you ought to come here with some constructive proposals, rather than criticism, rather than trying to throw obstacles in the way of something that the Federal Government is trying to do. It has not only an unselfish motive in this, but the), have a serious responsibility. Dr. Woodward. We cannot understand yet, Mr. Chairman, why this bill should have been prepared in secret for 2 years without any intimation, even, to the profession, that it was being prepared .49 After accusing Dr. Woodward of obstruction, evasion and badfaith, the Committee did not even thank him for his testimony.50 D. Congressional "Deliberation" and Action We noted earlier that the marijuana "problem" andthe proposed federal cure were virtually unnoticed by the generalpublic. Unable to arouse public opinion through its educationalcampaign, the Bureau of Narcotics nevertheless pushed theproposed legislation through congressional committees. TheCommittee members were convinced by meaningless evidence thatfederal action was urgently needed to suppress a problem that wasno greater and probably less severe than it had been in thepreceding six years when every state had passed legislation tosuppress it. The Committee was also convinced, incorrectly, thatthe public was aware of the evil and demanded federal action. The debate on the floor of Congress shows both the low publicvisibility of the legislation and the nonchalance of thelegislators. The bill passed the House of Representatives in thevery late afternoon of a long session; many of the members wereacquainted neither with marijuana nor with the purpose of theAct. When the bill first came to the House floor late on June 10,1937, one congressman objected to considering the bill at such alate hour, whereupon the following colloquy occurred: Mr. DOUGHTON. I ask unanimous consent for the present consideration of the bill (H.R. 6906) to impose an occupational excise tax upon certain dealers in marihuana, to impose a transfer tax upon certain dealings in marihuana, and to safeguard the revenue therefrom by registry and recording. The Clerk read the title of the bill. Mr. SNELL. Mr. Speaker, reserving the right to object, and notwithstanding the fact that my friend, Reed, is in favor of it, is this a matter we should bring up at this late hour of the afternoon? I do not know anything about the bill. It may be all right and it may be that everyone is for it, but as a general principle, I am against bringing up any important legislation, and I suppose this is important, since it comes from the Ways and Means Committee, at this late hour of the day. Mr. RAYBURN. Mr. Speaker, if the gentleman will yield, I may say that the gentleman from North Carolina has stated to me that this bill has a unanimous report from the committee and that there is no controversy about it. Mr. SNELL. What is the bill? Mr. RAYBURN. It has something to do with something that is called marihuana. I believe it is a narcotic of some kind. Mr. FRED M. VINSON. Marihuana is the same as hashish. Mr. SNELL. Mr. Speaker, I am not going to object but I think, it is wrong to consider legislation of this character at this time of night.51 On June 14 when the bill finally emerged on the House floor,four representatives in one way or another asked that theproponents explain the provisions of the Act. Instead of adetailed analysis, they received a statement of one of themembers of the Ways and Means Committee repeating uncriticallythe lurid criminal acts Anslinger had attributed to marijuanausers at the hearings. After less than two pages of debate. theAct passed without a roll call.52 When the bill returned asamended from the Senate, the House considered it once again, andadopted as quickly as possible the Senate suggestions, which wereall minor.53 The only question was whether the AMA agreed withthe bill. Mr. Fred Vinson not only said they did not object whenin fact their committee witness had dissented strenuously, but healso claimed that the bill had AMA support. After turning Dr.Woodward's testimony on its head, he also called him by anothername, Wharton.54 In summary, the Act passed the Congress with little debate andeven less public attention. Provoked almost entirely by theFederal Bureau of Narcotics and by a few hysterical state lawenforcement agents hoping to get federal support for theiractivities, the law was tied neither to scientific study nor toenforcement need. The Marihuana Tax Act was hastily drawn, heard,debated and passed; it was the paradigm of the uncontroversiallaw. E. Provisions of the Act Except for the three differences noted above, the MarihuanaTax Act is modeled directly after the earlier federal tax actregulating the opiates -the Harrison Act. As with that Act, theenforcement of the new marijuana tax was left to the Bureau ofNarcotics in the Treasury Department. Thus, as a result of the1937 statute, the jurisdiction of the Bureau was increasedsubstantially.55 The Marihuana Tax Act deals specifically with the seeds, resinand most other parts and derivatives of the plant Cannabis SativaL. The Act requires persons importing, producing,56 selling or inany other way dealing with the drug to pay an occupational taxand to register with the Internal Revenue Service. In addition,all transferees of marijuana are required to file a written orderform and to pay a transfer tax, $1 per ounce if registered and aprohibitive $100 per ounce if not registered . 57 Possession ofthe drug without a written order form constitutes presumptiveevidence of noncompliance with the Act. It is also unlawful for atransferor to transfer the drug to a person who has not securedthe order form and paid the tax. As originally enacted, section12 of the Act assessed a fine of not more than $2,000 and/orimprisonment for not more than five years for violation of eachprovision of the Act. Footnotes and References 1 The best example of this argument is contained inCommissioner Anslinger's statement to the congressional committeehearings on the Marihuana Tax Act: STATE LAWS All of the States now have some type of legislation directedagainst the traffic in marijuana for improper purposes. There isno legislation in effect with respect to the District of Columbiadealing with marijuana traffic. There is unfortunately a loopholein much of this State legislation because of a too narrowdefinition of this term. Few of the States have a specialnarcotic law enforcement agency and, speaking generally,considerable training of the regular peace officers will berequired together with increased enforcement facilities before areasonable measure of effectiveness under the State laws can beachieved. NEED FOR FEDERAL LEGISLATION Even in States which have legislation controlling in somedegree the marijuana traffic, public officials, private citizens,and the press have urged or suggested the need for nationallegislation dealing with this important problem. A partial listof States wherein officials or the press have urged the need forFederal legislation on the subject are Colorado, Kansas, NewMexico, Louisiana, and Oklahoma. The uniform State narcotic law has now been adopted by some 35States, many of these including cannabis or marijuana within thescope of control by that law. However, it has recently beenlearned that the legislative definition of cannabis in most ofthese laws is too narrow, and it will be necessary to have thedefinition amplified in amendatory legislation in most of theStates, to accord with the definition in the pending Federalbill. As is the case at present with respect to opium, cocaleaves, and their respective alkaloids, the uniform State lawdoes not completely solve the enforcement problem with respect tomarijuana but it will provide the necessary supplement to theFederal act and permit cooperation of State and Federal forces,each acting within its respective sphere, toward suppression oftraffic for abusive use, no matter in what form the traffic isconducted. The Bureau of Narcotics, under the Marijuana TaxingAct, would continue to act as an informal coordinating agency inthe enforcement of the Uniform State law, exchanging informationas between the respective State authorities in the methods ofprocedure and attempting to secure true uniformity in theenforcement of the act in the various States which have adoptedit. Tax Act Hearings 31. 2 Mandel, Problems with Official Drug Statistics, 21 STAN. L.REV. 991, 1002 (1969). This article is the most completediscussion of the present inadequacies of all official drugstatistics. 3 Tax Act Hearings 26-27. 4 The FBN statistics for 1935 through 1937 on quantities (inpounds) of harvested marijuana seized by state and municipalauthorities in the major states are as follows: 1935 1936 1937 Louisiana 20 1,196 30 Mississippi 5 1,309 * New York 372,000 1 * Ohio 17,314 431 86 Texas 216 463 20 All other states 2,232 1,972 120 TOTALS 391,787 5,372 256 BUREAU OF NARCOTICS, U.S. TREASURY DEP'T, TRAFFIC IN OPIUM ANDOTHER DANGEROUS DRUGS 63 (1935) [hereinafter cited as TRAFFIC INOpium]; id. at 90 (1936); id. at 81 (1937); Part of the erraticquality of these figures may stem from failure to weigh only thedried flowering tops of the plants seized. For example, 256pounds seized in 1937 may represent a larger quantity of totalplants than 391,787 pounds seized in 1935. See Mandel, supra note2, at 999. 5 N.Y. Times, Oct. 18, 1934, at 4, col. 4. The article goes onto refer to "mariajuana [sic], or loco weed, which producesa pleasant, relaxed sensation when smoked, and eventually drivesthe habitual user insane 6 Id., July 17, 1935, at 8, Col. 8. 7 See id., Aug. 19, 1936, at 16, col. 3; id., July 28, 1936,at 11, col. 6. 8 See Tax Act Hearings 3 S. 9 TRAFFIC IN OPIUM 90 (1936). 10 See Tax Act Hearings 26. 11 See, eg., THE MARIHUANA PAPERS at xv (D. Solomon ed. 1966).See also H. BECKER, OUTSIDERS 140-42 (1963). 12 Becker's survey of marijuana-related articles in theReaders' Guide to Periodical Literature between January 1925 andMarch 1951 indicates no articles written before July 1935, fourarticles written between July 1935 and June 1937, and seventeenwritten between July 1937 and June 1939. H. BECKER, OUTSIDERS 141(1963). 13 The Readers' Guide citations are: Anslinger & Cooper,Marihuana: Assassin of Youth, Am. MAGAZINE, July 1937, at 18;Parry, Menace: Marihuana, 36 Am. MERCURY 487 (1935); Simon, FromOpium to Hash Eesh, Sci. Am., Nov. 1921, at 14; Wolf, Uncle SamFights a New Drug Menace, POPULAR SCI, May 1936, at 14; Facts andFancies About Marihuana, LITERARY DIGEST, Oct. 24, 1936, at 7;Marihuana Menaces Youth, Sci. Am., Mar. 1936, at 150; Our HomeHasheesh, Crop, LITERARY DiGEST, .Apr. 3, 1926, at 64. 14 See text at notes 47-50 infra. 15 108 JA.M.A. 1543-44 (1937). 16 See St. Louis Star-Times, Jan. 17-Feb. 19, 1935. 17 See, e.g., N.Y. Times, Jan. 3, 1937, S 6, at 6, col. 4. Thearticle reported a meeting between Anslinger and the chairwomanof the New York Federation of Women's Clubs. After the meeting,the chairwoman started an all out campaign against marijuana,focusing on lobbying for the nationwide passage of statelegislation, and on an educational program aimed at educatinghigh school students on the dangers of the drug, Another New YorkTimes article described the appearance of a representative of theFederal Bureau of Narcotics at a meeting of the national Parentsand Teachers Association held in Richmond, Virginia, urging themembers of the association to help fight the menace of marijuanawhich produced in its users "a temporary sense of completeirresponsibility which led to sex crimes and other 'horrible'acts of violence." N.Y. Times, May 4, 1937, at 26, col. 1. 18 Id., July 24, 1936, at 6, col. 3; id., July 29, 1936, atII, col. 6; id., Aug. 14, 1936. at 12, co]. 3; id., Aug. 19,1936, at 16, col. 3; id., Oct. 4, 1936, S 1, at 3, col. 3; id.,Oct. 28, 1936, at 27, col, 6; id., Jan. 3, 1937,  6, at 6, col.4; id., Mar. 22, 1937, at 24, col. 1; id., May 4, 1937, at 26,col. 1. 19 Id., Aug. 3, 1937, at 4, col. 5. 20 Compare Tax Act Hearings 13-14 (testimony of ClintonHester, Office of the General Counsel of the Treasury Department)with State v. Bonoa, 172 La. 955, 136 So. 15 (1931). It should beasked whether the information at congressional disposal changedso drastically between 1937 and 1956 as to justify the statutorypresumption enacted at that time, 21 U.S.C. 5 176a (1964),providing that possession of marijuana was presumptive evidenceof knowing concealment of illegally imported marijuana. 21 Tax Act Hearings 13-14. Earlier state statutes,particularly Virginia's, had taken great pains to outline medicalexemptions from the marijuana prohibition. See p. 1040 supra. 22 United States v. Doremus, 249 U.S. 86 (1919). 23 Tax Act Hearings 13-14. 24 The hearings, including all material not actively discussedbut merely read into the record, cover only 124 pages. 25 Tax Act Hearings 77-86; see State v. Bonoa, 172 La. 955,136 So. 15 (1931). 26 See pp. 1030-32 supra. 27 See Tax Act Hearings 30-3 1. 28 Id. at 45. 29 Quoting Dr. Walter Bromberg, Mr. Anslinger stated: Young men between the ages of 16 and 25 are frequent smokersof marihuana; even boys of 10 to 14 are initiated (frequently inschool groups); to them as to others, marihuana holds out thethrill. Since the economic depression the number of marihuanasmokers was increased by vagrant youths coming into intimatecontact with older psychopaths. Tax Act Hearings 24. See also id. at 32-35, 39, 45. 30 Id. at 24. 31 Id. at 22-23. 32 Id. at 32-37. 33 Id. at 50-52. 34 See id. at 22-23. It is entirely likely that some of theseparticularly lurid stores were the product of desperatedefendants, who, upon being caught red-handed in the commissionof crime, sought mitigation of their penalties by claiming to beunder the influence of the drug. See Bromberg, Marijuana: APsychiatric Study, 113 J.A.M.A. 4 (1939). Bromberg cautions,"The extravagant claims of defense attorneys and the pressthat crime is caused by addiction to marihuana demands [sic]careful scrutiny, at least in this jurisdiction [New YorkCounty)." Id. at 10. 35 Tax Act Hearings 35. 36 A good example is the series run by the St, LouisStar-Times in early 1935 which featured such articles as the oneentitled "Young Slaves to Dope Cigaret Pay Tragic Price forTheir Folly" on Jan. 18, 1935. 37 See Gomila & Gomila, Marihuana-A More Alarming Menaceto Society Than All Other Habit-Forming Drugs, quoted in Tax ActHearings 32, 34. Mr. F. R. Gomila was public safety director ofNew Orleans. 38 Stanley, Marihuana as a Developer of Criminals, 2 Am. J.Police Sci. 252 (1931), quoted in Tax Act Hearings 37-42, isbased on, and indeed is nearly a word-for-word paraphrase of,Fossier's article in the New Orleans Medical journal, supra note91 at P. 1044. As we have seen, Fossier, in reaching hisconclusions, overlooked the Panama Canal Zone study. 39 Tax Act Hearings 39. 40 0ne assumes the drug was thought to be too dangerous torisk experimentation on people. 41 Tax Act Hearings 48. 42 Id. 43 Id. at 51. 44 Id. at 92. 45 Thus, the following witnesses appeared: Hon. Ralph E.Lozier, General Counsel of the National Institute of OilseedProducts; Raymond G. Scarlett of the birdseed industry; andJoseph B. Hertzfeld, Manager, Feed Department, The PhiladelphiaSeed Co. 46 See id. at 74. 47 Id. at 87-121. 48 Id. at 87-88 ("During the past 2 years I have visitedthe Bureau of Narcotics probably 10 or more times. Unfortunately,I had no knowledge that such a bill as this was proposed untilafter it had been introduced"). 49 Id. at 116. 50 See id. at 121. There is sonic indication in Fred Vinson'squestioning of Dr. Woodward that one cause of the hostilitydirected at the witness was the growing disfavor with which theNew Deal Congress viewed the fairly conservative AMA. Vinson wasparticularly pointed when he said that the AMA was trying toobstruct here as it had with the Health Care provisions of theSocial Security Act, Id. it 102-04. 51 81 CONG. REC. 5575 (1937). 52 Id. at 5689-92. 53 Id. at 7624-25. 54 Id. at 7625. 55 See Dickson, Bureaucracy and Morality: An OrganizationalPerspective an a Moral Crusade, 16 SOCIAL PROD. 143 (1968)(relating this expansion of the Bureau's area of enforcement totheir solid support for the need of such federal legislation). 56 Section 4 (b) of the Act (now INT. REV. CODE Of 1954, 4755 (a) (2) ) gives rise to a presumption that one is a producerof marijuana within the terms of the Act if marijuana is foundgrowing on his property. 57 The Act does not prohibit possession or purchase ofmarijuana per se. Contents | Feedback | Search DRCNet Library | Schaffer Library | Major Studies The Forbidden Fruit and the Tree ofKnowledgeWT01-B31-49IA031-000652-B037-247http://206.61.184.43:80/schaffer/library/studies/vlr/vlr5.htm 206.61.184.43 19970122125312 text/html 62411HTTP/1.0 200 OKDate: Wednesday, 22-Jan-97 12:53:02 GMTServer: WebSitePro/1.1f (S/N wpo-0deb)Allow-ranges: bytesContent-type: text/htmlLast-modified: Saturday, 28-Dec-96 06:47:45 GMTContent-length: 62193 A New Rationale - The "Stepping Stone" Theory Contents | Feedback | Search DRCNet Library | Schaffer Library | Major Studies The Forbidden Fruit and the Tree ofKnowledge THE FORBIDDEN FRUIT AND THE TREE OF KNOWLEDGE: AN INQUIRYINTO THE LEGAL HISTORY OF AMERICAN MARIJUANA PROHIBITION Richard J. Bonnie & Charles H.Whitebread, II VI. THE 1950's: HARSHER PENALTIES AND A NEW RATIONALE-THE"STEPPING STONE" THEORY The 1950's witnessed the advent of an extremist legislativepolicy with respect to drugs generally and marijuana inparticular. For the first time in our national history, there waspublic interest in narcotic drugs. Apparently there had been anincrease in narcotic drug abuse in the late 40's, and the publicmind was ripe for the FBN propaganda. In the paranoid atmosphereof the times, the call for harsher penalties was soothing.Unfortunately, marijuana was caught in the turbulence of thisera. Although the pharmacological facts about the drug werebeginning to emerge, congressional furor was aroused by the novelassertion, rejected by Commissioner Anslinger in 1937, that useof marijuana led to use of harder drugs. This new plateau ofmisinformation was to provide the base for continual escalationof penalties and proliferation of offenses throughout the decade. A. The Boggs Act and Its Progeny: The First Escalation In 1951 Congress passed the next major piece of federalnarcotics legislation-the Boggs Act .2 The importance of thislegislation is that provided much harsher penalties for all drugviolators. Also, for the first time on the federal level,marijuana and other narcotics were lumped together as a result ofthe Act's provision for uniform penalties for violators of eitherthe Narcotic Drugs Import and Export Act3 or the Marihuana TaxAct.4 This indiscriminate treatment of marijuana as just anothernarcotic drug flew in the face of contemporary testimonychallenging the assumption that the hemp drugs were addictive,crime-producing, and likely to lead to insanity and death. Newtestimony that marijuana was unlikely to be addictive was buriedunder the new rationale for harsh penalties against offenders ofthe marijuana laws-that the drug inevitably is the stepping stoneto heroin addiction. Eventually, the states followed the federallead in striking out against drug violators with the samemindless fervor that characterized their anti-communistcampaigns. 1. The Problem: Increased Narcotics Use The hearings before the Subcommittee of the House Ways andMeans Committee and the floor debate show that the primary reasonfor passage of the Boggs Act was the increase in narcotic use inthe period 1948-1951. Testimony and evidence from a wide varietyof sources indicated an abrupt and substantial increase inaddiction, especially among teenagers, between 1947 and 1951.5Young people under 21 who had rarely been addicts suddenly becamea predominant group involved in addiction and narcotics crimes.6Representative Boggs, speaking during the congressional debateson his bill, enunciated a concern which was reflected in manyother quarters. After noting that there had been a 24 percentincrease in arrests for narcotics violations between 1949 and1950 and a 77 percent increase between 1948 and 1950,Representative Boggs stated: The most shocking part about these figures is the fact that there has been an alarming increase in drug addiction among younger persons. In the first- 6 months of 1946, the average age of addicted persons committed . . . at Lexington, Ky. was 37.5 years. Only 3 patients were under the age of 21. During the first 6 months of 1950, only 4 years later, the average had dropped to 26.7 years, and 766 patients were under the age of 21.... [I]n New York City alone it has been estimated that 1 out of every 200 teenagers is now addicted to some type of narcotics.7 Later he said, "We need only to recall what we have readin the papers in the past week to realize that more and moreyounger people are falling into the clutches of unscrupulous dopepeddlers . . . ." 8 Representative Boggs then proceeded to insert in the recordeleven newspaper and magazine articles dated between May 2 andJuly 16, 1951.9 The Washington Evening Star of July 16 (the dayof the debate) carried a story on the results of a mayor'scommittee report on drug addiction in New York City. According tothe newspaper, "between 45,000 and 90,000 persons in NewYork City are using illicit dope.... Based on the city'spopulation of 7,835,099, that would be 1 out of every 87 or 1 outof 174 persons." The paper indicated that the report showedan increase in addiction among teenagers, and it called for"more severe penalties for dope sellers, and for wholesalerevisions of Federal and State penal statutes relating tosale." An article in Time magazine of June 25, 1951, inserted by Mr.Boggs, related New York City School Superintendent WilliamJansen's statement that one out of every 200 high school studentsin the city was a user of habit forming drugs. The article wenton to describe the alarming increases in dope consumption"in other major cities and the ease with which school childrenobtained narcotics. Another article, in the Washington EveningStar of June 12, 1951, contained statements by a member of thestaff of the Attorney General of New York to the effect thatbetween 5,000 and 15,000 of New York City's 300,000 high schoolstudents were drug addicts. To supplement the stock figures,these articles included the testimony of witnesses who describedtheir own acts of prostitution and thievery, the loss ofeducational opportunities, the death of addicts from "hotshots," the horrors of withdrawal, and a wide variety ofother aspects of drug abuse. This evidence of increasing use of narcotics, especially amongthe young, and the fear that narcotics use would continue tospread, presented a problem that Congress felt needed a quick andeffective solution. 2. The Solution: Harsher Penalties In the same way that the congressional hearings,investigations and debates reflect the impetus for enactment ofthe Boggs Act, they also reveal the official and public consensusas to the solution-harsher penalties. Perhaps CommissionerAnslinger best described the prevailing climate when he stated: Short sentences do not deter. In districts where we get good sentences the traffic does not flourish.... There should be a minimum sentence for the second offense. The commercialized transaction, the peddler, the smuggler, those who traffic in narcotics, on the second offense if there were a minimum sentence of 5 years without probation or parole, I think it would just about dry up the traffic.10 This statement before the Committee was quoted byRepresentative Boggs during the congressional debate on his bill,along with the Kefauver Committee's recommendation that"mandatory penalties of imprisonment of at least 5 yearsshould be provided for second offenders." 11 RepresentativeBoggs indicated that his bill was to incorporate the KefauverCommittee recommendations of mandatory minimum sentences for drugpeddlers and had as its principal purpose ... to remove the powerof suspension of sentence and probation in the cases of secondand subsequent offenders against the narcotics and marijuanalaws, and to provide minimum sentences .... 12 Moreover, Representative Boggs and others supported themandatory minimum sentences because they felt some federal hadbeen lax in enforcing the narcotic laws 13 and because theybelieved harsher penalties had reduced crimes, particularlykidnapping and the white slave trade, in other areas.14Representative Edwin Arthur Hall of New York urged substitutionof his bill, which provided for minimum sentences of 100 yearsfor dope peddlers.15 Although there was some opposition to theBoggs Act, notably by Representative Celler, who thought that themandatory minimum sentence provision would be unjust foraddicts,16 the majority opinion was clearly that mandatoryminimum sentences were necessary to insure punishment ofpeddlers.17 In response to Mr. Celler's contention that youngaddicts could be subjected to long prison terms because of theloss of judicial discretion in sentencing, Representative Jenkinsstated: The enforcing officers will always have sympathy for the unfortunate consumer, especially if he is harmless. These enforcing officers are going to protect the little boys and little girls. They are not going to drag the high school boys and girls before the criminal courts until they know that they are collaborating with the peddlers18 Mr. Boggs presented a more reasonable justification formandatory minimums: [I]t is not the intention of this legislation to affect a teen-ager or any such person who has possession of narcotics. But the gentleman also knows that if we try to make a distinction between possession and peddling that we immediately open the law to all types of abuses.19 The Act as passed provided uniform penalties for violations ofthe Narcotic Drugs Import and Export Act and the Marihuana TaxAct. The penalties prescribed were: First offense 2 - 5 years Second offense 5 - 10 years Third and subsequent offenses 10 - 20 years Fine for all offenses $2,000.00 The relatively low fines reflected a congressional belief thatmonetary penalties were an insignificant deterrent.20 Anessential provision of the Act removed judicial discretion insentencing by providing that upon conviction for a second orsubsequent offense the imposition or execution of the sentencecould not be suspended nor probation granted. As in the nontaxpredecessors of the Boggs Act since 1909 and the Marihuana TaxAct, possession of a narcotic drug was sufficient for convictionunless the defendant could explain the possession to thesatisfaction of the jury.21 3. Marijuana and the Boggs Act Congressional and public attention was clearly focused on hardnarcotics use, primarily the opiates. Judging from the recordedproceedings, especially the floor debate in the House, marijuanaseems to have been along for the ride, much as it had been duringenactment of the Uniform Narcotic Drug Act. However, here therewas a conscious decision to include marijuana violations in thenew penalty provisions. Underlying this decision weredeterminations that marijuana use had also increased during thelater 1940's, that it too was spreading to white teenagers, andthat the drug's dangers, warranted the harsh treatmentcontemplated by the Act. (a) Increased Use.-To test the allegation of an increase inmarijuana use during this period, we have used the seizure andenforcement figures used by the proponents of the legislation.These figures tend to sustain the hypothesis that marijuanatraffic increased from 1948 to 1951, following a declinethroughout the early 40's. However, the figures are alsoconsistent with other hypotheses, for example that improvedenforcement techniques and increased state-federal cooperationhad increased arrests. Federal agents of the Narcotics Bureau began vigorouslyenforcing the Marihuana Tax Act almost as soon as PresidentRoosevelt signed it into law. From October 1 to December 31,1937, alone, the FBN made 369 seizures totaling 229 kilograms ofthe drug.22 Moreover, state officials made extensive seizures either inconjunction with FBN agents or in pursuance of their newly-passedstate controls over marijuana's Marijuana seizures by federalauthorities hit their low point in 1945 when only 257 kilogramswere taken, 128 of which were seized by the FBN and the rest byUnited States Customs agents .24 At this time the FBN hadapproximately 180 agents.25 This low seizure figure suggests adecrease in marijuana use throughout the early 1940 's.26 Beginning in about 1948, however, the arrest and seizure 27figures rose dramatically, the arrest figures rising 33 percentfrom 1947 to 1948. These figures tend to corroborate theCommissioner's assertion that there was a drastic increase innarcotics use between 1948 and 1951 28 and to justify thesimultaneous calls for amendment of the narcotics and marijuanalaws.29 On the other hand, these figures could reflect increasedor I improved enforcement. For example, in 1949 the FBN had begunto encourage the largest cities to form special narcotics squadsto deal especially with the drug problem.30 By 1951, however,only New York and Los Angeles had formed the separate policedetail the FBN had requested .31 Thus even if one were tempted totry to correct for improvements in the law enforcement machinery,the seizure figures for the late 40's and 50's do sustain thenotion that the traffic in marijuana increased from 1948 to 1951. (b) Youthful Users.-As with the hard narcotics, Congress wasespecially alarmed by the alleged spread of marijuana to whiteteenagers and school children. Militating against thisproposition is evidence that marijuana use was not widespreadamong the young as late as 1944. In that year, the famous LaGuardia Report reached the following conclusions among others:Marijuana use was widespread in the Borough of Manhattan buttended to be limited to certain areas, notably Harlem; themajority of marijuana smokers were Negroes and Latin-Americans,and marijuana smoking was not widespread among school children.32 The La Guardia study portrays marijuana use in this period asa rather casual adjunct to ghetto life. Since it was not costly,this euphoriant was well within the reach of ghetto residents. Itappears that throughout the early 40's marihuana use in the Westas well as in the East continued to be associated with the ethnicminorities, especially in the inner city.33 The fear that marihuana use would spread to white teenagers isone that has recurred since the earliest legislative cognizance.In fact, it was probably a factor in the early opium laws .34 Wehave been unable to confirm whether the fear was justified atthis time, but in light of the documentation of increasednarcotics use among the young, we shall presume the same usepatterns to be true of marihuana. (c) The Danger: A New Rationale.-The FBN had begun itseducational campaign for harsher marihuana penalties immediatelyafter passage of the Tax Act." In the early years, thecampaign was particularly effective with judges. For example, inone of the first cases under the Tax Act, a Colorado judgestated: I consider marihuana the worst of all narcotics-far worse than the use of morphine or cocaine. Under its influence men become beasts, just as was the case with [the defendant]. Marihuana destroys life itself. I have no sympathy With those who sell this weed. In the future I will impose the heaviest penalties. The Government is going to enforce this new law to the letter.36 The crime, pauperism and insanity rationale was acceptedunquestioningly as late as 1951.37 Under this rationale, harsherpenalties were certainly as imperative for marijuana offenders asthey were for opiate offenders. However, in a paper filed as anexhibit to the hearings38 on the Boggs Act, Dr. Harris Isbell,Director of Research at the Public Health Service hospital inLexington, Kentucky, exploded the traditional rationale. Hestated that marijuana was not physically addictive.39 Although hepostulated a definition of addiction which amounts to nothingmore than chronic intoxication 40 and noted the possibility of"temporary psychoses" in "predisposedindividuals," Isbell's description of marijuana wasextraordinarily favorable. Before the Kefauver Committee hetestified: Marijuana smokers generally are mildly intoxicated, giggle, laugh, bother no one, and have a good time. They do not stagger or fall, and ordinarily will not attempt to harm anyone. It has not been proved that smoking marijuana leads to crimes of violence or to crimes of a sexual nature. Smoking marijuana has no unpleasant after-effects, no dependence is developed on the drug, and the practice can easily be stopped at any time. In fact, it is probably easier to stop smoking marijuana cigarettes than tobacco cigarettes. In predisposed individuals, marijuana may precipitate temporary psychoses and is, therefore, not an innocuous practice with them.41 Dr. Isbell's statements that marijuana does not cause aphysical dependence were supported by other doctors, 42 prisonofficials,43 and perhaps most significantly by the statement of anumber of narcotics addicts .44 Despite this testimony the legislators approved greatlyincreased penalties for marijuana users. The crucial reason forthis severe treatment can be seen in the following colloquyduring the House subcommittee hearings: Mr. Boggs. From just what little I saw in that demonstration, I have forgotten the figure Dr. Isbell gave, but my recollection is that only a small percentage of those marijuana cases was anything more than a temporary degree of exhilaration .... Mr. Anslinger. The danger is this: Over 50 percent of those young addicts started on marijuana smoking. They started there and graduated to heroin; they took the needle when the thrill of marijuana was gone.45 Many others -doctors ,46 crime prevention experts,47 policeand narcotics bureau officials48 -testified to the link betweenmarijuana use and ultimate heroin addiction. Representative Boggshimself summed up this novel danger of marijuana in one of thefew statements even to mention marijuana in House floor debate: Our younger people usually start on the road which leads to drug addiction by smoking marijuana. They then graduate into narcotic drugs-cocaine, morphine, and heroin. When these younger persons become addicted to the drugs, heroin, for example, which costs from $8 to $15 per day, they very often must embark on careers of crime . . . and prostitution . . . in order to buy the supply which they need.49 The passage of this new Federal Act marked a significant shiftin rationale for the illegal status of marijuana; that statusbecame more entrenched by the indiscriminate lumping of marijuanawith the other narcotic drugs. 4. The State Response: Mindless Escalation While the Boggs Act was still pending in Congress, the Bureauof Narcotics encouraged the states to modify their existingnarcotic and marijuana legislation to enact "penaltiessimilar to those provided for in the Boggs bill [which] would beof material assistance in the fight against the narcotictraffic." 50 Seventeen states (including Virginia) and theTerritory of Alaska responded by passing "little BoggsActs" by 1953, and eleven other states increased theirpenalties by 1956. In 1951, seven states and the Territory of Alaska passedpenalty provisions similar to those contained in the BoggsAct.,51 In addition, nine other states amended their drug laws toprovide for more severe penalties, but the provisions wereneither uniform nor identical to those provided for under thefederal measure. 52 In 1952, four more states, includingVirginia, amended the penalty provisions of their drug laws tobring them in line with the Boggs Act.53 Six more states followedsuit in 1953.54 Finally, in 1955 and 1956 two states, Ohio andLouisiana respectively, enacted penalty provisions which weresubstantially more severe than those passed previously in anyJurisdiction.55 The Virginia "little Boggs Act" was signed into lawon April 1, 1952 ,56 after having passed both housesunanimously.57 The measure was regarded as routine, and as one ofthe "less controversial" proposals to come before thelegislature during the 1952 session.58 It cleared the House on aday when bills were being passed "at the rate of about one aminute during some periods" 59 and won Senate approvalduring the final rush to complete business in the waning hours ofthe 1952 General Assembly. The Act produced three basic changes in Virginia's scheme ofnarcotics control. It added marijuana to those drugs whose salewas forbidden under the state's version of the Uniform NarcoticDrug Act; it created the new substantive crime of sale to aminor; and it provided for harsher penalties for violations ofthe drug laws.60 Prior to 1952, the Virginia anti-marijuana provision wasseparate from those provisions governing the sale of"hard" drugs. But the 1952 Act repealed this provisionand included marijuana under the state's general narcotic controllaw. As a result, a person illegally selling marijuana becamesubject to the same penalties imposed upon a person legallyvending such drugs as heroin, morphine and cocaine .61 The heart of the 1952 Act was the provision for stifferpenalties for the violation of Virginia's general narcotic lawsprohibiting the sale of drugs without a prescription. For thefirst offense, the penalty was imprisonment in the penitentiaryfor not less than three nor more than five years plus a fine ofnot more than $1,000. For the second offense, the penalty wasimprisonment for not less than five nor more than ten years and afine of not more than $2,000. For the third and succeedingoffenses, the penalties were fines of not more than $3,000 andimprisonment for not less than ten nor more than twenty years. The 1952 Act also made it a felony to sell, barter, peddle,exchange or otherwise dispense marijuana or any other narcoticdrug to a minor. Any person found guilty of such offense wassubject to imprisonment for a term of not less than ten years normore than thirty years, no part of which could be suspended, anda fine of not more than $ 1,000 for the first offense, $2,000 forthe second offense and $3,000 for the third and subsequentoffenses. Such a provision exemplifies the increasedsophistication of anti-narcotic legislation during the 1950's.Thus, the continued escalation of penalties for drug lawviolators was followed in Virginia. Moreover, despite the publicconcern and attention in the national media, in Virginia it isplain that the 1952 amendments to the narcotic laws passedvirtually unnoticed in the press .62 B. The Late 1950's: Another Escalation of the Penalties Whether because use had decreased or because the propagandistshad accomplished their main mission, the narcotics problemdropped almost entirely from public view after the Boggs Act waspassed. Nevertheless, state and federal police authorities, armedwith data suggesting that the strengthening of the drug laws hadat least halted the increase in drug use, pressed for furtherincreases in penalties in order entirely to root out the drugmenace. 63 Without significant debate or public interest,Congress responded by passing the Narcotic Control Act of 1956.64 Although the legislators paid even less attention to marijuanathan they had in 1951, the precedent there established ofclassifying marijuana with hard narcotics resulted in aproliferation of marijuana offenses and a further increase inpenalties. In some ways, this legislation represents thehigh-water mark of uninformed public policy regarding marijuana.In almost every respect, the provisions of the Act and thelegislative motivation bear absolutely no rational relation tomarijuana's pharmacology and to the drug's actual use and trafficpatterns. I. Provisions of the Narcotic Control Act of 1956 Public Law 728, an act intended to make more effective controlof the narcotic drugs and marijuana, was approved on July 18,1956. It amended the Internal Revenue Code of 1954 and theNarcotic Drugs Import and Export ACt65 primarily in the directionof increasing still further the penalties for violation of thoseacts and proliferating the scope of federal control over the use,possession and sale of narcotic drugs and marijuana. The new law raised the potential fine for all narcotics andmarijuana offenses to $20,000 66 and increased the mandatoryminimum sentences for offenses in the prescription, registrationand possession categories to two, five and ten years forsuccessive offenses.67 No distinction was made between addictsand traffickers with regard to these types of violations.Violations of the sale, transfer and smuggling provisions of theAct carry a minimum sentence of five years for first offenses andten years for all subsequent offenses. 68 In this connection theAct created a new offense by prohibiting illegal importation ofmarijuana and forbidding knowing receipt, concealment, purchase,sale, and facilitation of transportation or concealment of suchillegally, imported marijuana .69 Simple possession was bystatute sufficient evidence of guilt to convict.70 Thisprovision, now 21 U.S.C.  176a, paralleled a similarimportation provision for narcotics originally passed in 1909. In addition, any sale or transfer of any drug by an adult to awas made punishable by a minimum ten-year sentence.71 Finally,the Act made suspension, probation and parole unavailable to alloffenders except those convicted of a first offense forpossession, prescription or registration.72 In addition to the increases in offenses and penalties, thelaw contained wide variety of provisions relating to enforcement.Customs and Narcotics Bureau agents were authorized to carryweapons and to make arrests without a warrant on belief that adrug violation had been committed .73 The Government was allowedto appeal unfavorable decisions suppressing evidence74 and tocompel testimony from witnesses by a grant of immunity.75 In aconcession to those legislators who favored a wiretappingprovision, the new law created a category of offense based on theuse of communications instrumentalities in violation of the druglaws.76 This provision carried penalties of a minimum two-yearsentence and up to a $5,000 fine. The Act required that citizenswho are drug users and drug law violators must register with theimmigration authorities upon entering or leaving the UnitedStates .77 The Act also amended the Immigration and NationalityAct to provide for deportation of alien drug users and drug lawviolators .78 2. Marijuana-Along for the Ride The Narcotic Control Act of 1956 was premised on the samebeliefs as was the Boggs Act. Few if any of the legislatorsrecognized that marijuana was in any way different from thephysically addictive narcotics.79 The stepping stone concept wasnow so widely accepted that only once during the extensivecongressional debates on the House and Senate versions of thebill was the subject of marijuana as a separate substance evenraised. In a statement reflecting both ignorance of the basiccharacteristics of marijuana and naive acceptance of the steppingstone concept, Senator Daniel, Chairman of the Senatesubcommittee that investigated the drug problem, describedmarijuana: That is a drug which starts most addicts in the use of drugs. Marihuana, in itself a dangerous drug, can lead to some of the worst crimes committed by those who are addicted to the habit. Evidently, its use leads to the heroin habit and then to the final destruction of the persons addicted.80 Because Congress bought the FBN's propaganda lock, stock andbarrel, it is not surprising that there was no dissent from theproposition that harsher penalties were the means to eliminateillicit use and sale of all drugs.81 3. Trafficking Patterns The 1956 Act reflected an unsupported conception of the natureof the marijuana traffic. Under the assumption that"peddlers" of all drugs, marijuana included, arecontrolled by organized crime, the Act assessed extremely heavypenalties for sale, especially to minors. For example, the HouseWays and Means Committee report noted that "narcotictraffickers ... are in most cases well organized professionalracketeers." 82 Similarly, in recommending prohibition ofprobation or suspension of sentence for first-offender peddlers,the House subcommittee had asserted that if the first offenderpeddler problem was not solved, there would eventually be"large scale recruiting of our youth by the upper echelon oftraffickers." 83 While the reference to organized crime was undoubtedly validwith respect to hard drugs, the assumption that marijuana trafficwas controlled by large-scale racketeers was completelyunsupported. The marijuana distribution pattern today is fardifferent than the distribution pattern for "hard"drugs. On college campuses today, the marijuana seller is likelyto be a smoker who has a small amount he wants to sell. Unlessone is to believe that organized crime has abdicated adistribution role to "amateurs," it is difficult toimagine that it controlled the distribution of marijuana in 1956.Accordingly, the 1956 Act's widely divergent treatment of saleand use of marijuana may not have been justified at the time ofenactment, and it certainly makes little sense today. 4. Origin and Use A related misconception about the marijuana trade concerns thenew importation offenses. Underlying the presumption of knowingconcealment of smuggled marijuana arising from possession are twofindings that the mainstay of marijuana traffic is imported fromMexico and that possessors are likely to be aware of that fact.Even in 1956, such findings were dubious.84 As to the presumptionof importation, Commissioner Anslinger's estimate that 90 percentof all marijuana seized by federal authorities had been smuggledfrom Mexico85 was grossly misleading. The Federal Bureau ofNarcotics had practically abandoned the responsibility formarijuana control to increasingly effective state narcoticssquads and to the Customs agents.86 Of course, federal figurestaken alone would suggest a high percentage of importation.Furthermore, the Commissioner's conclusion was inconsistent withan essential premise of the Tax Act87 and with other materialsbefore the Congress,88 all of which emphasized the large degreeof domestic cultivation. As to the possessor's knowledge, the underlying assumptionagain was that there was an organized trade pattern so that eachuser knew where his drug came from. As we know, marijuana wasthen a casual adjunct to ghetto life. It was a social, ratherthan an economic, phenomenon limited almost exclusively tounemployed or menially employed members of racial minorities inthe center cities.89 As applied to such a class of people, thepresumption is farcical.90 5. Enforcement Patterns Although the proliferation of federal offenses suggests on itsface that state enforcement was inadequate to cope with marijuanatrade or that increased use of the drug presaged increasednarcotics addiction, nothing could be farther from the truth.Considering marijuana alone, the 1956 legislation was passed inresponse to no need at all. The enforcement statistics confirmour hypothesis that marijuana was simply "along for theride." First, as we noted above, federal arrests declined continuallyafter 1952.91 Although attributable in part to increased stateenforcement92 and to a conscious FBN decision to concentrate onnarcotics, the figures do suggest a decline in or at least astabilization of marijuana use by the middle fifties, even inareas in which narcotics use continued unabated. Second, theclass of users does not seem to have changed at all during thisperiod. Arrest statistics still indicate that use was centered inthe ghetto areas of major cities93 in California, Texas,Louisiana, Michigan, New York, and Illinois.94 However, becausestatistics were not refined according to race, age, sex and ofteneven the drug used,95 we cannot state categorically that therewas no change in use patterns. 96 6. The Epitome of Irrationality: Virginia's 1958 Amendment In 1958, Virginia's Uniform Drug Act was further amended tomake the "possession of illegally acquired narcotic drugs[which included marijuana] in any quantity greater thantwenty-five grains, if in solid form, or eight ounces, if inliquid form," a crime punishable by a fine of not more than$5,000 and imprisonment for not less than twenty nor more thanforty years .97 The effect of this enactment was to provide apenalty for illegal possession that was more than twice as severeas the penalty for unlawful sale and one and one-half times morestringent than that for sale to a minor. It is incredible thatdespite the extreme harshness of this penalty, themeasure passed both houses of the General Assembly with but onedissenting vote, and no mention was made of it in the RichmondTimes-Dispatch during the period of February 14 to April 7, 1958. In conclusion, the Federal Narcotic Control Act of 1956 andsubsequent state legislation reflect the same basic congressionaland public misconceptions about the nature and dangers ofmarijuana that characterized the early fifties. Even moreunchanged, and in fact strengthened by results under the BoggsAct, was the assumption that the key to the solution of thenarcotic drug problem was the imposition of harsher penalties onboth users and traffickers in illicit drugs. Classification ofmarijuana with narcotic drugs was now a foregone conclusion. Infact, legislators seemed less aware that marijuana was a distinctsubstance than they had been in 1951. Footnotes and References 1 Between 1937 and 1951, the Uniform Narcotic Drug Act wasamended to change the definition of cannabis from the floweringor fruiting tops of just the female plant to include thecorresponding parts of the male plant. See 1942 HANDBOOK 172-73. 2 Act of Nov. 2, 1951, ch. 666, 65 Stat. 767. 3 21 U.S.C.  174 (1964). 4 26 U.S.C.   4741-76 (1964). 5 Hearings Before the Special Senate Committee to InvestigateOrganized Crime in Interstate Commerce, 82d Cong., 1st Sess., pt.14, exhibit 1, at .131, 240-41, 266 (1951) [hereinafter cited asKefauver Committee Hearings). Senator Kefauver stated at the June26, 1951, session of the hearings: Illegal drug use has reached epidemic proportions, accordingto information secured by this committee from different parts ofthe country. One of the most alarming aspects is the reportedincrease in addiction among the younger generation, some ofschool age. Id., pt. 14, at 235. See also N.Y. Times, June 19, 1951, at25, col. I ("the present wave of juvenile addiction struckus with hurricane force in 1948 and 1949, and in a short time hadthe two Federal hospitals bursting at the seams") (statementof Commissioner Anslinger). 6 A 57 year-old addict witness, who had started smoking opiumaround 1912, stated that he had never seen significant use ofdrugs by young people until recently and theorized that marijuanawas the cause. Kefauver Committee Hearings, pt. 14, at 382. 7 97CONG. REC. 8197 (195 1). 8 Id. at 8198. 9 Id. at 8198-8204. 10 Id. at 8198 (as quoted by Representative Boggs). See alsoKefauver Committee Hearings, pt. 14, at 430-31 (testimony ofCommissioner Anslinger). 11 97 CONG. REC. 8198 (1951). 12 Id. at 8196. 13 See id. at 8197, 8207. One of the most critical statementson this point came from Representative Harrison of Virginia who,after noting that narcotics laws violations had been increasing"only" in those jurisdictions where federal judges hadfailed to impose adequate sentences on recidivists, stated:"Where the judiciary is abusing its discretion, it is theduty of the law-making body to limit the discretion in order thatthe public may be protected." Id. at 8211. 14 Id. at 8207. 15 Id. at 8209. 16 Id. at 8210. 17 Representative Celler suggested that harsh mandatorysentences would have "two results: grand juries will refuseto indict and petit juries will refuse to convict." Id. at8206. 18 Id. at 8207. 19 Id. at 8206. 20 Id. at 8197. 21 Representative Keating Questioned the constitutionality ofthe provision. Id. at 8206. Apparently Keating acceptedRepresentative Harrison's statement that the language had been inthe statutory predecessors for years and had been passed on bythe Supreme Court. Id. at 8211. 22 TRAFFIC IN Opium 80 (1937). For a full and effectivediscussion of the flaws in these drug statistics from 1937 untilthe mid 1940's due to a confusion over what parts of themarijuana plant were to be weighed in determining how much of thedrug had been seized, see Mandel, Problems with Official DrugStatistics, 21 STAN. L. REV. 991, 998-99 (1969). 23 The following figures are available from 1936 to 1941.After 1941 the FBN ceased publication of the number of seizuresby state and municipal authorities: Year Number of seizures Amount seized 1935 unreported 195+ tons 1936 377 386 tons 1937 335 116 Kg. 1939 289 22,807 Kg. 1940 433 71,129 Kg. 1941 193 19 Kg. TRAFFIC IN Opium 63 (1935); id. at 57 (1936); id. at 81(1937); id. at 80 (1939); id. at 73 (1940); id. at 38 (1941). Thegreat discrepancy in these numbers may be one reason the FBNceased their publication in 1941. 24 Id. at 80 (1945). 25 Hearings on Dep'ts of Treasury and Post OfficeAppropriations for 19S1 Before a Subcomm. of the House Comm. onAppropriations, 81st Cong., 2d Sess., pt. 1, at 128 (1950). 26 The figures on the amount seized by federal agents from1939-1945 are as follows: Year FBN No. of Kgs. Seized Customs No. of Kgs. Seized 1939 419 63 1940 495 100 1941 396 12 1942 289 44 1943 150 168 1944 247 78 1945 128 129 TRAFFIC IN Opium 78 (1939); id. at 72 (1940); id. at 37(1941); id. at 49 (1942); id. at 42 (1943); id. at 34 (1944); id.at 23 (1945). 27 The figures for the period 1946-1951 are as follows: Year Seized No. of Arrests for Violations of Marijuana Laws Year No. of Kgs. Seized FBN Customs 1946 293 331 953 1947 307 466 911 1948 422 1023 1278 1949 384 1165 1643 1950 323 933 1490 1951 447 558 1177 TRAFFIC IN Opium 23, 27 (1946); id. at 23, 29 (1947); id. at23, 28 (1948); id. at 22, 26 (1949); id. at 29, 33 (1950); id. at25. 29 (1951). 28 See Teen-Age Dope Addicts New Problem?, U.S. NEWS &WoRLD REPORT, June 29, 1951, at 18 (interview with CommissionerAnslinger). 29 See text at note 10 supra. 30 See Teen-Age Dope Addicts New Problem?, supra note 28, at19. 31 Anslinger, The Facts About Our Teen-Age Addicts, READERSDigest, Oct. 1951, at 139. 32 The conclusions of the LaGuardia Report are discussed in THE MARIHUANA PAPERS 277-410(D. Solomon ed. 1966). The thirteen conclusions on the sociologyof marijuana use are so significant we include them in full: From the foregoing study the following conclusions are drawn: 1. Marihuana is used extensively in the Borough of Manhattanbut the problem is not as acute as it is reported to be in othersections of the United States. 2. The introduction of marihuana into this area is recent ascompared to other localities. 3. The cost of marihuana is low and therefore within thepurchasing power of most persons. 4. The distribution and use of marihuana is centered inHarlem. 5. The majority of marihuana smokers are Negroes andLatin-Americans. 6. The consensus among marihuana smokers is that the use ofthe drug creates a definite feeling of adequacy. 7. The practice of smoking marihuana does not lead toaddiction in the medical sense of the word. 8. The sale and distribution of marihuana is not under thecontrol of any single organized group. 9. The use of marihuana does not lead to morphine or heroin orcocaine addiction and no effort is made to create a market forthese narcotics by stimulating the practice of marihuana smoking. 10. Marihuana is not the determining factor in the commissionof major crimes. 11. Marihuana smoking is not widespread among school children. 12. Juvenile delinquency is not associated with the practiceof smoking marihuana. 13. The publicity concerning the catastrophic effects ofmarihuana smoking in New York City is unfounded. Id. at 307. 33 The New York trend was also typical of Los Angeles.California Division of Narcotic Enforcement, Marijuana-Our NewestNarcotic Menace, April 11 1940, at 12. See also Note, Youth andNarcotics, 1 U.C.L.A. L. Rev. 445, 453 (1954) (reporting abreakdown by race of narcotics arrests by the Oakland policedepartment). 34 For example, in 1895 New York had passed a statute, ch.1041, 5 1, [1895 ] N.Y. Laws 972, requiring instruction in publicschools on the effect of narcotics. 35 For full accounts of the FBN "educationalcampaigns" up through the present day, see TRAFFIC IN Opiumfrom 1937 to the present. For the full exposition of the FBN'sposition on the drug user as a criminal before he becomes anaddict, see Recidivism on Narcotic Law Violators, in Traffic inOpium for each year. 36 Judge J. Foster Svmes of Denver, Colorado, quoted inTRAFFIC IN OPIUM 57 (1937). 37 See, e.g., G. CREIGHTON, NARCOTICS: THEIR LEGITIMATE ANDILLICIT USE (I 95 1). 38 Hearings an H.R. 3490 before the Subcomm. on Narcotics ofthe House Comm. on Ways and Means. 82d Cong., 1st Sess. 147(1951) [hereinafter cited as Boggs Act Hearings). 39 Dr. Isbell's paper stated: Any definition [of addiction] which makes dependence anessential feature will also not include intoxications with suchsubstances as cocaine, marijuana, and amphetamine. becausedependence on these substances is no more marked than isdependence on tobacco and coffee and yet, in some ways,intoxication with cocaine or marijuana is more harmful than isaddiction to morphine. Furthermore, definitions which excludecocaine and marijuana from the list of addicting drugs wouldcause endless confusion because, in common parlance and legally,both drugs arc regarded as addicting. Id. at 147-48. 40 Id. at 148. 41 Kefauver Committee Hearings, pt. 14, at 119. 42 Id. at 136. See also Boggs Act Hearings I 01. 43 Boggs Act Hearings 96 44 Kefauver Committee Hearings, pt. 14, at 73, 101, 109(statements of three addicts). See also id. at 190, 204 forstatements by addicts to the effect that upon Moving frommarijuana to hard drugs they did not know that the Latter wereaddictive. The implication is clear that marijuana is notaddictive. See id. at 91. 45 Boggs Act Hearings 206. 46 Kefauver Committee Hearings, pt. 14, at 133. 47 Boggs ActHearings 105. 48 Kefauver Committee Hearings, pt. 14, at 449; Boggs ActHearings 62. 49 97 CONG. REC. 8197-98 (1951). The linkage of marijuana useto heroin was also supplied by sonic of the testimony by addictsthemselves. Of 27 addicts interviewed in part 14 of the KefauverCommittee Hearings, 15 testified that they had started their druguse with marijuana. This figure is misleading because asubstantial majority of the 12 who had not used marijuana wereaddicts because of illness or were older addicts who had begunusing drugs before marijuana was readily available. See KefauverCommittee Hearings, pt. 14, at 11, 29, 54, 62, 71, 84, 93, 99,104, 108, 153, 157, 160, 162, 167, 171, 182, 189, 194, 203, 211,216, 220, 367, 380, 432, 436. Approximately 5 of the addictwitnesses indicated that marijuana did in fact lead to the use ofthe harder drugs but only one gave definite reasons why hethought this transition inevitably took place. One male addict,after stating that the average age of marijuana smokers was 13 or14, stated: You would very seldom find a person smoking marijuana who doesjust that, he keeps on, and he gets to the point where he doesnot have the same drive or feeling that he first had, and it islike a stepping stone, he graduates to heroin. Kefauver CommitteeHearings, pt. 14, at 199-200. Note that among many of these addicts curiosity and peer grouppressure was the primary factor in starting them into the use ofhard drugs. Id. at 12, 32, 94, 109, 254. Moreover, RepresentativeBoggs introduced some mystery into his statements during theHouse debates by stating: A study in February of 1950 of 602 case reports indicates that53 percent . . . started their addiction to drugs by reason ofassociation with other addicts, and 7 percent of them started onmarijuana. 97 CONG. REC. 8197 (1951). This study is cited on the samepage with Representative Boggs' statement that our young peopleusually start on the road to drug addiction by smoking marijuana. 50 TRAFFIC IN Opium 6 (1950). 51 Alabama, Indiana, Maryland, New Jersey, Oklahoma, Tennesseeand West Virginia. Id. at 8 (1951). 52 Connecticut, Illinois, Louisiana, Michigan, New York,Pennsylvania, Utah, Washington and Wisconsin. Id. at 8-9. 53 Colorado, Georgia, Kentucky and Virginia. Id. at 6 (1952). 54 Delaware, Iowa, Minnesota, Nebraska, Pennsylvania andWyoming. Id. at 9 (1953). 55 The Ohio law, approved June 16,1955, provided for imprisonment of any one found guilty ofillegally selling narcotic drugs for a period of not less thantwenty nor more than forty years. Id. at 7 (1955). The Louisianameasure, adopted the following year, provided severe prisonsentences without parole, probation or suspension for the illegalsale, possession or administration of a narcotic drug. Sentencesranged from a five year minimum to a ninety-nine year maximum.Id. at 28 (1956). 56 Ch. 451, [1952) Va. Acts of Assembly 736. 57 The bill, H.B. 132, passed the House 65-0 on February 23,1952, and the Senate 34-0 on March 7, 1952. 58 Richmond Times-Dispatch, Mar. 2, 1952, 5 2, at 1, col. 6. 59 Id., Feb. 24, 1952,  2, at 5, col. 3. The House passedfifty bills and advanced thirty-five more during its session ofFebruary 23, 1952. Id. 60 Ch. 212, [1936] Va. Acts of Assembly 361. 61 Ch. 451, [1952] Va. Acts of Assembly 736. 62 See also Proffit, An Analysis of the Missouri Narcotic DrugLaws, 17 Mo. L. REV. 252 (1952), in which the author shows thatnarcotic hysteria was closely linked to the general hysteria and"Red Scare" of the early fifties: "The opinion hasbeen advanced that the recent upsurge in consumption [of drugs]is fostered by Communists in an effort to undermine the morals ofour youth." Id. at 252-53. He cites a Missouri official whoso testified before a state legislative committee. For more ofthe same, see W. OURSLER & L. SMITH, NARCOTICS: AMERICA'SPERIL 266 (1952). The Missouri case parallels the Virginia datain that great public concern is expressed about the possiblespread of narcotics addiction but little if any separate noticewas given marijuana. Everywhere the narcotics evil was linked byveiled references to international communism, especially that ofChina, the traditional home of the opium habit. 63 Hearings on Illicit Narcotics Traffic Before the Subcomm.on Improvements in the Federal Criminal Code of the Senate Comm.on the judiciary, 84th Cong., 1st Sess. 57 (1955) [hereinaftercited as Daniel Committee Hearings]; see H. ANSLINGER & W.OURSLER, THE MURDERERS (1962). 64 Ch. 629, 70 Stat. 567. 65 Ch. 202, 42 Stat. 596 (1922). 66 Ch. 629,   103, 105-06, 108, 70 Stat. 568, 570, 571(codified at 26 U.S.C.  7237 (1964); 21 U.S.C.  174, 176a,184a (1964)). 67 Id.  103, 70 Stat. 568 (codified at 26 U.S.C.  7237(1964)). 68 Id. 69 Id.  106, 70 Stat. 570 (codified at 21 U.S.C.  176a(1964)). 70 Id. (declared unconstitutional in Leary v. United States,395 U.S. 6 (1969)) 71 Id.  103, 70 Stat. 568 (codified at 26 U.S,C.  7237 (b)(1) (1964)). The statute also provided that a seller peddlingheroin to a minor may be subject to a sentence of lifeimprisonment imposed by a court, or to a death sentence imposedby a jury. Id.  107, 70 Star. 571 (codified at 21 US.C.  176b(1964)). 72 Id. S 103, 70 Stat. 569 (codified at 26 U.S.C. 7237(d)(Supp. 111, 1966)). 73 Id.  104, 70 Star. 570 (codified at 26 U.S.C.  7607(1964)). 74 Id.  201, 70 Star. 573 (codified at 18 U.SC. S 1404(1964)). 75 Id., 70 Star. S74 (codified at 18 U.S.C. S 1406 (1964)). 76 Id., 70 Star. 573 (codified at 18 U.S.C. 5 1403 (1964) ). 77 id., 70 Stat. 574 (codified at 18 U.S.C.  1407 (1964)). 78 Id. S 301, 70 Stat. 575 (codified at 8 U.S.C.  1182(a)(5), (23) (1964)). 79 The House Subcommittee on Narcotics, which produced whatbecame the essentials of the Narcotic Control Act of 1956,revealed its knowledge of the distinction between marijuana andnarcotics solely by a footnote to the major heading"Narcotics" which stated in fine print that the termnarcotics included marijuana. See U.S. CODE CONG. & Am News3294 (1956). 80 102 GONG. REC. 9015 (1956). 81 Representative Boggs, father of the Boggs Act and Chairmanof the Subcommittee on Narcotics of the House Ways and MeansCommittee, stated that '[e]ffective steps to eliminate theunlawful drug traffic requires ... the imposition of severepunishment by the courts." Id. at 10689. The subcommittee,which had set out to determine the effect of the Boggs Act onnarcotics traffic, U.S. CODE CONG. & AD. News 3291 (1956),began its recommendations with calls for further increases in thepenalties for narcotics law violations. Id. at 3309. In fact, thesubcommittee felt that this was the only way to eliminate thedrug menace, and recommended that educational programs on theevils of narcotics not be instituted in the schools for fear ofexciting the curiosity of young people. Id. at 3305. Both theHouse Ways and Means Committee report and the subcommittee reportare filled with statements to the effect that harsher penaltiesare the most effective weapons in the war against illicitnarcotics. Id. at 3281-3303 passim. The Ways and Means Committeeconclusion was succinct: "Experience with the Boggs law . .. has clearly demonstrated the efficacy of severe punishment inreducing the illicit commerce in drugs." Id. at 3286. Finally, Senator Daniel, speaking for the Senate subcommitteeinvestigating the drug situation in the United States, found"it absolutely necessary for the Congress of the UnitedStates to strengthen the hands of our law enforcement officersand provide higher penalties if we are to stop the narcoticstraffic in this country." 102 CONG. Rec. 9014 (1956). Hissubcommittee also recommended the kind of across-the-boardincreases in penalties that the Act eventually contained. 82 U.S. CODE CONG. & AD. News 3283 (1956); see id. at3302. 83 Id. at 3304. 84 In holding unconstitutional the presumption of knowledgethat marijuana was smuggled, the Supreme Court in Leary v. UnitedStates, 395 U.S. 6 (1969), relied on the change in use patternsfrom 1959 to 1967. We think the presumption was unconstitutionalwhen passed in 1956, both as to importation and knowledge. 85 Daniel Committee Hearings 18. 86 The decline in the number of FBN arrests and seizures isdirectly related to the increase in local and state enforcementpersonnel. This thesis is supported by data from California wherestatewide arrests soared while federal arrests remained stable.Bureau of Criminal Statistics, California Dep't of Justice, Crimein California (1956). See also A. LiNDESMITH, THE ADDICT AND THELAW 238 (1963). One commentator has suggested that except for theyears immediately after the passage of the Marihuana Tax Act,when the Bureau wanted to concentrate on its newly acquiredenforcement field, the FBN arrest data show clearly its emphasison the hard narcotics. Mandel, Problems with Official DrugStatistics, 21 STAN. L. REV. 991, 1019-20 (1969). 87 See note 20 at p. 1053 supra. 88 Written materials inserted into the record of the Senatehearings included the testimony of an experienced federal Customsofficial that high quality marijuana was being grown near theTexas cities of Laredo and Brownsville. Daniel Committee Hearings3488-89. In addition, the Attorney General of Ohio noted thatmarijuana may grow unnoticed along roadsides and vacant lots inmany parts of the country." Id. at 4814. Also, a bulletinissued by the Philadelphia Police Academy recited that"[plenty of marijuana is found growing in this city."Id. at 599. 89 Blum, Mind-Altering Drugs and Dangerous Behavior: DangerousDrugs, in THE PRESIDENT'S COMMISSION ON LAW ENFORCEMENT ANDADMINISTRATION OF JUSTICE, TASK FORCE REPORT: NARCOTICS AND DRUGABUSE 21, 24 (1967); Bouquet, Cannabis, 3 U.N. BULL. ONNARCOTICS, Jan. 1951, at 22, 32-33. 90 This is especially true with respect to the young and blackminorities. The presumption has validity only as applied torecently immigrated Mexicans. Cf. Chein, The Status ofSociological and Social Psychological Knowledge ConcerningNarcotics, in NARCOTIC DRUG ADDICTION PROBLEMS 146, 155 (R.Livingston ed. 1963). Mr. Chein reports a shift in drug use from1930-1960 from old to young and a continued increase in thepercentage of drug users who are Black or Spanish-speaking. 91 The number of federal arrests for marijuana violations fellfrom 1288 in 1952 to 169 in 1960. TRAFFIC IN Opium 26 (1952); id.at 69 (1960). 92 By 1954, many major states and cities had special narcoticssquads. See Daniel Committee Hearings 13 -14, 1 10. 93 Cf. TRAFFIC IN Opium 66 (1956); id. at 41 (1959). The FBNcharts show clearly the extraordinary incidence of drug abuseamong Blacks, Mexican-Americans and other minority communities. 94 Daniel Committee Hearings, exhibit 7, at 267-71. Localarrests in those six states accounted for 2,822 of the 3,205marijuana arrests made by local law enforcers in 1954. 95 For example, the statistics in TRAFFIC IN Opium seldom evendistinguish among the drugs involved, and the FBI Uniform CrimeStatistics frequently report all drug related arrests together,with no delineation of the type of drug used or the nature of theoffender. 96 Chein, supra note 90, at 152, suggests that whateverpatterns of drug use existed in the fifties were merelycontinuations of patterns observed in the thirties. 97 Ch. 535, (19581 Va. Acts of Assembly 675. Contents | Feedback | Search DRCNet Library | Schaffer Library | Major Studies The Forbidden Fruit and the Tree ofKnowledgeWT01-B31-50IA031-000652-B037-282http://206.61.184.43:80/schaffer/library/studies/vlr/vlr7.htm 206.61.184.43 19970122125340 text/html 42800HTTP/1.0 200 OKDate: Wednesday, 22-Jan-97 12:53:25 GMTServer: WebSitePro/1.1f (S/N wpo-0deb)Allow-ranges: bytesContent-type: text/htmlLast-modified: Saturday, 28-Dec-96 06:47:31 GMTContent-length: 42582 Marijuana Users in the Courts: 1930-1965 Contents | Feedback | Search DRCNet Library | Schaffer Library | Major Studies The Forbidden Fruit and the Tree ofKnowledge THE FORBIDDEN FRUIT AND THE TREE OF KNOWLEDGE: AN INQUIRYINTO THE LEGAL HISTORY OF AMERICAN MARIJUANA PROHIBITION Richard J. Bonnie & Charles H.Whitebread, II VII. MARIJUANA USERS IN THE COURTS: 1930-1965 Having studied the evolution of legislative hostility tomarijuana from a regional phenomenon with racial overtones to anationwide paranoia, it is worthwhile to consider the fate ofmarijuana users in the courts during this evolutionary period.After the courts had summarily rejected the substantiveconstitutional arguments, appeals in marijuana cases tended tofocus on three contentions particularly germane to drugviolations: procedural objections arising from interrelatedstatutory schemes on the state and federal levels punishingessentially the same conduct; objections to police conductintrinsic to victimless crimes; and objections to sufficiency ofevidence at trial. Like their legislative colleagues, state andfederal translated what they knew of the drug's mythical effectsinto overt hostility. Coupled with the traditionally conservativetreatment afforded the rights of criminal defendants, especiallyin state prosecutions, this judicial hostility producedever-lengthening sentences and few reversals. A. Statutory Fantasies: The Complications ofFederal Legislation 1. Quadruple "Jeopardy" and the "KillerWeed" When Congress passed the Marihuana Tax Act in 1937, marijuanahad already been included in the Uniform Narcotic Drug Act andevery state had enacted some form of marijuana prohibition.1 Inaddition to its ostensible revenue-raising function, the Act wasobviously designed both to deter further use of the drug 2 and tofacilitate enforcement of the state laws.3 The statute assuredthe availability to state prosecutors of the order forms filedwith the IRS at the time of payment of the tax. 4 Congress hadthought that the order forms and registration requirements woulddevelop an "adequate means of publicizing dealings inmarihuana in order to tax and control the trafficeffectively."5 Thus, after 1937, possession of marijuana without filing thetransfer form and paying the federal tax constituted a violationof both state and federal law;- yet filing the form and payingthe tax would probably not have eliminated the buyer's exposureto prosecution under state law. Indeed, compliance would probablyhave readily identified the buyer to state officials. To thisunfairness the courts paid no heed, noting that exposure to stateand federal prosecution for the same act did not constitutedouble jeopardy7 and that the fifth amendment did not protectdefendants from prosecution for violation of state law.8 After passage of the 1956 federal narcotic drug legislation9possession of marijuana constituted at least one, and often two,additional crimes. First, the Narcotic Drugs Import and ExportAct was amended10 in 1956 to punish directly illegalimportation11 of marijuana or other dealings in the drug withknowledge that it had been illegally imported. Since merepossession was sufficient evidence to convict under the Act, 12possession without registration and order form now constitutedthree crimes, and compliance with the filing and tax provisionswould have exposed the defendant to liability under state law andunder the importation provision if the original importation wasillegal. Again the courts saw no fifth amendment violation.13Second, another provision of the 1956 package required everyperson addicted to or using narcotics or convicted of a violationof the narcotics or marijuana laws punishable by over one year'simprisonment to register upon leaving the country. 14 Designed toaid the Government in identifying potential smugglers. thestatute was upheld, as a strict liability offense, 15 against amultitude of constitutional challenges. 16 Since penalties formarijuana possession almost uniformly exceeded one year'simprisonment during this period, a first offense possessionconviction by either sovereign triggered the registrationprovision. 2. Statutory Presumptions Because the federal statutes punished sale and possession ofmarijuana only indirectly, each had to bridge the gap betweenthose acts and the technical crimes-tax violations andimportation-related acts. As a bootstrap from the federal taxingpower to a federal police power, Congress chose presumptions.Thus, under the Marihuana Tax Act, possession plus failure toproduce the required forms was presumptive evidence of thecriminal act-failure to pay the tax17 -and the courts had notrouble upholding this provision. 18 In addition, under theImport and Export Act possession of marijuana constitutedpresumptive evidence of illegal importation and of defendant'sknowledge of such importation.19 Against a rash of attacks on the rationality of thispresumption, the lower federal courts20 noted that the SupremeCourt had upheld the same statutory language in the originalFederal Import and Export Act with respect to opium 21 and thatthere was sufficient general knowledge that most marijuana wasimported from Mexico to make the presumption rational. Althoughthe Ninth Circuit at one time indicated that a defendant couldrebut the presumption by showing that the marijuana in hispossession was manicured and therefore more likely to have beendomestically grown,22 that court later held that such proof wasinsufficient and that the defendant must also show actualdomestic production. 23 B. Attacks on State Legislation Most attacks on the state statutes focused on the vagueness ofstatutory terms-marijuana, however spelled, or cannabis or IndianHemp24 -both as a scientific matter and in terms of commonexperience.25 Predictably, however, few state courts were of amind to inhibit legislative proscription of the "killerweed." Due in part to greatly exaggerated conceptions aboutthe effects of the drug26 and in part to the ease with which themature plant is processed for the outlawed purposes,27 the courtsconstrued these statutory definitions as broadly as possible 28despite the traditional rule of strict construction of criminalstatutes. With the progressive increase in the severity of penaltieswhich accompanied adoption of the Uniform Act in the 1930's and1940's and the surge of amendments in the 1950's in the wake ofthe Boggs Act.29 Some problems of application arose.Interestingly enough. some courts, applied the lesser penaltywhere one of two penalties could be imposed.30 Similarly manycourts tended to impose minimum sentences until the late 1950'swhen they , too, lost all sense of proportion.31 C. Procedural Defenses and Entrapment Statutory attacks during this period tended to reflect thecomplicated interrelation of state and federal law and thescientific imprecision of legislative drafting. These attackswere usually rebuffed, and defendants, caught in a squeeze ofjudicial and legislative hostility, had few, if any, viabledefenses based on whether or not they had violated the regulatoryscheme. Both state and federal statutes merely required theprosecution to prove that the particular defendant was found inpossession of a substance which when chemically tested was foundto be marijuana. There were few tricky problems of proof, and theprosecution usually had a clear case. If these offenders werecaught dead to rights on the merits, the energetic attorney hadto look elsewhere for his defense. Fortunately, the exigencies of police practice in the field ofnarcotics law enforcement provided a defendant's attorney with anew area of attack-procedural irregularities in the arrest andapprehension of his client. The possession and sale of marijuanaepitomize the crime without a victim; neither seller nor buyer isapt to complain of the transaction. In order to promote vigorouslaw enforcement in this area, the police have had to use a seriesof undercover agents, surprise raids and often questionablesearch and arrest techniques. Because of the nature of theconduct they are trying to stifle, the police must intrude into aprivate social relationship where none of the parties wants it-thus, the police have found it essential to employ highlysecretive and often patently deceitful practices. It is nocoincidence that the vast developments in the law of criminalprocedure-especially in the fourth amendment area-have beenoutgrowths primarily of narcotics and marijuana cases. 1. Search and Seizure Today the major remedy for an illegal search is exclusion ofthe seized items as evidence. Some states and the federal courtshave used this exclusionary rule since early in the twentiethcentury. However, before the 1961 decision in Mapp v. 0hio32required all states to adopt this remedy, many state courts didnot exclude illegally seized evidence. In jurisdictions withoutthe rule, it scarcely helped the victim of an illegal search toraise the point. So, for example, in a 1945 Louisiana case, thecourt permitted introduction of marijuana seized without awarrant from defendant's room while he was out of town .33 Because of the scope permitted the searching officer, thingswere not much better in jurisdictions adhering to theexclusionary rule. In states using the rule before Mapp, thecrucial issue when the lawfulness of a search was questioned waswhether or not the search was reasonable under thecircumstances.34 One might expect, in view of the judicialhostility toward marijuana defendants, that the reasonablenessstandard provided sufficient leeway for circumvention of theexclusionary rule in more than a few cases.35 Other end runsaround the rule were developed in the federal system and in thestates purporting to apply the rule to evidence seized in anillegal search. First, courts upheld searches if there wasarguably an untainted source for seizure of the evidence. Forexample, a court might admit marijuana seized in a concededlyillegal search where a police officer saw the marijuana beforebeginning the illegal search .36 Second, in order to havestanding to assert the inadmissibility of seized items, one hadto admit the narcotics in question belonged to hirn.37 Third,courts often permitted searches pursuant to a warrant to extendfar beyond the items named in the warrant 38 under what came tobe known as the contraband theory. This theory reasoned thatcertain items could never lawfully be possessed and belonged onlyto the government; thus any seizure of these items waspermissible.39 2. Entrapment In order for federal and state agents to detect narcoticstraffic and use, it is essential that they infiltrate the drugculture. Obtaining this inside information may often involvepolice use of special employees - informers-or may require thatthe police become directly involved in the commission of thecriminal act .40 Many defendants in narcotics cases have claimedthat they were forced into sales or purchases of narcotics by thepolice or their agents. These charges led to the affirmativedefense of entrapment, first recognized in federal courts by theSupreme Court in Sorrels v. United States.41 Since that time, theprinciples of the defense, as stated in that decision, werereaffirmed by the Supreme Court in Sherman v. United States .42In Sherman, a government informer induced the defendant, who wastrying to quit his use of narcotics and was undergoing treatmentat a narcotics rehabilitation center, to resume his use andsupply the informer. The Court held that the conduct of thepolice informer constituted entrapment. The entrapment defense would seem the ideal defense tactic inmarijuana cases, because so often the defendant has beenapprehended due to some police informer or police trick .43However, the theoretical and practical outlines of the defensenarrowly restrict its scope and make it rarely successful.Moreover, because it may entail an admission that defendantcommitted the act charged 44 it is usually the last resort. From the beginning there have been two conflicting views ofthe entrapment defense. The majority view has consideredentrapment an exception to the given criminal statute on theground that the legislature could not have intended entrapment tofall within the statutory definitions of the crime. With this asthe theoretical justification of the defense, the inquiry focuseson the innocence of the defendant but for the police conduct. Thepractical question is whether the police merely supplied anopportunity for a person with a preexisting prediliction to thecriminal act. In the majority view this question of fact is to beresolved by the jury. 45 Throughout the years a substantial minority position hascontended that the entrapment defense should be considered apolice control mechanism. Under this view, the focus is on thepolice and their conduct rather than on the character of thedefendant. This rationale is premised on the court's supervisorypowers over tile administration of justice, and the question ofentrapment is one of law to be decided by the not by the jury.46 The focus of the defense on the character of the defendant andthe use of usually unsympathetic juries to decide the issue havegreatly hindered the successfulness of the entrapment defense.Since the defense must be raised affirmatively, the defendantbears a heavy burden in proving that he would not have committedthe crime but for the police inducement. Thus, in Gilmore v.United States47 the defendant was unable to carry the burden ofproving that he would not have otherwise committed the marijuanaoffense. A government agent approached the defendant andrequested marijuana, but the jury found no entrapment and thecourt could not declare that there was entrapment as a matter oflaw. With the entrapment defense, as with illegal searches, thecourt has a known lawbreaker before it and for this reason isreluctant to free him unless there is an overwhelming reason todismiss the charges, As a California court stated, It is not theentrapment of a criminal upon which the law frowns . . . . "48 The focus upon the defendant and his mental state, rather thana focus on the government enforcement practices and theirpossible effect of creating a particular crime, places anincredible burden on the defendant to try to convince the jurythat he is otherwise blameless. The use of informers and specialagents who become friendly with those suspected of dealing inmarijuana, and the use of this friendship to try to purchasemarijuana, often by supplying the cash,49 are bound to have adetrimental effect on the lay enforcement officers as well as toassure a slight increase in the supply of marijuana which wouldotherwise not have entered the trade. Nevertheless, the defenseas presently structured remains virtually impossible for thedefendant to raise with any real hope of success. D. The Pro Forma Trial When the marijuana defendant had exhausted his motions fordismissal or suppression of the evidence and was brought totrial, he was usually in deep trouble, faced with judicialhostility, lax methods of identification, and loose standards ofproof. Convictions were rarely reversed for any reason andespecially not for insufficient evidence. And penalties, nomatter how harsh, were never set aside. The first line of defense in the marijuana trial ofteninvolved the defendant's claim that the substance seized from himwas not really marijuana. In general, the state had no difficultyproving the substance to be marijuana. In the important case,expert evidence of chemical tests may have been introduced,50 butmore commonly courts permitted the testimony of policeofficers,51 undercover agents and other lay witnesses52 to besufficient to create a question of fact for the jury to decide.53 Thus, when chemical evidence was not introduced, juries werestrongly inclined to believe the policeman or a disinterestedprosecution witness as against the defendant.54 This ease of identification combined with the uncriticalacceptance of uncorroborated testiniony,55 produced what amountedin fact to a very low standard of proof. Thus, in a Californiacase, People v. Janisse,56 the conviction was upheld on thetestimony of teenage boys, though the defendant's co-workerstestified for an alibi. The evidence of rookie police officerswho later failed their civil service exams57 has been acceptedover the word of the defendant. Finally, even the testimony ofwitnesses who stand to benefit only from the conviction of thedefendant has been accepted without corroboration, whether thebenefit was indirect58 or direct.59 The wisdom of allowing suchtestimony by itself to be legally sufficient for a conviction isdoubtful. Although in theory the state must prove the defendant'spossession was knowing,60 through the use of circumstantialevidence the state usually encountered few problems in meetingits burden of proof. The state was permitted to usecircumstantial evidence to link the defendant to a quantity ofmarijuana, but where only circumstantial evidence existed theremust have been an instruction to the that all other reasonableinferences of innocence had been overcome.61 For example,behavior such as running away from police, if marijuana was foundalong the path run, was sufficient to link the defendant topossession 62 though mere proximity without other guilty behaviorwas not enough to prove possession. 63 Finally, judicial hostility to the "morallydepraved" marijuana user was so strong that often judgescondoned inflammatory statements by the prosecution to the juryabout the nature of the drug and its users. Indeed, some judgesthemselves often participated in these highly emotionalstatements. For example, one judge in instructing a juryannounced: Marijuana is a vicious, demoralizing substance that robs a person of morality honor, integrity, decency, and all the virtues that are the foundation of good character and good citizenship. The Government is constantly engaged in an effort to stamp out traffic in this and in narcotic drugs. Officers of the Government are employed in this effort usually and are entitled to credit for their loyalty and integrity.64 In the same way, direct aspersions toward a defendant'scharacter were tolerated .65 For instance, courts overlookedprosecution comments that the defendant sold his drugs near a'junior high school" or that drug use among teenagers mustbe stopped .66 In sum, then, defendants in marijuana cases had greatdifficulties at trial during this period. Easy identificationmethods, jury acceptance of uncorroborated testimony, use ofcircumstantial evidence to prove defendant's possession wasknowing, and the 'judicial participation in inflammatorystatements to the jury made defense success at trial a virtualimpossibility. Footnotes 1 See p. 1034 supra. 2 See, e.g., Hearings on H.R. 006 Before a Subcomm. of the SenateComm. on Finance, 75th Cong., 1st Sess. 5-7 (1937); H.R. REP. No.792, 75th Cong., 1st Sess. 1-3 (1937). 3 See Leary v. United States, 395 U.S. 6, 26-27 (1969). 4 26U.S.C.  4773 (1964). 4 H.R. REP. No. 792, 75th Cong., 1st Sess. 2 (1937); S. REP.No. 900, 7Sth Cong., 1st Sess. 3 (1937). 5 With minor exceptions, the Marihuana Tax Act requires alltransactions in marijuana to be carried out by written orderform. 26 U.S.C.  4741-44 (1964). It is unlawful for atransferor to transfer except by such form obtained by thetransferee, 26 U.S.C. S 4742 (1964), and for the transferee toacquire, transport or conceal marijuana without filing thetransfer form, registering with the IRS and paying the applicabletransfer tax. 26 U.S.C.  4744 (a) (1964). For heretoforeunregistered persons, that tax is $100 an ounce. 26 U.S.C. 4741 (1964). Since marijuana was excised from the United StatesPharmacopoeia, there have been few legitimate transactions byregistered persons. THE PRESIDENTS COMMISSION ON LAW ENFORCEMENTAND ADMINISTRATION OF JUSTICE, REPORT: THE CHALLENGE OF CRIME INA FREE SOCIETY 214 (1967). Since .the tax is otherwiseprohibitive, the Act is in effect almost entirely a criminal law;the crime is having anything to do with marijuana-possession,sale, acquisition or importation-since proof of possessioncoupled with failure, after reasonable notice and demand by theSecretary of the Treasury or his delegate, to produce thetransfer form is "presumptive evidence" of guilt. 26U.S.C.  4744(a) (1964). 7 Cf. Abbate v. United States, 359 U.S. 187 (1959); Bartkus v.Illinois, 359 U.S. 121 (1959); United States v. Lanza, 260 U.S.377 (1922). One state court held, as an interpretation of statelegislative policy rather than under constitutional compulsion,that acquittal of a federal marijuana possession charge wouldconstitute a defense to the same state charge. State v. Wortham,63 Ariz. 148, 160 P.2d 352 (1945). 8 See Leary v. United States, 383 F.2d 851, 870 (5th Cir.1967), revd, 395 U.S. 6 (1969); Haynes v. United States, 339 F.2d30, 31-32 (5th Cir.), cert. denied, 380 U.S. 924 (1965). 9 See pp. 1077-78 supra. 10 21 U.S.C.  176a (1964). 11 Importation "contrary to law` was that in violation ofthe Marihuana Tax Act, 26 U.S.C. S 4755 (1964), or the CustomsAct, 19 U.S.C. S 1496-97 (1964). 12 See note 19 infra and accompanying text. 13 See, e.g., Rule v. United States, 362 F.2d 215 (5th Cir.1966), cert. denied, 385 U.S. 1018 (1967). 14 18 U.S.C.  1407 (1964). 15 Application of the statute was particularly harsh. Eventhough defendant, found guilty of a drug offense and sent to theCalifornia Youth Authority for several months, had been told uponrelease that his record was clean, the court held that he hadviolated the statute by failing to register. Adams v. UnitedStates, 299 F.2d 327 (9th Cir. 1962). 16 See Palma v. United States, 261 F.2d 93 (5th Cir. 1958');Reyes v. United States, 258 F.2d 774 (9th Cir. 1958); UnitedStates v. Eramdjian, 155 F. Supp. 914 (S.D. Cal. 1957). Thecourts struggled mightily with arbitrariness, vagueness, right totravel, self incrimination, and equal protection arguments, butupheld the statute. But cf. Russell v. United States, 306 F.2d402 (9th Cir. 1962) (gun registration requirementunconstitutional since it required admission of presumptivelyunlawful possession). 17 26 U.S.C. S 4744 (a) (1964). 18 E.g., Manning v. United States, 274 F.2d 926 (5th Cir.),rcv'd on other grounds on rehearing, 280 F.2d 422 (5th Cir.1960). This provision was early interpreted not to require governmentagents to request the transfer form at the time of arrest, thecourts holding that possession of the form was an affirmativedefense. E.g., Hill v. United States, 261 F.2d 483 (9th Cir.1958); Hensley v. United States, 160 F.2d 257 (D.C. Cir.), cert.denied, 331 U.S. 817 (1947). 19 21 U.S.C.  176a (1964). 20 Leary v. United States, 383 F.2d 851, 869 (5th Cir. 1967),rev'd, 395 U.S. 6 (1969); Borne v. United States, 332 F.2d 565(5th Cir. 1964); United States v. Gibson, 310 F.2d 79 (2d Cir.1962); Claypole v. United States, 280 F.2d 768 (9th Cir. 1960);Butler v. United States, 273 F.2d 436 (9th Cir. 1959); Caudillov. United States, 253 F.2d 513 (9th Cir.), cert. denied, 357 U.S.931 (1958). 21 Yee Hem v. United States, 269 U.S. 178 (1925). 22 Caudillo v. United States, 253 F.2d 513 (9th Cir.), cert.denied, 357 U.S. 931 (1958). Implying that the presumption ofimportation was a rule of evidence, not of substantive law, thecourt noted that imported marijuana was ordinarily composed ofmixed twigs and stems since the growers waited until maturitybefore harvesting. In the United States, on the other hand,growers avoided police detection by picking individual leavesbefore the plant matured, Since appellant possessed mixed twigsand stems, the court upheld application of the presumption; theclear suggestion, however, was that the presumption would not beapplied to manicured marijuana. 23 Costello v. United States, 324 F.2d 260 (9th Cir. 1963),cert. denied, 376 U.S. 930 (1964). 24 Use of the Latin word "cannabis" was challengedas an unconstitutionally vague definition of the prohibitedsubstance in People v. Oliver, 66 Cal. App. 2d 431, 152 P.2d 329(Dist. Ct. App. 1944), on the basis of an early holding that theuse of Latin to define a sex crime was unconstitutionally vague,Ex parte Lockett, 179 Cal. 581, 178 P. 134 (1919) (fellatio andcunnilingus). -In rejecting the vagueness argument, the courtheld that "cannabis" was later explained in the statuteby the use of the word "marijuana" and that the twowords were synonymous. See People v. Martinez, 117 Cal. App. 2d701, 256 P.2d 1028 (Dist. Ct. App. 1953) ("Indian Hemp"not unconstitutionally vague); cf. People v. Johnson, 147 Cal.App. 2d 417, 305 P.2d 82 (Dist. Ct. App. 1957)("lophophora" not unconstitutionally vague reference topeyote). 25A related issue was whether the charge of possession of"marijuana" was specific enough where there werestatutory exceptions to protect the bird seed and hempindustries. The general rule was that the state need not allegethat the parts possessed were not within the statutoryexceptions. E.g., Simpson v. State, 129 Fla. 1279 176 So. 515(1937). Contra, People v. Sowrd, 370 111. 140, 18 N.E.2d 176(1938'). 26See, e.g., Simpson v. State, 129 Fla. 127, 131, 176 So. 515,517 (1937) (marijuana causes erotic hallucinations, loss ofsense, false conviction, loss of values, a general weakening ofpowers, making it dangerous to mind and body). In Commonwealth v.LaRosa, 42 Pa. D. & C. 34, 36-37 (Fayette County Dist. Ct.1941), the court stated: The deleterious, even vicious, qualities of the plant whichrender it highly dangerous to the mind and body, upon which itoperates to destroy the will, to produce imaginary delectablesituations, and gradually to weaken the physical powers, residein a sticky resin of great narcotic power that pervades theentire plant .... 27 State v. Bonoa, 172 La. 955, 136 So. 15(1931). 28 See State v. Hall, 41 Wash. 2d 446, 249 P.2d 769 (1952);Commonwealth v. LaRosa, 42 Pa. D. & C. 34 (Fayette CountyDist. Ct. 1941). LaRosa held that the statute, passed two yearsearlier, created a duty to cut down marijuana plants before theycould seed and that defendant had no right to plant marijuanaeven if he meant to cut the plants before maturity. Defendant'sconviction for possession of two thousand mature plants and onehundred fifty thousand immature plants was accordingly affirmed. 29 See pp. 1074-75 supra. 30 E.g., State v. Economy, 61 Nev. 394, 130 P.2d 264 (1942). 31 This was particularly true in the Southwest, where usecases were more numerous and appeals more frequent. Indicative ofthis trend are the following Texas cases in chronological order:Gonzales v. State, 108 Tex. Crim. 253, 299 S.W. 901 (1928) ($25fine); Baker v. State, 123 Tex. Crim. 209, 58 S.W.2d 534 (1933)(5-year sentence reversed); Horton v. State, 123 Tex. Crim. 237,58 S.W.2d 833 (1933) (2-year sentence reversed); Spangler v.State, 135 Tex. Crim. 36, 117 S.W.2d 63 (1938) 1-year sentenceaffirmed); Ramirez v. State, 135 Tex. Crim. 442, 125 S.W.2d 597(1938) (3-year sentence affirmed) (possession of a crop of 300plants); Fawcett v. State, 137 Tex. Crim. 14, 127 S.W.2d 905(1939) (2-year sentence reversed); Anderson v. State, 137 Tex.Crim. 461, 131 S.W.2d 961 (1939) (5-year sentence affirmed)(defendant tried to dispose of marijuana in station house);Martinez v. State, 138 Tex. Crim. 51, 134 SW.2d 276 (1939)(6-year sentence reversed); Carrizal v. State, 138 Tex. Crim.103, 134 S.W.2d 287 (1939) (2-year sentence affirmed); Lufkin v.State, 144 Tex. Crim. 501, 164 S.W.2d 709 (1942) (2-yearaffirmed); Cornelius v. State, 158 Tex. Crim. 356, 256 S.W.2d 102(1953) (2-year sentence affirmed); Sparks v. State, 159 Tex.Crim. 111, 261 S.W.2d 571 (1953) (2-year sentence reversed); Raov. State, 160 Tex. Crim. 416, 271 S.W.2d 426 (1954) (2-10 yearsentence); Brewer v. State, 161 Tex. Crim. 28, 274 S.W.2d 411(1954) (8-year sentence affirmed); Torres v. State, 161 Tex.Crim. 480, 278 SW.2d 853 (1955) (3-year sentence affirmed); Gomezv. State, 162 Tex. Crim. 30, 280 SW.2d 279 (1955) (5-25 yearsentence affirmed); McWhorter v. State, 163 Tex. Crim. 318, 291SW.2d 329 (1956) (2-3 year sentence affirmed); Crosco v. State,164 Tex. Crim. 257, 298 S.W.2d 134 (1957) (2-year sentenceaffirmed); Garcia v. State, 166 Tex. Crim. 482, 316 S.W.2d 734(1958) (life sentence affirmed); Sherr2d v. State, 167 Tex. Crim.119, 318 SW.2d 900 (1958) (13-year sentence reversed); Leal v.State, 169 Tex. Crim. 222, 332 S.W.2d 729 (1959) (75-yearsentence affirmed) (one prior conviction); King v. State, 169Tex. Crim. 34, 335 S.W.2d 378 (1959) (7-year sentence affirmed);Locke v. State, 169 Tex. Crim. 361, 334 S.W.2d 292 (1960)(15-year sentence affirmed); Massiate v. State, 365 S.W.2d 802(Tex. Crim. App. 1963) (life sentence affirmed) (two priorburglary convictions). 32 367 U.S. 643 (1961). 33 State v. Shotts, 207 La. 898, 22 So. 2d 209, cert. denied,326 U.S. 730 (1945). 34 See, e.g., United States v. Rabinowitz, 339 U.S. 56 (1950).The Court here upheld the search of a one-room office on thegrounds that the search was incident to a lawful arrest, and saidthat the scope of such searches must turn on the reasonablenessof the search considering all the underlying circumstances. 35 Cf. Anderson v. State, 137 Tex. Crim. 461, 131 S.W.2d 961(1939). See also Lea) v. State, 169 Tex. Crim. 222, 332 S.W.2d729 (1959), holding it reasonable for a policeman to searchdefendant's shorts where he suspected from an informer's tip thatthe "out of the ordinary bulge" in defendant's pantsconcealed marijuana. 36 Ramirez v. State, 135 Tex. Crim. 442, 125 SW.2d 597 (1938).Eventually, courts began to allow the admission of illegallyseized evidence if there was any untainted source whatsoever.Thus, where defendant testified that the police had foundmarijuana in a dresser drawer in his house, the court permittedthe state to introduce the marijuana based on the untaintedsource of defendant's own statements in court. Rao v. State, 160Tex. Crim, 416, 271 S.W_2d 426 (1954). 37 See Connolly v. Medalie, 58 F.2d 629 (2d Cir. 1932). Inthat case judge Learned Hand wrote: Men just wince at admitting that they were the owners, or inpossession, of contraband property; may wish at once to securethe remedies of a possessor, and avoid the perils of the part;but equivocation will not serve. If they come as victims, theymust take on that role, with enough detail to cast them withoutquestion. The petitioners at bar shrank from that predicament;but they were obliged to choose one horn of the dilemma. Id. at 630 38 See King v. State, 169 Tex. Crim. 34, 335 SAV.2d 378(1959). Here the Texas court held, with one dissent, that asearch warrant for the premises of the husband authorized asearch of the wife's bag in the house; her conviction for thematerials found in the bag was affirmed, In the field of search incident to an arrest, courts went evenfarther. Thus, a Texas court affirmed a conviction based upon thearrest and search of a defendant, even though the police officeradmitted he had arrested the defendant solely for the purpose ofsearching him. The officer ostensibly arrested the defendant fora knife fight, but later admitted that he had arrested himbecause he suspected him of possession of marijuana. The courtnoted that the defendant was unable to give any authority for hiscontention that the state should be bound by the officer'sstatement as to the purpose of the arrest. Gonzales v. State, 160Tex. Crim. 548, 272 S.W.2d 524 (1954). 39 It had been held that contraband may be seized in a searchincident to arrest although the items taken had no relationshipto the crime for which the arrest was made. Harris v. UnitedStates, 331 U.S. 145 (1947). overruled, Chimel v. California, 395U.S. 752 (1969). 40 THE PRESIDENT'S COMMISSION ON LAW ENFORCEMENT ANDADMINISTRATION OF JUSTICE, TASK FORCE REPORT: NARCOTICS AND DRUGABUSE 8. See also MASS PRODUCTION JUSTICE AND THE CONSTITUTIONALIDEAL 52-53 (C. Whitebread ed. 1970). 41 287 U.S. 435 (1932). 42 356 U.S. 369 (1958). 43 See A. LITTLE, DRUG ABUSE AND LAW ENFORCEMENT (1967). 44 See Henderson v. United States, 237 F.2d 169, 172 (1956);State v. Taylor, 375 S.W.2d 58, 62 (Mo. 1964). But see People v.Perez, 62 Cal. 2d 769, 401 P.2d 934, 44 Cal. Rptr. 326 (1965)(Traynor, C.J.). 45 Sherman v. United States, 356 U.S. 369, 377 & n.8(1958) (Warren, GJ.). 46 Id. it 378 (Frankfurter, J., concurring); Sorrells v.United States, 287 U.S. 435, 453-59 (1932) (Roberts, J.,dissenting). 47 228 F.2d 121 (5th Cir. 1955), See also United States v.Davis 272 F.2d 149 (7th Cit. 1959). Davis was not strictly anentrapment case; the government agents had arranged for thetransportation of a hag of marijuana front Texas to Chicago. Thedefendant argued that the agents' activities were illegal, andfor that reason, the government was estopped from prosecuting himand that the evidence was inadmissible. The trial court foundthat the defendant had arranged for the deal and instructed thejury to acquit if the agents had illegally caused theimportation. As in Gilmore, the jury was not willing to condemnthe police, 48 People v. Branch, 119 Cal. App. 2d 490, 494, 260 P.2d 27,30 (Dist. Ct. App. 1953), where the police had their witness callthe defendant and ask to buy some marijuana and then accompaniedthe witness to the defendant's home. 49 See People v. Williams, 146 Cal. App. 2d 656, 304 P.2d 100(1956); Commonwealth v. Jones, 46 Dauph. 300 (Dauphin County,Pa., Dist. Ct. 1938). 50 See, e.g., People v. Agajanian, 97 Cal. App. 2d 399, 218P.2d 114 (Dist. Ct. App. 1950); People v. Oliver, 66 Cal. App. 2d431, 152 P.2d 329 (Dist. Ct. App. 1944); Valdez v. State, 135Tex. Crim. 201, 117 S.W.2d 459 (1938). 51 McWhorter v. State, 163 Tex. Crim. 318, 291 S.W.2d 329(1956). 52 People v. Sanchez, 197 Cal. App. 2d 617, 17 Cal. Rptr. 230(Dist. Ct. App. 1961); People v. Haggard, 181 Cal. App. 2d 38, 4Cal. Rptr. 898 (Dist. Ct. App. 1960); People v. Janisse, 162 Cal.App. 2d 117, 328 P.2d 11 (Dist. Ct. App. 1958). Even minors whoreceive the marijuana from the defendant are competent toidentify the substance. People v. Sanchez, supra. 53 See Hernandez v. State, 137 Tex. Crim. 343, 129 S.W.2d 301(1938). 54 See, e.g., cases cited at note 52 supra. 55See, e.g., People v. Ballejos, 216 Cal. App. 2d 286@ 30 Cal.Rptr. 725 (Dist. Ct. App. 1963); People v. Johnson, 99 Cal. App.2d 559, 222 P.2d 58 (Dist. Ct. App. 1950). overruled, People v.Perez, 62 Cal. 2d 769, 401 P.2d 934, 44 CA Rptr. 326 0965)(Traynor, C.J.). See also People v. Sanchez, 197 C21. App, 2d617, 17 Cal, Rptr. 230 (Dist. Ct. App. 1961); People v. Alinnns,110 Cal. .@,\pp. 2d 310, 242 P.2d 331 (Dist. Ct. App.), ccrt.dcnied, 344 U.S. 846 (1952). 56 162 CA App. 2d 117, 328 P.2d 11 Misr. Ct. App. 1958) (itwas not too improbable that defendant would have given marijuanaaway to a near stranger). But see People v. MacCagnan, 129 Cal.App, 2d 100, 276 P.2d 679 (Dist. Ct. App. 1954) (evidence of theprice admitted to show the unlikelihood that defendant was giventhe marijuana). 57 People v. Gebron, 124 C21. App, 2d 675, 208 P.2d 1068(Dist. Ct. App. 1954). 58 People v. Mimms, 110 Ca]. App. 2d 310, 242 P.2d 331 (Dist.Ct. App.), cert. denied, 344 U.S. 846 (1952). 59 People V. JA7irlSton, 46 Ca]. 2d 151, 293 P.2d 40 (1956)(witnesses against defendant for sale to minor were due to go ontrial themselves); People v. Ballejos, 216 Cal. App. 2d 286, 30Cal Rptr. 725 (Dist, Ct. App. 1963) (agent alleged to be paid bygovernment if successful was only witness against defendant). 60 See People v. Carrasco, 159 Cal. App. 2d 63, 32i P.2d 129(Dist. Ct. App. 1958), People v. Antista, 129 Cal. App. 2d 47,276 P.2d 177 (Dist. Ct. App. 1954) (defendant never reportedhaving previously used marijuana and apartment used by many otherpersons); People v. Candiotto, 128 Cal. App. 2d 347, 275 P.2d 500(Dist. Ct. App. 1954); People v. Savage, 128 Cal. App. 2d 123,274 P.2d 905 (Dist. Ct. App. 1954) (maid found marijuana wrappedin napkins two days after a party held to be insufficientevidence) (trial judge held to be prejudiced); Fawcett V. State,137 Tex. Crim. 14, 127, S.W.2d 905 (1939) (reversed for failureto give instruction on ignorance as a defense). 61 Gonzales v. People, 128 Colo. 522, 264 P.2d 508 (1953);State v. Walker, 54 N.M. 302, 223 P.2d 943 (1950). 62 Perez v. State, 34 Ala. App. 406, 40 So. 2d 344 (Ct. App.1949) (paper in apartment matched paper on marijuana). See alsoPeople v. Rodriguez, 151 Cal. App. 2d 598, 312 P.2d 272 (Dist.Ct. App. 1957) (defendant knowingly helping owner move marijuanais sufficient for possession). 63 People v. Miller, 162 Cal. App. 2d 96, 328 P.2d 506 (Dist.Ct. App. 1958) (reversible error to introduce marijuana founddown the street from the defendant's apartment without furtherproof of defendant's ownership) - In Sherrad v. State, 167 Tex.Crim. 119, 318 S.W.2d 900 (1958), defendant's conviction wasreversed for the failure of the prosecutor to connect the paymentto the defendant with the later payment to another defendant whomade delivery of the marijuana to the agent. The court noted thatdefendant had been charged as the principal, and that no proof ofany conspiracy had been made. See also People v. Vasquez, 135Cal. App. 2d 446, 287 P.2d 385 (Dist. Ct. App. 1955) (defendantchargeable with transporting, not possession, where he toldco-defendant to throw marijuana away and co-defendant did not doso). 64 Lake v. United States, 302 F.2d 452 (8th Cir. 1962). 65 See, e.g., People v. Sykes, 44 Cal. 2d 166, 280 P.2d 769,cert. denied, 349 U.S. 934 (1955) (evidence of defendant'sactivities as a pimp admissible in a trial on charge of marijuanasale to minor in order to prove that there was a plot tosubjugate both the body and mind of the minor) (Traynor, CJ,dissented, stating that the evidence was prejudicial and of noprobative value); Escamilla v. State, 162 Tex. Crim. 346, 285SW.2d 216 (1955) (permissible for prosecutor to call defendant apeddler and then to withdraw statement); People v. Salo, 73 Cal.App. 2d 685, 167 P.2d 269 (Dist. Ct. App. 1946); Medina v. State,149 Tex, Crim. 249, 193 S.W.2d 196 (1946) (no error to calldefendant a dealer in marijuana in possession trial). 66 Torres v. State, 161 Tex. Crim. 480, 278 S.W.2d 85 3 (1955). 67 People v. Head, 108 Cal. App. 2d 734, 239 P.2d 506 (Dist.Ct. App. 1952). Contents | Feedback | Search DRCNet Library | Schaffer Library | Major Studies The Forbidden Fruit and the Tree ofKnowledgeWT01-B31-51IA031-000652-B037-305http://206.61.184.43:80/schaffer/library/studies/vlr/vlr8.htm 206.61.184.43 19970122125359 text/html 44984HTTP/1.0 200 OKDate: Wednesday, 22-Jan-97 12:53:47 GMTServer: WebSitePro/1.1f (S/N wpo-0deb)Allow-ranges: bytesContent-type: text/htmlLast-modified: Saturday, 28-Dec-96 06:47:20 GMTContent-length: 44766 The Public Discovers The Truth About Marijuana Contents | Feedback | Search DRCNet Library | Schaffer Library | Major Studies The Forbidden Fruit and the Tree ofKnowledge THE FORBIDDEN FRUIT AND THE TREE OF KNOWLEDGE: AN INQUIRYINTO THE LEGAL HISTORY OF AMERICAN MARIJUANA PROHIBITION Richard J. Bonnie & Charles H.Whitebread, II VIII. THE PUBLIC DISCOVERS THE TRUTH ABOUT MARIJUANA We need not belabor the point, but sometime after 1965the wisdom of the marijuana laws suddenly became dinner-tableconversation in most American middle-class homes along with theIndochina war and campus dissent. Many sons and daughters, andeven mothers and fathers, of the middle class had tried the drug,and those who had not were certainly familiar with"pot" and the law. The medical profession finallycommenced a research effort to determine who was right-the userwho said the drug was a harmless pleasant euphoriant or thelawmakers, who by their actions had condemned it as a noxiouscause of crime, addiction and insanity. A. Marijuana and the Masses Although marijuana arrests arid seizures hit their all-timelow point in 1960,1 the middle and late sixties witnessed arevolution in marijuana use. Vast numbers of people have recentlyadopted the drug as their principal euphoriant; however, by allestimates, the new users are the sons and daughters of the middleclass, not the ethnic minorities and ghetto residents formerlyassociated with marijuana.2 Student marijuana use is now socommon that it has been associated in the public eye with theoverall campus life style.3 Accompanying the growth of widespreadmarijuana use on campus has been an increasing experimentationwith the drug by intellectuals, professors, young professionalsand members of several other social groups who would never haveconsidered using the drug ten years ago.4 Dr. Stanley F. Yolles, former Director of the NationalInstitute of Mental Health, testifying before a Senatesubcommittee, said, "A conservative estimate of persons inthe United States, both Juvenile and adult, who have usedmarihuana, at least once, is about 8 million and may be as highas 12 million people."5 Other estimates have run as high astwenty to twenty-five million users.6 This vast increase in thenumber of people using marijuana seems to have begun in the earlyand middle sixties. It is likely that this new use pattern wasinitially precipitated by the publicity surrounding the LSDexperimentation of Doctors Alpert and Leary at Harvard in 1963.7As a growing segment of the academic fringe began to preachconsciousness-expansion, students began to find marijuanaavailable on campus. From that point the phenomenon snowballed.As more novice marijuana users reported no ill effects from itsuse, more students tried it, and in turn those who used andenjoyed the drug began to "turn on" those who had not.By 1970, some campuses reported that over seventy percent of thestudent body were users.8 More recently, marijuana use spreadbeyond the student subculture; reportedly its use has becomecommon even among young professionals on Wall Street.9 Moreover,since it is readily available and widely used in Vietnam,marijuana has become popular with many soldiers.10 3 See, e.g., R. DEBoLD& R. LEAF, LSD,MAN AND SOCIETY(1967); R. GOLDSTEIN, ONE IN SEVEN: DRUGS ON CAMPUS (1966); K.KENNISTON, THE UNCOMMITrED: ALIENATED YOUTH INAMERICAN SOCIETY(1967); D, LOURIA, THEDRUG SCENE (1968); L. SIMMONS & B.WINEGRAD, IT'S HAPPENING (1967). 4 See Malabre, Drugs on the Job, Wall St. J., May 4, 1970, at1, Col. 6. This article deals not only with drug use byprofessionals but also details the increasing trend of drug useon the job. 5 Hearings Before the Subcomm. to Investigate juvenileDelinquency of the Senate Comm. on the Judiciary, 91st Cong., 1StSess. 267 (1969) [hereinafter cited as Narcotics LegislationHearings]. 6 Id. at 268. 7 See R. DEBOLD & R. LEAF, LSD, MAN AND SOCIETY 130-31(1967). 8 TIME, Sept. 26, 1969, at 69; Yale Daily News, Jan. 14, 1970. 9 Malabre, supra note 4. 10 D. LOURIA, THE DRUG SCENE 10 (1968). The general public is clearly aware that there has been both avast increase in the number of users and a shift from lower- tomiddle-class use of the drug. These great changes in the natureof marijuana use have had important social consequences. First,with the sharp rise in the number of users and the tendency ofmarijuana users to share common life styles and often politicalopinions, the drug has become associated ill the past few yearswith a major counter-culture, Many proponents of thatcounter-culture have contended that the illegal status ofmarijuana -which puts large numbers of people oil the wrong sideof the criminal law-is the most significant unifying andrecruiting agent for the New Left and the other political andsocial causes of the late sixties." Some New Left leadershave gone so far as to oppose reduction in the penalties formarijuana possession because they feel severe penalties aid theirrecruiting ends by making marijuana users outraged against asociety that overacts so strongly to a nonexistent danger."We feel the general disrespect for marijuana laws may be causinga dangerous disrespect for all laws in a sizeable segment of thepopulation. The credibility of government suffers on all issueswhen its handling of the use of this drug seems to so many so farremoved from reality. This opinion is supported by the increasingmedical evidence that the dangers of tile drug are de minimus. Secondly, the new middle-class use of marijuana has inducedthe first significant medical inquiry into the nature of thedrug; has spawned increasing numbers of challenges to theconstitutionality of marijuana laws and penalties, and hasspurred the passage of more lenient legislation. One commentator has stated: Nobody cared when it was a ghetto problem. Marijuana -well, itwas used by jazz musicians or the lower class, so you didn't careif they got 2-to-20 years. But when a nice, middle-class girl orboy in college gets busted for the same thing, then the wholecommunity sits up and takes notice. And that's the name of thegame today. The problem has begun to come home to roost-in allstrata of society, in suburbs, in middle-class homes, in thecolleges, suddenly, the punitive, vindictive approach wastouching- all classes of society. And now the most exciting thingthat's really happening is the change in attitude by the people.Now we have a willingness to examine the problem, as to whetherit's an experimentation, or an illness rather than "anevil." With this change I think we can come to a morerational approach to methods of drug control.13 Without doubt, the new class of users has successfullydemanded more favorable attention from the legislatures and thecourts than the lower class could have attracted. In fact, eventhe slightest circumscription of the reach of a state marijuanalaw is now national news.14 A third result of the widespread use of marijuana has been asubstantial challenge to the traditional picture of the nationalmarijuana trade. Over the past three decades, law enforcementofficials continued to convince legislators that the traffic inmarijuana was controlled by professional criminals.15 Confrontedwith this portrait of the marijuana trade, legislators naturallystereotyped the "seller" as the vicious criminalpushing his wares for high profit and felt that extraordinarilyharsh penalties were justified for sellers.16 From several recentstudies it appears that the structure of marijuana traffic bearslittle or no relation to the traditional stereotype. In a recentsurvey of 204 users it was found that 44 percent had sold tofriends at least once. Many casual users sell to leave themselvesenough profit to cover the amount of their own use. 17 The studyfurther finds that even at the very top, profits are too smalland the product too bulky to interest the criminal class thatprobably underwrites sales of heroin and other "harddrugs." 18 Thus even at the top, amateurs-composed generallyof the students, young professionals and soldiers who constitutethe users-are the main source of the drug.19 It is also importantto note that marijuana is typically sold by the ounce20 ratherthan by the cigarette as was traditionally assumed. Thus, eventhe relatively casual experimenter was likely to have at least anounce of the drug in his possession. B. Enforcement of the Marijuana Laws:1960-1970 As a result of the rapid spread of marijuana use, fullenforcement of the marijuana laws has become impossible.21 By1967 the Federal Bureau of Narcotics had 299 agents, roughly 50more than in 1956.22 In the same period the use of marijuanaprobably increased 1,000 fold. It seems obvious from both FBNstatistics and the best available state and local statistics thattwo enforcement patterns emerged in the sixties: concentration on"sellers" and selective enforcement. Since 1960 the FBN and major state and municipal narcoticsquads have concentrated on the larger sellers. In the earlysixties this trend was less pronounced,23 but by 1968 theCommissioner of the FBN said that 75 percent of federal marijuanaarrests were of dealers and that even the remaining 25 percentwere sellers but were charged with possession as a result of pleabargains. Statistics from California show the same concentrationon sellers nevertheless the California bureau found that most ofthese sellers were young and first offenders.26 Thus, at least by1968 it became clear that sellers were quite often neophytes. At the same time that the police have abandoned fullenforcement for concentration on dealers, enforcement of the lawshas remained necessarily haphazard and somewhat selective. Sincemarijuana use has become so common, there are certain student andhippy communities in which the police could arrest nearlyeveryone. Here the problem of selective enforcement necessarilyarises-the police arrest those they dislike for other reasons,either political disagreement or suspicion of use of other drugs.This inevitable practice, although perhaps not consciouslyplanned, has brought outcry from some victimized communities.27This policy-if not a policy by the police at least a perceptionby the hippies-of selective enforcement has provided themincreased impetus toward the anti-establishment life style theyhave adopted. Their attitude is aggravated when the police engagein particularly aggressive tactics, such as use of informers, totrap the offenders. 28 By 1970, the unenforceability of the marijuana laws was mostclearly evidenced by the failure of President Nixon's OperationIntercept which was designed to seal off the Mexican border andthe supply of marijuana coming into the United States fromMexico.29 Both national and international tensions led to thefailure of the "Noble Experiment." By now, themarijuana trade is so scattered and at the same time sofragmented (with no real hierarchy in the trade) that theunenforceability of these laws has reached Prohibitionproportions. C. Emergence of Medical Opinion One of the most significant causes of widespread middle-classuse of marijuana was the lack of any medical proof of theallegedly evil effects of its use. In fact, what authoritativestudies had been conducted up to this time were inconsistent withthe assumptions underlying anti-marijuana legislation. In thissituation, users viewed themselves as experimenters with a mildeuphoriant, not criminals endangering themselves or society atlarge. The inevitable consequence was increased medical inquiryinto the effects of the drug, beginning in about 1967.31 Concurrently, the National Institute of Mental Healthsignificantly Increased its funding for grants and contracts formarijuana research.32 Despite this intensified inquiry, uncertainty about theeffects of the drug persists. There are several major researchobstacles responsible for continued absence of reliable research.After outlining the impediments to conclusive findings, we shallextract from the existing studies the present state of medicalknowledge. 1. Research Obstacles The major obstacle is the nature of the marijuana plantitself. Marijana is a derivative of the plant Cannabis Sativa,commonly denoted the hemp plant. It is classified as a dioeciousplant, that is, the male reproductive parts are on one individualplant and the female parts are on another. The differentiation ofthe male and female plants is exceedingly significant because thechemical compounds responsible for the euphoric effect ofmarijuana are found primarily in the sticky resin that covers theunfertilized female flowers and adjacent leaves. The male plantmay contain a small amount of this active resin, but it is grownmainly for hemp fiber.33 The hemp plant yields three rough grades of intoxicatingsubstances, the least potent of which is "marijuana."34 Yet, because the classifications are imprecise, confusion isengendered by attributing to "marijuana" the effectsproduced by the excessive use of the more potent forms ofcannabis.35 In addition, the psychic potency of the plant differsdepending upon where the marijuana is grown, 36 and uponcultivation variables such as occurrence of fertilization andtime of harvesting: If the male plants are not removed and fertilization occurs, the female plants which carry the main intoxicating properties are considerably weakened in that respect. In addition, unless harvesting is carried out immediately before the blossoming of the flowers there is further weakening and variation in the potency of the produce.37 It is interesting to note in this connection that themarijuana used in the United States is among the weakest in theworld.38 These factors frustrate the creation of a standardizeddosage in any given experiment and preclude the comparison of theresults of independent studies.39 In addition to the problems engendered by the great variancein potency and dosage, meaningful marijuana research alsoinhibited by differences in means of consumption. Sincestandardized doses are generally considered impossible if thedrug is smoked,40 most studies, including the La Guardia Report,are based upon oral administration of marijuana to the subjects.Yet smoking is the method of consumption among nearly allAmerican users. Furthermore, standardized dosage is not evenassured by the oral method since "little is known about thegastrointestinal absorption of the highly water-solublecannabinals in man." 41 Finally, "there is considerableindirect evidence from users that the quality of the intoxicationis different when marijuana or its preparations are ingestedrather than smoked. In particular, ingestion seems to cause morepowerful effects . . . . " 42 2. Current Medical Knowledge It is perhaps best to begin with the medical data concerningthe traditional allegations about marijuana. (a) The Myths.-First, it is universally accepted among medicalauthorities that marijuana is not physically habit-forming.43Although some researchers have asserted that a psychologicaldependence may result from continued use of the drug, thishypothesis has not been established and its relevance has beenquestioned. One authority has noted that "habituation tomarihuana is not as strong as to tobacco or to alcohol." 44Another has commented that "[a] psychological dependence anddesire for the drug may occur, but this is inconsistent and isnot uncontrollable.... Perhaps the dependence is even less thanthe dependence on cigarettes." 45 Second, there is no evidence whatsoever that the use ofmarijuana has a direct relationship to the commission of crime.One commentator has noted that " during the high themarihuana user may say things he would not ordinarily say, but hegenerally will not do things that are foreign to his nature. Ifhe is not normally a criminal, he will not commit a crime underthe influence of the drug." 46 In fact, it is entirelylikely that the characteristic passive reaction to the use ofmarijuana tends to inhibit criminality. A recent study has shownthat juvenile "potheads" tend to be nonaggressive andto stay away from trouble.47 Similarly, there is no scientificevidence for the proposition that marijuana is an aphrodisiac. Ithas been suggested to the contrary that the most potent form ofcannabis, pure ganja, has the reverse effect, being taken byIndian priests to quell the libido.48 Finally, the evidence is at best inconclusive regarding thecontention that use of marijuana leads to the use of"hard" narcotics. Some of the early studies claiming tohave established a valid connection were scientificallyunreliable. One authority has observed in this regard: Supposedly scientific studies of this problem have been conducted in the past, such as the one done in a deprived area of a large city where the use of heroin was widespread, and indicating that many users of marijuana went on to the use of more hazardous drugs. I am sure that without previous marijuana, the use of such drugs in that environment would be just as high, and that if such a study were done on a college population, it would be found that the subsequent use of "hard" drugs would be negligible.49 Referring to a presidential task force investigation, anotherauthoritv has commented: It is true that the Federal study showed that among heroin users about 50% had had experience with marijuana- the study also found, however, that most of the heroin addicts had been users of alcohol and tobacco. There is no evidence that marijuana is more likely than alcohol or tobacco to lead to the use of narcotics.50 On the basis of the available information, most authoritieshave concluded that there is no scientific basis for the theorythat the use of marijuana is a causal factor in the use of"hard" narcotics.51 In any event, as a matter of commonsense, it would appear that the phenomenon in dispute is verycomplex, including both individual personality features andenvironmental factors. As one commentator put it "Several ofthe studies indicate that the precious statistics have beenmisleading and exaggerated." Whether or not the propositioncan be scientifically established, there is probably a slightlygreater chance that an individual who has used marijuana could goon to opiates, but statistically this is not . . . an importantsocial consideration."52 Thus, it appears that none of the traditional allegationsabout marijuana has been scientifically established, that itsalleged addictive qualities have been disproved, and that theoverwhelming weight of authority disputes its allegedly crimeproducing and stepping stone tendencies. We will now brieflysurvey the medically recognized effects of the drug, physical,psychomotor and psychological. (b) Physical Effects.-The acute physical effects of marijuanaare the subject of much debate. Various studies have reacheddifferent conclusions. Nearly all authorities, however, are inagreement that the bodily symptoms accompanying the"high" are very slight. The most commonly noted effectsare a slight rise in blood pressure, conjunctival vascularcongestion, slight elevation in blood sugar, urinary frequencyand an increase in pulse rate.53 In general, these acute symptomsare relatively short-lived, and there are no known lastingphysical effects.54 On the other hand, there is evidence thatprolonged smoking could lead to "marijuana bronchitis,"and that communal smoking has the tendency to encourage thespread of communicable diseases. (c) Psychomotor Effects.-Varying results have also beenreported in studies of the acute effects of marijuana uponpsychomotor functions. Although the researchers have sometimesfound some slight impairment in performance tests,55 there isapparently no general depressing or stimulating effect on thenervous system and no influence on speech and coordination.56 Inthe most recent study, Doctors Well, Zinberg and Nelson of theBoston University School of Medicine found that marijuana usersare able to compensate nearly 100 percent for whatever adverseeffects may result on ordinary psychomotor performance. 57 Such findings suggest that marijuana is not likely to be acausal factor in driving accidents, a hypothesis that issupported by a recent simulated driving test comparing theperformance of subjects under the influence of marijuana andalcohol.58 There seems to be no contention in the medical fieldthat there are any lasting effects from marijuana in thepsychomotor area. The Well study reported that noticeable effects"were diminished between 30 minutes and I hour, and theywere largely dissipated 3 hours after the end of smoking. Nodelayed or persistent effects beyond 3 hours were observed orreported." 59 (d) Psychological Effects.-The acute psychological effects ofthe use of marijuana are more complex. At the outset, it can bestated with certainty that "marijuana is definitelydistinguishable from other hallucinogenic drugs such as LSD, MIT,mescaline, peyote, and psilocybin. Although it produces some ofthe same effects, it is far less potent than these other drugs.It does not alter consciousness to nearly so great an extent asthey do nor does It lead to increasing tolerance to the drugdosage." 60 Furthermore, the subjective effects of cannabisare dependent upon the personality of the user, his expectations,and the circumstances under which the drug is taken, as well aslearning to smoke marijuana properly.61 There is general agreement about the pleasurable psychologicaleffects. Users uniformly experience greatly enhancedperception-whether real or delusory-of visual, auditory, tasteand touch effects, increased sense of humor or hilarity, feelingsof well-being or wonderment, and distorted time and spaceperceptions.62 In this connection, it is interesting to note thateven the pleasurable phenomena are dependent on individualcircumstances, particularly ivlicii the drug is taken for thefirst time. Many, if not most, people do not become"high" on their first exposure to marijuana, even if itis smoked correctly.63 The probable explanation for this curiousphenomenon is that repeated exposure to marijuana reducespsychological inhibition, as part of, or as a result of, alearning process.64 Medical knowledge is most tentative with reference to adversepsychological effects. Recent studies, however, have vehementlydisputed an earlier tendency to attribute psychoses and severepanic reactions to marijuana use.65 As Dr. Well has noted: Because reliable information about the acute effects of marijuana has been as scarce within the medical profession as without, many of these reactions have been misinterpreted and incorrectly treated. For example, simple panic states, which doubtless would be properly diagnosed in other circumstances, are often called "toxic psychoses" when doctors elicit immediate histories of marijuana use.66 Medical experts now generally agree that the possibility ofdepression, panic and psychoses depends entirely on thecircumstances of use and the personality of the user.67 In hismost recent study, Dr. Weil concluded that "serious adversereactions are uncommon in the 'normal' population,"68 butnoted three exceptions. First, simple depressive reactions whichrarely occur in regular users may occur in novices who approachtheir initial use ambivalently.69 Second, the most frequentadverse reaction is apprehension, more often described asanxiety, and sometimes reaching a degree of panic. Again, suchreactions are closely related to the attitude of the user and tothe social setting.70 The social setting also influences thefrequency of panic reactions, suggesting again that thisphenomenon correlates with the degree of reluctance with whichpeople approach initial use of the drug: In a community where marijuana has been accepted as a recreational intoxicant, they may be extremely rare (for example, one per cent of all responses to the drug). On the other hand, at a rural Southern college, where experimentation with the drug may represent a much greater degree of social deviance, 25 per cent of persons trying it for the first time may become panicked.71 The panicked person normally believes that he is either dyingor losing his mind, and simple reassurance will end most suchreactions.72 The reaction normally is short-lived, but it may beprolonged by an attitude encouraging the underlying fears.73 Inshort, "panic reactions . . . seem more nonpharmacologicthan pharmacologic."74 Third, psychotic reactions occur rarely, if at all, in normalusers,75 and occur mainly in persons with a low psychosisthreshold or a history of psychosis76 or hallucinogenic drugexperimentation.77 Even in such cases, marijuana is a precipitantrather than a primary cause of this type of reaction 78 whichlasts at most a day or two.79 Footnotes 1 TRAFFIC IN Opium 69 (1960). 2 In reporting the marijuana arrests of Robert Kennedy, Jr.,and R. Sargent Shriver, Jr., Walter Cronkite noted that"This case is not unusual; more and more parents across thenation find themselves going to court with their children on drugcharges. It's becoming an incident of modern living." CBSEvening News, Aug. 6, 1970, See also J. Rosevear, Pot: A HANDBOOKOF MARIHUANA 117-31 (1967); TRAFFIC IN OPIUM 2, 40 (1966). 11 Perhaps the best statement the authors have yet encounteredto this effect was made by Jerry Rubin, one of the Chicago Seven,in Charlottesville, Virginia, on May 6, 1970, when he said:"Smoking pot miles you a criminal and a revolutionary-assoon as you take your first puff. you are an enemy ofsociety" See also J. Rubin. Do It! (1970). 12 Wash. Post, Feb. 24, 1970, at III, col. 3. 13 N.Y. Times, Feb. 15, 1970,  6 (Magazine), at 14(statement of Dr. Stanley Yolles). 14 See, e.g., Wash. Post, May 16, 1970, at A3, col. 8(reporting a Minnesota Supreme Court decision holding thatpossession of small amount of marijuana does not necessarilyjustify conviction). This case is discussed at P. 1122 infra. 15 N.Y. Times, Oct. 19, 1969,  4, at 8, col. 2. 16 Narcotics Legislation Hearings 4 (statement of SenatorDodd). 17 Goode, The Marijuana Market, 12 Colum. F., Winter 1969, at7. 18 Id. at 8. 19 Hearings Before the Subcomm. to Investigate JuvenileDelinquency of the Senate Comm. on the judiciary, 90th Cong., 2dSm. 4510 (1968) [hereinafter cited as Juvenile DelinquencyHearings]. At these hearings, former Commissioner of the Bureauof Narcotics, Henry Giordano, stated: "We have not seen anyevidence of criminal syndicates such as the Mafia being involved[in the marijuana trade]." Id. 20 Goode, supra note 17, at 4, 5. See also Leary, thePolitics, Ethics, and Meaning of Marijuana, in The MARIHUANAPAPERS 121 (D. Solomon ed. 1966). 21 See Los Angeles Times Dec. 4, 1967, s. 2 at 6, col. 1(statement by Los Angeles Police Chief). 22 See Mandel, Problems with Official Drug Statistics, 21Stan. L. Rev. 991, 1021 n. 114 (1969). 23 See TRAFFIC IN OPIUM 72 (1960); id. at 65 (1961) id at 78(1963) Hearings on Depts of Treasury and Post Office and the Executive Offic Appropriations for 1969 Before a Subcomm. Of the Hose Comm. On Appropriations, 90th Cong. 2d sess., pt. 1, at 624 (1968) 25 The state of California has kept excellent statistics since1959. In 1968. as a typical year of the late sixties, the policeseized over 30,000,000 grams of marijuana of all kinds in only10,000 arrests. The larger amount seized relative to the numberof arrests seems to indicate the concentration on dealers. BUREAUOF CRIMINAL STATISTICS, DEPT OF JUSTICE, STATE OF CALIFORNIA,DRUG ARRESTS AND DISPOSITIONS IN CALIFORNIA 41, 43 (1968) 26 Id. at 37-39. 27 See Fort, Social Problems of Drug Use and Drug Policies, 56CALIF. L. Rev. 17, 23 (1968). See also H. BECKER, OUTSIDERS 159(1963); T. DUSTER, T14E LEGISLATION OF MORALITY: LAW, DRUGS ANDMORAL JUDGMENT (1970). 28 See LITTLE, DRUG ABUSE AND LAW ENFORCEMENT 1313 -15 (1967);Project, Marijuana Laws: An Empirical Study of Enforcement andAdministration in Los Angeles County, 15 U.C.L.A. L. Rev. 1507,1522-31 (1968). 29 TIME, Sept. 26, 1969, at 70. 30 One commentator has charged that those most knowledgeableabout marijuana have "dodged" the topic. Kaplan, TheSpecial Case of Marihuana (Or, It's the Doctor's Fault), 9 J.CLINICAL PHARMACOLOGY 349, 351 (1969). 31 At the end of 1968 there existed only four known studies onhuman subjects conducted by Americans. See Weil, Zinberg &Nelson, Clinical and Psychological Effects of Marihuana in Man,162 SCIENCE 1234, 1235 (1968) [hereinafater cited as Weil Study].The previous lack of concern with marijuana call also be observedby 211 examination of the number of articles appearing in medicalperiodicals. During the decade between 1942 and 1951, only sixarticles dealing with the subject are listed in the index formedical journals. Eleven reports were noted as being published inthe next ten years. From 1962 to 1966, an average of threematerials per year were available. It was not until 1967 that thesubject became of sufficient interest to occupy the time of areasonable number of medical authors. In that year, elevenarticles appeared in medical periodicals. By 1968, this numberhad increased to 30, and in 1969 more than 60 articles dealingwith the topic of human marijuana consumption have appeared. Inother words, more than three times the number of articlesappeared in the last three years than in the 25 preceding years. 32 In Fiscal year 1967, NIMH obligated $786,000 for marihuanaresearch grants and contracts. Comparable figures for 1968 and1969 respectively were S1,239,000 and $1,330,000. In Fiscal year1970, if funds are available, the institute proposes to obligate$2,550,000 to support grant and contract studies of marihuana,which means that there will have been a more than three-foldincrease for support of these studies in the last fouryears." Statement by Dr. Roger 0. Egcberg, AssistantSecretary for Health and Scientific Affairs, M.S. Dep't of HEW,before the Select Committee oil Crime, U.S. House ofRepresentatives (mimeographed press release). 33 Weil Study 1234. 34 The three substances are charas-pure unadulterated resinthat has been scraped from the leaves and flowering tops of thefemale plant; hashish or ganja-an agglomeration of femaleflowering tops and stems with whatever resin is attached to theirsurfaces, thought to contain about 40% resin; and marijuana-a lowpotency preparation consisting of dried mature leaves andflowering tops of both male and female plants, thought to containbetween 5 and 8% resin. Schwarz, Toward a Medical Understandingof Marihuana, 14 CAN. PSYCHIATRIC ASS'N J. 591, 592 (1969). 35 As long as the term marihuana is used indiscriminately torefer to cannabis of all kinds and potencies, confusion willcontinue. . . . In this country some of the vigorous opponents ofmarihuana seem to foster this confusion by attributing to any useof marihuana the effects produced primarily by the excessive useof the more potent forms of cannabis in an attempt to preserve astrongly negative public image of marihuana. H. NOWLIS, DRUGS ON THE COLLEGE CAMPUS 93 (1969). 36 "The major botanical feature of the plant is theextreme variability in its appearance, characteristics andproperties when grown in different geographical and climaticcondition." Schwarz, supra note 34, at 591. In the UnitedStates and Mexico, for example, the production of the more potentforms is relatively uncommon, and there appears to be no demandfor them. J. ROSEVEAR, POT: A HANDBOOK OF MARIHUANA 31-33 (1967). 37 Schwarz, supra note 34, at 592. 38 Zunin, Marijuana: The Drug and the Problem, 134 MILITARYMED. 104, M. 7 (1969). According to the author, several factorscontribute to this phenomenal: (1) The amount of resin found inthe flowering tops markedly decreases as the plants are grown inmore temperate areas. It is estimated that the resin content ofIndian cannabis is 20%; Mexican 15% or less; that grown inKentucky 8%; and that found in Wisconsin 6% or less. (2) The activity of the resin in the female is greatly reducedif fertilized by the male. In this country, because of aninability to distinguish between the two plants, inattention tocultivation and lack of knowledge, the female plants arefertilized. (3) The resinous content is highest prior to"going to seed" of the female plant. The marijuana inthis country has gone to seed prior to harvesting. (4) The male plant contains little or no resin content. Inthis country, the male plant is indiscriminately mixed with thefemale plant in the final preparation. (5) The most active portion of the plant is the flowering top.In this country, preparations of marijuana are composed primarilyof leaves, twigs, and seeds which are crushed. (6) The potency of marijuana decreases with time. It isreduced at the end of one year, markedly reduced at the end oftwo years, and nonexistent at the end of three years. Inaddition, it keeps better in cold, dry climates. Most of themarijuana in the United States is several months to several yearsold by the time it has been harvested and has passed through thesmuggling operation. 39 Given the above variations in the plant and in its productsand extracts, together with the continuing ignorance of itschemistry it is not surprising that it is virtually impossible tomake direct comparisons between the various studies on theeffects on human beings who are even more individually variable. Schwarz, supra note 34, at 593. Recently. what is believed to be the active ingredient inmarijuana has been isolated and synthesized. However, thissubstance denominated (THC), is only available for research invery limited quantities. Weil Study Furthermore, it has not beenproven that THC is the sole ingredient contributing to theeffects caused by marijuana. 40 "[M]any pharmacologists dismiss the possibility ofgiving marihuana by smoking because, they sav, the dose cannot hestandardized." Weil Study 1235. 41 Id. 42 Id. 43 "-There is now an abundance of evidence that marihuanais not an addictive drug. Cessation of its use produces nowithdrawal symptoms, nor does a user feel any need to increasethe dosage as he becomes accustomed to the drug." Grinspoon,Marihuana 221 Sci. Am. 17, 21 (1969). 44 Id. 45 Zunin, supra note 38, at 108. 46 Grinspoon, supra note 43, at 22. 47 McGlothlin & West, The Marihuana Problem: An Overview,125 Am. J. PSYSH. 370, 372-73 (1968). This supports the findingof the La Guardia Report that marijuana is not a direct causalfactor in criminal misconduct, but that the "high"leads to sociable attitudes. 48 THE MARIHUANA PAPERS 44 (D. Solomon ed. 1966). Sincemarijuana has a tendency to produce drowsiness, it is difficultto see how it could lead to an act of violent sex. J. ROSEVEAR,supra note 36, at 61. See also La Guardia Report, in THEMARIHUANA PAPERS 296-97 (D. Solomon ed. 1966). 49 Radoosky, Marijuana Foolishness, 280 NEW ENG. J. MED. 712(1969). 50 Grinspoon, supra note 43, at 21-23. 51 THE PRESIDENT'S COMMISSION ON LAW ENFORCEMENT ANDADMINISTRATION OF JUSTICE, TASK FORCE REPORT: NARCOTICS AND DRUGABUSE 13-14 (1967); Council on Mental Health and Committee onAlcoholism and Drug Dependence, Dependence on Cannabis(Marijuana), 201 JAM.A. 368-71 (1967). 52 Zunin, supra note 38, at 108. 53 L. GOODMAN & A. GILMAN, THE PHARMACOLOGICAL BASIS OFTHERAPEUTICS ch. 16 (3d ed. 1965). Nausea, vomiting and diarrheahave also been reported, but it is felt that these symptoms aremainly the result of oral administration. Grinspoon, supra note43, at 20. Increased appetite and dryness of the mouth are alsosaid to be common. 54 Usually the reports of chronic ill effects are to be foundin Eastern studies of individuals using the stronger hashish orpure resinous substances over prolonged periods of time and arecomplicated by the immeasurable effects of many other social,economic, personality and cultural factors. Schwarz, supra note34, at 595. 55 Tests by Robert S. Morrow in the 1930's revealed that evenlarge doses of marijuana did not affect performances on tests ofthe speed of tapping or the quickness of response to simplestimuli. Grinspoon, supra note 43, at 20. "The drug didaffect steadiness of the hand and body and the reaction time forcomplex stimuli." Id. The most recent study in this area wasdone by Andrew Weil, Norman Zinberg and Judith Nelson of theBoston University School of Medicine. Their conclusions were thatregular users of marijuana may show some slight degree ofimpairment in performance tests, but that the aptitude of thesubjects may even improve slightly after smoking marijuana. WeilStudy 1242. Marijuana-naive subjects tended to show someimpairment in performance. Id. 56 N.Y. Times, May 11, 1969, 6 (Magazine), ' at 92, Col. 2. 57 We were struck by the difficulty of recognizing when asubject is high unless he tells you that he is . . . . It seemspossible to ignore the effects of marihuana on consciousness, toadapt to them, and to control them to a significant degree. Id. 58 Comparison of tbe Effects Of Marijuana and, Alcohol OnSimulated Driving Performance 164 SCIENCE 851 (1969) (concludingthat subjects under a "social marijuana high" showed nosignificant differences from control subjects in accelerator,brake, signal, steering, and total errors). In addition,"unlike alcohol drinkers, most pot smokers studiously avoiddriving while high." J. ROSEVEAR, supra note 36, at 135. 59 Weil Study 1238. 60 Grinspoon, supra note 43, at 19. 61 H. NOWLIS, DRUGS ON THE COLLEGE CAMPUS 96-101 (1969). 62 L. GOODMAN & A. GILMAN, supra note 53, at ch. 16;Dependence on Cannabis (Marijuana), supra note 51, at 368-71. 63 Weil Study 1241; Wash. Post, May 24, 1970, at A26, col. 1. 64 "The subjective responses of our subjects indicatethat they had imagined a marihuana effect to be much moreprofoundly disorganizing than what they, experienced." WeilStudy 1241. This subjective control over the effects extended asfar as the reporting of no effects when in actuality the subjecthad received a large dose. Id. 65 Grinspoon, supra note 43, at23-24. 66 Weil, Adverse Reactions to Marijuana, 282 NEW ENG. J. MED.997 (1970). 67 See, e.g., Schwarz, supra note 34, at 595; Weil, supra note66. 68 Weil, supra note 66, at 997. 69 Marihuana depressions I have seen have occurred mainly inobsessive-compulsive persons who are ambivalent about trying thedrug or who invested the decision to experience marihuana withgreat emotional meaning. In interviewing these patients, I havethought that they used marihuana as an excuse for lettingthemselves be depressed, not that their depressions werepsycho-pharmacological. Id. at 998. 70 Dr. Weil has stated that "panic reactions occurredmost often among novice users of marijuana-frequently olderpersons who are ambivalent about trying the drug in the firstplace." N.Y. Times, May 1, 1970, at 18C, col. 2. 71 Id. These panic reactions may emulate acute psychoses inhospital emergency wards "where the patient may feeloverwhelmed, helpless and unable to communicate hisdistress." Weil, supra note 66, at 998. 72 Id. 73 N.Y. Times, May 1, 1970, at 18C, col. 3. 74 Weil, supra note 66, at 1000. 75 Dr. Weil is of the opinion that "all adverse reactionsto marihuana should be considered panic reactions until provenotherwise," id. at 998, and that he has never seen a toxicpsychosis following the smoking of marijuana by a normal user.Id. at 9199. 716 Id. at 1000. 7-7 Id. at 999-1000. 78 H. Nowlis, DRUGS ON THE COLLEGE CAMPUS 96-101 (1969);Schwarz, supra note 34 at 595. 79 McGlothlin & West, The Marijuana Problem: An Overview,125 Am. J. Psych. 370,372 (1968). Contents | Feedback | Search DRCNet Library | Schaffer Library | Major Studies The Forbidden Fruit and the Tree ofKnowledgeWT01-B31-52IA031-000652-B037-334http://206.61.184.43:80/schaffer/library/studies/vlr/vlr9.htm 206.61.184.43 19970122125425 text/html 45637HTTP/1.0 200 OKDate: Wednesday, 22-Jan-97 12:54:11 GMTServer: WebSitePro/1.1f (S/N wpo-0deb)Allow-ranges: bytesContent-type: text/htmlLast-modified: Saturday, 28-Dec-96 06:47:08 GMTContent-length: 45419 Marijuana Legislation Clashes with Judicial Skepticism1965-70 Contents | Feedback | Search DRCNet Library | Schaffer Library | Major Studies The Forbidden Fruit and the Tree ofKnowledge THE FORBIDDEN FRUIT AND THE TREE OF KNOWLEDGE: AN INQUIRYINTO THE LEGAL HISTORY OF AMERICAN MARIJUANA PROHIBITION Richard J. Bonnie & Charles H.Whitebread, II IX. MARIJUANA LEGISLATION CLASHES WITH JUDICIAL SKEPTICISM ANDEMERGING VALUES - PIECEMEAL JUDICIAL RESPONSE: 1965-1970 The dramatic increase in marijuana use during the latter1960's and the consequent increase in prosecution1 were mattersof high public visibility. Judicial response at both the trialand appellate levels was influenced by a combination of powerfulforces, none of which had been present in the preceding years.The 1960's saw a revolution in the law of criminal procedure, andin few areas were police practices more suspect than in theenforcement of the drug laws. The latter part of the decadewitnessed widespread dissent against the political and legalsystems; this protest milieu gave an added dimension to marijuanause as more and more people smoked, oftentimes overtly, in orderto defy a seemingly ignorant law. Faced with this unusualconjunction of widespread political and social eccentricity, thecourts-institutional protectors of political deviants-wereinevitably pressed into institutional sympathy for socialdeviants. A third force was the revitalized judicial interest inthe value of privacy in a highly automated, technologicalsociety; more and more people went to the courts to questionlongstanding governmental prohibitions against essentiallyprivate decisions and acts-homosexuality, abortion, contraceptionand drugs. Together with the well-publicized medical skepticismabout the soundness of the nation's drug laws, particularly thoseregulating marijuana, these forces moved the courts to scrutinizeenforcement practices and consider a new wave of constitutionalobjections to state and federal marijuana legislation. A. Multiple Offenses: Untying the Statutory Knots 1. Federal Developments In the major decision during this period, the United StatesSupreme Court voided the federal provisions most often employedto prosecute the possessor (buyer) of marijuana. In the first armof Leary v. United States,2 the Court held that the FifthAmendment relieves unregistered buyers of any duty to pay thetransfer tax and to file the written order form as required bythe Marihuana Tax Act.3 The Court reasoned that, since filingsuch a form would expose a buyer to liability under state law,under the occupational tax provisions of the Tax Act, and perhapsunder the marijuana provision of the Import and Export Act,4 thefiling provisions violated the fifth amendment guarantees againstself-incrimination. On the other hand, the Court held in a latercase that the fifth amendment does not relieve the marijuanaseller of the duty to confine his sales to transferees who arewilling to comply with the order form requirements.5 Similarly,the Eighth Circuit recently held6 that Leary does not compelinvalidation of Tax Act section 4755(b), which prohibits theinterstate transportation of marijuana, because a convictionunder that section is not really a conviction for falling toregister and pay the occupational tax and, even if it were,registration under section 4753 is not necessarily incriminatingas was the written order form requirement struck down in Leary .7 The second arm of Leary reversed the long line of decisions8upholding the presumption of knowing concealment of illegalimportation arising from possession under section 176a of theImport and Export Act.9 The Court held that, in light of the casewith which marijuana was domestically cultivated and the numberof users, the presumption of know1edge could not rationally bedrawn from possession.10 it could not be said "withsubstantial assurance that the presumed fact [knowing concealmentof illegally imported marijuana] is more likely than not to flowfrom the proved fact [possession] on which it is made todepend."11 Although there is authority to the contrary,12the Ninth Circuit has held this part of Leary retroactive,thereby invalidating all prior Section 176a convictions in whichthe defendant did not admit knowledge and the was instructed asto the applicability of the statutory presumption .13 A serious dispute remains as to what the Government will haveto prove in subsequent prosecutions under section 176a. Assumingthat the entire provision does not violate the privilege againstself-incrimination,14 it is likely that the prosecution will haveto prove actual knowledge of illegal importation in the future.15Since it is highly improbable that such proof will beforthcoming, section 176a has probably been rendered useless asapplied to possessors. It should be clear that the entire seriesof decisions under the Tax Act and section 176a has an air ofunreality about them because Congress probably has Article Ipower directly to prohibit possession and sale of marijuana andhas now exercised that power in the Comprehensive Drug AbusePrevention and Control Act of 1970.16 This new legislation,although stopping short in some respects, discards many of thefictions perpetuated by earlier legislation. The Leary decisionwas at least partially responsible for forcing Congress torationalize the federal role in the drug field, particularly withrespect to marijuana. Another manifestation of judicial dissatisfaction with theextreme nature of existing drug legislation is the apparentreversal of the trend of decisions upholding the strict liabilityof one-time drug offenders, users and addicts for failure toregister when leaving the country.17 The Ninth Circuit held thephrase "uses narcotic drugs" unconstitutionallyvague.18 Taking a more direct approach, the Second Circuit foundknowledge of the registration requirement to be an element of thecrime.19 Thus construed, the statute precludes any due processchallenge to the sufficiency of the notice.20 Although aself-incrimination issue remains, 21 the Second Circuit'sdecision removed the most serious defect in the statute, one thathad become intolerable as the number of marijuana convictionsescalated in the late 1960's. 2. State Developments The erosion of the archaic federal criminal statutes formarijuana-related offenses has been accompanied by a similar,albeit limited, development on the state level. The major issuein state litigation concerns so-called "drug-proximity"offenses which are generally employed as plea-bargaining tools orto prevent the release of a suspect when evidence was 1 illegallyseized or when the evidence is insufficient to secure aconviction under the substantive drug offense. Typical ancillaryoffenses are loitering in the common areas of a building for thepurpose of unlawfully using or possessing any narcotic drug;22loitering in public by a user, addict or convicted drug offenderwithout lawful employment;23 presence in an establishment wherenarcotic drugs are dispensed;24 and presence of a user or drugoffender in a private place where drugs are kept.25 The decisional trend seems to point to the unconstitutionalvagueness of simple loitering and vagrancy statutes.26 Because ofthe nexus between narcotics and crime, however, the courts arestruggling to redefine narcotics-proximity statutes to avoid thevagueness objection.27 It might appear that where "goodaccount" provisions give the arresting police officer toomuch discretion the statute will fal1.28 On the other hand,courts generally avoid vagueness objections based on lack ofnotice by reading in knowledge elements wherever neccssary.29Because of the tenuous relation between marijuana and crime, thecourts should construe "narcotics" in such statutes notto include marijuana. Similar restriction of marijuana-related offenses has beenaccomplished by holding that charges of possession and sale willnot both lie where the only possession is incident to sale,30 andby tightening the requirements of specificity in the indictmentregarding the proscribed parts of the plant.31 B. Procedural Objections to Enforcement Practices The law of criminal procedure underwent a major revolution inthe 1960's. The Bill of Rights was applied piece by piece to thestates through the fourteenth amendment. The Supreme Courtfocused its concern on protecting the rights of the criminaldefendant. The earlier philosophy had been that, so long as thedefendant's rights at trial were guaranteed, the Court shouldnot, and did not need to, intrude into the pretrial stages of thecriminal process. For a variety of reasons it became clear in the1960's that in a system where between 75 and 90 percent of alldefendants bargain and enter guilty pleas, rights must be assuredwell before trial if they are to have any real meaning to theaverage person caught in the net of the criminal process. Thus,step by step the Court began to regulate police practices-search,arrest and interrogation techniques-and the conduct of the earlystages of the criminal process. This substantial change inattitude meant that more marijuana defendants could successfullyraise procedural objections. 1. Search and Seizure The most important development for the marijuana offender hasbeen the close judicial scrutiny of police searches as a resultof Supreme Court rulings under the fourth amendment. Morestringent standards have been established for the police toobtain search warrants32 and the proper scope of searchesincident to a lawful arrest has been narrowed substantially. 33 Although courts have refused to exclude any evidence that wasin plain sight when seized, such as a bag of marijuana in aschool satchel voluntarily opened by a student,34 or marijuanathrown out of window by a defendant trying to dispose of it,35they have narrowed the permissible time and area in which a carmay be searched .36 Moreover, the difficult standing problem posed by therequirement that one had to admit possession or ownership of theseized property in order successfully to challenge the search wasalleviated in cases involving group arrests by permitting allthose on the premises to challenge a given search.37 The new requirements for procuring search warrants led to anumber of technical defense victories. For example, searches ofdefendants' residences were successfully challenged in twoMontana marijuana cases38 because the warrants were issued by ajustice of the peace, rather than by a district judge, asrequired by the state law. These holdings were premised on thesanctity of private residences, and they suggest a growingreluctance to countenance "reasonable" warrantlesssearches, especially of the home. Similarly, Maryland struck downthe fruits of a search of defendant's guests and theirautomobiles on the ground that the permissible search was limitedto the areas described in the warrant.39 An Illinois court hasheld that property not included in the warrant must be returnedto the defendant.40 This return to a more stringent view ofparticularity requirements of warrants stands in stark contrastto the willingness of courts to overlook these requirements inthe late fifties.41 Likewise, courts now scrutinize more closely police claims ofprobable cause for expanding the area of the search. A Californiacourt held that even though defendant was lawfully arrested,search of his luggage in a friend's apartment was justifiedneither by the friend's consent nor by the officer's having seenthe defendant swallow something.42 The search was especiallyunjustifiable since the defendant had been arrested in hisautomobile. In another California case, the presence of peculiarodors did not constitute probable cause for the search of afootlocker.43 An airline had detained the footlocker since it correspondedto a police description. The officers had smelled the marijuanaand then searched the footlocker before sending it on its way andtracing it. The California Supreme Court held that the smellalone was not sufficient cause to search without a warrant. Despite judicial narrowing of the scope of searches with orwithout a warrant, the easing of the standing requirements, andthe closer scrutiny on the probable cause issue, courts continueto permit police to enter dwellings without knocking or by forcewhere circumstances indicate such action is reasonable andnecessary. For example, a California court upheld a marijuanasearch, even though the police entered without knocking, becausethe police heard people running around inside yelling, "It'sthe police," and thought they heard a shot fired.44 Thecourt held that the statutory knocking requirement was subject toexception when there was danger of destruction of evidence anddanger to the police. Closely related to no-knock entry isforcible entry, upheld in an Illinois case45 where the policebroke into the defendant's residence when he did not immediatelyrespond to their knocks. The necessity for forced entry isessentially the same as for unannounced entry, but forced entryadds the danger of causing fright and damage. Another search area that has not been substantiallyliberalized is that of the border search. Customs officials havea much more extensive right to search than their policecolleagues. Mere suspicion is sufficient to justify a bordersearch.46 Even though the jurisdiction of customs agents endsonce entry into the country is completed,, the courts haveallowed border guards great discretion in determining whatconstitutes completed entry. In Thomas v. United States.47 theFifth Circuit held admissible evidence seized an hour and a halfafter the appellant had entered the United States because he wasonly six blocks from the border. Although there is an inevitableproblem of how far the jurisdiction of the customs agent extends,Thomas suggests c1early that it is not limited to bordercrossings. 2. Entrapment Although the majority opinions in Sorrells v. United States48and Sherman v. United States,49 remain the leading statements onentrapment, some courts have recently permitted expansion of thedefense. In California a defendant may plead not guilty and stillraise the entrapment defense in some cases. The court in Peoplev. Perez stated: To compel a defendant to admit his guilt as a condition ofinvoking the defense of entrapment would compel him to relievethe prosecution of its burden of proving his guilt beyond areasonable doubt at the risk of not being able to meet his burdenof proving entrapment.50 The defendant must, however, still raise the defense at trialto be determined as a matter of fact by the jury.51 There is noright to raise the defense in a pretrial motion to suppress theevidence.52 Most courts continue to focus on the moralculpability of the accused53 in determining whether or notentrapment has been successfully shown. Recent Arkansas,54 andNevada55 cases, however, suggest that the courts are increasinglyconcerned about the conduct of law enforcement agents, especiallyin marijuana cases. 3. Other Prosecution Practices Several major abuses, although judicially recognized, remainlargely uncorrected. Long delay between offense and arrest iscommon in narcotics offenses because the police desire to exposethe full extent of distribution and to maintain a cover for theundercover agent as long as possible. Yet any substantial delayprejudices the defendant since the prosecution continues togather evidence while the defendant may forget exactcircumstances and possibly exculpating facts. Judicial responsehas been inconsistent, focusing primarily on the purposefulnessof the delay.56 In light of the recent rejuvenation of the speedytrial requirement by the Supreme Court,57 there is some hope thatthis abuse may be corrected. A more serious abuse with which state and federal prosecutorshave been charged is politically-motivated discretionaryenforcement.58 Although the courts can do little to remedy thisstate of affairs, it forms the basis for one of our basiccontentions: The political-social overtones of the marijuanaproblem may inhibit a rational political and prosecutorialresponse and at the same time may provoke a protective judicialresponse. One judge, particularly expert with regard tocontemporary drug problems acknowledged the partial truth of thecharges of political prosecution against Hippies, long-hairs anddraft-card burning college students.59 To the extent that othertrial and appellate Judges recognize these prosecutorialtendencies, we can expect some judicial compensation either infact-finding, in sentencing, or in response to substantivechallenges to the law. It is our contention, of course, that suchjudicial reaction has already begun. C. Sufficiency of the Evidence The ease of identifying marijuana in conjunction with the useof uncorroborated testimony and circumstantial evidence continuesto require of the prosecution only a very low burden of proof.Nevertheless, appellate decisions are gradually beginning totighten these requirements, and active judicial hostility attrial has all but disappeared. Although the use of uncorroborated testimony to convictcontinues to be upheld by the courts,60 an Illinois appellatecourt has reversed a conviction because of the behavior of thetestifying officer.61 Noting that the officer had repeatedlypressured the defendant to become an informer, the court heldthat the uncorroborated testimony of this officer was notsufficient to support a conviction. The court did not make clearwhether it exercised a weight of the evidence review of the trialjudge's fact-finding, or whether it applied an exclusionaryevidence rule pursuant to its inherent powers over theadministration of criminal justice. Whatever the case, judicialperspective in the clash between marijuana defendant and policeofficer has clearly shifted. The amount of marijuana required to uphold a conviction isundergoing substantial change. The California Supreme Court heldin People, v. Leal62 that to be sufficient for conviction, theamount of narcotics must be enough for sale or consumption, therule generally applied where the statute does not specify aminimum quantity.63 In Eckroth v. State64 a Florida court ruledthat the taking of a drug from a passing pipe is not sufficientto constitute possession where the defendant did not own thepipe, the drug or the premises. Similarly, in a case thatreceived national publicity,65 the Minnesota Supreme Court fieldthat if the state defines marijuana as a narcotic, it cannotpunish possession of what could be native cannabis in amounts tooscanty to produce a "narcotic" effect. Accordingly,exiguous traces of the drug found in the crevices of defendant'sbrief case left in his mistress' car did not constitute an amountsufficient for conviction .66 Other problems remain unsolved. Circumstantial evidencecontinues to link defendants to seized marijuana. Constructivepossession was found where the defendant's daughter was theactual possessor67 and the fact that marijuana was found where aninformer said she had seen defendant smoking it the previous daywas sufficient to support the defendant's conviction.68 There isa split as to whether a conviction can be upheld where thedefendant gratuitously brings the buyer and seller together.Massachusetts upheld the conviction for possession where thedefendant's only contact with the marijuana was passing it to thestate's agent,69 ruling that the facilitation of the sale addedenough to the act of passing to allow the court to findpossession. In a similar case, however, a New York court heldthat there was not present the required involvement or concert ofaction to uphold a conviction for sale.70 Nevertheless, courtshave refused conviction on numerous occasions in which thedefendant was not linked exclusively with the marijuana that wasfound71 and have generally required an outside linking factorbefore upholding the possession.72 However, the element that cantip the scales in favor of conviction is often unrelated to thepossible possession of the marijuana. For example, a Californiacourt73 upheld the finding of possession of marijuana discoveredalong with a purse the defendants had stolen. The defendantscontended that the marijuana was not theirs and must have been inthe purse when stolen. That the defendants were thieves probablyplayed more heavily in the conviction than any evidence of theirconnection with marijuana. Where marijuana is found on the premises of the individual,possession is presumed, although the courts have read in adefense of ignorance of the presence of the marijuana.74Nevertheless, in a New Hampshire case75 the court upheld apossession conviction premised on the defendant's knowledge ofpresence of the drug on the premises even though the courtapparently believed the defendant's story that it belonged to athird party. Ordinarily there is direct corroborating evidence toindicate the defendant's knowledge.76 Along with the gradual thaw on these points in state courts,the late sixties witnessed a total absence of the outrageousjudicial participation in inflammatory statements about thedangers of the drug and its users which we saw was typical of thelate fifties. To the contrary, the appellate opinions, at least,are replete with skeptical references to the inclusion ofmarijuana in the narcotics classification .77 D. Sanction Nowhere has judicial disenchantment with the drug laws,especially marijuana, been greater than in the area ofpunishment. Preference for civil treatment of drug abuse,78disgust with severe mandatory sentencing that deprives theJudiciary of its traditional function of weighing the culpabilityof the individual offender, 79 and skepticism about a statutoryscheme which catches the user or small scale distributor andmisses the major trafficker80 have all found their way intojudicial opinions. This dissatisfaction with legislative inaction in the area ofde-escalating punishment has already begun to provoke remedial81judicial action. In a landmark decision82 receiving nationalattention,83 the Supreme Court of New Jersey recently held thatany prison sentence imposed for first-offense possession ofmarijuana for personal use "should be suspended,"84While the court based its holding on the judiciary's statutoryauthority to suspend sentences in "the best interests of thepublic as well as of the defendant,"85 and on the appellatecourt's power to review for abuse of discretion trial courtsentencing decisions, it appears that the true locus of theopinion is the Eighth Amendment. That is, the court reallydetermined that any prison sentence for first-offense possessionof marijuana for personal use is unreasonably excessive.Accordingly, the decision will be discussed in more detail in thefollowing section.86 Footnotes: 1 See pp. 1096-1 101 supra. See also People v. Patton, 264Cal. App. 2d 637, 70 Cal. Rpt. 484 (Dist. Ct. App. 1968), wherethe arresting officer testified that he had made about 1,000marijuana arrests. 2 395 U.S. 6 (1969). 3 Although Leary involved only the concealment andtransportation provision, 26 U.S.C.  4744 (a) (2) (1964), theEighth Circuit has held, correctly, that Leary also covers theacquiring provision,  4744(a) (1), "since a personobviously would have to acquire the marijuana to knowinglytransport or conceal it." United States v. Young, 422 F.2d302, 304 (8th Cir.), cert. denied, 398 U.S. 914 (1970). 4 Because the "danger of incrimination under statelaw" was "so plain," the Court did not pursue theadditional question of a buyer's exposure to liability under theImport and Export Act. 395 U.S. at 16 n.14. 5 Minor vs. United States, 396 U.S. 87 (1969) 6 United States v. Young, 422 F.2d, 302 (8th Cir.), cert. Denied, 398 U.S. 914 (970) 7 "Although we need not reach the question, we feel thatthe Fifth Amendment is not violated by the insubstantial hazardsof incrimination posed by section 4753. Id. at 306 8 See p. 1086, supra 9 Anticipating the Leary decision on the  176a presumptionwas United States v. Adams, 293 F. Supp. 776 (S.D.N.Y. 1968). 10 395 U.S. at 52 53. Having found the "knowledge"presumption unconstitutional, the court avoided consideration ofthe "illegal importation" presumption. Id at 38. Theknowledge presumption has also be held invalid as applied tohashish. United States v. Maestri, 424 F.2d 1066 (9thCir. 1970) ; cf. United States v. Cepelis, 426 F.2d 134 (9thCir. 1970) (remanded for factual determination as to whetherLeary applies to hashish.) In Turner v. United States, 396 U.S. 398 (1970), the Courtupheld the presumption in 21 U.S.C.  174 (1964) (directancestor of  176a as applied to heroin but declared itirrational as applied to cocaine. It has been held that Turner isretroactive, United States v. Vallejo, 312 F. Supp. 244 (S.D.N.Y.1970). 11 395 U.S. at 30. 12 Rivera-Vargas v. United States, 307 F. Supp. 1075 (D.P.R.1969). 13 United States v. Scott, 425 F.2d 55 (9th Cit. 1970). Wethink the Ninth Circuit is right, at least with respect toconvictions secured after marijuana achieved high publicvisibility in the 1960's. Since the number of people stillincarcerated for earlier convictions is minimal, completeretroactive effect is in order. Essential to the Leary decisionwas a determination that the presumption was factuallyunsupportable; it therefore constituted a material flaw in thefact-finding process and seriously impaired the right to jurytrial. 14 Absent the written order form requirement of the MarihuanaTax Act, we do not see how prosecution under  176a involves thefifth amendment at all. Neither did the Ninth Circuit. Id. at 61. 15 See United States v. Martinez, 425 F.2d 1300 (9th Cit.1970); McClain v. United States, 417 F.2d 489 (9th Cit. 1969). Amere inference of importation is clearly not enough to sustain aconviction since it would nullify Leary. Cf. United States v.Ramos, 282 F. Supp. 354 (S.D.N.Y. 1968) (where Government failedto prove possession beyond reasonable doubt, court could notinfer knowledge of importation). It is difficult to see how theGovernment could raise an inference of knowledge without provingactual knowledge. If, however, such can be done, it is clear thatthe defendant has a right to prove that the marijuana was notimported. United States v. Espinoza, 406 F.2d 733 (2d Cir.),cert. denied, 395 U,S. 908 (1969) (retrial ordered for failure oftrial judge to allow defendant to prove that marijuana came fromCalifornia), 16 Pub. L. No. 91-513 (Oct. 27, 1970). See also Leary v.United States, 395 U.S. 6, 54 (1969) ("We are constrained toadd that nothing in what we hold today implies any constitutionaldisability in Congress to deal with the marijuana traffic byother means"). 17 See P. 1085 supra. 18 Weissman v. United States, 373 F.2d 799 (9th Cir. 1967).Struggling to confine its holding, the court distinguished anapparently contradictory case, United States v. Eramdjian, 155 F.Supp. 914 (S.D. Cal. 1957), on the ground that it involved"addiction" rather than use of narcotic drugs. 19 United States v. Mancuso, 420 F.2d 556 (2d Cir. 1970). 20 See Lambert v. California, 355 U.S. 225 (1957) (applicationof city ordinance requiring convicted felons to register withinfive days after arrival in city where there is no actual noticeor knowledge of ordinance is unconstitutional). 21 The Mancusocourt did not discuss the issue. 22 N.Y. PENAL LAW  1533 (5) (McKinney 1967). 23 D.C.CODE ANN.  22-3302 (1967). 24 Id.  22-1515(a). 25 Id.  3 3 -416 (a). 26 e.g.. Wheeler v. Goodman, 306 F. Supp. 58 (W.D.N.C. 1969),appeal docketed, 38 U.S.L.W. 3409 (U.S. Apr. 21, 1970) (No. 1273,1969 Term; renumbered No. 102, 1970 Term); Lazarus v. Faircloth,301 F. Supp. 266 (S.D. Fla.) appeal docketed, 38 U.S.L.W. 3225(U.S. Dec. 16, 1969) (No. 630, 1969 Term; renumbered No. 43, 1970Term; Broughton v. Brewer, 298 F. Supp. 260 (S.D. Ala. 1969). 27 In People v. Pagnotta, 25 N.Y.2d 333, 253 N.E.2d 202, 305N.YS.2d 484 (1969), the New York Court of Appeals upheld astatute making it illegal to loiter about any "stairway,staircase, hall, roof, elevator, cellar, courtyard, or anypassageway of a building for the purpose of unlawfully using orpossessing any narcotic drug." The court distinguished theordinary vagrancy and loitering cases on the ground that theconduct punished in the narcotics vagrancy statute is directlyrelated to the commission of crime against others: [P] rotection of innocent citizens from drug users is a verycrucial problem. As has recently been pointed out by severalnewspaper articles, in some of our poorer urban areas where druguse is high, innocent citizens are often beaten, robbed and evenmurdered by drug addicts .... It is completely reasonable andproper for the Legislature to protect these citizens fromaccidentally stumbling into the midst of such miscreants in thecommon areas of buildings. Id. at 338, 253 N.E.2d at 206, 305 N.Y.S.2d at 489. 28 Ricks v. District of Columbia, 414 F.2d 1097, 1104-05 (D.C.Cit. 1968). But cf. United States v. McClough, 263 A.2d 48 (D.C.Ct. App. 1970) (upholding statute prohibiting presence in anestablishment where defendant knows narcotics are beingdispensed). 29 e.g., United Stares v. McClough, 263 A.2d 48 (D.C. Ct. App.1970) (reading scienter provision into statute prohibiting priordrug users or offenders from being "found in any place . . .building, structure . . . in which any illicit narcotic drugs arekept"); cf. People v, Brim, 257 Cal. App. 2d 839, 65 Cal.Rptr. 265 (Dist. Ct. App. 1968) (interpreting statute outlawingknowingly being in a place where narcotics are being used ascharging defendant with intentional involvement with the unlawfuluse of marijuana). 30 State v. Duplain, 102 Ariz. 100, 425 P.2d 570 (1967);People v. Theobald, 231 Cal. App. 2d 351, 41 Cal. Rptr. 758(Dist. Ct. App. 1964). 31 See, e.g., State v. Haddock, 101 Ariz. 240, 418 P.2d 577(1966) (seeds contain no cannibin, therefore no crime charged);State v. Curry, 97 Ariz. 191, 398 P.2d 899 (1965) (marijuanarefers to the p2its of the plant containing cannabin). Contra,State v. Ringo, 5 Conn. Cir. 134, 246 A.2d 208 (Cir. Ct. 1968)(possession of seed, residue in pipes and a small package ofmarijuana); Commonwealth v. Cunningham, 35 Pa. D. & C.2d 527(0. & T. Allegheny 1964) (possession of marijuana seeds); cf.State v. Everidge, 77 N.M. 505, 424 P.2d 787 (1967) (defendantrequired to raise defense that marijuana possessed was withinstatutory exception); State v. Mudge, 69 Wash. 2d 861, 420 P.2d863 (1966) (same). 32 Spinelli v. United States, 393 U.S. 410 (1969); Aguilar v.Texas, 378 U.S. 108 (1964). 33 Chimel v. California, 395 U.S. 752 (1969) (search incidentto a lawful arrest limited to an area within immediate control ofthe suspect). See also Terry v. Ohio, 392 U.S. 1 (1968). 34 People v. Bloom, 270 Cal. App. 2d 731, 76 Cal. Rptr. 137(Dist. Ct. App. 1969). 35 State NT. Garcia, 76 N.M. 171, 413 P.2d 210 (1966). 36 Preston v. United States, 376 U.S. 364 (1964). See alsoCooper v. California, 386 U.S. 58 (1967). The holdings in boththese cases are probably limited by Chimel. 37 Jones N7. United States, 362 U.S. 257 (1960). 38 State v. Kurland, 151 Mont. 569, 445 P.2d 570 (1968); Statev. Langan, 151 Mont. 558, 445 P.2d 565 (1968). 39 Haley v. State, 7 Md. App. 18, 253 A.2d 424 (1969). 40 People v. Hartfield, 94 111. App. 2d 421, 237 N.E.2d 193(1968). 41 See pp. 1089-91 supra. 42 People v. Cruz, 61 Cal. 2d 861, 395 P.2d 889, 40 Cal. Rptr.841 (1964); accord, People v. Patton, 264 Cal. App. 2d 637, 70Cal. Rptr. 484 (Dist. Ct. App. 1968). In Cruz the court statedthat it was reasonable for the officers to try to dislodge thesuspected marijuana from the defendant's mouth. 43 People v. McGrew, 103 Cal. 3d 404, 462 P.2d 1, 82 Cal.Rptr. 47 3 ( 1 969), relying on People v. Marshall, 69 Cal. 2d51, 412 11.2d 665, 69 Cal. Rptr. 585 (1968) (" 'In plainsmell,' therefore, is plainly not the equivalent of 'in plainview'" 44 People V. Clay, 273 Cal. App. 2d 279, 78 Cal. Rptr. 56(Dist. Ct. App. 1969) 45) People v. Hartfield, 94 111. App. 2d 421, 237 N.F.2d 193(1968). 46 United States v. Glaziou, 402 F.2d 8 (2d Cir. 1968), cert.denicd, 393 U.S.1121 (1969); Henderson v. United States, 390 F.2d805 (9th Cir. 1967). 47 372 F.2d 252 (5th Cir. 1967). The customs agents hadsearched the defendants belongings at the time he had entered thecountry arid had not discovered the marihuana and heroin hepossessed. They came into town and searched the defendant whenthey were notified by an informer that he was carrying thecontraband. 48 287 U.S. 435 (1952) 49 356 U.S.369 (1958) 6062 Cal. 2d 769, 776, 401 P.2d 934, 938, 44 Cal. Rptr. 326,330 (1965). The decision overturned a long series of precedents.That all justices concurred is indicative of the sentiment forchange. The court required the prosecution to disclose theidentity of the informant because he was essential to thedefenses of entrapment and lack of knowledge. The decision wasimmediately implemented in People v. Marsden, 234 Cal. App. 2d796, 44 Cal. Rptr. 728 (Dist. Ct. App. 1965). There, defendantwas repeatedly requested to furnish marijuana to a governmentagent and finally purchased and gave the agent one marijuanacigarette. The court noted that the case was close to entrapmentas a matter of law. 51 People v. Oatis, 264 Cal. App. 2d 324, 70 Cal. Rptr. 524(Dist. Ct. App. 1968), cert. denied, 393 U.S. 1108 (1969). 52 State v. Folsom, 463 P.2d 381 (Ore. 1970). 53 Commonwealth v. Harvard, 253 N.E.2d 346 (Mass. 1969);Glosen v. Sheriff, 451 P.2d 841 (Nev. 1969). 54 Peters v. State, 450 S.W.2d 276 (Ark. 1970). Here thedefendant gave some marijuana free of charge to the agent afterrepeated requests. The marijuana had been left in the defendant'sshop by others. In remanding the case for consideration by thejury whether entrapment existed the court stated: Perhaps, neither the persistent solicitation, the use of analias, the misrepresentation of the purposes for which [theagent] wanted to acquire the marijuana nor the use of friends ofappellant for an entree, standing alone, would have beensufficient to raise a fact question as to entrapment, but whentaken together along with the total lack of evidence that [thedefendant] had possessed or sold marijuana before, there was suchan issue. Id. at 278. 55 Froggatt v. State, 467 P.2d 1011 (Nev. 1970) (reversed forfailure to give entrapment instruction where policeman placed marijuana in defendant's carand then Defendant sold it to another officer). 56 Compare Jordan v. United States, 416 F.2d 338 (9th Cir.1969), cert. denied, 397 U.S. 920 (1970) (since three-month delaywas not purposeful, defendant must show actual prejudice), withRoss v. United States, 349 F.2d 210 (D.C. Cir. 1965) (chargesdismissed since seven-month delay found purposeful). 57 Smith v. Hooey 393 U.S. 374 (1969). 58 E.g., J. KAPLAN, MARIJUANA THE, NEW PROHIBITION 40-42(1970). 59 Oliver, Assessment of Current Legal Practices from theViewpoint of the Courts, in DRUGS AND Youth 229 (J. Wittenborned. 1969). Judge Oliver tried to minimize the seriousness of theproblem, However: I think that as judge I must be interested in what might appear to be a pattern of discriminatory law enforcement, but I . . . consider much of this talk must be viewed with the same critical eye which most other talk about drug abuse must be viewed. Id. at 233. 60 See, e.g., Winfield v. State, 248 Ind. 95, 223 N.E.2d 576(1967). 61 People v. Quintana, 91 Ill. App. 2d 95, 234 N.E.2d 406(1968). The court was greatly displeased with the continuingmisbehavior of the officer: "[The 5-8 previous arrests andshakedowns] were a high-handed display of police power whichcompletely disregarded the defendant's constitutionalrights." Id. at 98, 234 N.F.2d at 408. 62 64 Cal. 2d 504, 413 P.2d 665, 50 Cal. Rptr. 777 (1966)(heroin). 63 People v. Villalobos, 245 Cal, App. 2d 561, 54 Cal. Rptr.60 (Dist. Ct. App. 1966) (50 milligrams insufficient); see Tuttlev. State, 410 S.W.2d 780 (Tex. Crim. App. 1967) (63 milligramssufficient, enough to make a very small cigarette); People v.Hokuf, 245 Cal. App. 2d 394, 53 Cal. Rptr. 828 (Dist. Ct. App.1966) (reversible error for the court not to instruct the jurythat fragments of marijuana cannot support conviction). But seeFranklin v. State, 8 Ind. App. 134, 258 A.2d 767 (1969) (heroin),in which the court upheld a conviction for possession where thedefendant went to the hospital with an overdose. Althoughrecognizing that once the drug is inside the body there is nopossession because there is no control, the court felt that priorpossession and self-administration could be inferred. Thedecision should do much to discourage addicts from receiving anymedical treatment that might expose them to criminal penalties. 64 227 So. 2d 313 (Fla. Dist. Ct. App. 1969). 65 See P. 1099 & note 14 supra. 66 State v. Resnick, 177 NW.2d 418 (Minn. 1970). 67 People v. Thomas, 76 Ill. App. 2d 42, 221 NE. 2d. 800(1966). 68 State v. Mantell, 71 Wash. 2d 768, 430 P.2d 980 (1967). 69 Commonwealth v. Harvard, 253 N.F.2d 346 (Mass. 1969). 70 People v. Hingerton, 27 App. Div. 2d 754, 277 N.Y.S.2d 754(1967). 71 See, e.g., State v. Oare, 249 Ore. 597, 439 P.2d 885 (1968)(one marijuana cigarette found in bathroom with two people, Homeowner convicted); People v. Van Syoc, 269 Cal. App. 2d 370, 75Cal. Rptr. 490 (Dist. Ct. App. 1969) (marijuana found onrighthand side of the dashboard in defendant's car while parkedin public lot), People v. Evans, 72 Ill. App. 2d 146, 218 N.E.2d781 (1966) (marijuana found under bar where defendant had beensitting). 72 State v. Faircloth, 181 Neb. 333, 148 NW.2d 187 (1967)(defendant had dufflebag full of marijuana between his legs in automobile); People v.Blunt, 241 Cal. App. -Id 200, 50 Cal. Rptr. 440 (Dist. Ct. App.1966) (defendant only one who had sat in back of police car whereMarijuana found). 73 People v. Irvin, 264 Cal. App. 2d 747, 70 Cal. Rptr. 892(Dist. Ct. App. 1968). 74 See Commonwealth v. Buckley, 354 Mass. 508, 238 N.F.2d 335(1968); People v. Mitchell, 51 Misc. 2d 82, 272 N.Y.S.2d 523(Sup. Ct. 1967). Contra. State v. Givens, 74 Wash. 2d 48, 442P.2d 628 (1968). 75 State v. Colcord, 109 N.H. 231, 248 A.2d 80 (1968). 76 The evidence of fragments of marijuana on the defendantoften provides this evidence, See, e.g., People v. Slade, 264Cal. App. 2d 188, 70 Cal. Rptr. 321 (Dist. Ct. App. 1968); Peoplev. Haynes, 253 Cal. App. 2d 1060, 61 Cal. Rptr. 859 (Dist. Ct.App. 1967), cert. denied, 392 U.S. 914 (1968); People v. Hurta,238 Cal. App. 2d 162, 47 Cal. Rptr. 580 (Dist. Ct. App. 1965). 77 See 1131-32 infra. 78 E.g., Oliver, supra note W. 79 See, e.g., United Sates v. Kleinhalzer, 306 F. Supp. 311(E.D.N.Y. 1969) (Weinstein, J.); Oliver, supra note 59, at 230: In most other areas of the law, however, legislatures havefreely granted judges the power and discretion within quiteflexible limitations, to determine appropriate sentences for allparticular defendants before them that may or may not, dependentupon the particular case, include commitment to a penalinstitution. . . . In the field of drug abuse, quite contrary to that experience,mandatory prison sentences apparently reflect a legislativeconviction that all drug offenders are so alike that sending allto prison is, in fact, a real solution to what must have beenviewed as a relatively simple problem. They also seem to reflecta certainty and righteousness that can hardly be said to bejustified by our present scientific knowledge. 80 For example, in Aguilar v. United States, 363 F. 2d 379 (9thCir. 1966), the court affirming the smuggling conviction of aMexican mechanic driving a car containing marijuana back to theUnited States, noted: Here was a young man with a previous clean record, and therewas no indication he was a user of narcotics or inside anarcotics ring. Apparently he was a victim of his personaleconomics. When the law gets no closer than this to the realrascal, one must wonder about the policy of it, although it bebeyond our function. Id. at 381. See also Oliver, supra note 59, at 233 81 What Justice Jackson said about adjudicative mood when thedeath penalty hangs in the balance is equally appropriate withregard to harsh marijuana penalties: When the penalty is death, we, like state judges, are temptedto strain the evidence and even, in close cases, the law in orderto give a doubtfully condemned man another chance. Stein v. New York, 346 U.S. 156, 196 (1953) 82 State v. Ward, No. A-9 (N.J. Oct. 26, 1970) 83 N.Y. Times, Oct. 27. 1970, at 1, Col. 4 84 State v. Ward, No. A-9 (N.J. Oct. 26, 1970) 85 N.J. Stat. Ann. Section 2a:168-1 (1969) 86 See pp. 1138-39 infra. Contents | Feedback | Search DRCNet Library | Schaffer Library | Major Studies The Forbidden Fruit and the Tree ofKnowledgeWT01-B31-53IA031-000652-B043-159http://206.61.184.43:80/schaffer/library/studies/cu/cu6.htm 206.61.184.43 19970122131127 text/html 20139HTTP/1.0 200 OKDate: Wednesday, 22-Jan-97 13:11:18 GMTServer: WebSitePro/1.1f (S/N wpo-0deb)Allow-ranges: bytesContent-type: text/htmlLast-modified: Saturday, 28-Dec-96 07:13:36 GMTContent-length: 19921 Licit and Illicit Drugs - Chapter 6, Opium is Outlawed Contents | Feedback | Search DRCNet Library | Schaffer Library | Major Studies Consumers Union Report on Licit andIllicit Drugs Chapter 6 Opium smoking is outlawed To summarize the data reviewed so far, opiates taken daily inlarge doses by addicts were not a social menace undernineteenth-century conditions, and were not perceived as amenace. Opium, morphine, and heroin could be legally purchasedwithout a prescription, and there was little demand for opiateprohibition. But there was one exception to this generaltolerance of the opiates. In 1875, the City of San Franciscoadopted an ordinance prohibiting the smoking of opium insmoldng-houses or "dens." 1 The roots of this ordinance were racist rather thanhealth-oriented, and were concerned with what today is known as'1ife-style." Opium smoking was introduced into the UnitedStates by tens of thousands of Chinese men and boys importedduring the l850s and 1880s to build the great Western railroads.*The Chinese laborers then drifted into San Francisco and othercities, and accepted employment of various kinds at low wages-giving rise to waves of anti-Chinese hostility. Soon white menand even women were smoking opium side by side with the Chinese,a life-style which was widely disapproved. The San Franciscoauthorities, we are told learned upon investigation that"many women and young girls, as well as young men ofrespectable family, were being induced to visit the [Chinese]opium-smoking dens, where they were ruined morally and otherwise* The 1875 ordinance followed, "forbidding the practiceunder penalty of a heavy fine or imprisonment or both. Manyarrests were made, and the punishment was prompt and thorough.- 6 * Professor Jonathan Spence of the Department of History, YaleUniversity, presented a fascinating account of opium smoking innineteenth-contury China at the Conforence on Local Control andSocial Protest during the Ch'ing Period, hold at Honolulu,Hawaii, from June 27 to July a, 1971. He reported, for example,that "opium was highly regarded in China, both as amedicinal drug (that checked diarrhea and sorved as a febrifuge),and as an aphrodisiac. Therefore people might become addictedeithor becawe they took opium intensively during an illness hrinstanco in the great cholera epidemic of 1821-or bocause theyhad vigor, leisure and money and wanted to make the best of it. 'Those who who ate regularly and well did not sufferphysiologically from their addiction, but for the poor, addictionwas a serious health hazard (even though, ironically, it wasoften first taken for health reasons), since scarce cashresources were put to opium rather than food purchases. Therewards for the poor were a blurring of the pains of prolongedlabor, and an increase in work capacity over short periods oftime. Then there was heavy addiction among coolies andchair-bearers, and among such groups as boatmen who had to worktheir boats upstream, and stone-cutters working out-of-doors incold weather. The last Chinese to become addicted seem to havebeen the peasants, though as they grew moro opium crops theincidenceof heavy opium anoking rose, and by 1902 one could findentire rural communities that were in desperate straits becauseaddiction had become almost total. By the late Ch'ing, it scansthat no major occupational group was without its addicts."5 ~* One white girl of good family and education began opiumsmoking at sixteen in San Francisco in 1880, later became aprostitute, moved to Victoria, British Columbia, and was found inan opium den in 1884 by a Royal Comnmission. The transcript ofher answers to questions reads, in part: Q. Why did you commence to smoke opium? A. Why do people commence to drink? Trouble, I suppose led meto smoke. I think it is better than drink. People who smoke opiumdo not kick up rows; they injure no one but themselves, and I donot thinlc they injure themselves very much. Q.... Why do you smoke now? A. Bocause I must; I oould not live without it. I smoke partlybecause of the quiet enjoyment it gives, but mainly to escapefrom the horrors which would ensue if I not smoke. To betwenty-four hours without smoking is to suffer worse torturesthan the lost. Q. But does not the smoking make you wretched, past asdrinking would? A. No; I require about twelve pipes, then I fall into a stateof somnolence and complete rest. When I awake I feel all right,and can attend to fixing-up the house. I am brisk, and can workas well as anybody else. I do not feel sick or nervous, neitherhave I the inclination to smoke more opium. O. Then why do you return to the use of the drug? A. Ah! that's it; there is a time when my hands fail me; tearsfall from my eyes, I am ready to sink; then I come here and for afew bits have a smoke which sets me right. There is too muchnonsense talked about opium-smoking. Life without it would beunendurable, I am in excellent health; but, I suppose, every onehas their own troubles, and I have mine. Q. I do not want to be offensive, but are you what is called afast woman? A. I am. But you would be greatly mistaken if you inaginedthat all the women wbo oome here to smoke are of that character.In San Francisco I have known some of the first people visitopium houses, and many respectable people do the same here. Q. Are women of your class generaIly addicted toopium-smoking? A. No; they are more addicted to drink, and drink does themfar more harm. Drink excites passions, whereas this allays it;and when a fast woman drinks she goes to min pretty quick.... Q. Have you anything else to add . . . ? A. No; I would say this, though: that if opium houses werelicensed as drinking saloons are one need not have to come intosuch holes as this to smoke. There would be nice rooms with nicecouches, and the degradation would be mitigated. At all events Ithink the government that will not license an opium saloon shouldshut up public houses and hotels where they sell vitriol forwbiskey and brandy, and where men idle themselves with acertainty and a rapidity beyond the power of opium.' This first law, however, like so many subsequent antinarcoticslaws, failed to worlc despite the promptness and thoroughness ofthe punishment. When opium dens became illegal, "The vicewas indulged in much less openly, but none the less extensively,for although the larger smoking-houses were closed, the smalldens in Cbinatown were well patronized, and the vice grew surelyand steadily.". Indeed, the new law "seemed to add zestto their enjoyment." 7 A similar ordinance was passed inVirginia City, Nevada, the following year.8 This also failed toaccomplish its purpose; hence the State of Nevada passed a morestringent act a year or two later.6 Other states and cities votedsimilar statutes soon after. ================================================================== When these laws failed as well, Congress took a hand. Beforeopium can be smoked, it must be specially prepared; and weakopium containing less than the usual amount of morphine is usedin its preparation. In 1883, Congress raised the tariff on opiumprepared for smoking from $6 to $10 a pound; ' and in 1887 itprohibited altogether the importation of the kind of weakopium-that containing less than 9 percent morphine- used forpreparing smoking opium. The 1887 law also prohibited theimportation of opium by Chinese, and a law three years laterlimited the manufacture of smoking opium to American citizens.11 The results of these steps were set forth in a letter datedJanuary 12, 1888, from the Secretary of the Treasury of theUnited States to the Speaker of the House of Representatives. Theeffect, he wrote, had been "to stimulate smuggling,extensively practiced by systematic organizations [presumably theChinese "tongs" or mutual benefit societies on thePacific coast. Recently completed facilities for transcontinentaltransportation have enabled the opium smugglers to extend theirillicit traffic to our Northern border. Although all possibleefforts have been made by this Department to suppress thetraffic, it is found practically impossible to do so." 12 The law was not changed, however; indeed, the tariff onsmoking opium was further increased, from $10 to $12 per pound in1890. Then, in 1897, it was reduced to $6 a pound"experience having at last taught that it could not bear ahigher rate without begetting an extensive surreptitiousmanufacture or serious smuggling operations." Following thereduction in the tariff, "the amount that passed through thecustoms houses . . . progressively increased." 13 Throughout this period, states and cities continued to passlaws against opium smoking;* by 1914 there were twenty-seven suchlaws in effect.. Yet the amount of smoking opium legally importedcontinued to rise steadily, as shown in Table 2. 14 *Several of these laws also made it a crime to possess a pipefor the smoking of opium precedent for later laws prohibiting thepossession of hypodermic needles and syringes without aprescription. There was a lesson implicit in these import figures. Duringmore than thirty years of city, state, and federal efforts tosuppress opium smoking, the amount smoked per year increasedsevenfold-without taking account of smuggled supplies. In 1909, the importation of smoking opium was prohibitedaltogether.l5 This law was successful in the sense that smokingopium imported through the customhouses fell to zero, but it didnot solve the opium-smoking problem. Congress in January 1914found it necessary to amend the 1909 law 16 and to pass anadditional statute imposing a prohibitive tax ($300 per pound) onopium prepared for smoking within the United States.7 In December1914 Congress passed the Harrison Narcotic Act, with far broaderprovisional~ (see Chapter 8). Yet as late as 1930, according to FederalNarcotics Commissioner Harry J. Anslinger and United StatesAttorney William F. Tompkins, "opium dens could be found inalmost any American city." 19 Pounds of Number of Smokers Decade Smoking Opium Imported Who Could Be Supplied a 1860-69 21,176 8,470 1870~79 48,049 19,2l9 1880~89 85,988 34.395 1890~99 92,462 36,985 1900~09 148,168 59,287 At 21/2 pounds per year. Table 2. Rise in Legal importation of Opium, 1860- 1909. l One reason for the failure of these anti-opium-smoking laws,and of subsequent anti narcotics laws, appears obvious. They wereaimed at private transactions between willing sellers andwilling, usually eager, buyers Thus there were no complainants.Other such laws include the Volstead Act, since repealed, whichprohibited the sale of alcoholic beverages; the laws againstfornication, homosexual acts, and other sexual acts betweenconsenting individuals in private; the laws against gambling; andthe drug laws generally. The phrase "crimes withoutvictims" has been applied to such acts; they can moreaccurately be called "crimes without complainants." Itis hard to cite a law aimed at crimes of this class which has hadmuch effect in curbing the behavior aimed at..* * -all laws which can be violated without doing any one aninjury are laughed at. Nay, so far are they from doing anythingto control the desires and passions o men that, on thecontrary, they direct and incite men's thoughts the rnore towardthose wry objects; for we always strive toward what is forbiddenand desire the things we are not allowed to have. And men ofleisure are never deficient in the ingenuity needed to enablethem to outwit laws framed to regulate things which cannot beentirely forbidden.... He who tries to detennine everything bylaw will foment clime rather than lessen it."-Baruch Spinoza(1632-1677).20 The mere fact that a law fails to achieve its goal fully is ofcourse not a sufficient reason for repealing it; witness the lawsagainst murder. The basic argument against laws creating crimeswithout complainants must rest on evidence that they not onlyfail but also, in the process of failing, do more harm than good.Such evidence exists with respect to the laws against opiumsmoking. For one effect of these laws was to convert opiumsmokers to more hazardous forms of opiate use. "Opium smoking is vastly less vicious thanmorphine-taking," wrote an American authority on opiates,Dr. Charles B. Towns, in 1912.21 Dr. Marie Nyswander also commented on opium smoking, in 1956: There is a pattern of self-limitation or restraint in opiumsmoking as practiced in countries where it is sociallyacceptable. It is common for natives of these countries toindulge in opium smoking one night a week, much as Americans mayindulge in alcoholic beverages at a Saturday night party....families who accept opium smoking as part of their culture aremindful of its dangers much as we are mindful of the dangers ofoverindulgence in alcohol.22 The reasons for the lesser harmfulness of opium smoking inmoderation are not hard to find. The opium used, as noted above,is of a specially weak type containing less than 9 percentmorphine. Only about 10 percent of the morphine in this weakopium enters the vapor, and only a portion of the morphine in thevapor enters the human bloodstream when inhaled. Since the opiumis heated rather than burned, only smoke-free vapor is inhaled;there are no "tars" or other carcinogens to causecancer. The so-called "opium smoker" is actually avapor inhaler. At a very rough estimate, a smoker would have tosmoke 300 or 400 grains of opium to get a dose equivalent to theintravenous injection ("mainlining-) of one grain of heroin.Even heavy opium smokers actually smoke less than this daily..And the opium-smoking dose is necessarily spread over aconsiderable span of time rather than being absorbed into thebloodstream almost instantaneously, as in mainlining. Surely thenineteenth-century enemies of opium smoking did not and could notforesee that the new laws were starting this country down thedismal road from that relatively innocent "vice" to theintravenous injection of heroin-the dominant form of illegalopiate use today; yet that was in fact the sequel. ~ Dr. Charles B. Towns wrote (1912) "The averageopium-smoker consuming twenty-five pills a day gets only theequivalent of about a quarter grain [15 milligrams] of morphinetaken hypodermically or of a half grain taken by the mouth. Abeginner could not smoke a quarter of that quantity.... 22 Dr. Lawrence Kolb wrote (1925): "Case 35, nowthirty-eight years of age, started smoking opium twenty years ago[in 1905]. After the importation of smoking opium was preventedby law, he used morphine, and when this could no longer besecured, he changed to heroin." This was the common pattern. Chapter 6 References 1. H. H. Kane, Opium Smoking in America and China (New York,1882), cited in Terry and Pellens, p. 73. 2. Jonathan Spence, ''opium Smoking in Ch'ing Chins,"presented at the Conference on Local Control and Social ProtestDuring the Ch'ing Period, Honolulu, 1971 (under the auspices ofthe American Council of Learned Societies and the University ofCalifornia); unpublished. 3. British Columbia Study pp. 498-500. . 4.Kane, in Terry and Pellens, p. 73. 5.. ibid 6.Ibid. 7. Cited in AIfred R. Lindesmith, Opiate Addiction (Evanston,Ill.: Principia Press. 1947), p. 186. 8. Kane, in Terry and Pellens, p. 808. 9.Ibid. 10. Terry and Pelllens, p. 747. 11. Ibid., p. 748. 12. Esec. Doc. No. 79, House of Representatives, 5Oth Cong.,1st Sess., C. S. Fairchild to Mr. Carlisle, Jan. 12, 1888, citedin Terry and Pellens, p. 747. 13. Terry and Pellens , pp. 747-748. 14. Lawrence Kolb and A. G. Du Mez, The Prevalence and Trng ofDrug Addiction in the United States, and Factors lnfuencing It,Treasury Deparunent, U.S. Public Health Service, Reprint No. 924(Washington, D.C.: U.S. Government Printing Office, 1924), p. 14. 15. Outlook, 91 (February 6, 1900): 275; Public law No. 221,60th Cong., approved February 9, 19O9. 16. Public Law No. 46, 63rd Cong., approved January 17, 1914. 17. Public Law No. 47, 63rd Cong., approved Janualy 17, 1914. 18. Public Law No. 233, 63rd Cong., approved December 17,1914. 19. Harry J. Anslinger and William F. Tompkins, The Traffic inNarcotics (New York: Funk and Wagnalls, 1953), p. 54. 20. Baruch Spinoza, quoted by Joel Fort in Richard Blum andA.ssociates, Utopiatt, (New Yo'rk: Atberton Press, 1968), p. 205. 21. Cbarles B. Tow=, "The Peril of the Drug Habit,"Century Magazhe, 84 (1910 583. 22. Jerome H. Jaffe, in Goodman and Gilman, 3rd ed. (1965), p.285. 23. Charles B. Towns, "The Peril of tbe Drug Habit,"p. 583. 24. Lawrence Kolb, "Pleasure and Deterioration fromNarcotic Addiction," Mental Hygiene, 9 (1925): 719-720. Contents | Feedback | Search DRCNet Library | Schaffer Library | Major StudiesWT01-B31-54IA031-000652-B043-188http://206.61.184.43:80/schaffer/library/studies/cu/cu7.htm 206.61.184.43 19970122131202 text/html 5157HTTP/1.0 200 OKDate: Wednesday, 22-Jan-97 13:11:33 GMTServer: WebSitePro/1.1f (S/N wpo-0deb)Allow-ranges: bytesContent-type: text/htmlLast-modified: Saturday, 28-Dec-96 07:13:29 GMTContent-length: 4940 Licit and Illicit Drugs - Chapter 7 - The Pure Food andDrugs Act Contents | Feedback | Search DRCNet Library | Schaffer Library | Major Studies The Consumers Union Report on Licit andIllicit Drugs Chapter 7 The Pure -Food and Drug Act of 1906 A major step forward in the control of opiate addiction wastaken in 1906 when Congress passed the first Pure Food and Drug Act despiteopposition from the patent-medicine interests. The pressures to pass theact were intense-generated by Dr. Harvey W. Wiley and his crusadingjournalistic followers, notably Samuel Hopkins Adams,' who were known as"muckrakers." The 1906 act required that medicines containing opiates andcertain other drugs must say so on their labels.2 Later amendments to theact also required that the quantity of each drug be truly stated on thelabel, and that the drugs meet official standards of identity and purity.Thus, for a time the act actually served to safeguard addicts. The efforts leading to the 1906 act, the act itself andsubsequent amendments, and educational campaigns urging families not touse patent medicines containing opiates, no doubt helped curb the makingof new addicts. Indeed, there is evidence of a modest decline inopiate addiction from the peak in the 1890s until 1914.3 For those already addicted, however, the protection affordedby the 1906 act and by subsequent amendments was short-lived, for in 1914Congress passed the Harrison Narcotic Act, which cut off altogether thesupply of legal opiates to addicts. As a result, the door was openedwide to adulterated, contaminated, and misbranded black-marketnarcotics of all kinds. The heroin available on the street in the United Statestoday, for example, is a highly dangerous mixture of small amounts ofheroin with large and varying amounts of adulterants. The black marketsimilarly distributes today large quantities of adulterated,contaminated, and misbranded LSD and other drugs. The withdrawal of theprotection of the food-and-drug laws from the users of illicit drugs, as weshall show, has been one of the sign)ficant factors in reducing addicts totheir present miserable status, and in making drug use so damaging today. [47] Chapter 7 Ref: I. Samuel Hopkins Adams, The Great American Fraud: Articles onthe Nostrum Evil and Quackery, reprinted from Collier' (1905, 19)O6 1907,1912) by American Medical Association, Terry & Pellens p. 75. See, for example, Lawrence Kolb and A. G. Du Mez, ThePrevalence and Trend of Drug Addiction in the United States and Factor, InfluencingIt, Treasury Department, U.S. Public Health Service, Reprint No. 924(Washington, D.C.: U.S. Government Printing Office, 1924), p. 14, Table 2. Contents | Feedback | Search DRCNet Library | Schaffer Library | Major StudiesWT01-B31-55IA031-000652-B043-219http://206.61.184.43:80/schaffer/library/studies/cu/cu12.htm 206.61.184.43 19970122131215 text/html 41122HTTP/1.0 200 OKDate: Wednesday, 22-Jan-97 13:12:04 GMTServer: WebSitePro/1.1f (S/N wpo-0deb)Allow-ranges: bytesContent-type: text/htmlLast-modified: Saturday, 28-Dec-96 07:13:59 GMTContent-length: 40904 The "heroin overdose" mystery and otheroccupational hazards of heroin addiction Contents | Feedback | Search DRCNet Library | Schaffer Library | Major Studies The Consumers Union Report on Licit and Illicit Drugs Chapter 12 The "heroin overdose" mystery andother occupational hazards of addiction Chapter 4 of this Report reviewed in detail the effects ofheroin and other opiates on addicts, including deleteriousphysiological effects traceable to the drugs themselves.Narcotics addicts today face other physiological hazards that aretraceable to the narcotics laws, to the adulteration,contamination, and exorbitant black-market prices that those lawsfoster, and to other legal and social (as distinct frompharmacological) factors. Dr. Jerome H. Jaffe has described someof these risks in Goodman and Gilman's textbook (1970):"Undoubtedly, the high cost and impurities of illicit drugsin the United States exact their toll. The high incidence ofvenereal disease reflects the occupational hazard of the manyfemales who earn their drug money through prostitution. Theaverage annual death rate among young, adult heroin addicts isseveral times higher than that for nonaddicts of similar age andethnic backgrounds. . . . The suicide rate among adult addicts islikewise considerably higher than that of the generalpopulation." 1 Because "the preferred route of administration isintravenous," Dr. Jaffe continues, "there is sharing ofimplements of injection and a failure to employ hygienictechnics, with a resultant high incidence of endocarditis, andhepatitis, and other infections." 2 The exorbitant price of black-market heroin, Dr. Jaffe mighthave added, is one of the factors that makes intravenousinjection "the preferred route of administration," for"mainlining" is the cheapest way to forestallwithdrawal symptoms. And the laws restricting possession ofinjection equipment, under penalty of imprisonment, increase therisk of needleborne infections by encouraging the sharing ofimplements. There remains to be considered yet another risk of heroinaddiction, the most publicized hazard of all-death from"heroin overdose." Because these deaths are a source ofsuch widespread concern, and also because they are so widelymisunderstood, even by authorities on heroin addiction and byaddicts themselves, we shall examine the data in detail. Much ofthe discussion that follows is focused on New York City, sincethe deaths attributed to heroin overdose are most numerous thereand since the New York City data are published in convenientform. "Prior to 1943, there were relatively few deaths amongaddicts from overdosage. " 3 By the 1950s, however, nearlyhalf of all deaths among New York City addicts were beingattributed to "acute reaction to dosage or overdosage." 4 In 1969, about 70 percent of all New York addict deathswere assigned the "overdose" labels and in 1970, theproportion was about 80 percent.- The number of deaths sodesignated by New York City's Office of the Chief MedicalExaminer increased from very few or none at all before 1943 toabout 800 in 1969 and 1970 .7 During this same twenty-eight-year span, addict deaths fromall other causes-infections, violence, suicide, and soon-increased very little. The enormous increase in number ofdeaths among addicts shown in Figure 2 was attributed almostentirely to "overdose" deaths. The number of deaths throughout the United States attributedto heroin overdose from 1943 to date must total many thousands.In New York City it was reported that narcotics, chiefly heroin,were the leading cause of death in 1969 and 1970 in all malesaged fifteen to tbirty-five,8 including nonaddicts. This canproperly be characterized as an epidemic; the general alarm overthese deaths is thoroughly warranted. There are two relatively simple ways, however, to preventdeaths from heroin overdose. First, addicts can be warned to take only their usual dose ofheroin rather than risking death by taking too much. Second, even in cases where an addict takes a vastly excessivedose despite the warning, death usually can be readily prevented,for death from an overdose of opiates is ordinarily a slowprocess. "in cases of fatal poisoning with morphine, thetime of death may vary roughly from one to twelve hours." 9The first signs are lethargy and stupor, followed by prolongedcoma. If, after a period of hours, death does ensue, it isusually from respiratory failure. During the minutes or hoursfollowing the injection of a potentially fatal overdose, deathcan be readily forestalled by administering an effectiveantidote: a narcotic antagonist known as nalorpbine (Nalline).10Nalorphine brings a victim of opiate overdose out of his stuporor coma within a few minutes. Since there is plenty of time andsince nalorphine is stocked in pharmacies and hospital emergencyrooms throughout the country, the death of anyone due to heroinoverdose is very rarely excusable. But alas, the two standard precautions againstoverdose-warnings against taking too much and administration ofan antidote-are in fact wholly ineffective in the current crisis,for the thousands of deaths attributed to heroin overdose are notin fact due to heroin overdose at all. The evidence falls underthree major rubrics. (1) The deaths cannot be due to overdose. (2) There has never been any evidence that they are due tooverdose. (3) There has long been a plethora of evidence demonstratingthat they are not due to overdose. Let us review these three bodies of data in detail. (1) Why these deaths cannot be due to overdose. The amount ofmorphine or heroin required to kill a human being who is notaddicted to opiates remains in doubt but it is certainly manytimes the usual dose (10 milligrams) contained in a New York Citybag. "There is little accurate information," Drs. A. J.Reynolds and Lowell 0. Randall report in Morphine and AlliedDrugs (1967). "The figures that have been reported show widevariation." 12 This ignorance no doubt stems from the rarityof morphine or heroin overdose deaths. The amounts of morphine orheroin needed to kill a nonaddict have been variously estimatedat 120 milligrams (oral),13 200 milligrams, 14 250milligrams," and 350 milligrams16-though it has also beennoted that nonaddicts have survived much larger doses .17 Thebest experimental evidence comes from Drs. Lawrence Kolb and A.G. Du Mez of the United States Public Health Service; in 1931they demonstrated that it takes seven or eight milligrams ofheroin per kilogram of body weight, injected directly into avein, to kill unaddicted monkeys." On this basis, it wouldtake 500 milligrams or more (50 New York City bags full,administered in a single injection) to kill an unaddicted humanadult. Virtually all of the victims whose deaths are falsely labeledas due to heroin overdose, moreover, are addicts who have alreadydeveloped a tolerance for opiates-and even enormous amounts ofmorphine or heroin do not kill addicts. In the Philadelphia studyof the 1920s, for example, sonic addicts reported using 28 grains(1,680 milligrams) of morphine or heroin per day."' This isforty times the usual New York City daily dose. In onePhiladelphia experiment, 1,800 milligrams of morphine wereinjected into an addict over a two-and-a-half-hour period. Thisvast dose didn't even make him sick.20 Nor does a sudden increase in dosage produce significant sideeffects, much less death, among addicts. In the Philadelphiastudy, three addicts were given six, seven, and nine times theircustomary doses-"mainlined." Far from causing death,the drug "resulted in insignificant changes in the pulse andrespiration rates, electrocardiogram, chemical studies of theblood, and the behavior of the addict." 21 The addictsdidn't even become drowsy.22 Recent studies at the Rockefeller Hospital in New York City,under the direction of Dr. Vincent P. Dole, have confirmed theremarkable resistance of addicts to overdose. Addicts receivingdaily maintenance doses of 40 milligrams to 80 milligrams ofmethadone, a synthetic narcotic (see Chapter 14), were given asmuch as 200 milligrams of unadulterated heroin in a singleintravenous injection. They "bad no change in respiratorycenter or any other vital organs ." 23 (2) There is no evidence to show that deaths attributed tooverdose are in fact so caused. Whenever someone takes adrug-whether strychnine, a barbiturate, heroin, or some othersubstance-and then dies without other apparent cause, thesuspicion naturally arises that he may have taken too much of thedrug and and died of poisoning an overdose. To confirm or refutethis suspicion, an autopsy is performed, following awell-established series of procedures. If the drug was taken by mouth, for example, the stomachcontents and feces are analyzed in order to identify the drug andto determine whether an excessive amount is present. If the drugwas injected, the tissues surrounding the injection site aresimilarly analyzed. The blood, urine, and other body fluids andtissues can also be analyzed and the quantity of drug presentdetermined. Circumstantial evidence, too, can in some cases establish withreasonable certainly that someone has died of overdose. If aPatient fills a prescription for a hundred barbiturate tablets,for example, and is found dead the next morning with only a fewtablets left in the bottle, death from barbiturate poisoning is areasonable hypothesis to be explored. Similarly, if an addictdies after "shooting up," and friends who were presentreport that he injected many times his usual dose, thepossibility of death from heroin overdose deserves seriousconsideration. Further, in cases where an addict has died following aninjection of heroin, and the syringe he used is found nearby orstill sticking in his vein, the contents of the syringe can beexamined to determine whether it contained heroin of exceptionalstrength. And there are other ways of establishing at least aprima facie case for an overdose diagnosis. A conscientious search of the United States medical literaturethroughout recent decades has failed to turn up a singlescientific paper reporting that heroin overdose, as establishedby these or any other reasonable methods of determining overdose,is in fact a cause of death among American heroin addicts. Theevidence that addicts have been dying by the hundreds of heroinoverdose is simply nonexistent. At this point the mystery deepens. If even enormous doses ofheroin will not kill an addict, and if there exists no shred ofevidence to indicate that addicts or nonaddicts are in fact dyingof heroin overdose, why is the overdose myth almost universallyaccepted? The answer lies in the customs of the United Statescoroner-medical examiner system. Whenever anyone dies without a physician in attendance tocertify the cause of death, it is the duty of the local coroneror medical examiner to investigate, to have an autopsy performedif indicated, and then formally to determine and record the causeof death. The parents, spouse, or children of the dead person canthen ask the coroner for his findings. Newspaper reporterssimilarly rely on the coroner or medical examiner to explain anewsworthy death. No coroner, of course, wants to be in aposition of having to answer "I don't know" to suchqueries. A coroner is supposed to know-and if he doesn't know, heis supposed to find out. At some point in the history of heroin addiction, probably inthe early 1940s, the custom arose among coroners and medicalexaminers of labeling as "heroin overdose" all deathsamong heroin addicts the true cause of which could not bedetermined. These "overdose" determinations rested ononly two findings: (1) that the victim was a heroin addict who"shot up" prior to his death; and (2) that there was noevidence of suicide, violence, infection, or other naturalcause.24 No evidence that the victim had taken a large dose wasrequired to warrant a finding of death from overdose. Thiscurious custom continues today. Thus, in common coroner andmedical examiner parlance, "death from heroin overdose"is synonymous with "death from unknown causes afterinjecting heroin." During the 1940s, this custom of convenience did littleapparent harm. Most deaths among heroin addicts were due totetanus, bacterial endocarditis, tuberculosis, and otherinfections, to violence, or to suicide, and they were properlylabeled as such by coroners and medical examiners. It was only anoccasional death which baffled the medical examiner, and whichwas therefore signed out as due to "overdose." But,beginning about 1943, a strange new kind of death began to makeits appearance among heroin addicts .25 The cause of this newkind of death was not known, and remains unknown today-though itis now quite common. A striking feature of this mysterious new mode of death is itssuddenness. Instead of occurring after one or more hours oflethargy, stupor, and coma, as in true overdose cases, deathoccurs within a few minutes or less-perhaps only a few secondsafter the drug is injected. Indeed, 11 collapse and death are so rapid," one authorityreports, "that the syringe was found in the vein of thevictim or on the floor after having dropped out of the vein, andthe tourniquet was still in place on the arm ." 26 Thisexplains in part why nalorphine and other narcotic antagonists,highly effective antidotes in true opiate overdose cases, areuseless in the cases falsely labeled overdose. An even more striking feature of these mysterious deaths is asudden and massive flooding of the lungs with fluid: pulmonaryedema. In many cases it is not even necessary to open the lungsor X-ray them to find the edema; "an abundance of partlydried frothy white edema fluid [is seen] oozing from the nostrilsor mouth " 27 when the body is first found. Neither of thesefeatures suggests overdose-but since "overdose" hascome to be a synonym for "cause unknown," and since thecause of these sudden deaths characterized by lung edema isunknown, they are lumped under the "overdose" rubric. Not all of the deaths attributed to heroin overdose arenecessarily characterized by suddenness and by massive pulmonaryedema, but several studies have shown that a high proportion ofall "overdose" deaths share these twocharacteristics.28 (3) Evidence demonstrating that these deaths are not due tooverdose is plentiful. This evidence has been summarized in aseries of scientific papers, beginning in 1966, by New YorkCity's Chief Medical Examiner, Dr. Milton Helpern, and hisassociate, Deputy Chief Medical Examiner, Dr. Michael M. Baden.At a meeting of the Society for the Study of Addiction held inLondon in 1966, Dr. Helpern explained that the most conspicuousfeature of so-called "overdose" deaths is the massivepulmonary edema. When asked the cause of the edema, he cautiouslyresponded: This is a very interesting question. To my knowledge it is notknown why the pulmonary edema develops in these cases.... Thisreaction sometimes occurs with the intravenous injections ofmixtures, which as far as is known, do not contain any heroin,but possibly some other substance. The reaction does not appearto be specific. It does not seem to be peculiar to one substance,but it is most commonly seen with mixtures in which heroin is thesmallest component. In a paper published in the New York State Journal of Medicinefor September 15, 1966, Dr. Helpern again cast doubt on the myththat these deaths are due to overdose. "Formerly such acutedeaths were attributed to overdose of the heroin contained in thesample injected," Dr. Helpern reported-but he went on tocite several lines of evidence arguing against the overdosetheory: ... Unexpected acute deaths may occur in some addicts whoinject themselves with heroin mixtures even though others whotake the same usual . . . dose from the same sample at the sametime may suffer no dangerous effect. In some fatal acute cases,the rapidity and type of reaction do not suggest overdose alonebut rather an overwhelming shocklike process due to sensitivityto the injected material. The toxicologic examination of thetissues in such fatalities, where the reaction was so rapid thatthe syringe and needle were still in the vein of the victim whenthe body was found, demonstrated only the presence of alkaloid,not overdosage. In other acute deaths, in which the circumstancesand autopsy findings were positive, the toxicologist could noteven find any evidence of alkaloid in the tissues or body fluids.Thus, there does not appear to be any quantitative correlationbetween the acute fulminating lethal effect and the amount ofheroin taken. . . .30 Dr. Helpern's associate, Deputy Chief Medical Examiner Baden,went on to further discredit the already implausible overdosetheory at a joint meeting of two American Medical Associationdrug-dependency committees held in Palo Alto, California, inFebruary 1969. "The majority of deaths," Dr. Baden told the AMAphysicians, "are due to an acute reaction to the intravenousinjection of the heroin-quinine-sugar mixture. This type of deathis often referred to as an 'overdose,' which is a misnomer. Deathis not due to a pharmacological overdose in the vast majority ofcases." 31 At the same AMA committee meeting and at a meeting of theMedical Society of the County of New York, Dr. Baden cited sixseparate lines of evidence overturning the "heroinoverdose" theory. First, when the packets of heroin found near the bodies ofdead addicts are examined, they do not differ from ordinarypackets. "No qualitative or quantitative differences"are found.32 This rules out the possibility that some incrediblystupid processor may have filled a bag with pure heroin insteadof the usual adulterated mix. Second, when the syringes used by addicts immediately beforedying are examined, the mixture found in them does not containmore heroin than usual. Third, when the urine of addicts allegedly dead of overdose isanalyzed, there is no evidence of overdose. Fourth, the tissues surrounding the site of the fatalinjection show no signs of high heroin concentration. Fifth, neophytes unaccustomed to heroin rather than addictstolerant to opiates would be expected to be susceptible to deathfrom overdose. But "almost all of those dying" ofalleged overdose, Deputy Chief Medical Examiner Baden reported,"are long-term users." Sixth, again according to Dr. Baden, "addicts often'shoot' in a group, all using the same heroin supply, and rarelydoes more than one addict die at such a time." 33 These definitive refutations of the heroin overdose theoryshould, of course, have led to two prompt steps: a warning toaddicts that something other than overdose is causing thesehundreds of addict deaths annually -and an intensive search forthe true cause of the deaths. But neither of these steps has beentaken. Hence the news media go right on talking about"heroin overdose" deaths. "Death from acutereaction to heroin overdose" and other complicated phrasesare also used; these phrases similarly conceal the fact thatthese deaths are not due to overdose. How can the "heroin overdose" myth not only survivebut flourish even after these repeated scientific debunkings? Twostenographic transcripts provide an answer. The first is the transcript of a press conference held at theRockefeller University on October 27, 1969, in connection withthe Second National Conference on Methadone Treatment. In thecourse of his remarks to the assembled reporters, Deputy ChiefMedical Examiner Baden there discussed at some length a case ofwhat he described as an "addict who died of an overdose ofheroin." 34 The reporters present naturally referredthereafter to this death as a "heroin overdose" case. At the scientific meeting held in the same room on the sameday, however, Dr. Baden described the same death in quitedifferent terms. To the scientists he stated that the addict inquestion "died of acute reaction to injection of heroin, aso-called overdose." When even this description waschallenged by a fellow physician, who pointed out that addictsdon't die following even enormous doses,35 Dr. Baden went on toexplain that whenever I say 'overdose,' it is in quotationmarks." 36 The reporters, of course, could not see those invisiblequotation marks when they listened to Dr. Baden at his pressconferences and interviews. They quite naturally took himliterally-and continued to inform the public that addicts weredying of overdose.* Even Chief Medical Examiner Helpern eventually becameconvinced that the "heroin overdose" publicityemanating from his office was "dangerously wrong." Intestimony before the Select Committee on Crime of the UnitedStates House of Representatives on June 27, 1970, Dr. Helpernstated: A difficulty has been that people have considered these fatalreactions the result of overdose. Now, to some people thedesignation overdose means [taking] more than usual with theimplication that if you are careful of how much is taken there isno danger of anything other than the usual effect. Thisimpression which many addicts have is dangerously wrong. 38 Yet a full year after Dr. Helpern testified, neither he norDr. Baden nor anyone else had yet ventured to correct the"dangerously wrong" view that was being foisted on theNew York and national news media. Almost everyone who did notread Dr. Helpern's and Dr. Baden's papers in the medical journalsstill believed that heroin addicts by the hundreds were dying ofoverdose. Worse yet, nobody had as yet even begun to investigateseriously the crucial question: If these hundreds of addicts ayear aren't dying of overdose, what are they dying of? Fortunately, enough is already known to suggest some promisingdirections for immediate research. Most deaths from so-called overdose, as noted above, arecharacterized by suddenness and by pulmonary edema. No othercause of death-such as tetanus, bacterial endocarditis,hepatitis, or a knife or gunshot wound -is found. Inapproximately 60 percent of autopsies, a 1970 study indicates,there is also cerebral edema (accumulation of fluid in the brain)along with widespread fragmentation of the astrocytes(star-shaped cells) in the brain.39 A death with thesecharacteristics, occurring in a heroin addict, constitutes adramatic and readily identifiable syndrome which Dr. Helpern hascalled "acute fatal reaction to the intravenous injection ofcrude mixtures of heroin and other substances." We shallhere apply a less cumbersome label: "Syndrome X." 1 Thus in the New York Times for December 16, 1969, a reporterwas led to state without qualification: "About 800 addictsof all ages died this year from overdoses, according to Dr.Baden." 37 One clue to the true cause of Syndrome X is its initialappearance about 1943, its relative rarity for the next fewyears, and its recent rapid increase in frequency. The timesequence obviously suggests that the cause of Syndrome X must besome factor introduced about 1943 and affecting a vastlyincreased number of addicts during 1969 and 1970. Heroin clearlydoes not qualify; it was widely used long before 1943. Indeed, ahighly significant fact about Syndrome X is that it has becomemore and more frequent as the amount of heroin in the New YorkCity bag has gone down and down. These deaths are, if anything,associated with "underdose" rather than overdose. One theory sometimes advanced is that Syndrome X deaths arecaused by the quinine in the bag. Quinine was introduced as anadulterant of heroin sometime after 1939, when an epidemic ofmalaria spread by contaminated injection needles hit New YorkCity addicts 40 thus the time of introduction fits the Syndrome Xtimetable. Some addicts discovered that the quinine contributedto the sensation known as a "rush" immediately afterinjection. Heroin traffickers also discovered that the bittertaste of the quinine makes it impossible for addicts to gauge theconcentration of heroin in the bag by tasting the mixture. Forthese and possibly other reasons, quinine has remained a standardadulterant of New York City heroin ever since. Perhaps the first suggestion that quinine might be causing NewYork City's Syndrome X deaths came from Dr. F. E. Camps, theUnited Kingdom Home Office pathologist in charge of investigatingopiate deaths in England. At a conference of the Society for theStudy of Addiction held in London in September 1966 (which ChiefMedical Examiner Helpern attended), Dr. Camps stated: "Theonly comparable drug to heroin which causes rapid death withpulmonary oedema is quinine. In this case patients start off withdiscomfort in their chest, and then rapidly die. It isconceivable that this could have some relation to [New York City]heroin deaths ." 41 At the same conference an American pathologist, the late Dr.Rudolph J. Muelling of the University of Kentucky Medical School,added that a type of lung lesion similar to that found inSyndrome X deaths "is found to occur when one studies purequinine cases. In the United States this kind of lesion has beenfound in several nurses attempting to induce abortions onthemselves. They take the quinine orally and the condition comeson quite rapidly. The patients die of quinine alone." 42 A second possible cause of Syndrome X deaths can best beillustrated by two examples. One is the case of "C. G.," a heroin addict longaccustomed to mainlining his drug, who one day got drunk, tookhis "customary injection of heroin and collapsed shortlythereafter." Subsequent X-rays showed lung edema.43 Another is the case of a heroin addict whose death wasrecently reported by Dr. George R. Gay and his associates at theHaight-Ashbury Medical Clinic, San Francisco. This addict first"shot some reds" (that is, barbiturates) and then"fixed" with heroin following the barbiturates. He diedof what was diagnosed as "overdose of heroin ." 44 Cases such as these have given rise to the question whetherSyndrome X deaths may result from injecting heroin (with orwithout quinine) into a body already laden with acentral-nervous-system depressant such as alcohol or abarbiturate. Addicts themselves would seem to deserve credit for firstsuspecting that so-called "heroin overdose" deathsmight in fact result from the combined action of alcohol andheroin. Back in 1958, a team headed by Dr. Ray E. Trussell andMr. Harold Alksne interviewed more than 200 New York Cityaddicts-alumni of the Riverside Hospital addiction treatmentprogram (see Chapter 10). In this as in other pre-1960 studies,few addicts drank alcohol while on heroin, and they did not drinkmuch. When asked why, the addicts commonly gave two reasons. One was that the effect of alcohol is "offensive" toa man on heroin. "The narcotic alone has an analgesic effectwhich tends to quiet the individual. Alcohol, on the other hand... has the capacity to agitate the individual in hisrelationships with other people. This generally is offensive tothe addict." 45 The other reason given by addicts in 1958 for not drinkingwhile on heroin is the first extant clue to the possiblerelationship between alcohol and death from "heroinoverdose." Addicts, the Trussell-Alksne team noted,"believe that the use of narcotics and alcohol incombination is dangerous and might possibly lead to the death ofan individual." 46 By the 1960s, this awareness of thehazard of shooting heroin while drunk had disappeared from theaddict scene. Addicts, like others, were evidently convinced bythe official announcements that those deaths were indeed due toheroin overdose. If the theory is sound that even an ordinary dose of an opiateinjected while drunk can produce death, then death could occurwhen an ordinary drunk who is not addicted is brought into ahospital emergency room with a painful injury and is given aroutine (10 milligram) injection of morphine to ease his pain.Drs. William B. Deichmann and Horace W. Gerarde report in theirToxicology of Drugs and Chemicals (1969 edition) that death mayin fact occur under such conditions. "The ordinary safe therapeutic dose of morphine,"they warn, in italics, in their textbook, "may be fatal topersons who have been drinking alcoholic beverages. Morphine intherapeutic doses [similar to the doses commonly injected byaddicts] resulted in fatalities in individuals whose bloodalcohol levels ranged from 0.22 to 0.27%. Morphine is alsosynergistic with barbiturates and related drugs." 47 Thusthe hazard of death from shooting an opiate while drunk onalcohol or a barbiturate is familiar to some toxicologists eventhough it has been ignored by authorities on drug addiction-andby coroners and medical examiners-through the years. If this alcohol-heroin and barbiturate-heroin explanation iscorrect, the fact is of the utmost practical importance-forhundreds of deaths a year might be prevented by warning addictsnot to shoot heroin while drunk on alcohol or barbiturates. The alcohol-barbiturate hypothesis fits the Syndrome X timeschedule. Throughout the nineteenth century and well into thetwentieth, opiate addicts were known for their dislike of alcoholwhile on opiates. As noted earlier, they turned to alcohol onlywhen deprived of their opiate supply or when trying to "kickthe habit." This remains generally true today; an addictrarely drinks while on heroin. He often drinks, however, when hisheroin supply runs out and withdrawal symptoms set in. DuringWorld War 11, many heroin addicts were abruptly deprived of theirheroin supply for longer or shorter periods. If some of themturned to alcohol, then connected with a fresh heroin supply and"shot up" while still drunk, the first few identifiedSyndrome X deaths might have occurred. The recent sharp increasein Syndrome X deaths might similarly be explained by an increasedtendency to alternate alcohol or barbiturates with heroin as aresult of high heroin prices. As the amount of heroin in the NewYork City bag went down and down, according to this theory, moreand more addicts got drunk-and died of Syndrome X following theirnext "fix." Evidence in recent years for the use of alcohol by addictsshortly before their death has been assembled from the New YorkCity files by Drs. Jane McCusker and Charles E. Cherubin. Theyreviewed 588 city toxicology reports found in the files onaddicts who died in 1967. In 549 of these cases, tests foralcohol had been run-and in 43 percent of the cases tested,alcohol was in fact found .48 (Barbiturates were not reportedon.) Their findings led Drs. McCusker and Cherubin to suggestthat further research be promptly launched into the possible roleof alcohol and the barbiturates in so-called "heroinoverdose" cases. The same suggestion has been tentatively made by Dr. Gay ofthe Haight-Ashbury Medical Clinic. Thirty-seven percent of theaddicts attending the clinic, Dr. Gay states, report usingbarbiturates "for sedation and sleep" when heroinwithdrawal symptoms set in; and 24 percent report using alcoholsimilarly.49 Thus the stage is set for shooting heroin whiledrunk on one or the other-and, perhaps, for sudden death fromoverdose." Two of the most publicized "overdose deaths" of1970, Dr. Gay informed the National Heroin Conference in June1971, fit precisely this pattern. These were the deaths of therock musician Jimi Hendrix and the singer Janis Joplin. Hendrixwas known to use both alcohol and barbiturates-and possibly alsoheroin. Janis Joplin "drank [alcohol] like an F. ScottFitzgerald legend," Dr. Gay adds-and also used narcotics.50The magazine Time reported on October 19, 1970, shortly afterJanis Joplin's death: The quart bottle of Southern Comfort [whiskey] that she heldaloft onstage was at once a symbol of her load and a way oflightening it. As she emptied the bottle, she grew happier, moreradiant, and more freaked out.... Last week, on a day that superficially at least seemed to beless lonely than most, Janis Joplin died on the lowest andsaddest of notes. Returning to her Hollywood motel room after alate-night recording session and some hard drinking with friendsat a nearby bar, she apparently filled a hypodermic needle withheroin and shot it into her left arm. The injection killed her.51 Janis Joplin's death, of course, was popularly attributed to"heroin overdose." If the alcohol-barbiturate-herointheory is correct, her fatal injection of heroin while drunk onalcohol was the prototype of many other deaths similarlymislabeled "overdose." The British experience with deaths attributed to heroinoverdose is consistent with the alcohol-barbiturate hypothesis.Dr. Ramon Gardner of the Bethlem Royal Hospital and MaudsleyHospital in London studied the records of 170 deaths known tohave occurred among addicts in Britain during the five-yearperiod 1965 through 1969. Twenty of these deaths were deemedsuicides, 24 were traceable to infections, 12 were from naturalcauses, 11 were drownings, falls, murders, or other accidents,and 6 occurred during treatment (of which two followed abruptwithdrawal of narcotics when the addicts were imprisoned). Eightmore were due to overdose of barbiturates or other nonopiatedrugs. This left a maximum of 89 mysterious deaths out of 170which might have been caused by accidental opiate overdose-or bysomething else.52 Dr. Gardner then went on to study in more detail 47 of thesedeaths possibly due to heroin overdose. In a number of cases, hefound that the addicts bad been confined in a hospital, prison,or detention center or had for other reasons been abstinent fromopiates for a week or longer, and had thus lost at least aportion of their tolerance for opiates. They had then injected anopiate-some of them on the day of discharge, others within thenext day or two. Thus these deaths might have been due tooverdose-though evidence was lacking that the victims had in facttaken fatally large doses. (Merely doubling or quadrupling thedose, it will be recalled, will not kill even nonaddicts.) But in at least 21 of the 47 cases, there had been nowithdrawal from opiates prior to death, so that tolerance had notbeen lost. And in some cases, the dose preceding death was sosmall-as little as 20 or 30 milligrams of heroin, for example-asto establish beyond question that overdose was not the cause .53 These British deaths, accordingly, remain mysterious, likedeaths from Syndrome X in the United States. Among several likelyexplanations, Dr. Gardner himself noted, is the possibility thatthese addicts may have taken some other drug, perhaps acentral-nervous-system depressant, at the same time. Since thereis no quinine in British opiates, that drug must be exonerated inthe British deaths. Another British drug authority adds that in Britain as in theUnited States, "many of those who die, in fact, have takenbarbiturates as well [as opiates] at the same time." 54 It might prove absurdly easy to confirm thealcohol-barbiturate hypothesis. All that might be necessary wouldbe to addict a few monkeys or other primates to heroin,intoxicate them on alcohol or barbiturates, and then injectmodest doses of heroin. If the monkeys drop dead of Syndrome X, awarning against shooting heroin while drunk on alcohol orbarbiturates might save many hundreds of lives a year throughoutthe world. Several other possible explanations of Syndrome X deaths havebeen offered. No theory has yet been proved. Worse yet, no theoryhas ever been experimentally tested. The time has surely come todetermine the cause (or causes) of Syndrome X and bring to aclose this tragic series of deaths. If 800 respectable citizensinstead of heroin addicts had dropped dead in New York City of amysterious syndrome in 1970, a gargantuan research program wouldno doubt have been promptly launched. If the Syndrome X deaths are due to quinine or to any otheradulterant or contaminant in the bag, the responsibility clearlyrests with the American heroin black market for selling unsafemixes. If the cause of these deaths is the shooting of heroinwhile drunk on alcohol or barbiturates, the black-marketdistribution system remains at least indirectly responsible, forit is largely the high cost of black-market heroin that makesheroin users turn to alcohol and barbiturates on occasion-andthus, perhaps, to risk death from Syndrome X. The two steps which must now be taken are (1) to stop sweepingthese mysterious deaths under the carpet by falsely labeling them"overdose" and (2) to launch an intensive clinical andexperimental search for what is in fact killing these addicts. Contents | Feedback | Search DRCNet Library | Schaffer Library | Major Studies WT01-B31-56IA031-000652-B043-251http://206.61.184.43:80/schaffer/library/studies/cu/cu44.htm 206.61.184.43 19970122131231 text/html 42518HTTP/1.0 200 OKDate: Wednesday, 22-Jan-97 13:12:19 GMTServer: WebSitePro/1.1f (S/N wpo-0deb)Allow-ranges: bytesContent-type: text/htmlLast-modified: Wednesday, 01-Jan-97 22:44:55 GMTContent-length: 42299 How To Launch a Nationwide Drug Menace Contents | Feedback | Search DRCNet Library | Schaffer Library | Major Studies The Consumers Union Report on Licit and IllicitDrugs 44. How to launch a nationwide drug menace During the 1960s, Dr. Ralph M. Susman of the United StatesDepartment of Health, Education, and Welfare, and his associateLenore R. Kupperstein, prepared a "Bibliography on theInhalation of Glue Fumes and Other Toxic Vapors," which theypublished in the Spring 1968 issue of the International Journalof the Addictions. Despite diligent search, the earliestreferences to glue-sniffing in either the medical or the popularliterature that they were able to find dated from 1959.1 Asimilarly thorough search in the course of preparing thisConsumers Union Report has turned up no earlier mention ofglue-sniffing. Other documented studies of glue-sniffing aresimilarly void of references earlier than 1959. Thus, while it islikely that children (and adults as well) sniffed glue onoccasion before 1959, the practice either went unobserved or,more probably, was not deemed worthy of recording. The firstknown mentions of glue-sniffing in print date from 1959 andconcern the arrest for sniffing glue of children in Tucson,Arizona, Pueblo, Colorado, and perhaps other Western cities. Lawsagainst sniffing glue or sniffing anything else, of course, didnot yet exist. Accounts of these remarkable arrests reachedDenver, where two reporters investigated. Their account ofglue-sniffing-the first full description in the mass media thathas yet turned up-appeared in Empire, the Sunday magazinesupplement of the Denver Post, on August 2, 1959. The articlereported: "Police in Pueblo, Colo. and several other citiesin the West and Midwest report that juveniles seeking a quickbang and a mild jag spread liquid glue on the palms of theirhands, then cup their hands over their mouth and nose and inhaledeeply." 2 Alerted by these police actions in other cities,the two reporters interviewed Denver police officers concernedwith juvenile problems, and other authorities, to learn aboutglue-sniffing in Denver. Apparently Denver bad no cases toreport, for the story led off with an account of a childaccidentally affected by glue fumes in a poorly-ventilatedbasement room; and an expert the two reporters interviewed-Dr.Samuel Johnson, director of Denver's Poison ControlCenter-similarly warned against using quick-drying glue in a roomwith the windows closed, lest intoxication accidentally result.Dr. Johnson was on the whole reassuring about the glue"menace." If a person is affected by the fumes, hesaid, he need only go out and breathe fresh air to recover.Permanent injury is possible only if the exposure is prolongedand heavy-as when a worker in a glue factory breathes the stuffall day long every day. Yet the pioneer Denver story, setting apattern soon to be followed by newspapers and magazinesthroughout the country, carried a scare headline: SOME GLUES ARE DANGEROUS Heavy Inhalation Can Cause Anemia orBrain Damage This and subsequent warnings in the mass media wereall based on the results of earlier industrial studies that, asnoted above, could not be justifiably applied to theglue-sniffing fad. The newspaper story also explained that oneway to inhale glue is to soak a handkerchief with glue and holdit over the mouth and nose." A photograph accompanying thearticle showed a young man demonstrating how the glue-soakedhandkerchief should be held. Interesting results were promised ifthe glue were sniffed as directed: "The first effect ofbreathing the undiluted fumes is dizziness, followed bydrowsiness. There is a feeling of suspension of reality. Laterthere is lack of coordination of muscle and mind." In aword, it was like getting drunk. The effects of this newspaperarticle, published August 2, 1959-and no doubt of other similararticles and broadcasts in other Denver mass mediathereafter-were visible by June 1960, when Denver police reportedthat during the past six or eight months they had investigatedsome 50 cases of glue-sniffing. In addition to these 50 cases, ofcourse, there were no doubt many hundreds of others which had notcome to the attention of the police. Denver was thus experiencingwhat-so far as the available literature reveals-was the earliestof many similar local glue-sniffing epidemics throughout thecountry. Denver police met the new peril in the usual way-byescalating the warnings. In August 1959, Denver glue-sniffers hadbeen threatened merely with anemia and brain damage. In June 1960a spokesman for Denver's juvenile Police Bureau was quoted assaying: "This practice is extremely dangerous, and a kid candie from it if he gets too much." A second police spokesmanadded that "inhaling large quantities of the cement fumescan lead to permanent injury of the respiratory system and couldcause death." And the head of the Police Crime Laboratorywarned: "I'm afraid some kid will get hold of too much ofthe stuff and we'll have a fatal case on our hands." 3 InOctober 1961 a Denver police lieutenant was quoted as explainingthat glue fumes "diminish the oxygen supply to theblood" and "cause severe brain damage and death ."4 A representative in the state legislature warned thatglue-sniffing "can result in permanent damage to the brain." 5 In April 1962Denver youngsters were warned that glue-sniffing causes"stimulation of the central nervous system, followed bydepression and often convulsions," and that "it canaffect the respiratory tract, mucous membranes, skin, liver,kidneys, heart and blood-depending on what type of glue isused." 6 The headline over the June 1960 story presented thetwo central themes which were later to characterizeanti-glue-sniffing propaganda in other cities as well: COULD BE FATAL Plane Glue Gives Kids a Kick Far from ending Denver's glue-sniffing epidemic, however,these warnings were followed by a further spread of the epidemic.The warnings seemed to function as lures. By October 23, 1961,the chief probation officer of the Denver juvenile Court was ableto announce: "We are averaging about 30 boys a month now onthis glue-sniffing problem." Worse yet, he added, the customwas spreading from the high schools into the junior highs and"even into the grade schools." I A police spokesmansimilarly announced that glue-sniffing, unknown 26 monthsearlier, was now "a major problem among juveniles inDenver." He noted that 278 arrests were made forglue-sniffing in 1961, as compared with only 95 in 1960.8 Nor wasthe problem limited to Denver. Tom Adams, director of the statereform school in Golden, Colorado, was quoted in October 1961:"Right now I have about 50 boys here because of thisglue-sniffing." 9 Since no city or state law againstglue-sniffing had yet been passed, the reporter who covered thestory felt called upon to explain how 278 arrests could be madein 1961 for glue-sniffing and how 50 children could beincarcerated in a reform school for the same offense. Hisexplanation, however, did not entirely clarify the mystery. Allhe could say was that "the youths are charged under juveniledelinquency procedures when they are found sniffing glue." Apolice spokesman added a detail: the 278 Denver arrests forglue-sniffing were classed for statistical purposes as"drunkenness arrests."' Throughout 1960 and 1961,Denver police made further headlines by periodic raids onglue-sniffers. A typical 1961 example was headed: * Readers should not be surprised at this development, for asubstantial proportion of arrests and incarcerations of juvenilesthroughout the country are for actions which are not prohibitedby any law and which would not be crimes if indulged in byadults. (See Ruth and Edward Brecher, The Delinquent and the Law,Public Affairs Pamphlet No. 337 [New York: Public AffairsPamphlets, 1962]; also, The Challenge of Crime in a Free Society,A Report by the President's Commission on Law Enforcement andAdministration of Justice [New York: Avon Books 1968], . 227-228. 7 DENVER YOUTHS ARRESTED FOR DEADLY "GLUE-SNIFFING"The story began: Seven Denver teenagers were arrested over the weekend for"glue-sniffing," a new thrill-seeking activity thatjuvenile authorities label "extremely dangerous." Fiveof the boys, four of them 16 and the other 17, are in City jail.Two others, 13 and 14, were lodged in juvenile Hall. All sevenwere arrested Sunday near the Curtis Park Recreation Center, 50thand Curtis Sts., by Patrolmen Dale Nelson and Donald Smith.10 Thus the broad pattern was established-the dramatic policeraids and the imprisonment of children and teenagers, accompaniedby dire warnings of physical and psychological damage. The nextelement in the pattern was soon added: proposals for specificantiglue legislation. On December 8, 1961, just six weeks afterthe sensational Curtis Park police raid, the Denver papersreported that State Representative Ben Klein, a former probationofficer, would "propose to the January [1962] session of theColorado Legislature three new laws to deter youngsters fromsniffing airplane glue. . . ." 11 Denver youngsters no doubtnoted the order of events: arrests and jailings first,legislation later-a sequence unlikely to encourage respect forlaw. In support of his three new laws, Representative Kleinquoted Denver's juvenile Court judge Philip Gilliam as sayingthat he considered gluesniffing to be now "the Number Ijuvenile problem in the metropolitan area." Glue-sniffinghad achieved this preeminence within two and a half years afterthe two writers in Empire had found no evidence of gluesniffingin Denver. Representative Klein's three laws would make it anoffense (1) to sell glue to minors without parental consent, (2)to drive a car while under the influence of glue, or (3) to sniffglue. This last proposed offense was remarkable-for, as noted inPart 1, it is not an offense to use even such drugs as heroin, inDenver or elsewhere in the United States. Representative Kleinsaid his legislation would also require retailers "to keep aregistry of sales . . . similar to the registry of sales ofnarcotics drugs." Thus glue-sniffing was more or less subtlylinked with heroin. just as arrests for glue-sniffing werefollowed by laws against gluesniffing, so medical warnings werefollowed by medical studies designed to justify the warnings. Astudy undertaken by Dr. Oliver Massengale, director of theAdolescent Clinic at the University of Colorado Medical Center,and Dr. Helen Glaser, assistant professor of pediatrics at theuniversity, was no doubt the first scientific research on therecreational aspects of glue-sniffing in the history of themedical sciences. Dr. Massengale explained that he became interested inglue-sniffing way back in 1960, when early newspaper reports ofglue-sniffing hazards had appeared. A mother almost in tears, herecalled, had brought her son to his office. "He's sniffingglue," the mother declared. "You've got to stop himbefore he dies." A reporter for a Denver paper, in aninterview with Drs. Massengale and Glaser published April 29,1962, cited these researchers as authority for the statement thatsome types of plastic cement "may cause damage to the liver,kidneys and brain." 12 When the full text of theGlaser-Massengale study was published in the Journal of theAmerican Medical Association for July 28, 1962, however, certaindetails were added that the newspaper interview had neglected.Cases of damage from glue all involved either the swallowing ofsubstantial amounts or else the continuous dayafter-day exposureto high concentrations among workers in industrial plants."Although a great deal of concern about the ill effects ofthis practice is expressed by parents, school personnel, juvenileauthorities, and the children themselves," the medicalexperts noted in the medical publication, "very little isactually known about possible damage to organ systems resultingfrom deliberate inhalation of cement vapors. Many children sharethe so far unsubstantiated belief that glue-sniffing producesinsanity and death, and we know of one case in which glue wasfirst used by an adolescent boy in an attempt to commitsuicide." 13 Drs. Glaser and Massengale then presented sixcases of juvenile Denver glue-sniffers. In none of them was anyphysical damage attributable to glue-sniffing; and in none ofthem was glue-sniffing the source of the child's psychologicalproblems. Case Number 1, for example, concerned aneleven-year-old boy; "his mother worked at night; hisparents were separated; and he had not seen his father for sixyears." The mother of Case Number 2 "was an alcoholicand was possibly also psychotic. The parents were separated, andthe patient lived in a foster home, where he was unhappy.... Hewas ... depressed, anxious, and fearful, and longing foraffectional security. Seeing the world as hostile andpain-inflicting, he tended to withdraw into passive, immatureforms of behavior." Patient Number 3 was a fourteen-year-oldwhose father had died when he was five, "and he had beentaken out of the custody of his alcoholic mother but subsequentlyhad been returned to her. A few months before being seen in theclinic the boy bad spent eight months in a reformatory because ofstealing." Case Number 5 was the boy who tried to commitsuicide by sniffing glue. "This boy's father, possiblyacting out of a cultural pattern of insecurity and fear, was verystrict and rigid and was looked upon by the patient as a tyrant.His mother was a weak, inadequate person who sided with her son but was unable to rebel againsther husband in his behalf." Case Number 6 was afifteen-year-old; "the patient's father, who had been verystrict and punitive, had died about six months before, and themother was finding her son increasingly unmanageable anddestructive. This boy had been in trouble even before hisfather's death because of writing obscenities in school books,running away, and joy-riding." 14 In all cases, the child'sproblems and disturbances had antedated the glue-sniffing. justwhat good was accomplished by arresting and incarcerating thesetroubled youngsters for sniffing glue did not appear in thestudy. It should be noted, moreover, that these were not typicalglue-sniffers. Rather they were typical of the small subsample ofglue-sniffers who were caught at it-arrested by the police andreferred to the university's adolescent clinic. TheGlaser-Massengale paper in the Journal of the American MedicalAssociation confirmed the incredible speed with whichglue-sniffing had spread following the first accounts in the massmedia: "Glue sniffing, almost unheard of two years ago, hasbecome a serious threat in some communities. In the Denver areait is considered by responsible juvenile authorities to be themost serious problem they face currently in working with knowndelinquents and other youngsters brought to the attention of thecourt because of violations of the law."' The 130 Denverchildren arrested in the two-year period for glue-sniffing"ranged in age from 7 through 17, with a mean age of 13years, and all but 6 were boys."" Eighty percent badSpanish surnames; this high incidence was perhaps due as much tothe arresting practices of the police as to the frequency ofglue-sniffing among those children. Glue-sniffing children inmiddle-class white neighborhoods are customarily seen bypediatricians in private practice. The remainder of the Denverstory need here be only briefly summarized through selectednewspaper items:  January 18, 1965: Legislation introduced to banglue-sniffing."  March 21, 1965: juvenile court laysplans for preventive approach to glue-sniffing."' * April22, 1965: Adams County sheriff announces breakup of juvenileglue-sniffing activities with arrest of nineteen-year-old girl.18* April 29, 1965: Thirteen-year-old leader of glue-sniffing gangadmits burglaries19 * June 25, 1965: Glue-sniffing chargesagainst boy will be dismissed if he enlists in armed servicesbefore September 13 .20 * As noted above, however, there was asyet no law to be violated. * July 2, 1965: United States Department of Health, Education,and Welfare makes $85,500 grant to finance study of glue-sniffingin Denver.21 * January 11, 1966: Thirteen-year-old resident ofcounty receiving home hangs himself after being scolded forsniffing glue.22 a May 18, 1966: Twenty-one-year-old jailed afteradmitting he burglarized drugstore to get glue to sniff.23 * June10, 1966: Three with Spanish surnames sentenced to 30 days eachin County jail after pleading guilty to sniffing glue .24 *October 30, 1966: An additional $44,923 HEW grant is made tostudy glue-sniffing in Denver . . . . 25 While Denver was in all probability the first city in theworld to suffer a major glue-sniffing epidemic, other cities soonfollowed Denver's example. In New York City, for example, the NewYork Times ran a story about glue-sniffing on October 6, 1961:"L.I. Youths Inhale Glue in Model Kits For NarcoticEffect." 26 Other New York area newspapersand no doubt radioand television stations as well-ran similar stories. As inDenver, the New York stories stressed the hazards ofglue-sniffing. The initial New York Times story, after statingthat youngsters sniff glue to "obtain a feeling of elationsimilar to that of narcotics," and that youngsters who sniffglue are "found in seemingly drunken stupors," went onto cite the Nassau County Health Department as authority for thewarning that toluene, the organic solvent most commonly used inmodel airplane glue, "dulls the brain when it is inhaled andcould kill a person. It can cause damage to the liver and bonemarrow if it is taken in small repeated doses. The chemical hasan irritating effect on the lungs and can cause pain, vomiting,headaches, confusion, and ultimately coma. It can also cause theheart to beat irregularly and can result in transient euphoria.The lethal dose is unknown. No fatalities have beenrecorded." These warnings, like the earlier Denver warnings,seemed to be highly effective lures. Within fifteen months, NewYork City police had made 778 arrests for glue-sniffing 27 andthe city authorities were seriously considering proposals to makeglue-sniffing illegal. In 1963, New York City arrests totaled2,003.28 Many tens of thousands of others, of course, were nodoubt sniffing glue by then without coming to the attention ofthe police. Salt Lake City was another city where local newsmedia publicized glue-sniffing early, and where the glue-sniffingepidemic had an early start. Twelve boys, aged fourteen toeighteen, were apprehended there for glue-sniffing andinterviewed in 1962; the interviews were of particularsignificance in revealing the way in which glue-sniffing, which afew years earlier was only one of a number of forms of sniffing,had become the prime form of sniffing. "Seven of the boysbad previously inhaled the fumes of other substances, notably thefumes of gasoline (6 boys), ether, and nasal inhalers (one each), and one of these boys had beensmoking marijuana." Glue-sniffing had recently, however, faroutstripped the other sniffings, "to the extent that in onesmall town the practice was considered virtually universal amongboys. Girls, as yet, have not been widely involved." 29Marijuana smoking did not catch up with glue-sniffing amongchildren until a major antimarijuana campaign was launched alittle later. The glue interests contributed notably to expandingthe anti-gluesniffing campaign from a local to a nationwidephenomenon. As early as 1962 the Hobby Industry Association ofAmerica, representing 1,100 industry members, announced that itwas spending $250,000 a year to combat glue-sniffing. "Tohelp inform communities about the sniffing problem," theWall Street Journal announced on its front page on December 7,1962, "the Hobby Industry Association has produced a15-minute color film 'The Scent of Danger,' which it soon willrelease to local civic groups. The film describes the harm doneby glue sniffing and mentions other products, such as cleaningfluid and nail polish, which also contain solvents that can causeintoxication. It recommends that communities make it illegal tosniff any substance with an intoxicating effect." 30 Forthis the hobby industry won rewards of two kinds-public approvalfor its dedication to the anti-glue-sniffing campaign, and amarked rise in glue sales during the subsequent years. The earlyanti-glue-sniffing laws were remarkable in several respects. Oneof the first of them-perhaps the very first-was Ordinance Number1722, passed by the City of Anaheim, California, on June 6, 1962.This ordinance made it illegal for any person to "inhale,breathe, or drink any compound, liquid, chemical, or anysubstance known as glue, adhesive cement, mucilage, dope, orother material or substance or combination thereof, with theintention of becoming intoxicated, elated, dazed, paralyzed,irrational or in any manner changing, distorting or disturbingthe eyesight, thinking process, balance, or coordination of suchperson ." 31 Whiskey drinking was no doubt illegal underthis ordinance. A Maryland law enacted a little later was notquite so broad; this statute made it "unlawful for anyperson under twenty-one years of age to deliberately smell orinhale such excessive quantities of any narcotics, drugs, or anyother noxious substances or chemicals containing any ketones,aldehydes, organic acetates, ether, chlorinated hydrocarbons orany other substances containing solvents releasing toxic vapors,as cause conditions of intoxication, inebriation, excitement,stupefaction, or dulling of the brain and nervous system. . . .Any person violating this section will be guilty of a misdemeanorand upon conviction thereof shall be fined . . . . 32 Whyglue-sniffing by adults aged twenty-one or older was exemptedfrom the Maryland law is not apparent. Other cities and states passed laws restricting the sale ofglue in various ways-though this approach was opposed by theHobby Industry Association. At the beginning of 1968 theKupperstein-Susman bibliography listed 13 states and 29 countiesand municipalities that had already passed glue-sniffing laws;additional states, counties, and municipalities had such lawsunder consideration. The national news media contributed notablyto the glue-sniffing campaign. In its issue of February 16, 1962,for example, the weekly news magazine Time carried an item headed"The New Kick," which declared: "The newest kickis glue-sniffing. A 14-year-old sniffer explains: 'You take atube of plastic glue, the kind squares use to make modelairplanes, and you squeeze it all out in a handkerchief, see.Then you roll up the handkerchief into a sort of tube, put theend in your mouth and breathe through it. It's simple and it'scheap. It's quick, too. Man! , " 33 As is customary, theinformation about how to get high on glue was accompanied in Timeby ritual warnings-much as crime movies of the era, afterglorifying the heroic criminals, ended with their tragic deaths.Time quoted Dr. Alan K. Done, director of Salt Lake City's PoisonControl Center, as saying: "I have found definite evidenceof effects on the kidneys from glue sniffing. It is too soon toknow whether this effect is temporary or permanent damage ."34 Neither Time nor the other media, however, publicized thefindings of Dr. Massengale and his Denver associates indicatingthat glue-sniffing did not produce kidney damage in Denver.Newsweek followed on August 13, 1962, with a story entitled"The New Addicts." It began: You're in outer space. You're Superman. You're floating inair, seeing double, riding next to God. It's Kicksville. Arethese the fantasies of narcotics addicts on a pop? No. Moredisturbingly, these hopped-up reactions are those of teenagershooked on goofballs, model airplane glue, and cough medicine.Across the nation, police last week reported case after case ofthis alarming trend.35 In Miami, Newsweek noted, "a 12-year-old boy, discoveredsniffing airplane glue by his father, snatched up a knife andthreatened to kill him." A police officer with the Miamijuvenile Bureau was then quoted as commenting: "It's commonfor the boys who sniff glue to become belligerent. They arewilling to take on a policeman twice their size." AndNewsweek added: "Glue sniffers-while not physiologicallyaddictedcan do equal damage to their systems. Some of thelong-term effects [include] burned-out nose membranes, liverdamage, perforations of the gall bladder, destruction of bonemarrow, blindness, and possible death. But," Newsweekcogently went on, "this threat doesn't deter youngsters fromsqueezing up to five tubes of glue daily into a paper bag andbreathing the fumes ." 36 Consumer Reports, the magazine ofConsumers Union, also ran a warning against glue-sniffing-a bitmore restrained than the othersin January 1963. "Althoughthere is as yet no documented evidence . . . " the ConsumerReports article cautiously noted, "CU's medical consultantsare convinced that the inhalation of sufficient solvent vapors toproduce the mental effects the sniffers seek probably will alsoproduce damage to the liver, kidneys, respiratory organs, andpossibly other organs as well." 37 Even the Federal Bureauof Investigation took a hand in the anti-gluesniffing campaign.Its FBI Law Enforcement Bulletin for October 1965 carried anarticle by Dr. Jacob Sokol, chief physician for the Los AngelesCounty Probation Department, entitled "A Sniff ofDeath." The tenor of the article was summarized in thesubhead: "Glue-sniffing-in all its horrifying and alarmingramifications, mentally, physically, and medically -is discussedby Dr. Sokol in plain, lay language. His report should be of theutmost interest to law enforcement officers, parents, teachers,civic leaders, and all persons concerned with the welfare andhealth of young people ." 38 The FBI Bulletin article,moreover, cited a new argument by Dr. Sokol againstglue-sniffing: Glue sniffers have described to me bow a number of children,boys and girls, meet in unoccupied houses where they sniff gluetogether and later have sexual relations-both homosexual andheterosexual. To my knowledge this practice has not, however,come to the attention of law enforcement agencies. Recently,while conversing with deputy probation officers, I have beeninformed that several episodes of homosexual relations haveoccurred between adults and children under the influence of glue.Some of these sexual perverts are encouraging the children tosniff glue with the intensions of having homosexual relationswith them." just where the "sexual perverts" got this idea ofgiving children glue was not discussed; perhaps it was fromreading the anti-glue-sniffing campaigns in the mass media. Toend the glue menace, the FBI Bulletin article recommended sevenmeasures, including the following: "I. We should arousepublic opinion as to the dangers of this practice.... "7.Legislation should be passed which would prohibit the sale ofglue containing certain toxic chemicals to persons under 21 yearsof age." 40 One side effect of the anti-glue-sniffingcampaign, which continued throughout the 1960s, calls for specialmention. The campaign produced subtle changes in the relations ofparents and teachers to children. A child was now a suspect to bespied upon lest he secretly be sniffing glue. Health departmentsand other authoritative agencies encouraged this espionage, and listed the symptoms adults should be on thealert for: "Parents suspecting or told that their childrenhave deliberately sniffed glue should take them to a doctorwithout delay. "Schoolteachers should note irritability,inattentiveness, sleeping or loss of consciousness as symptoms ofglue sniffing." 41 The one voice of reason and common senseamid the near-hysterical concern with glue-sniffing was found inthe Verhulst-Crotty bulletin issued by the National Clearinghousefor Poison Control Centers, cited earlier. Summing up theevidence from the studies of glue-sniffers reviewed by theauthors, the bulletin noted: By speculation, projection, and imagination, one can ... buildup quite a case for the potential hazards of the repeatedinhalation of organic solvents such as those used in plasticcements. It behooves us, however, to ascertain facts in thisregard. [One expert] inferred from his contact with a number ofboys who practice glue-sniffing that the boys could and wouldgive up the practice readily if they were convinced it wasdangerous. At the same time, however, it became evident that thetransparent misinformation or contradictory statements byauthorities concerning the dangers of these practices would becompletely disregarded by these boys and taken as evidence thatnone of the information was true. It also became apparent that,if the boys gave up glue-sniffing, they would take up otherhabits which would provide a comparable effect. [One expert]points out that, in our present state of knowledge, toluene (oneof the more commonly used solvents in plastic cements) isconsiderably safer than many other organic solvents.42 The mass media of the early 1960s were filled with reports ofdeaths due to glue-sniffing. The Verhulst-Crotty bulletin trackeddown these reports and found a total of nine allegedglue-sniffing deaths-each one reported many times. Six of thenine were not due to glue fumes but to asphyxiation, whichoccurred when the victim's head was covered by an airtightplastic bag. A seventh death was probably also a plastic-bagcase. In an eighth case there was no evidence whatever that thevictim had been sniffing glue before his death, and no toluenewas found at autopsy. The last case was probably not due toglue-sniffing; the victim had been ill and bad sniffed gasoline.Thus among tens of thousands of glue-sniffers prior to 1964, nodeath due unequivocally to glue vapor had as yet been reported.The lifesaving advice children needed was not to sniff glue withtheir heads in plastic bags. The Verbulst-Crotty bulletin alsoreviewed behavioral effects of gluesniffing; childrenunquestionably did all sorts of silly and potentially dangerousthings when high on glue much the same things they would havedone if drunk on alcohol. Those bulletins, unfortunately, weredistributed in mimeographed form to only a short list ofrecipients. They had no visible effect on the nationwideanti-glue-sniffing campaign. The toxicology of recreational solvent-sniffing at thiswriting remains very much where it was at the time of the 1964Verhulst-Crotty summary. No one is prepared to say thatoccasional solvent sniffing is safe, and some studies suggestthat frequent sniffing may be moderately harmful. Later in thedecade, it was widely observed that young people paid little orno attention to dire warnings against the hazards of marijuanasmoking, LSD-using, and other forms of drug use. It seems highlylikely, in retrospect, that the exaggerated warnings againstglue-sniffing were among the factors desensitizing some youngpeople to drug warnings in general. Most teenagers knew of othersin their own neighborhoods who had sniffed glue repeatedly, andwho did not drop dead or go to the hospital with brain damage,kidney damage, or liver damage. Children may be ignorant, butthey are not stupid. When the evidence of their own experiencecontradicts adult propaganda, they (like sensible adults) rely ontheir own experience-and tend to distrust in the future a sourceof information which they had found unreliable in the past. Thenationwide anti-glue-sniffing campaign, it should be noted,preceded the anti-LSD campaign, to be described later, and inpart set the model for it. The anti-LSD campaign, like theantiglue campaign, featured solemn warnings of dire damage, lawsagainst LSD, sensational police raids, scientific studiesdemonstrating hazards-and an endless bombardment of publicityconcerning all of these other factors. Both campaigns werefollowed by increased use of the drugs attacked. There was alsoone difference. In the case of LSD (see Chapter 50), the drug waspopularized through the simultaneous efforts of LSD enthusiastsand LSD enemies. But glue-sniffing had no Timothy Leary toadvertise and praise it. The enemies of glue-sniffing popularizedthe custom all by themselves. At the beginning of the decade,gasoline sniffing was the most common form of organic solventinhalation. Paint-thinner sniffing, varnish-remover sniffing,cigarette-lighter-fluid sniffing, glue-sniffing, and the otherswere not-very-common phenomena to which no one paid muchattention. So far as can be determined, gasoline sniffing at theend of the 1960s was neither more nor less popular than at thebeginning. The same was true of the sniffing of other readilyavailable organic solvents. Only glue-sniffing was the target ofa nationwide campaign-and only gluesniffing became a popularyouth pastime. It seems clear that the damage done by the arrestsand imprisonments of children for glue-sniffing during the 1960sfar exceeded the damage done by glue-sniffing during that sorrydecade-and served to popularize rather than to discourage thepractice. Just how popular it became, many recent surveys reveal. In 1969, 1,348 high-school seniors in Montgomery County,Maryland, filled out a drug-use questionnaire. Of these, 7.4percent stated that they had sniffed glue, and 1.0 percentdescribed themselves as current gluesniffers. Similarly, among1,429 Montgomery County junior-high-school students, 6.6 percentreported that they had sniffed glue.43 Among 781 sophomores,juniors, and seniors in five high schools in Madison, Wisconsin,filling out a questionnaire in 1969, 5.1 percent stated that theyhad sniffed glue. The replies indicated that 0.8 percent sniffedglue frequently, 1.0 percent sniffed glue infrequently, and theremaining 3.3 percent had sniffed glue only once or twice .44Among 47,182 students in Utah high schools and junior highsanswering a questionnaire in 1969, 7.1 percent reported that theyhad at some time sniffed glue; 9.5 percent of the boys and 4.8percent of the girls had sniffed. Among the boys, 3.5 percent hadsniffed only once, 3.8 percent had sniffed several times, and 2.2percent had sniffed more than 10 times. The returns indicatedthat 1.8 percent of the boys and 0.9 percent of the girls hadsniffed glue within the past few weeks.45 Among 1,379 high-schoolseniors in 11 selected Michigan high schools in 1968, 8.1 percentin one school reported glue-sniffing, as compared with 7.0percent in another, 4.7 percent in a third, and none at all intwo small high schools.46 Among 1,225 students at Mamaroneck (NewYork) Senior High School answering a questionnaire in 1967, 6.1percent reported having sniffed glue and 2.0 percent had sniffedglue more than once. Among 1,294 Mamaroneck junior High Schoolstudents, 8.3 percent reported having sniffed glue, and 1.4percent had sniffed glue more than once .47 These and othersimilar surveys suggest that at a rough estimate, at least 5percent of all young Americans graduating from high schoolperhaps 150,000 in each annual cohort-have sniffed glue at leastonce. This level of use can be contrasted with the level before1959, when glue sniffing was essentially unknown andunpublicized. On July 20, 1971, the New York Times heralded yet anothernationwide campaign against yet another inhalant menace with afront-page headline: AEROSOL SNIFFING: NEW AND DEADLY CRAZE The story, by Grace Lichtenstein, echoed closely the kickoffof the antiglue-sniffing campaign a decade earlier:"Physicians, government officials, drug experts and chemicalmanufacturers are growing increasingly worried about a deadly andrelatively new drug-abuse problem among the nation's children:the inhalation of aerosol sprays." As in the earlier storiesabout glue-sniffing, precise details were sup- plied on how to get high on aerosols: "The aerosolproduct-hair spray, deodorant, household cleaners or someother-is sprayed into a paper bag or balloon and then inhaledbecause the propellant produces a strange, floating kind ofhigh." There followed the usual warnings of disastrouseffects: According to the Food and Drug Administration, more than 100youths have died from deliberate aerosol sniffing since 1967,with an average of four deaths a month currently being recorded.. . . It appears that death occurs after a youngster deeplyinhales an aerosol spray for a prolonged period, either on asingle occasion or on several occasions. The fluorocarbonpropellant Freon, the best-known brand of fluorocarbon, can makethe heart beat irregularly and then stop. An expert was quoted as adding: "Once the final eventbegins, it's quick, sudden, and irreversible." 48 An earlier round of aerosol inhaling by children, the storynoted, had centered around a spray-on product used to chillcocktail glasses. This product had therefore been removed fromthe market. Little was accomplished, however, for "expertsstress that any of the 300 kinds of aerosol products now on themarket can be equally abused because all use similarpropellants." Like the glue industry in the earlierglue-sniffing campaign, the aerosol industry entered theaerosol-sniffing campaign through an "Inter-IndustryCommittee on Aerosol Use." "The campaign includes afilmstrip, 'Rap On,' that has been distributed to 3,000 schooldistricts. The industry has also put out a booklet, 'Will DeathCome Without Warning?' which declares that aerosol products aresafe when used as directed." "They're really tryingawfully hard," said B. J. Burkett, spokesman for theInter-Industry Committee and public relations manager of theFreon Products Division of E. I. du Pont de Nemours & Co.There was as yet no suggestion that aerosol sniffing be made acriminal offense; but laws were being proposed to require awarning-perhaps even a skull-and-crossbones-on the label of allaerosol products. Such measures, however, had been decidedagainst as of this writing. But, one might wonder: Here we goagain?' * The first effort to repress the recreational use of nitrousoxide (laughing gas) was also instituted in 1971. PsychiatricNews reported: "Strict regulations have been placed on thedistribution and sale of nitrous oxide in Maryland by Dr. NeilSolomon, state following reports that the gas is being used bysome young people as an inhalant to produce an exhilaratingeffect. This is the first regulatory action in the nationconcerning improper use of nitrous oxide, according toinformation from the Food and Drug Administration. . . ." 49 Contents | Feedback | Search DRCNet Library | Schaffer Library | Major StudiesWT01-B31-57IA031-000652-B043-270http://206.61.184.43:80/schaffer/library/studies/dwda/dwdfwd.htm 206.61.184.43 19970122131239 text/html 5927HTTP/1.0 200 OKDate: Wednesday, 22-Jan-97 13:12:30 GMTServer: WebSitePro/1.1f (S/N wpo-0deb)Allow-ranges: bytesContent-type: text/htmlLast-modified: Saturday, 28-Dec-96 07:11:11 GMTContent-length: 5710 Dealing With Drug Abuse -- Foreword Contents | Feedback | Search DRCNet Library | Schaffer Library | Major Studies | DealingWith Drug Abuse Dealing with Drug Abuse A Report to the Ford Foundation Foreword by McGeorge Bundy This report grew out of an effort by the Ford Foundation tounderstand the massive and complex problem of drug abuse in theUnited States and to determine the most effective ways in whichthe Foundation might contribute to efforts to deal with theproblem. Like many institutions working in such fields as education andpoverty, we encountered the growing blight of drug abuseincreasingly in the 1960's. The Foundation made a number ofgrants to projects that dealt with drug abuse as an aspect of alarger problem, as in work with high school students, faculty,and parents to understand and overcome the alienation of youth.As drug abuse increased, however, the Foundation consideredwhether it might undertake a larger program. The study that ledto this report, undertaken in mid-1970, was the first step inthat consideration. The second important step was to join with three otherfoundations that have shared our concern with drug abuse-theCarnegie Corporation, the Commonwealth Fund, and the Henry J.Kaiser Family Foundation-in financing one of the principalrecommendations of the report, namely, the establishment of anindependent national Drug Abuse Council. The four foundationshave now committed substantial funds for the first several yearsof the Council's work. The functions of the Drug Abuse Council will include: Analysis of the development and results of public policies in the drug-abuse field Dissemination to the public of accurate data on the causes, extent, and treatment of drug abuse Promotion of needed research Synthesis and distribution of available information in research and treatment Evaluation of treatment and education programs Details of the Council's composition and plans are expected tobe announced shortly after this manuscript goes to press. The report leading to the establishment of the Council-thework of an outstanding independent task force of lawyers,scientists, and other investigators-identified four major problemareas in the drug-abuse field: heroin addiction in urbanghettoes; drug experimentation by the young; overuse of legalstimulants and tranquilizers; and the use of drugs to controldeviant behavior, especially among children. The task-force report was intended principally for the FordFoundation's guidance. Yet, the scope and quality of the workwere such that the Foundation shared the first draft, inDecember, 1970, with legal, scientific, and governmentalauthorities active in efforts to control and prevent drug abuse.The reaction to the report was strongly affirmative. The reportwas praised for its thorough, clear, and sober analysis, and anumber of authorities urged the Foundation to make it availableto a wider audience. Accordingly, the Foundation asked the staffof the developing Drug Abuse Council. to bring up to date thosesections dealing with aspects of the problem in which there hadbeen substantial change since the first draft was prepared. Webelieve that this revised, expanded, and updated report is both aforerunner and the first product of the Drug Abuse Council. Assuch, we believe it is a promising harbinger of othercontributions the Council may make, both in understanding thisspreading danger to American society and in helping to curb it. We hope that the report will be useful to the public at largeas well as to specialists, for the drug-abuse problem is so broadand complex that effective efforts to overcome it will demand theunderstanding and support of as many Americans as possible. Contents | Feedback | Search DRCNet Library | Schaffer Library | Major Studies | DealingWith Drug Abuse WT01-B31-58IA031-000652-B043-292http://206.61.184.43:80/schaffer/library/studies/dwda/dwdprfc.htm 206.61.184.43 19970122131249 text/html 6235HTTP/1.0 200 OKDate: Wednesday, 22-Jan-97 13:12:39 GMTServer: WebSitePro/1.1f (S/N wpo-0deb)Allow-ranges: bytesContent-type: text/htmlLast-modified: Saturday, 28-Dec-96 07:11:07 GMTContent-length: 6018 Dealing With Drug Abuse - Preface Contents | Feedback | Search DRCNet Library | Schaffer Library | Major Studies | DealingWith Drug Abuse Dealing with Drug Abuse A Report to the Ford Foundation Preface In April, 1970, the Ford Foundation asked us to undertake abroad survey of the drug-abuse problem in this country and toreport back by the end of the year on what activities privatefoundations might usefully undertake in this field. During May toDecember, 1970, we had the opportunity to review the drug-abusefield, both through a study of the literature and throughextensive interviews. The report was completed by December 1,1970, and submitted to several foundations for theirconsideration. We did not anticipate making any startling new discoveries inthis field, and, in fact, we have made none. We cannot say thatthere is a magic solution to the problem of drug abuse. Rapid orremarkable results in this area cannot be promised. Alleviationof local and national drug-abuse problems will come, in ourjudgment, through a slow and painful process of social change andaccommodation. Insofar as our report can help to establish themechanisms by which such change and accommodation may begin, andeven be accelerated, it will have more than served its intendedpurpose. The report is reproduced here without change. Although we haveadded occasional footnotes to indicate significant developmentssince December, 1970, we have concluded that any attempt to takenote of every factual change would be both futile andunnecessary. Suffice it to say that developments during the pastyear have only underscored the thrust of the original report. Appendixes to the main report were developed largely by theproject staff both during 1970 and after the report itself wascompleted and submitted to the foundations, in order to recordsome of the more detailed information gathered in the course ofthe survey. These staff papers may be considered current as ofabout September, 1971. Although they do not always represent aconsensus of the project participants, they do make a usefulcontribution to knowledge and discussion in the field. It is not possible to name all of those to whom we areindebted for assistance with the survey and the report. We spoketo hundreds of people throughout the country, all of whomgenerously provided time and material. The trustees, officers,and staff of the Ford Foundation provided complete freedom forthis inquiry, together with ample financial support. We areespecially indebted to Mitchell Sviridoff and Thomas Wright fortheir personal involvement. The Carnegie Corporation, theCommonwealth Fund, and the Kaiser Foundation have been mostencouraging in their consideration of the report, as havenumerous other foundations and organizations. We could not have undertaken the work involved in this surveyor completed the report without the strong support of James V.DeLong, the only professional staff member who worked on theproject from beginning to end. His tenacity in ferreting out thetypes of elusive facts on which any useful report must inevitablyrely, and his detailed and repeated review of the work producthave won him the respect of the entire drug-abuse field. We wouldalso like to give special thanks to Peter Wilson, who was withthe project during the first hectic period. Substantial support in the form of time and resources wasfreely donated by the Washington law firm of Covington &Burling. We also wish to thank the support staff-Meg Gleason,Jacqueline Volpe, Angela Corley, Joan Henderson, Janine Yunker,and Lilly Smith-for their skill and patience in finding andkeeping track of material and in preparing and revising endlessdrafts. Finally, we are gratified by the announcement that the DrugAbuse Council proposed in the report has been established and isbeginning operations. We wish its new President, Thomas E.Bryant, M.D., and the Chairman of its Board, Bethuel M. Webster,success in bringing this new venture to fruition. PATRICIA M. WALD PETER BARTON HUTT Co-chairmen Washington, D.C. December, 1971 Contents | Feedback | Search DRCNet Library | Schaffer Library | Major Studies | DealingWith Drug Abuse WT01-B31-59IA031-000652-B044-37http://206.61.184.43:80/schaffer/library/studies/dwda/dwdsum.htm 206.61.184.43 19970122131302 text/html 140343HTTP/1.0 200 OKDate: Wednesday, 22-Jan-97 13:12:48 GMTServer: WebSitePro/1.1f (S/N wpo-0deb)Allow-ranges: bytesContent-type: text/htmlLast-modified: Saturday, 28-Dec-96 07:10:03 GMTContent-length: 140124 Dealing With Drug Abuse -- Summary and Recommendations Contents | Feedback | Search DRCNet Library | Schaffer Library | Major Studies | DealingWith Drug Abuse Dealing with Drug Abuse A Report to the Ford Foundation THE DRUG ABUSE SURVEY PROJECT Summary of Findings, Conclusions, and Recommendations by Patricia M. Wald and Peter Barton Hutt The Present Problem and Efforts to Control It A More Promising Approach to Drug Abuse The Drug Abuse Council This report, which summarizes the results of the Drug AbuseSurvey Project, is based upon extensive reading and numerousinterviews with workers in the field throughout the country. Part I describes the present drug-abuse problem in thiscountry and what is currently being done to control it. Part 11summarizes the project's views on a more promising approach todrug-abuse problems. Part III sets forth the project'srecommendations for private foundation activity in this field. Two preliminary observations are essential to this discussion.First, in many aspects of this field, important basic facts havenot yet been determined and perhaps cannot be determined in thenear future; conclusions, therefore, depend on fragmentaryinformation and primarily on judgment. Because of the emotionaland moral attitudes involved in drug issues, conclusions differwidely among individuals and are strongly and deeply held.Secondly, even where facts exist, experts in the field oftendisagree on their meaning and significance. We have found fewareas in which there is not widespread disagreement. As a result, in arriving at the project's conclusions andrecommendations, we have relied strongly on the judgment of theCochairmen and the Executive Director. It should be understoodthat at least one recognized expert could readily be found tochallenge, perhaps vehemently, virtually any statement we make ormight make. It appears that there can be no such thing asconsensus or a noncontroversial report on drug abuse. THE PRESENT PROBLEM AND EFFORTS TO CONTROLIT THE NATURE AND EXTENT OF DRUG ABUSE Staff Report I describes the characteristics of the mostcommon drugs of abuse. For purposes of this report, such sociallyaccepted and legal drugs as alcohol and nicotine have beenexcluded, and "drug abuse" has been limited primarilyto heroin, marijuana, stimulant and depressant drugs, andhallucinogens. The effects of a drug, the pattern of drug use, the prognosisfor the user, and the bases of social concern all vary widelydepending on the drug used, the age and class of the user, andthe circumstances. No categorization, therefore, is totallysatisfactory. The four core problems, however, have been broadlydelineated by many commentators as: (1) the use of heroin inurban poverty areas, (2) experimentation with a wide variety ofdrugs by the young, (3) the use of drugs by middle-aged and olderpersons as a form of quasi-self-medication, and (4) the use ofdrugs as a behavior-control device. Heroin in Urban Poverty Areas. According to our bestestimates, there were, as of November, 1970, approximately150,000 to 250,000 active heroin addicts in the United States.'(Some estimates run as high as 300,000 heroin addicts in New YorkCity and 600,000 nationally, but these figures have littlesupport.) The addicts are heavily concentrated in the poorestareas of large metropolitan areas. Probably half live in NewYork, and 60 to 70 per cent of them are black, Puerto Rican, orMexican-American. Almost 85 per cent are male. These figures represent people who use heroin on a dailybasis, injecting a dose every six to eight hours as the effect ofthe previous dose wears off. They may spend anywhere from $10 to$100 per day on heroin, depending on their dosage and tolerance,their economic ability to sustain the habit, the purity of thedrug bought, and the price level of the city in which they live. There is an additional, though unknown, population that usesheroin only occasionally, either alone or as part of a pattern ofmultiple drug use. The size of this group is a matter ofconjecture and debate. Some experts believe that repetitive useof heroin leads inexorably to addiction, whereas others believethat there is a substantial number of intermittent users who donot become addicted. It is not possible to resolve this issue definitively. Itseems probable, however, that a large number of persons haveexperimented with heroin a few times without becoming addicted.Heroin is easily available in the slum areas of most majorcities. Although a large habit is expensive, a single dose ischeap ($1 or less for a capsule containing about I mg. of heroinin Washington, D.C.), and the unit of sale in many places is sosmall that a neophyte can take it without much fear of anoverdose. It seems likely that a large percentage of the youngblack males in any large urban lower-class area have triedheroin. The majority who have experimented with it have notbecome addicted. And, although the potency of heroin makes itdifficult to believe that large numbers of intermittent usersnever become addicted, this possibility cannot be ruled out onthe basis of present information. Although heroin is a primary drug for the addict, multipledrug use is exceedingly common. According to some studies,between 40 and 60 per cent of the addicts use one of theamphetamines or barbiturates as a secondary drug on a regularbasis. Cocaine, a strong nonaddictive stimulant, is also usedwidely. The tremendous wave of concern about heroin that has swept thecountry appears to be caused primarily by the fear of crimeassociated with addiction. Heroin itself does not cause criminalbehavior in any physiological or psychological sense, but theneed to maintain an expensive habit often does. A heroin addictwill do almost anything to obtain money to buy the drug. There isvirtually no way in which a poor, black, unskilled youth can earnlegally the $30 per day that is required for the average habit.To maintain his addiction, he can deal in drugs, engage inconsensual crime, or steal. It is reasonable to estimate thataddicts steal between $1 billion and $2 billion in merchandiseper year. Estimates of thefts in New York City alone range from alow of $.25 billion to a high of $1.9 billion. There is someevidence that up to 50 per cent of property crimes in the majormetropolitan areas with a serious heroin addiction problem arecommitted by addicts. On the other hand, there is evidence thatmost addicts engaged in crime before they became addicted.Addiction, therefore, cannot necessarily be regarded as the causeof a criminal life-style, although it unquestionably intensifiescriminal activity. A secondary cause of the current concern about heroin is thefear that it has, or will, spread throughout society. Whileheroin is undoubtedly now available in the suburbs, there islittle evidence that it represents a substantial problem there.It remains largely a lower-class drug. A third cause commonly cited for the concern about heroin isfear of the effects of the drug on the user. Actually, there isno proof that heroin itself causes any organic damage to the bodyor brain similar, for example, to the extensive damage caused byalcohol. Death through overdose has been attributed by medicalexperts to the fact that heroin is a powerful nervous-systemsuppressant that may cause respiration to cease when the dosageexceeds the individual's tolerance, or to the fact that someindividuals may experience a severe allergic reaction to heroin. It seems possible that many addicts would function normally ifgiven a steady supply of good-quality drugs. The real harm tousers is that they presently tend to become social dropouts, inthat the illegal status of the drug causes them to spend alltheir time obtaining and using it. There seems little doubt that,if it were not for the fear of crime and the spread of heroin tothe suburbs, most of society would not be seriously worried aboutheroin addiction. Youthful Drug Experimentation. Within the last five yearsthere has been a substantial increase in the use of illicitnonopiate drugs by the young, particularly among middle-classcollege and high school students and young military personnel.The prevalent drugs of abuse for this group are marijuana (and,to some extent, the more potent cannabis product, hashish), oralamphetamines and barbiturates, LSD, and other hallucinogens.During 1971 the use of heroin by GI's in Vietnam became, for thefirst time, a matter of grave public concern. As of November, 1971, the best estimates are that 15 millionpeople in this country have experimented with marijuana. Possibly30 per cent of these go on to become occasional users, and 5 percent become frequent users. While these estimates are veryuncertain, survey research supports the conclusion that marijuanause has spread fantastically in the last few years. One survey of200 colleges found that 47 per cent of those interviewed hadsmoked it 34 per cent occasionally and 13 per cent frequently.There are major differences among colleges, of course. Othersurveys found that 70 per cent of the student body at one medicalschool were current users of marijuana, as compared with 44 percent and 5 per cent at two other medical schools. Extrapolatingfrom available statistics, it is likely that 20 per cent of allAmericans between the ages of. 15 and 35 have used marijuana atleast once -a crime for which they could have been imprisoned bythe federal government for up to ten years.' There is currently little evidence that marijuana causesphysical harm. The federal government is now engaged in a crashresearch program to find out the short- and long-term effects ofmarijuana. Critics of this research program argue that it isintended simply to justify current federal policy and is not asound independent scientific investigation. Even persons who aresympathetic to marijuana use will be surprised, however, if it isdiscovered that marijuana use in large amounts over a long periodof time is totally harmless. The real issue over marijuanaappears to be not whether it causes mild physical damage butwhether its use has already spread so widely that, as is true ofalcohol, the social costs of efforts to prohibit it exceed thephysical costs that would be incurred by eliminating criminalpenalties for, or even legalizing, its use.' Experimentation with oral amphetamines and barbiturate drugs,all of which have recognized medical uses and are therefore ofteneasily obtainable, is probably second only to the use ofmarijuana. Some 18 per cent of the students in the 200-campussurvey had tried amphetamines, and 15 per cent had triedbarbiturates, but only 2 per cent and 1 per cent, respectively,had used them frequently. There are no more reliable estimatesavailable. A quite dangerous pattern of middle-class youthful amphetaminedrug use is the injectable methamphetamine ("speed")Culture. Intravenous injections of methamphetamine usually takethe form of continuous use of massive doses for several days.Users may become psychotic while under its influence, and it isprobably the drug most likely to lead directly to violence. Thereis some evidence that it causes serious organic damage. Speedalso tends to make the user lose interest in food, sleep, andhygiene. Because of these extreme effects, a speed"run" is hard to sustain over any length of time, andthe end of a period of heavy speed use-the"crash"-produces serious depression. Users have learnedover time that they can make the crash smoother by takingbarbiturates or heroin. Reports from San Francisco, the firstcity to have a sizable speed culture, are that heroin is becomingthe drug of choice for a large proportion of former speed usersbecause it is a more pleasant "down" than thebarbiturates. The use of LSD originally peaked in about 1967, declinedbriefly, and then started to increase again as the early reportsabout genetic damage caused by the drug were discredited and asuse spread downward into the high schools. The survey that foundmarijuana use among 47 per cent of college students on 200campuses found that 11 per cent had used LSD, but only I per centused it frequently. The National Institute of Mental Health hadearlier reported surveys showing a 2 to 9 per cent range of LSDuse among college students, with an over-all average of 5 percent. While a ratio of one LSD experimenter to every five triersof marijuana seems too high for the population at large, or evenfor most colleges and high schools, it does illustrate a higherrate of current usage than has been suspected. There is general agreement that LSD is a powerful drug thatshould be used with care. In clinical use, severe reactions arerare. One study found that 25,000 administrations of LSD ormescaline to 5,000 people resulted in serious complications inonly 0.08 per cent of experimental subjects and 0.34 per cent ofsubjects who were undergoing therapy. There is no scientificcertainty concerning other types of reaction that have beenalleged, but not proved, to result from LSD use, such asflashbacks and birth defects. The long-term effects are notknown. Youthful . experimentation may also involve heroin, especiallyin the ghetto. A recent survey of juvenile addicts in Washington,D.C., showed that over half started directly by mainlining heroinrather than first using other drugs. Among middle-class youth,however, experimentation with marijuana predominates, and heroinis probably the least used drug. Youthful middle-class experimentation with heroin as part of apattern of multidrug use does appear to be increasing. Thisphenomenon is too new, and information is too fragmentary, tojudge whether it represents the beginnings of significant growthin middle-class addiction. Preliminary reports indicate thatpeople who become involved with heroin in this non-ghetto contexthave less tendency toward heavy involvement. The extent of penetration of drugs other than marijuana isdifficult to assess. Considerably fewer young people seem to havetried oral doses of amphetamines and barbiturates than have triedmarijuana, but more appear to have tried them than have triedLSD. The number of young people who become heavily involved withamphetamines (especially injectable methamphetamine) andbarbiturates is unknown but is probably of about the samemagnitude as those heavily involved with LSD. Society's current concern about youthful drug experimentationis often attributed to the possible detrimental effect on thehealth of drug users. Certainly, concern about the potential harmfrom heroin experimentation in the ghetto is far more justifiedthan concern about marijuana experimentation in the suburbs. Itis our judgment, however, that physical harm is actually only apartial cause of this public concern. There are, after all, up to9 million alcoholics, whose alcohol abuse affects a total of wellover 30 million people in this country, a far larger number thanare affected by drug abuse; yet, this enormous health problem hascreated relatively little public concern. Rather, the principal force behind the present public concernabout youthful middle-class experimentation seems to relate todifferences in perceptions and life-styles between older andyounger generations. Older persons tend to accept the use ofdrugs only for therapeutic purposes. They do not regard alcoholand nicotine as "drugs" and believe that the substancescan be properly used for social and personal pleasure. But theolder generation regards the use of drugs, such as marijuana andLSD, for social and personal pleasure as symptomatic ofdisrespect for law and authority and as an attempt to escaperesponsibility. In contrast, many in the younger generation tendto regard the use of drugs for social and personal pleasure asentirely proper. Use of such drugs as marijuana and LSD istherefore viewed by them as an opportunity for enhancement ofpersonal experience, an act of social custom within a peer group,or a mark of youthful rebellion and independence similar tosmoking weeds or sipping beer behind the barn fifty years ago. Drug Use among the Middle-aged and Elderly. Millions of peopleuse psychoactive drugs as a way of coping with the tensions andproblems of everyday living. Current estimates are vague, but ina 1967 survey 25 per cent of all persons over 18 reported use ofa psychoactive drug during the preceding year. The number ofpersons reporting use of a tranquilizer at some time in theirlives rose from 7 per cent in 1957 to 27 per cent in 1967.American industry apparently produces about 4 billion dosageunits of barbiturates (not including other major and minortranquilizers) and 8 billion dosage units of amphetamines eachyear. It is charged that half of these are diverted to theillegal market at some point, and an unknown proportion of therest are prescribed carelessly. Some of these drugs are used byheroin addicts and youthful experimenters. Most are not so used,however, and the problem of self-prescribed use of these drugs isone that pervades all strata of society. (In addition, about 10per cent of the 80 million people who use alcohol have a seriousproblem of dependence.) The National Institute of Mental Health (NIMH) is nowconducting a series of comprehensive drug-use surveys, whichshould provide an accurate picture of the extent of middle-ageand elderly drug abuse with legal as well as illegal drugs. Theproject includes research into the frequency and situationalaspects of this problem. Why certain persons become dependent on these drugs is notclear. As in the case of heroin addiction, there is considerabledebate as to what physiological and psychological factors areinvolved. The personal costs of this type of drug abuse can be veryhigh. Of all the potential drugs of abuse, alcohol is one of themost damaging, since even relatively light consumption clearlycauses some damage to such organs as the brain and liver, andheavy consumption causes serious damage and sometimes death.Barbiturates cause damage very similar to that caused by alcohol,and, in the formal literature, these two drugs are regarded asessentially additive and interchangeable in chronic intoxication.With barbiturates, as well as alcohol, there is a serious risk oflethal overdose. The personal costs of steady amphetamine use arenot clear. Experts believe that large doses entail a high risk oforganic damage. There appears to be no clear evidence concerningsmaller doses. The social costs of alcoholism are now fairly well known andneed not be detailed here, but the social costs of the abuse ofbarbiturates and amphetamines are still largely unknown. Thesocial benefits attributable to these drugs are equallyuncertain. There is clearly a widely felt need for the particulareffects of the various drugs. It is far from clear thatelimination of this form of drug abuse would result in netbenefits to the society, because one cannot be sure that otherpossible responses to life situations would be less harmful. Itis possible that reducing the use of tranquilizers would resultin a rise of the violent crime rate, or in the divorce rate, orin child beating. It almost certainly would require greaterinstitutionalization of persons with borderline emotionalproblems. Drugs in Behavior Control. A fourth emerging problem is theoverprescription of drugs to control the behavior of captivepopulations, such as overactive school children and nursing-homeresidents, where other, nondrug methods of control shouldproperly be used instead. Recent information has revealedsignificant use of amphetamines to calm down behavior in theclassrooms of urban public schools. At the other end of the agespectrum, tranquilizers are reportedly being used far tooextensively on elderly patients in nursing homes to keep themfrom clamoring for the attention of overworked attendants. These drugs are properly used, within limits of sound medicalpractice approved by the Food and Drug Administration, forhyper-kinetic children and elderly patients with emotionalproblems. There is a serious danger, however, that they may beused as a simple method of managing school children,institutionalized patients, and correctional inmates as asubstitute for a competent staff and the other resources neededin dealing with those not able to care for themselves. And, asthe range of behavior-controlling drugs becomes wider, we cananticipate even greater problems in their use in unwarrantedsituations. BASIC RESEARCH ON DRUG ABUSE Existing Research. Most of the basic research now being doneon drugs of abuse is conducted by the NIMH Addiction ResearchCenter (ARC) at Lexington, Kentucky, or conducted or financed bygrant or contract through the NIMH Division of Narcotic Addictionand Drug Abuse and the NIMH Division of Psycbopharmacology. ARC is an interdisciplinary group doing basic research on thephysiological effects of a number of drugs of abuse, and one ofthe very few to our knowledge that has recently conducted anyresearch with heroin. Its 1970 budget is about $.8 million. Itsprincipal functions are research on the abuse potential of drugsand on opiate antagonists. ARC would need far more personnel,ranging from senior research scientists to technicians andparaprofessionals, and far more funds if it were to expand itsactivities broadly to include basic research on the cause andnature of all drug abuse and drug dependence. NIMH funds for intramural and extramural research relating todrug abuse have increased threefold in five years.' The figuresbelow include research in pharmacology, sociology, psychology, Year Budget Authority (1,000,000) 1966 6.4 1967 10.6 1968 13.3 1969 14.1 1970 16.3 1971 18.3 TOTAL: $79.0 and many other areas. They also apparently include at leastsome of the research on psychoactive drugs sponsored by the NIMHDivision of Psychopharmacology, which is interested primarily inthe use of drugs in the treatment of mental disorders. The research funds are dispersed among the various drugs ofabuse, not concentrated on one or two. For 1970, the only yearfor which we now have information, the division by drugs was asfollows: Drugs Allocation 000,000) Opiates 3.8 Marijuana 2.3 Hallucinogens 1.8 Barbiturates 5.3 Amphetamines 2.8 Other .3 TOTAL: $16.3 NIMH is unable to provide either a dollar breakdown on thetypes of research represented (pharmacology, sociology, etc.) ora breakdown by drug for previous years. In 1970, $1.3 million ofthe money spent on marijuana research was dispersed throughspecial contracts. ARC received $.8 million of the moneydesignated for opiate research to operate its program. Anundeterminable amount is spent by the Division ofPsychopharmacology and other parts of NIMH.' The balance ofresearch expenditures represents about 50 grants to specificindividuals and institutions given on application. The allocation of grant resources is determined primarily byan advisory committee of physical and social scientists thatreviews all applications for funding and assigns them a priorityranking on the basis of scientific merit. While NIMHadministrators have some authority to overrule the committee(they can fund a low priority project instead of a high-priorityone, but they cannot fund a project if the committee refuses toassign it any priority at all), we have been informed that thishappens rarely. We have also been informed that little or no effort is made tocreate a program of research. Applications are reviewed in avacuum. Consideration is not given to the importance or relevanceof the research to policy issues or to major scientific andmedical questions, or to alternative uses of the research budget.The results of prior projects are reportedly not made availableto the committee for its consideration in reviewing current grantapplications. No significant effort is made to encourage grantapplications in areas of particular interest to scientists,physicians, and the government. The Justice Department's Bureau of Narcotics and DangerousDrugs (BNDD) has engaged in some research in the past and stillhas some ongoing efforts on the abuse potential of drugs, thesociology of drug use, the characteristics of dealers, and themarket structure of the drug traffic. The decision has recentlybeen made, however, that BNDD's research role is to be limited tosubjects related to law enforcement. A major problem with basic research conducted or funded by thefederal government is that it is necessarily limited bygovernmental policy. Thus, as might be expected, there are largegaps in our basic knowledge about drugs of abuse. In particular,basic experimentation with the effects of heroin on chronicheroin addicts has been virtually ignored in view of the strongfederal policy against any such research. Until very recently,federal policy also virtually precluded marijuana research inhumans. Federal regulations single out LSD and a handful of otherhallucinogens, from among all known drugs, as requiring specificFood and Drug Administration (FDA) approval of an InvestigationalNew Drug Plan (rather than just filing the plan, as is true forall other drugs) before clinical investigation may begin. Underthe 1970 federal drug-abuse law, research with heroin, marijuana,and LSD may be conducted only after the Secretary of HEW hasapproved the researcher and the protocol. In short, currentgovernmental policy is a critical factor in determining the typeof research that may be done under federal auspices or approval. Other possible sources of funding for basic research on drugsof abuse are the states, the universities, and the pharmaceuticalindustry. Thus far, the states have concentrated on appliedresearch, primarily in the area of treatment. The universitiesappear to have no significant source of funds for basic researchother than the federal government. And the pharmaceuticalindustry concentrates primarily on product-oriented appliedresearch. As a practical matter, therefore, most basic researchdepends on federal funds. The pharmaceutical industry's research efforts are not onlyproduct-oriented but, indeed, have the goals of increasing thenumber of psychoactive drugs, enhancing their effect, orimproving their activity in some other fashion. From thestandpoint of drug abuse, the pharmaceutical industry is workingnight and day to create products that will intensify the problem.Many of these drugs, of course, have enormous medical value thatfar outweighs their abuse potential. The Need for Additional Basic Research. It is apparent thatthere is a serious lack of basic information about how drugs ofabuse work and their long-term effects on the body. Many examplescould be given, but a few will make the point: Since World War 11, there have been over 3,000 technicalpapers on LSD. But scientists still do not know why LSD causes apsychoactive effect, or whether it is toxic, or whether it causesbirth defects, or whether the widely reported"flashback" effect is real or imagined and, if real,has an organic basis. In short, many of the most importantquestions remain unanswered. Morphine was first isolated in the early 1800's, and heroinwas synthesized in the late 1800's. Among the things we still donot know about these drugs are the mechanisms by which tolerancedevelops, or whether an addict can be stabilized on a given dose,or whether the drugs cause any organic damage, or the mechanismby which they alleviate pain, or even whether withdrawal can bepsychologically as well as physically induced. While it is common knowledge that many drug users, includingthose on methadone, use combinations of drugs, little is knownabout the effects of these combinations. For example, mixtures ofheroin and cocaine, or of amphetamines and barbiturates, areoften taken, but we do not know how they interact. We have been unable to discern agreement among researchers onwhat is and is not known, or on the priority needs for research,with respect to the drugs of abuse. Basic research questions concerning psychoactive drugs can bedivided roughly into two groups: (1) toxicological andpharmacological effects, and (2) psychological and perceptualeffects. Scientists probably know most about the toxicology (organicdamage done to the human body) of drugs of abuse, yet even herethere are many unanswered questions. It is known, for example,that excessive use of alcohol and barbiturates causes extremedamage to the brain and liver. It is suspected that amphetaminesin massive doses also cause organic damage, but scientists arenot yet sure. There is insufficient toxicological information onthe opiates (e.g., heroin, morphine), the cannabinols (e.g.,marijuana, hashish), and the hallucinogens (e.g., LSD,mescaline), the three categories of drugs with which the countryis most concerned. The organic damage caused by drugs is, of course, only oneaspect of the more general study of pharmacological effects thatis, on what cells does a drug operate, how does it operate, whatmetabolites are triggered, and so forth. Nor are such questionsunique to drugs of abuse. There appears to be no general theoryof drug action based on the chemical structure of drugs intowhich discrete studies of the pharmacology of the drugs of abusecan be fitted. And there is a question whether psychoactive drugsdo or do not represent a separate class of pharmacologicalcompounds that can be studied at a theoretical level, independentof the study of pharmacology generally. Basic pharmacological research would undoubtedly provideuseful knowledge for basic researchers, from which they may someday construct a general theory of psychoactive drug action. Thecentral-nervous-system effect of drugs is, however, aparticularly difficult area of study. Many of the drugs withwhich we are concerned have effects that are apparently quitesubtle and difficult to delineate. Some of the majortranquilizers, which exert immensely potent effects on the brain,have been studied intensively by NIMH for almost twenty years,and we still do not really know how they work. It is uncertainwhether more could be learned faster by studying LSD, marijuana,or even heroin. In short, the road to a general understanding ofthe pharmacological effects of psychoactive drugs is difficult,and basic research in this area is not guaranteed to beproductive. Brain functioning is, of course, one of the current frontiersof science, and the complexities of studying the central nervoussystem make it likely that this area will remain a frontier foryears, if not decades. Although drugs are simply one type ofinstrument for the study of the broader questions, the drugs ofabuse may be a particularly interesting input because theyclearly have large effects on the brain. There is a great deal of work to be done here, and much of itwill be important. As the pharmacologists study the physiologicalcorrelates of drugs and the psychopharmacologists andexperimental psychologists study the psychic correlates, at somepoint in time linkages will be made leading to a unified view ofthe entire process. The second category of potential research concerns the generalinteraction between drug taking and psychological and perceptualawareness. Such psychological variables as anxiety levels,attitudes toward self, perceptions, attention span, and mentalability are all affected by drug taking. Conversely, pre-existingstates of mind and attitude have a significant impact on whetheran individual will seek drugs in the first place and on theactual effects of a drug once it is taken. Historically, because drug abuse has been looked at primarilyfrom the standpoint of deviant behavior, the study of itspsychological and perceptual effects has been placed largelyunder the heading of psychopathology. Interest in the role ofexternal stimuli, of which drugs are but one example, in alteringthe individual's perception and awareness of his surroundings hasincreased in recent years. There is, for example, greaterscientific interest in the subjective experiences anddescriptions, rather than simply objective phenomena, connectedwith drug taking. As with basic pharmacology, there is muchimportant information yet to be obtained in this developing area,all of which is fundamental to a better understanding of humanfunctioning; but the progress of such research will likely beslow and uncertain. This area of interest, also, is not discrete. There areclearly physical correlates for different states of perceptionand awareness, although the links have yet to be forged. DRUG EDUCATION AND PREVENTION There is substantial uncertainty and confusion in the area ofdrug education and prevention. Although nearly all workers in thefield believe strongly that sensitive and accurate drug educationprograms can play an important role in preventing harmful drugexperiences among youth, there is no real evidence that sucheducational efforts are successful. Educators are cautious aboutnew programs because of concern in some quarters that too muchdiscussion about drugs of abuse could glamorize them and lead toexperimentation. There is also increasing concern about the useof ex-addicts in schools. Although they are popular with studentsfor "telling it like it is," there is justifiable fearthat providing them with an aura of prestige may lead significantnumbers of students to believe that they can and should try drugsthemselves. Past efforts have generally been of the "scare"type, emphasizing the moral and physical degradation of drugabuse and generously sprinkled with blatant misinformation,especially about marijuana. In schools, such lectures are usuallydelivered by gym teachers or visiting law-enforcement officials.Their aim has been one-dimensional-to stop young people fromtrying any illegal drugs. It is now widely recognized that drug education, to succeedwith increasingly sophisticated young audiences, must beaccurate, factual, and consistent with the listener's ownexperiences or observations. Although a truly candid educationalprogram may reduce involvement with the more dangerous drugs,such as heroin, it may also increase experimentation with theless dangerous drugs, such as marijuana, and many educators arereluctant to be drawn into an approach with such potentiallycontroversial consequences. The federal government spent $3.5million during the summer of 1970 in an attempt to train 350schoolteachers, administrators, and student leaders to conductworkshops in their home communities dispensing information aboutdrugs. The ability to withstand attitudinal confrontations ofskeptical students was stressed. We have no indication whetherthis program was successful. Virtually none of the myriad drug-education programs swampingthe market from private companies, civic organizations, and eventhe government itself has been evaluated. The only detailedevaluation we have seen, involving a model-education program in ahigh school, showed that students improved not only in theirfactual knowledge but in their cautionary attitude toward druguse. That evaluation showed that the students liked the personalaccounts of ex-addicts best but chose doctors to tell the facts.The students wanted more emphasis on the particular drugs incommon use in their school and an approach that took the drugs upone by one rather than all grouped together. The current emphasis among educators is on a continuousspectrum of education about drugs generally (legal and illegal),from kindergarten through high school, and on the integration ofdrug education into other social-problems curricula, which wouldinclude alcohol, smoking, sex, family living, and so forth. Dr.Norman Zinberg of Harvard has been evaluating such anexperimental course for senior and junior high schools outside ofBoston and expects to produce an effective and exportablecurriculum. Dr. William Soskin in California has a different kindof program, for which school credit is given, that creates athird force besides family and school in the youth's life-aprimary group with which he shares experiences all week,including a heavy emphasis on inner exploration. One intrinsic problem with any kind of school-based educationis that a large portion of serious student drug users havealready rejected school. The motivational exploration thateducators stress can be carried on only in a spirit of trust, andtoo many schools still require teachers and counselors to reportall known or suspected users to the police. Only a few schoolshave had the courage to experiment with the designation of one ormore teachers or counselors as official confidants to whomstudents can turn for help without fear of exposure. Few schoolshave close working alliances with treatment resources to whichthey can refer students. Parental permission for such treatmentposes another legal obstacle to such desirable arrangements. Itis doubtful that the federal government's crash summerteacher-training program can surmount these basic problemswithout a more fundamental change in community attitudes. The National Coordinating Council on Drug Abuse Education andInformation, composed of nearly one hundred government andprivate agency members, has recently entered the drug educationfield.' It conducts evaluations of the explosion of anti drugfilms and literature and stresses rational, coordinated effortsby city leaders to explore the basis and true extent of acommunity's drug problems and how the community can best utilizeits resources for dealing with them. NCC's approach is that drugeducation should not aim at suppression of all illicit drug usebut should teach children to make rational decisions based onreliable information about which drugs they will use and how muchthey will use them. It can reasonably be expected that more federal money will bechanneled to the states and cities for drug education, withlittle direction on how it should be spent. There are only themost primitive notions of how to determine whether adrug-education program has been successful. Even the goals ofsuch programs are hotly contested. And there is little emphasison evaluation techniques by the federal government. At least in the immediate future, most schools will probablybe unable to alter their basic authoritarian structure to thekind of open-minded approach to drug education that will helpearly experimenters or drug-prone students. The mere presentationof basic facts,, even if honestly set forth, can be expected tohave limited value in stopping the spread of youthfulexperimentation, and a law-enforcement orientation that requiresschool personnel to report all users will totally undermineeducation efforts. It is probably also true that adults, more than schoolchildren, need accurate drug information to counter long-heldmyths. An appalling number of well-educated parents, as well astheir children, still fail to understand the real differencesamong drugs of abuse. This misunderstanding is perpetuated in the1970 federal drug-abuse law, which provides a one-year maximumprison sentence for possession of any illegal drug, regardless ofwhether it is quite dangerous (like heroin) or less harmful (likemarijuana). TREATMENT With respect to treatment, two basic problems exist. First,relatively few drug-dependent persons are currently in treatmentprograms, largely because the programs do not have sufficientfacilities or staff. Second, existing treatment for drug abuseand drug dependence has not produced impressive results (exceptfor some methadone programs), and, even if all drug abusers anddrug-dependent persons had treatment available to them, theoutcome would be uncertain. There are three general types of treatment modalities forusers of drugs other than heroin. In many urban centers wheredrug use flourishes, crisis clinics have been set up to offerimmediate emergency services to drug users and other troubledyouths. They are typically staffed by youths under volunteerprofessional direction. They give out drug information, analyzestreet samples, "talk down" people with bad reactions,and see that those in genuine medical danger get to hospitals.Some also refer persons to long term treatment programs orthemselves offer individual or group therapy to drug users. SanFrancisco's Haight-Ashbury Free Medical Clinic is the best-knownexample of such clinics now found in many cities. Therapeutic communities, which operate on the basic assumptionthat a character defect causes drug use, treat all drug userswith encounter-group therapy or a more gentle form of "rapsession" therapy. Users of speed and LSD, and even heavy marijuana users, maywell have underlying psychiatric problems. The only treatmentavailable for them thus far is the kind of individual or grouptherapy used with other mental-health patients. Its successremains largely unevaluated. Because heroin is regarded as the most serious drug threat tosociety, there has been a much more concentrated effort attreatment for heroin addicts. In New York City, where probably 50to 60 per cent of the nation's heroin addicts reside, anestimated 10 per cent are in some form of treatment. Washington,D.C., has perhaps 15 per cent of its estimated 15,000 addictsunder treatment. As of October, 1970, there were about fiftymethadone projects throughout the United States serving a totalof about 9,00010,000 persons.' Nationally, it is safe to say thatwell over 90 per cent of all heroin addicts are not in anytreatment program at all. The two main treatment modalities for heroin addicts are (1)abstinence, bolstered by outpatient or inpatient group therapy,and (2) methadone maintenance, with or without supportiveservices. (A possible third approach is longer-term"detoxification" with methadone, which is given indecreasing dosages until the subject is entirely drug-free.) InNew York City, nearly 4,000 heroin users are currently in fiftyresidential therapeutic communities, and 5,000-7,000 arereportedly on methadone. In Washington and Chicago, about half ofall persons in treatment programs are on methadone and half onabstinence programs. There were, until recently, only a handfulof addicts on methadone in California because of a legalrestriction on its use outside institutions. Some legalrestrictions still exist today. Many other large cities stillhave no methadone program at all. Most methadone programs have long waiting lists. Almost alltreatment programs have selective admission criteria and thus areprobably skimming off the cream of the addict population. They donot appear to handle the most criminally active and hard-coreaddicts. As compared to abstinence, methadone is clearly showing betterresults. Depending upon the degree of prescreening and the amountof supportive services built into the program, between 45 and 80per cent of those admitted to methadone programs are successfullytreated, as measured by continuation in the program, decreasedarrests, job stability, and other social indicators.Experimentation is being tried in a few places with"barebones" methadone (without supportive services) tosee what portion of the addict population can make it on thesubstitute drug alone, without concomitant social-adjustmenthelp. The most promising approach we have seen is putting bothmethadone and nondrug treatment programs under the sameadministrative roof. From a research standpoint, this permitsaccumulation of a body of data from which a typology may bedeveloped to show which kind of addict succeeds in which kind ofprogram. There is some concern, however, that a multimodalityprogram, combining maintenance and abstinence alternatives, mayconfuse patients and reduce the effectiveness of both approaches. The more comprehensive the methadone program, and the morecomplete the data collection and evaluation, the more costly theprogram will be and the fewer patients it will be able to serve.Costs per patient per year may vary from a high of over $2,000for a full service program to a low of $500 for a"barebones" program. Methadone has thus far been used primarily with older addictswho have volunteered for treatment. Except in Washington, theaverage age of persons in methadone programs has been overthirty, close to the age when statistics indicate that a sizableportion of both addicts and criminals tend to "matureout" of their deviance. Whether methadone will do as wellwith an involuntary population of younger age remains to be seen. There is a sizable problem of methadone acceptance, especiallyin the black community, because of opposition from groups whoview it as a crutch indistinguishable from heroin and a source ofwhite enslavement of blacks. Detoxification from methadonemaintenance is being tried with a small number of patients. Ifthis proves successful, the cloud of lifelong dependence nowhanging over methadone will be removed and methadone should provemore acceptable among blacks. Another problem is the possibility of "leakage" inthe control system. Diversion of methadone poses a danger, as isindicated by the death of several non-opiate users who had notbuilt up a tolerance and who ingested large doses. On the otherhand, methadone appears to be safe for use by addicts incontrolled maintenance programs. Although all available evidence indicates that methadone is asafe and effective method of treatment, the federal governmenthas nevertheless concluded, apparently for policy reasons, toinhibit its use by giving it only investigational status. Thisraises costs and staff requirements and limits the number ofaddicts who can be treated. It is unclear what additionalinformation, if any, would persuade the Food and DrugAdministration to alter this decision.' Until methadone leaves the research context in which it nowlegally resides, its potential parameters will remain unclear.And just how much federal money will be available in the futureto encourage methadone or multimodality programs in all majorcities is unknown. Some work is also being done on the nonnarcotic antagonists,primarily cyclazocine and naloxone, which block the euphoriceffect of heroin. Several hundred people have now used theseantagonist drugs. The chief problems in their use have been theshort duration of action of both drugs-four to eight hours fornaloxone, about the same as heroin, and 22 to 26 hours forcyclazocine, about the same as methadone-and, until recently,unpleasant side effects from cyclazocine. Work has beenundertaken on longer-acting antagonists and on an implant thatcould discharge the drugs over a period of weeks. Theantagonists, however, apparently do not satisfy the drug cravingas methadone is said to do and have not proved as popular withaddicts. Other, more conventional methods of treating heroin addictionappear to have a substantially lower success rate than methadone,although comparison is difficult because of the differences inthe types of drug users treated, the criteria for success, thestatistics kept, and so forth. Therapeutic communities like Daytop Village, Odyssey House,and Phoenix House purport to have up to a 75 per cent successrate with those who stay in the program, but they do not includein their figures the large number of addicts (estimated as highas 50 per cent) who drop out within the first month or two. Dr.Jerome Jaffee's work in Chicago, which to our knowledgeconstitutes one of the few attempts to compare the effectivenessof methadone and therapeutic communities with the samepopulation, shows a startlingly greater success with methadonethan with the therapeutic community. Of the 2,500 addicts whohave been treated in the New York City Addiction ServicesAgency's Phoenix Houses since 1967, only 130 have graduated backinto community life (and 90 per cent of these work in addictionprograms). An inpatient in such a facility costs $3,000 to $5,000per year compared to a cost of $500 to $2,000 for a methadonepatient, but methadone may require a longer, or even a permanent,period of treatment. It seems highly unlikely, in any event, thatthere could ever be a sufficient number of residentialtherapeutic communities to have a major impact on the problem. Black community organizations, such as Colonel Hassan'sBlackman's Development Fund and the Bonabond Agency inWashington, also claim a special ability to keep black addictsoff heroin by abstinence therapy following detoxification withmethadone and appeal to racial pride. But thus far their claimsof success have received no objective evaluation. NIMH is still committed to comprehensive community mentalhealth centers as the answer to the drug-treatment problem, butrecent federal legislation for the first time permits support ofdrug-treatment programs unaffiliated with these centers. We havebeen able to find only a few examples of success with thecommunity-mental-health-center approach and an equal number ofoutright failures. The successful community-mental-health-center,drug-treatment programs would appear to be just as successful ifthey were not affiliated with the centers, and even in theorythere is reason to question the inclusion of drug treatment underthe umbrella of the centers. In any event, we are unable to findstatistics on the effectiveness of this approach. Virtually everyone agrees that individual psychiatric therapynot only is impractical because of the large number of addictsbut generally produces poor results with addicts. There is one method of treatment that has not been attemptedin this country since the Bureau of Narcotics, with the supportof the American Medical Association, stamped it out in the early1920's-heroin maintenance. At one time, there were some fortyheroin-maintenance clinics in several areas of the country,unfortunately under rather loose procedures. The Bureau succeededin banning them by 1923 and has since done everything possible todiscredit this method of treatment. The suggestion by aprestigious joint American Bar Association-American MedicalAssociation Committee in the late 1950's that experimentationwith a heroin clinic program again be undertaken was met with avicious attack by the Bureau of Narcotics. During the past fiveyears, the Bureau of Narcotics (now the Bureau of Narcotics andDangerous Drugs) and NIMH have argued that the British system ofnarcotics maintenance has utterly failed and could not reasonablybe considered for use in this country. (Staff Paper 7 of thisreport, prepared for the Project after an extensive on-siteinspection and investigation, concludes that the British systemof narcotics maintenance appears to have succeeded in containingthe narcotics problem there.) One outstanding deficiency in the treatment field involvesevaluation. Several treatment programs, mostlymethadone-maintenance programs, have data-collection andevaluation components. The Dole-Nyswander program in New York hasbeen intensively evaluated by a prestigious medical committee,and indeed the evaluation of methadone in various programsthroughout the country has now reached the point where there canno longer be serious question about the general usefulness ofthis treatment approach. The vast majority of the treatmentprograms, however, and particularly the non-methadone programs,have relatively narrow or quite inadequate data-collection andevaluation components, or no such components whatever. Moreover,data collection and evaluation are not standardized, with theresult that comparison of programs or techniques for differentpatients, taking into account the many possible variables, issimply not possible at this time. The Illinois Drug Abuse Rehabilitation Program, under Dr.Jerome Jaffe, has an unusually sophisticated system of datacollection and analysis combined with a multimodality treatmentprogram, thus permitting direct comparison of the effectivenessof different techniques. Similar programs with useful researchcomponents include the Washington, D.C., Narcotics TreatmentAgency, under Dr. Robert Dupont, and the Connecticut MentalHealth Center in New Haven, under Dr. Herbert Kleber. But no suchprogram has the funds or time to standardize data collection forall other programs or to persuade others to adopt a uniformsystem, much less to attempt to standardize and persuade othersto adopt uniform evaluation criteria. Without sufficient detailed data collected on a standardizedbasis by a substantial number of different projects, there can beno satisfactory comparative evaluation of various treatmentapproaches for different types of drug users. Largelyunsubstantiated and disputed claims of success and failure willcontinue to dominate the field until adequate evaluation isaccomplished. A second deficiency apparent throughout the country is thelack of enough trained administrators to run treatment programs.The few outstanding treatment projects emphasize the need forscholar-administrators with a medical and drug-abuse backgroundbut also with management skills. The most able project directorsdo not fall into the typical civil-servant mold but, rather, aremen willing to take gambles and basically to let themselves be"burned out" in a few years. How to create a reserve ofpeople equipped with this unique combination of talents and bowto provide incentives for them to enter the field are criticalquestions in the future of treatment. LAW ENFORCEMENT Law enforcement has, of course, been the primary means bywhich society has attempted to control drug abuse in the past andat present appears to represent the principal effort for thefuture also. Arrests for drug offenses have increaseddramatically during the past few years, from 31,752 in 1960 to134,006 in 1968 and over 230,000 in 1969. Such arrests of personsunder eighteen rose from 1,688 in 1960 to 33,091 in 1968 and over57,000 in 1969. There is, however, an acknowledged lack of direction and oftrained manpower in state and city efforts, which results inscant disruption of illicit traffic above the street level. Mostarrests are of users. The principal sellers arrested areamateurish young softdrug peddlers and addict street dealers.Studies show that almost all heroin addicts get arrested at leastonce every two years of active addiction and spend an average of15 per cent of their addicted life in jail. In New York City inJune, 1970, there were 4,000 drug arrests compared with 1,800 inJune, 1969. About 60 to 70 per cent of those arrests involvedheroin. In Washington, D.C., arrests doubled in the first sixmonths of 1970 and now run about four hundred per month; over 50per cent involved heroin. California reportedly made 150,000 drugarrests for use and possession in 1969, a 300-per-cent increaseover 1967, and it is unclear whether all of these are reflectedin the national statistics. BNDD has recently announced that it will provide no more thanconsultative services to local police in use, possession or smalltrafficking cases, and it is increasingly shifting its resourcesto the apprehension of large traffickers. In 1969, its agentsmade or instigated 4,000 arrests; for 1971, this figure isexpected to fall to about 1,875. Basically, however, thecriminal-law approach appears to have had little impact on thegrowth of the problem, as is demonstrated by the fact thatillegal drug use, by everyone's calculation, is increasing andshows no signs of leveling off. The federal government formerly took the position that illegaldrugs that are imported, such as heroin and marijuana, could bestopped at the border if sufficient resources were allocated tothis effort. In spite of recent large increases in budget andmanpower, however, no significant impact has been made. Borderseizures of heroin amounted to less than 5 per cent of theestimated imports in 1970. Indeed, the price of heroin has beenfalling steadily and the quality increasing, which indicates afailure to stem the supply. There is strong evidence thatOperation Intercept, the attempt to impede the flow of marijuanafrom Mexico into the United States, has resulted in significantsubstitution of other drugs for marijuana. The illegality of heroin is, of course, the sole reason forits high cost in this country. In England, the pharmacy cost ofheroin is $.04 per grain (60 mg.), or $.00067 per mg. In theUnited States, the recent street price is $30-$90 per grain, or$.50-$1.50 per mg., depending on the time and place of sale andthe quantity and quality of the drug. As a result of the failure to stop heroin at the border,recent federal government 'policy has concentrated on cooperationwith foreign governments, primarily Turkey, to reduce their opiumproduction. Since it is estimated that the United States requiresonly 50,000 to 60,000 pounds of opium each year for illicitheroin use, since this amount is about 1.5 per cent of the totalworld production of opium, and since the entire U.S. demand couldprobably be met by cultivation of about five square miles ofopium,' and since opium could readily be grown in other parts ofthe world, a program based upon suppression of opium productionseems no more likely to succeed than the program based uponprevention of importation. Finally, the initial hypothesis that drugs were notinterchangeable-that, for example, a heroin addict would not belikely to switch to a different drug (e.g., the barbiturates oramphetamines) if heroin were unavailable-does not appear to betrue. There is evidence that users will freely substitute evenless potent drugs if their drug of choice is not immediatelyavailable. There is a far greater pattern of multiple drug usethan was previously thought to exist. Suppression of one drug fora period of time, whether long or short, appears, therefore, tohave a limited effect on drug abuse generally. The law-enforcement approach to drug-abuse problems has beenameliorated by legislation permitting civil commitment in lieu ofcriminal punishment. Under present legislation, however, suchtreatment is largely illusory, since it is almost whollyinstitutionalized and often results in greater punishment thanwould be imposed by a criminal sentence. It is doubtful thatinstitutionalization under these programs has been markedly moresuccessful in rehabilitation than criminal sentencing. New York, California, and the federal government have civilcommitment treatment programs that take a relatively restrictedclass of criminal defendants in lieu of prosecution or sentencing(as well as persons committed voluntarily or by relatives andothers). The New York and California civil-commitment programshave proved very expensive-$4,000 to $5,000 per patient per yearfor care and treatment in New York, and a total of $12,000 forall costs. About $250 million was spent by New York State in1967-70, the major share for capital construction and custodialsalaries. Only one out of five patients successfully survives theparole period in the California program, and less than 25 percent the New York program. The federal Narcotic AddictRehabilitation Act (NARA) program currently has under 1,000persons in an outpatient status and 800 in an inpatient status.Many addicts are ineligible for treatment because of therestrictive admission criteria contained in the Act, and almosthalf of the cases referred for evaluation are rejected becausethey are found "not likely to be rehabilitated." Ingeneral, civil commitment programs have suffered from cumbersomelegal machinery, restrictive admission requirements, inflexibleterms of inpatient residence, expensive security consciousness,lack of dynamic programs, and active resentment among inmatesbecause of the prison like climate and poor treatment efforts. juvenile courts appear to offer one of the most flexible waysof channeling youthful users into early treatment, yet they arerarely used for this purpose. Almost all addicts are arrestedfirst while in their teens. Most juvenile courts already have thepower to divert drug users rapidly to a treatment agency, evenwithout a formal finding of law violation, and they can keep allrecords confidential. Speedy urinalysis and a closer workingrelationship between juvenile courts and community treatmentprograms might have an impact on the problem. Ordinary juvenileinstitutions are less useful. They are experiencing an increasingproblem with contraband drugs (we have been told that many youthsget their first drug experiences there), and few, if any, havedrug education or therapy programs, or indeed any urinalysissurveillance, after inmates leave the institution. The federal government (as well as local and state policeagencies) has been severely criticized for devoting itslaw-enforcement efforts to drug users and addict pushers andfailing to prosecute large drug wholesalers. In New York andWashington, and probably elsewhere as well, grassrootsorganizations claim to know the identity of the largerwholesalers and in some instances state that they have turnedinformation over to law-enforcement officials without results. The short working life of undercover agents, the large amountsof cash necessary to make substantial "buys," and thestructure of the heroin market, which is designed to insulatehigher figures from contact with the drug, are the reasons mostcommonly cited by law-enforcement and community officials for thepaucity of results in disrupting the heroin traffic. But thefactor more commonly cited by ghetto groups, and increasinglyalso by such respected citizens as former Chief justice EarlWarren, is corruption of narcotics agents. More than thirtyfederal agents were reportedly indicted on bribery andnarcotics-sale charges during 1969 and 1970. The view is endemicin ghetto areas-and apparently it is justified at least inpart-that the federal, state, and local police are not doingtheir job, and that they should be able to arrest more dealersand distributors than they do. Although it may be partly aquestion of better training, direction at the top, and placementof a higher priority in the area, there may also be widespreadcorruption involving pay-offs at the lower levels between policeand pushers. Both previous and present federal drug statutes makepossession of an illegal drug of abuse a crime. When the DrugAbuse Control Amendments of 1965 were enacted to cover nonopiatedrugs, possession for personal use was not made a crime, but thiswas changed in 1968 because of the LSD scare. The legislationenacted by Congress in 1970 to recodify and modernize all thefederal drug-abuse laws continues the policy of making possessiona criminal offense, with a one-year maximum sentence forpossession of any illegal drug and twice this term for second andsubsequent offenses. Neither prior law nor new legislationprovides that an addict is not criminally liable for possessionof a drug to support his habit. Test cases are being litigated todevelop this defense as a matter of constitutional or common law,and the staff of the National Commission on Reform of FederalCriminal Laws has proposed that this should in any event be astatutory defense. Congressional support for such a defensewould, however, appear difficult to obtain. Regardless of judicial or legislative reform, it appears thatthe law-enforcement process will remain a significant, andprobably by far the most important, intake unit fordrug-dependent people for many years to come. At present only afew, crude attempts are being made to utilize this intake path tochanneling addicts into useful treatment programs outside thecivil commitment procedures. Drug users are generally processed as ordinary criminals, and,conversely, a large percentage of ordinary criminals, when testedby urinalysis, are found to be drug users. Urinalysis tests inthe criminal courts and detention facilities of major urbancenters show that one-third to one-half of all criminaldefendants, including juveniles, are currently using drugs, andsome estimate that 80 per cent of the serious property crime inWashington, D.C., is committed by drug users. The likelihood thata criminally processed drug user will be given any specifictreatment during his incarceration is slight. But even morebasic, attempts at treatment programs in the prison setting havebeen markedly unsuccessful. Indeed, there is evidence that manynonusers or experimenters are first introduced to drug use orhave their habits reinforced while in prison. One survey showedthat 90 to 95 per cent of the heroin addicts who leave prisonwithout treatment follow-up lapse almost immediately into druguse. Many of the major urban areas now have parole programs thattest for drug use through urinalysis, and a few offer paroleesmethadone, group-therapy, and/or halfway-house programs.Nonmethadone programs with probationers and parolees, however,have not proved very successful. The majority of suchprobationers and parolees have had to be returned to prisons orcourt for drug violations. LEADERSHIP It is our belief that a major reason for the confusion anddivision within the drug-abuse field and the country in generalis the lack of effective leadership, on both a governmental and anongovernmental level. Effective leadership, by our definition,includes such functions as keeping the country informed aboutdrug abuse and the latest drug research and arranging an openclimate for medical and social research and for reasonableexperimentation with different models of control. Effectiveleadership should, further, avoid eliciting emotional publicreaction to isolated incidents and attempt to remove the drugproblem from national politics. Within the federal government, there are three organizationssubstantially concerned with drug abuse: BNDD, NIMH, and theDepartment of Defense." BNDD has for years pursued a national approach to drug abusecharacterized by suppression of illegal drugs and the enforcementof criminal penalties for drug abusers. Although Bureau officialsnow emphasize the need for rehabilitation, the basic policyposition of BNDD has not been significantly altered. Thelegislation recodifying federal drug-abuse laws, drafted by BNDDand passed by Congress in October, 1970, represents little changein fundamental narcotics policy and only reinforces and codifiesexisting law (except for some modification of penalties). Thereason for the recodification, indeed, was not a desire forreform but a need to repair legislative provisions voided by theSupreme Court on constitutional grounds. The new law still includes marijuana and heroin in the sameclassification, provides a uniform penalty for possession of anyillegal drug, and contains such harsh sanctions as a thirty-yearmaximum prison sentence for an eighteen-year-old with a prioroffense who sells marijuana to a twenty-year-old friend if thereis any profit involved in the transaction. Any change in thebasic BNDD approach of penalizing drug abuse seems highlyunlikely in the near future. During the past two crucial years of public-policydevelopment, NIMH has been singularly impotent as an independentvoice in policy decisions and has seemingly been forced to accedeto the BNDD approach of relying almost exclusively upon lawenforcement. There is no reason to believe that NIMH will begiven substantially more leeway in putting forward policyalternatives in the immediate future. Although there are a numberof NIMH personnel working on drug abuse who do favor a moreflexible and health-oriented approach toward drug users and whowould promote such an approach if allowed and encouraged to doso, a significant change in federal policy is required beforethey can be expected to speak out publicly on these matters. Until mid-1970, the Department of Defense denied that therewas any drug-abuse problem at all in the military. It has nowadmitted that drug abuse does indeed exist in the armed servicesand is initiating a program for treating users as an alternativeto punishment and dishonorable discharge. Legislation has been introduced in the U.S. Senate toliberalize treatment under the Narcotic Addict RehabilitationAct, to revitalize the narcotics work of NIMH, and to authorize afar more comprehensive health, welfare, and rehabilitationapproach to the problems of drug abuse by the federal government.But even if such legislation is enacted, the presentadministration's emphasis on the law-enforcement approach couldundermine its effective implementation. The state government picture varies, of course, from state tostate. Suffice it to say that, thus far, few states have refusedto follow the lead of BNDD with respect to narcotics policy andthat of the U.S. Congress with respect to narcotics legislation.As an example of the current climate, the August, 1970,Conference of Uniform State Law Commissioners approved a draft ofa uniform state drug-abuse law, prepared by a BNDD attorney, withthe understanding that it could be revised before finalpublication to reflect any appropriate changes in light offederal legislation then pending in Congress. An earlier draft,based upon what BNDD had hoped to have passed by Congress, wasenacted by two states before the final version was available. The nongovernmental organizations interested in the field ofdrug abuse have not exerted significant leadership during thepast two years. During this critical time of public-policydetermination, professional, medical, and scientificorganizations such as the American Bar Association, the AmericanMedical Association, the American Public Health Association, andthe National Academy of Sciences-National Research Council havespoken out only on specific issues of interest to them and onlyon isolated occasions. Because all these organizations deal onlytangentially with drug abuse and must rely for their effortsprimarily on busy professionals who have full-time jobs outsidethe organization, none of them could be expected to exert theeffective leadership that is needed in this field. There is no national voluntary citizens' organization in thefield of drug abuse comparable to the National Council ofAlcoholism (NCA), and NCA has recently decided that it will enterthis field only to consider problems in which drug abuse andalcoholism interact. Both the North American Association ofAlcoholism Programs and the National Association of State MentalHealth Program Directors, which are organizations representingstate tax-supported agencies, also deal only tangentially withdrug abuse and have made no serious effort to become concernedwith the field in detail. Largely because of this void, a paper organization, theCommittee for Effective Drug Abuse Legislation, was created torepresent the medical-scientific viewpoint before Congress duringthe hearings on the new drug-abuse legislation. Since thisorganization has been concerned almost exclusively with thefreedom to conduct research and is poorly funded, it has had toignore many other important public-policy issues. Another new organization is the previously mentioned NationalCoordinating Council on Drug Abuse Education and Information,created in 1969 to bring together virtually all nationalorganizations, from the drug industry to consumer groups, andfrom the PTA to the National Student Association, for the purposeof developing an effective drug-abuse education program. Althoughthe Coordinating Council is financed to a significant extent bythe federal government and has governmental representatives onits board of directors, it has shown independence and a reasonedapproach to education and community planning in the drug field.The Coordinating Council's achievements are largely the work of avery few people, however, and, because of its precariousfinancial underpinnings, it is uncertain how long and howvigorously it can continue its efforts. A MORE PROMISING APPROACH TO DRUG ABUSE The foregoing summary discloses a lack of leadership in thefield of drug abuse, a law-enforcement approach that is oftenineffective and even harmful, and a country deeply and evenbitterly divided over the proper approach to drug abuse. Webelieve that an effective attack on drug abuse can be launchedonly in a climate of reason and tolerance, allowing us to discernthe real evils of drug abuse while rejecting policies based onconfusion, misinformation, and emotion. Before we can begin to cope adequately with drug-abuseproblems, therefore, we must begin to refine and clarify ourthinking about them. The world is full of drugs, large numbers ofwhich are psychoactive. The majority of adult Americans takealcohol as a tension reliever or to facilitate socialintercourse, and the use of nonprescription and prescriptiondrugs for similar purposes is endemic. The availability andvariety of these drugs will probably not only continue butincrease. Many of the drugs used have profound therapeutic benefits thatallow people to offset physical or mental pathology and functionmore normally. Few of us would be willing to forego thesetherapeutic benefits, and no one perceives the use of drugs toachieve normal functioning as abuse. An increasingly large numberof people, however, are not willing to limit their drug taking tomedically supervised attempts to offset pathology. Some engage inself-medication with drugs they have become acquainted withthrough legitimate medical use. This pattern often occurs in thecase of tranquilizers. Some wish to escape an unwelcome realitywith heroin or barbiturates. Others desire the very acutefunctioning associated with the amphetamines. Still others,especially the young, seek the pleasurable effects ofhallucinogens or marijuana. The basic philosophy underlying our present drug-control lawsis that all of these self-induced effects are to be shunned, orat least are not to be sought through drugs other than alcohol.This is a decision based partly on the fear of actual physicaldamage caused by the drugs, but primarily on the belief thatdrugs damage society because they contribute to crime andalienation. It seems inevitable to us that all segments of society willcontinue to be exposed to a myriad of drugs in the future, andthat society must learn to cope with these chemicals as part ofeveryday life. It is not possible at present to foresee exactlyhow the necessary adjustments in social attitudes and policieswill be made. We do feel, however, that current national policy-whichsingles out particular drugs and makes their possession or use acrime-should be changed for very important empirical reasons. Webelieve that the individual and social harm caused by imposingcriminal sanctions on drug users far outstrips the benefits ofthis approach. Handling drug users as criminals has createdwidespread disrespect for the drug laws, has resulted inselective enforcement, has possibly done more to encourage thanto discourage illegal drug use, has undercut bona fide efforts toexplain the important differences among various drugs in thephysical and mental damage they cause, and has deterred drugabusers from seeking necessary help. We feel that, as a firststep in bringing the problem back into perspective, criminalpenalties for possession of illegal drugs for personal use onlyshould be abandoned in many jurisdictions. If this were done,drug users but not drug traffickers-could then be handled on apublic health and social-welfare basis. Like the Canadian LeDainCommission on Non-Medical Use of Drugs, which in its April, 1970,Interim Report recommended retention of only a perfunctory $100fine for illegal possession of drugs as an interim measurepending issuance of its final report, we have seen no evidencethat eliminating the criminal penalties for possession of illegaldrugs for personal use would materially impede the effectivenessof law-enforcement efforts against trafficking or remove anincentive for drug users to seek treatment or have otherunfortunate consequences. This conclusion in no way depends on a belief that chemicalsshould be freely used to induce pleasure. Nor do we believe thatit is necessary to await final resolution of the currentlypopular debate about whether alcohol or marijuana is the moredangerous drug, a debate that has succeeded only in provokingfurther generational confrontation about hypocrisy,permissiveness, and life styles. Most of those who advocate apublic-health approach disapprove strongly of the unsuperviseduse of dangerous drugs, especially by young people. Ourconclusion is based, rather, on a recognition that our presentmethods of handling the drug abuser are at best ineffective andat worst counterproductive, and that other approaches must betried. Eliminating criminal penalties for possession for personaluse would neither legalize a particular drug nor permit its use.Law-enforcement efforts would, and in our opinion should,continue, but they would be directed at illegal distribution. Andillegal drugs would remain subject to confiscation whereverfound. If the confrontation over the role of the criminal law inenforcing private moral judgments or choices of drugs wereeliminated, the country might be able to unite behind anintensified approach to research, prevention, treatment, and lawenforcement directed against the upper echelons of the illegaldrug traffic. Restrictions on scientific research inquiries intoparticular drugs might then be lifted and substantial public andprivate funds more easily directed toward the understanding ofhow drugs work on the mind and body and what effects, both shortand long term, they produce. Education of young people againstthe reckless use of powerful substances that affect the mindcould proceed in a free and open climate more calculated toinfluence their behavior. As research discloses more about specific drugs, some mighteventually become candidates for limited legalization, in thepattern now used for alcohol. In other cases, disclosure ofsevere or permanent damage to the mind or body would require thatdistribution controls remain under criminal penalty. With suchpotentially harmful drugs, the user who refuses to accepttreatment, and who can be shown to constitute a danger to others,might be committed civilly for appropriate treatment. Voluntary treatment for harmful effects of drugs couldsimilarly be made more flexible and accessible under such asystem. Restrictions against any experimentation with heroinmaintenance and unjustified limitations on the use of methadonemaintenance could be reviewed and possibly removed. More publicfunds would be devoted to current treatment efforts and tosearching out new treatment methods, to permit adequate handlingof all voluntary and involuntary patients. Finally, law enforcement could continue to act as an intakeunit for treatment programs for those drug abusers accused ofminor trafficking or other crimes. Where the drug taking resultsin dangerous antisocial acts, it is not unjust to require theoffender to undergo treatment as a condition of liberty or evento offer it to him within the confines of the institution. Butlaw enforcement's main focus would be directed at illegal drugwholesalers. In this endeavor, it would have the wholeheartedbacking of vast numbers of Americans, young and old alike. THE DRUG ABUSE COUNCIL In the previous section, we outlined an alternative approachto drug abuse that we believe is more promising than the presentnational approach. Private foundations do not have the meansfully to implement such an alternative approach, nor could theylegally do all that would be required to bring it about. Afoundation cannot, for example, properly engage in efforts tochange legislation. On the other hand, pursuit of the publicwelfare is a well-recognized task of all private foundations, andan important aspect of the approach described above involveseducation, research, and related activities that have longconcerned private foundations. The basic goal might be summarizedas one intended to make national drug-abuse policy responsive tofacts rather than emotion. This is clearly an area wherefoundations could properly play a very large role. Our primary recommendation is that an independent, nonprofitDrug Abuse Council be established to fill the leadership voidthat now exists in all areas of the drug-abuse field. This wouldpreferably be undertaken as a joint project by a number ofprivate foundations and organizations. The Council would striveto become a vitally needed center of excellence for drug-abuseinformation, basic research, education, and prevention,evaluation of treatment and education programs, and relatedactivities. The federal government is not equipped to perform thisfunction. Its activities in the drug-abuse field are fairlynarrowly circumscribed by political necessities, it relieslargely on recruitment of civil-service personnel even at the topleadership levels, and its financial commitments are short termand subject to the vagaries of Congressional and administrationdecisions. Federal activities in the drug-abuse field tend to bead hoc reactions to current crises, such as the 1970 crashdrug-education program in response to the well-publicized deathof a twelve-year-old heroin addict, rather than well-considered,long-term programs. Assuming that drug abuse will exist for years to come, andthat the country's policies should be grounded on fact and reasonrather than on emotion and politics, a long-range investment ineducation, research, and treatment is necessary. The Drug AbuseCouncil would be a long-term (ten years at a minimum) effort toobtain the factual information needed to provide a basis forsound policy and to disseminate to the public and to persons inkey policy positions the best knowledge available in the fieldand the best analysis of this knowledge as it pertains to currentprograms. The Council would have a board of 10 to 15 trustees. Workingunder the board's direction would be an interdisciplinary staffresponsible for performing the Council's daily work, headed by afull-time president. The president would be a member of the Boardof Trustees, but not its chairman. The majority of the Board of Trustees should be professionalsknowledgeable in the field of drug abuse. A few might beprestigious figures in the national scene, but persons who wouldcommit themselves to a heavy working schedule consisting at aminimum of one formal meeting a month and substantial contactwith the staff between meetings. The Board of Trustees should include representatives ofmedicine, psychiatry, pharmacology, education, communityleadership, law, and sociology. Board members would beappropriately compensated for their time and efforts. Thechairman of the board should probably be located in, oraccessible to, the city where the Council's headquarters arelocated-preferably Washington, D.C.-and he should beappropriately compensated for his additional work. The president would initially work out with the board thedirection for the Council's first efforts. He would then recruithis staff and proceed to implement those directives by drawing upa detailed set of proposals for Council action. The initial core of the Council staff might consist of amedically trained person (probably a psychiatrist), a basicresearcher in the biochemical field, a social scientist, alawyer, and an editor writer schooled in simplifying technicalwriting. This small nucleus could, of course, be expanded as theCouncil's president and board define priorities and activities. It is obvious that the President must be a key personality,with proved administrative ability, and soundly grounded in thedrug abuse field, its politics, personalities, and peculiarhistory. He would be responsible for proposing projects to theboard, arranging for their financing or administration, preparingdraft reports for board consideration, and so forth. Successfulimplementation of the Council's objectives would depend to adegree on the president's capabilities. The relationship of the staff to the Board of Trustees alsodeserves comment. Basically, there seem to be three types ofstaff-board working relationships. First, a board of trustees mayoperate as a figurehead, exercising minimal influence over theactivities of the staff. Secondly, it may have broad policy- andpriority-setting powers but leave most operating decisions to theworking group. This requires a far greater commitment of time bythe members of the board than the first relationship. Finally,the board may directly run the organization through a staffhaving little or no independent decision-making capabilities. Inessence, this third type of relationship would require themelding of the board of trustees with the working group. In the case of the Council, it appears that the mostproductive staff-board relationship would be the second type-aBoard of Trustees with policy authority over the working groupbut not actively involved in the actual day-to-day operations ofthe group. Such a board would have an important role. Because ofthe controversial nature of the drug field, board members must beprepared personally to back Council projects and policystatements and to withstand the inevitable attacks almost fromthe day they convene. If the Council's pronouncements and workare to carry weight in professional and governmental circles andamong the general public, the board must stand solidly behindthem. Once under way, the Council should explore the potential foraction in many different areas. The following representativelist, which reflects areas of current immediate concern, is notintended to exhaust the possibilities. Additional matters will beuncovered, and priorities will change, as developments occur inthe field that cannot be predicted at this time. Finally, it should be noted that the Council may carry out itsobjectives either by persuading others to undertake and financethe work or by underwriting the work itself. Whenever possible,the Council should encourage federal, state, and localgovernments to increase their roles in drug-abuse programs. Inthis respect, the Council should act as a watchdog, to makecertain that public agencies fulfill their intendedresponsibilities. In many instances, however, private action,either funded or undertaken directly by the Council, will also benecessary and appropriate. SPONSORSHIP OF BASIC RESEARCH Although not nearly enough is known about the effects of drugson the mind and body, the investment of new research funds mustbe carefully directed toward specific objectives, rather thanmerely toward supplementing federal funds. Some knowledgeablepeople are dubious about what could be accomplished by thecontribution of a few million dollars in private research funds.Nevertheless, we believe that there are finite areas of basicresearch that the Council could profitably explore. Encouragement of Interdisciplinary Research. Universities,where most basic research is done, tend to be structured alongdepartmental lines. The incentive structures for researchers and,even more important, for graduate students tend to force theresearcher to stay within his area and not become part of aninterdisciplinary group. The Council might usefully promotecenters of interdisciplinarianism in this field. There are cogent reasons for encouraging interdisciplinaryresearch. The question of why the same amount of drug ingested bythe same person produces dramatically different effects indifferent settings puzzles scientists and must be studied outsidethe laboratory as well as within, by psychologists and socialscientists as well as by pharmacologists. Many of the basicpharmacological studies on the effects of heroin or methadoneshould be attached to treatment programs, so that the subjectscould be studied and tested in the environment and under theconditions in which they become and remain drug-dependent. Someof the most creative hypotheses for basic research come from thecross-fertilization of different disciplines thinking about thesame problem from different approaches. This is the kind ofinnovative exposure that the federal government's researchprogram, based on the funding of finite projects to explorealready articulated hypotheses, does not at present have thecapacity to encourage. One way of supporting this type of work would be to establisha new in-house center for the scientific study of drug abuse onan interdisciplinary basis. Another would be to put money intothe best existing university centers, on the condition that theymake some effort to study drugs of abuse in the context of theirover-all work. Of these two courses, the second seems preferable. A number offirst-class researchers in a relevant field may not regard drugabuse as their primary area of interest or as an area on whichthey would wish to concentrate their full time, and in any eventthey might not wish to move. The best researchers in the fieldmight be more willing to study drug abuse, either separately oralong with other matters of interest to them scientifically, ifpermitted to remain at their present location. To a large extent,this means funding interdisciplinary efforts in universities,because that is where the best researchers are currently found. In addition to multidisciplinary research in universities, itmight also be productive to fund a narcotics-research section inan existing institution or simply to fund individual projectswherever the best researchers exist. Finally, the Council mightwish to participate in an ongoing treatment program for theunique information that the program might provide with areasonable additional investment in a research component. Suchquestions as why heroin addicts stabilize at different levels ofmethadone dosage and whether long-term tissue changes are causedby a variety of drugs are often researched best with a largetreatment population at hand. Each of these possibilities must beexplored in greater detail by the Council staff before finalrecommendations can be made. Detection of Drugs in the Body. Pharmacologists have informedus that the basic problem of drug detection in the body wheredrugs go, how long they stay, what metabolites they produce, andwhat happens to them-is not being studied in the way presentmethodology would permit if research funds were available toperfect it. The technology of drug detection is an area that isvery important to research but is not a high-priority item forany single researcher or university because the benefits arelargely external to any particular project. This type oftechnological development would be of value to all researchersworking in basic pharmacology. It would also enable the accurateidentification of drugs in cases of acute toxic reaction and thusthe development of better methods of treating or preventing suchtoxic reaction. Research in this area could also be directed towarddevelopment of more accurate, rapid, and inexpensive equipmentfor a variety of purposes. Of particular importance for bothlaw-enforcement and treatment programs is the chemical analysisof urine specimens to detect heroin and other illegal drugs.Urinalysis is used in broad surveillance programs in determiningwhether bail should be set for criminals, in probation and parolesurveillance, in methadone-maintenance programs, and indeed invirtually all types of drug-treatment programs. It is essentialto any evaluation of the success of these programs. Yet, in manyburgeoning methadone programs, such as that in Minneapolis, noprompt and cheap urine testing is available, and samples must bemailed hundreds of miles for analysis. There is substantial doubt whether surveillance programs arein all instances lawful, and even whether their use is productiveor counterproductive with respect to treatment results. It willbe some time before final answers can be obtained to thesequestions. Meanwhile, it is clear that urinalysis surveillance isincreasing and will continue to increase (particularly if it ismade mandatory for all methadone programs, as has been proposed).The problem is that urinalysis detection techniques can becostly, inaccurate, and very time-consuming. They may thereforelimit the number of patients who can be admitted to treatmentprograms because of the cost involved in continuous urinalysissurveillance, wrong decisions may be made because of theerroneous results obtained, and persons may be deprived ofliberty, placed under suspicion, or not given adequate treatmentfor long periods of time while awaiting results. BNDD and a few private companies reportedly are interested inimproving technology and methodology in this area, and there aresome indications of progress. One company has apparently produceda marketable electronic device that would improve the speed andreliability of urinalysis but not reduce the cost. We have beenassured that the technology for cheaper, reliable urinalysis isavailable but requires an initial investment to produce themodels. Reducing the cost per unit from $1 to $2 to $.50 or lesscould mean a savings of $.25 million for large-scale projects andmore for a city offering centralized urinalysis for all itsprograms. Hopefully, the Council could persuade the federalgovernment to make the initial investment of a few hundredthousand dollars to conduct this work, if the need is nototherwise met in the near future. Interaction of Different Drugs Taken in Combination. Largenumbers of drug abusers use several drugs, some legal and someillegal, together or in substitution for another. The net effectof their interaction may be quite different from that of eitherone used alone. (There is some indication, for example, thatheavy barbiturate use may neutralize the effect of birth-controlpills used simultaneously.) Research on drug interaction couldlead to knowledge that might prevent toxic fatalities. Research with Heroin and Heroin Maintenance. We are unaware ofany significant experimentation with heroin in this country,either in animals or in humans. Such research would bepotentially very valuable in determining such questions as how anaddict stabilizes on any given dose of heroin, how well hefunctions in society when consistently maintained on his drug,how wide a range of variation in dosage can be given withoutwithdrawal, whether some people can use heroin indefinitelywithout becoming addicted, and how long a person must use a givendosage of heroin in order to become addicted. The usage patternsof different types of heroin addict also remain a mystery andhave important research implications for treatment and education.Research on such issues as these might well have to combine fieldinvestigation and medical diagnosis. One of the first problems the Council would face if it decidedsuch research was desirable would be obtaining the necessaryfederal and state government permission, setting up the researchin a way that would satisfy medical ethics, and justifying theneed for the work to the public. Miscellaneous. Another vital area not now being adequatelyresearched is the effect of drugs, including marijuana andmethadone, taken by pregnant women on the behavior and physicalcharacteristics of the child. A high-priority question is whether there is either an inbornphysiological predilection to opiate addiction (as Dr. Dolesuggests) or a drug-induced physiological readdictionvulnerability (as Dr. Martin suggests) or a learned response toexternal stimuli (as Dr. Wickler suggests) or none of these.Although we are not certain how this can be made the subject of adirected research project, it is a question of the greatestimportance to the direction of treatment efforts, drug education,and even legal responsibility for addictive behavior. An attemptshould be made to devise a series of experiments to advance thiskind of research. FUNDING PROGRAMS RELATING TO TREATMENT AND RESEARCH WITHRESPECT TO TREATMENT We recommend that the Council should not, as a general rule,fund ongoing treatment programs, except insofar as they makepossible unique research efforts not otherwise available. TheCouncil's efforts in this area should instead be directedprimarily toward providing the public climate necessary to assureappropriate public financing of any drug-abuse or drug-dependencetreatment programs that are found worthy of support. As apractical matter, Council funds could not begin to match theamount of funding available from federal and state sources, ifthose sources could be persuaded to allocate appropriate amountsfor treatment. The failure of the Council to support ongoing treatmentprograms will undoubtedly subject it to criticism from communityaction leaders. We feel, however, that the Council should havethe more fundamental role of generating public support for drugabuse programs and supporting and conducting research andevaluation that will begin to establish criteria by which theeffectiveness of these programs can be measured. The Councilshould, further, disseminate information throughout the countrywith respect to programs that have proved to be worthwhile andthat, therefore, will have a broad and long-range nationalimpact. The Council should, however, be on the lookout for trulyexperimental and research-oriented treatment programs that,absent nongovernmental support, will not be undertaken. Areasthat deserve careful consideration include the following: Basic Field Work in Programs for juveniles and Hard-CoreAddicts. The populations least successfully treated are juveniledrug abusers and hard-core addicts for whom all known treatmentmethods have repeatedly failed. In our present state of almosttotal ignorance as to what kind of prevention or treatmentprograms will work with these populations, it may be necessary tosend people out into the field to study the problem for sixmonths to a year and then to come back and design operationalprogram models. There is to our knowledge no present source offunding for any such basic field approach in new prevention ortreatment techniques. Prototype projects designed to testspecific hypotheses resulting from such field investigationsmight then be recommended for operation by federal, state, orlocal governments. Heroin Maintenance. A related area that definitely seems worthexploring would be an experiment with heroin maintenance. Adetailed study of heroin maintenance in the United States beforeit was stamped out by the Bureau of Narcotics and of theheroin-maintenance techniques that have been utilized in Englandshould undoubtedly precede initiation of such experimentation inthis country. Research with respect to heroin maintenance-its possible useas a bait to get young addicts into other forms of treatment, itspossible use as long-term maintenance for addicts who haverepeatedly failed with other treatment methods, and otherpotential uses-might be a high-priority item for the Council. As already noted, a substantial driving force behind thepresent public concern about heroin addiction is the fear ofdrug-related crime. Assuming that not all addicts can berehabilitated, and indeed that the addiction problem will remainat least as great for some years to come, the hypothesis thatdrug addiction leads to crime and that a major portion of ourcrime wave is attributable to the high price of heroin must beput to the test. Such a controlled experiment could determinewhether, using a heroin maintenance system, crime is indeedreduced. The superiority of methadone over heroin, or vice versa,in maintenance programs could also be explored for the firsttime. Management Assistance to Ongoing Programs. The Council mightalso consider providing ongoing or nascent treatment programswith desperately needed managerial assistance. A team ofmanagement consultants who could look at local programs andpersuade their administrators to adopt proven techniques andperhaps to create a data-acquisition and digestion system whereappropriate would be a major contribution to good treatment. Thefew successful project administrators we have seen are workingfull time in their own projects and cannot spend the necessarymonths advising other projects. Many methadone programs aresubject to justified criticism, and a resultant loss of money,because of sloppy or uninformed management practices or failureto keep and record their data accurately. The kind of service wepropose could reduce such needless problems. Regional Networks. Finally, the Council might work with statesand cities to help treatment centers from regional networks toshare knowledge and experience, and even to cross-refer patientsfor specialized attention. This kind of regional network couldalso make cross-comparisons of variable techniques easier andallow interchange of personnel and pooling of funds forurinalysis, data collection, and training programs for personnel. EVALUATION OF TREATMENT APPROACHES Several different treatment approaches are in use today. Thereis also massive distrust among these programs, misinformation asto what is and is not being done, and a lack of any reliablemeans to separate truth from fiction. Evaluation approaches andcriteria for the various programs are not standardized, and basicdata often are not kept. Even when it exists, useful material isoften not organized or published. It is therefore virtuallyimpossible at this time to compare the effectiveness of any oneapproach with any other, or to study the effectiveness of a givenapproach for different types of patients. Because of lack ofevaluative data, we do not know, for example, whether and to whatdegree the concurrent use of social services increases theeffectiveness of methadone, or the per them cost of patienttreatment under different programs correlated with the rate ofrehabilitation, or the dropout rate under various treatmentprograms, or the type of person (age, pattern of drug use, race,economic background) who volunteers for and is best handled undervarious treatment programs. There is a great need for animpartial body to attempt standardization of evaluation criteriaand techniques nationally and to disseminate the results ofobjective evaluation of ongoing programs in order to promote themost useful components of these approaches and discourageineffective and unproductive efforts. One approach that the Council might consider in attacking theinformation gap is to develop a uniform data-processing systemfor drug-abuse projects and to provide several of the programswith the necessary software and consultative services to installsuch a system. Local treatment programs must participate activelyin working out a good data-evaluation system if they are to bepersuaded to cooperate. The results of the data collection mightbe fed to a central receiving station where Council experts couldanalyze it and interpret its meaning to the individual programsas well as to other interested parties. The decision as to what criteria should be used to evaluateany treatment program, however, involves not merely data analysisbut basic value judgments based on experience. The Council shouldbe involved in setting these criteria. Major methadone programs,for example, have been attacked because some of the participantscontinue to use drugs intermittently. This raises the question ofwhether eschewing all illegal drugs should be the sole or eventhe primary goal for a treatment program, or whether enhancedsocial functioning and cessation of antisocial acts, such asstealing, are sufficient criteria for success. If the Councilcould contribute toward formulating uniform criteria that reflecta realistic and flexible perspective on what treatment programscan be expected to accomplish and in what period of time, and onthe immediate and long-term nature of some of the goals oftreatment, it would be doing a tremendously worthwhile job. INFORMATION DISSEMINATION Technical Information. Technical personnel in the field,researchers, treatment project personnel, and educators need acomprehensive and accessible service that they can tap forcomplete, accurate, and up-to-date information on specificaspects of drug abuse, such as treatment proj ects, ongoing orpast research, model school curricula, or film listings. Thereare at present several fragmented attempts to provide this kindof informational coverage. On request, NIMH will supply, throughits National Clearinghouse for Drug Abuse Information, selectedmaterial on drug-abuse problems. Within about six months, it ishoped that the Clearinghouse will be able to provide a computerprintout of abstracts of all publications on any subjectrequested, concentrating on publications appearing within thelast decade, and without evaluation of content. Because the NIMHClearinghouse is a government service, it feels that it cannotexercise any discrimination in the articles it abstracts, andhence it often abstracts worthless material or several virtuallyidentical publications of the same author in differentperiodicals. NIMH also sends periodically, to certain persons,the protocols of research grants in progress. The NationalCoordinating Council on Drug Abuse Education and Information isplanning a looseleaf service to include information on treatmentprojects, legislation, films, and what is known about the natureand effect of individual drugs of abuse, but is not sure howcomplete it can be because of budget problems. Ideally, there should be one comprehensive index and digest ofall this material, perhaps in several looseleaf volumes, andpreferably one that is not prepared by the federal government. Itshould encompass virtually all information pertinent to thefield, including a reasonably selective cross-indexed review orabstract of past and present books, articles, reports, andscientific papers, reprints from nineteenth- and earlytwentieth-century literature on experiences with drug abuse thatare otherwise not generally available, descriptions of currenttreatment and research projects, public-opinion polls and drugsurveys, evaluated lists of educational materials, digests oflaws, court decisions, and legislative proposals, and othermaterial. The compilation of such a digest and its periodicupdating would be an enormous undertaking, and one that might bebest accomplished by subsidizing another organization to do theactual work. The relationship between the Council and theeditorial board of such a publication would have to be resolved. Another important way of disseminating and highlighting thebest of current research findings is through a technical journal,circulated largely to physicians, scientists, and otherspecialists in the field. The Institute for the Study of DrugAddiction, in New York, currently publishes the Internationaljournal of the Addictions, which covers both alcoholism and drugabuse. We have found this journal a very useful source of basicinformation. The publishers state that the very limited number ofpapers and abstracts, and the very small circulation, are due toa lack of funds. There seems to be no reason to set up a second journal of thistype. Subject to further exploration of this matter, we believethat the Council should give serious consideration to workingwith the Institute for the Study of Drug Addiction to expand thearticles and abstracts in their journal in order to cover thefield adequately (excluding alcoholism, which is covered wellenough in a separate journal), to make the journal a monthlypublication, and to increase its circulation. This would providethe field with the detailed results of all significant researchon a current basis. School Drug-Education Programs. The role of the Council in therace to the schoolhouse must be approached with care. Theconsensus is that private and public organizations are nowgenerating too many drug-education programs without sufficientknowledge of basic educational techniques, pretesting, orevaluation of results. There are not enough professional educators sufficientlyschooled in drug abuse to teach teachers about drugs. Very oftenwe have found that those who teach counselors and othersresponsible for drug education in the schools have themselves hadno training except for a few lectures. It may be that the Councilcan affect this vacuum through support of universityinterdisciplinary research that can train a cadre of experts toteach the teachers in the universities and surroundingcommunities. Another contribution of the Council might be to help subsidizethe evaluation of drug films, literature, and curricula offeredto the schools. It might also design or commission methods ofevaluation by which school programs would be able to assess theirown results. Perhaps the most critical problem of most schooldrug-education programs is their passivity. The Council mightsupport and disseminate information about some less traditionalapproaches, such as active engagement using drugs in behaviorexperiments with animals, discussion of nondrug inducement ofaltered states of consciousness, or extended discussions ofvalues and what youngsters hope to get out of drugs. Theserepresent a few of the more promising (but scarce) approaches wehave encountered. The attraction of television for the young child makes it alogical educational device on drugs. Consideration should begiven to working with a group skilled in educational motivationaltechniques, such as Children's Television Workshop, on films foruse in elementary school or over national television. General Public Information. Perhaps the single most importantservice of the Council would be to act as an independent sourceof relevant information for the public about drug-abuse problems.There is a need for a new and wholly independent perspective onsuch fundamental issues as the nature and scope of the drugproblem, the effects of present law-enforcement policies at alllevels, the real dangers of youthful marijuana use, the treatmentor recovery potential of different kinds of drug abusers, howmuch crime can really be accounted for by drug abusers, how theEnglish system of heroin maintenance works and with what results,the federal government's activity in terms of dollars, and theallocation of those dollars among enforcement, treatment,research, and education, the foreign experience with marijuanausers, and how a school-or a parent-should best react to thepresence of drugs. These are the issues that are troubling Americans. Two NewYork State public-opinion surveys showed that drug use wasconsidered a major neighborhood problem by 23 per cent of thoseinterviewed, surpassed only by burglary, vandalism, and unsafestreets. A New York Times survey of 463 New York voters, reportedon October 4, 1970, placed drugs as the fourth most prominentproblem facing the nation and the foremost problem facing thevoter's immediate community. At present, the public receives itsinformation on these matters primarily from government sources. Many methods must be used to inform the public of keydevelopments in the field and explore key policy issues in drugabuse control. The Council could commission its own publicopinion surveys on key issues to guide the direction of itsinformation efforts. State-of-the-art papers might be published,containing accurate but readable technical material on the natureand effects of drugs. Accounts of comparative experiences ofdifferent jurisdictions with varying law-enforcement, treatment,and education approaches could be prepared and disseminated. Whether such material is widely read will depend in large parton its readability and press coverage. The Council will need agood editor, with a sound basic understanding of the sciences andable to write simply but accurately. It will also need a librarycapacity to collect and analyze information of all kinds; it mayin time want to become a national information center, publishingattractively packaged periodicals for the lay audience containingsuch analyses. It may use radio and TV for forums in whichoutstanding experts in the field can discuss key concepts andthus dispel some of the myths that abound. Different media, ofcourse, would be targeted to different audiences-parents, youths,inner-city residents, and the suburban middle class. Consultative Services for Key Officials and Organizations. TheCouncil might wish to provide counseling services on a selectivebasis for key figures and organizations in the drug-abuse field,such as major professional organizations and leagues of city orstate officials. Such persons might wish to utilize the expertiseof Council staff in many areas before undertaking major policycommitments or advising their members. Meetings and symposiacould be designed by the Council staff to facilitatecommunication between key professionals and policy-makingofficials and to disseminate its own findings. LAW-ENFORCEMENT EFFORTS Basic law enforcement is, of course, a federal, state, andlocal governmental function, and we would recommend that theCouncil not enter this field in any substantial way. Although the federal government is now engaged ininternational negotiations to reduce the supply of opium and itsforeign manufacture into heroin, as well as to increase bordersurveillance to reduce its importation, we cannot be optimisticabout their efforts. Previous attempts by the United States tostop foreign cultivation and manufacture have provedfrustratingly unsuccessful, and the number of world sources ofopium and the ease with which foreign production quotas can becircumvented give no cause for belief that future efforts will beany more successful. There is also a widely held belief amongexperts in the drug field that, if any one drug of abuse wereeliminated, a new one would almost certainly be available todisplace it. Thus, even assuming that all heroin and marijuanawere stopped at the border, marijuana could be grown in thiscountry, synthetic hallucinogens (probably more toxic) couldreadily displace marijuana, and synthetic opiates and other drugscould readily be available for use in place of heroin. Althoughbetter border control or reduction of supply might tighten themarket somewhat, thus forcing the price up, it seems unlikelythat it would have a substantial long-range impact on theunderlying causes and effects of drug abuse, or even on itsprevalence. In sum, this appears to be an area of limitedpotential, wishful thinking to the contrary, and one in which thefederal government is already investing heavily. We do recommend, however, that some exploration be made intothe reasons that law-enforcement officials at present seem unableto prosecute more of the high-volume drug pushers once the drugsget into the country, even though they profess to know who thepushers are, where they engage in their operations, and a greatdeal of other information about them. Prosecution of importantnonaddict drug pushers can have a temporary effect on total drugavailability at the street level and force some addicts intotreatment. It would, in addition, have a substantialpsychological effect in many ghetto communities, where it isoften thought that the police purposely do not prosecute drugpushers because they have made deals with the illicit trader orbecause they wish minority groups to remain enslaved to drugs. Webelieve that exerting pressure on the commercial sellers ofillegal drugs is a desirable objective and should be done in themost efficient way possible. For that reason, we recommend theexploration with federal and local authorities of ways toincrease arrests at the top levels of the drug traffic. If theCouncil enters this area at all, it should work closely with thestaff of the Police Foundation to encourage innovative strategiesby state or local police departments. The active utilization ofantidrug community groups to help in policing and exerting formalsanctions in their own neighborhoods against pushers is one areaof potential. The Council might also want to study the effect of variouslaws and law-enforcement policies on the actual use of drugs andthe treatment of drug abusers. This area is badly in need ofcareful study. The results of such a study might then become thesubject of a "white paper" by the Council forconsideration by local officials, budgetmakers, and the public atlarge. It might also help to create a more open climate forexperimentation in different control strategies. The current pushfrom the federal government is for all the states to committhemselves legislatively to a single model of law enforcement. Itwould seem, however, that states should be as laboratories to tryout different approaches and to evaluate the results stemmingfrom those variations. There also appears to be a real need for educational programsspecifically aimed at law-enforcement and court personnel, whowill probably continue to be the largest intake process forillegal drug users. Although BNDD runs a law-enforcement trainingprogram for state and local police officers with respect tonarcotics laws, it does not appear to emphasize the medical andsocial aspects of drug abuse, its causes and effects, thecommunity resources that can be utilized in combating it from apublic-health and social standpoint rather than from a lawenforcement standpoint, the importance of not ruining the livesof young children as a result of unfortunate experimentation withdrug abuse, and similar aspects of this problem. The Councilmight fruitfully direct its efforts to helping police and courtpersonnel, both juvenile and adults, to develop informalmechanisms for rapidly screening and diverting serious drug usersinto treatment programs in lieu of legal processing. Conferencesmight be sponsored for law-enforcement and judicial personnel tofocus on the best of these diversion programs. An effectivejuvenile court treatment project along these lines is, in ouropinion, one of the greatest unmet needs in the entire field. Finally, many improvements in the present law-enforcementapproach toward drug abuse may have to come from the courts.There will be increasing attacks upon the irrationality ofpresent drug laws, centering upon the right to privacy involvedin the personal use of drugs, and the extension of the ruling inRobinson v. California that a person may not be criminallypunished for addiction to include possession, use, and presencein illegal establishments or association with other addicts. Thequestion of the right to treatment for an addict can be expectedto be raised not only in civil commitment programs, wheretreatment is minimal, but also in communities without methadoneprograms, or where methadone dispensation is severely restrictedby law, or even ultimately where doctors are not allowed toprescribe it for addict patients. In the juvenile field, a long-standing and perhaps legallyvulnerable impediment to treatment is the legal requirement forpaternal permission. Addicts can also be expected to raise theireligibility for welfare as "disabled persons" or as"medically needy" under Medicaid laws. Treatmentprograms all over the country have encountered difficulties inlocating facilities in highaddiction areas because of outmodedzoning laws. The right of "gatekeepers," such asteachers and nurses, to withhold from law-enforcement authoritiesconfidential information received from students may have to betested in the courts. Limitations of treatment programs toselected kinds of addicts will probably also be legally attacked.The adjustment of our now-primitive body of drug-abuse laws tonew medical developments in research and treatment may well haveto come about through a series of court cases as well as, andeven in the absence of, legislative changes. The Council staffshould keep abreast of such legal developments and, whereappropriate, lend financial assistance to legal groups seekingsuch adjustments. The D.C. Lawyers Committee project on traininga corps of addict specialists and the comments filed on themethadone regulations by the Center for Law and Social Policy areexamples of such worthy efforts. THE LEADERSHIP ROLE We have suggested that the most critical reason forestablishing a Drug Abuse Council is to create independentleadership in the field. That leadership must inevitably beearned through professional and public credibility, and throughexcellence of staff and product. The Council must lead informulating and disseminating sound ways of thinking and actingtoward drug use. It must, in short, become a center for policystudy in the drug field, to which researchers, legislators,educators, policy-making officials, and the lay public will turnfor nonpartisan analysis and information. This role can be accomplished primarily by using the bestthinkers in many different fields to find out what is actuallyhappening to drug users-not just the young experimenters ormainliners, but the older pill-takers as well-why they are takingdrugs, and what other ways can be found to satisfy theirunderlying urges and needs. The "drug-abuse problem"needs to be perceived in a less rigid and emotional way by thepublic at large. The nation has to understand how our presentsystem of drug controls really operates, and with whatconsequences to what people. It must be given a realistic notion,rather than palliatives, of what we can expect to accomplishthrough education, treatment, and law enforcement, and what partof the problem must be approached in even more complex and subtleways. At the same time, there must be a sense of urgency about theCouncil's work. As soon as it is organized, the Council mustconsider such matters of immediate importance as The work of the Commission on Marijuana and Drug Abuseestablished under the 1970 federal drug-abuse law The authority of the Secretary of HEW to authorize researchersto protect the privacy of research subjects under the 1970federal law The obligation of the Secretary of HEW under the 1970 federallaw to report to Congress on the proper methods of medicaltreatment of narcotic addiction The authority of the Department of justice to establish quotasfor drugs, like heroin, that have no accepted medical use but areneeded for research purposes The proposed new International Protocol on PsychotropicSubstances being considered by the U.N. Commission on NarcoticDrugs Implementation of the proposed new methadone regulations Theproposals to conform state law to the 1970 federal law and theproposed new Uniform State Act The proposed new federal Rules of Evidence that affect theconfidentiality of the doctor-patient relationship Of equal importance, priorities must be established withrespect to the broad work of the Council and work begun on itslong range objectives. The projects that should be given prompt .consideration include the following information: Analysis of the 1970 federal drug-abuse law for youth, researchers, physicians, and others A publication on the nature and extent of drug abuse in the United States today-what drugs are being used, by whom, the number of users, the relative harm of various drugs, what happens to users, the impact of drug use on crime, and so forth Evaluation of the English system of narcotic dispensationhow it works, the problems it has encountered, and whether it has controlled the spread of opiate addiction-perhaps coupled with an evaluation of U.S. clinics of the 1920's An evaluative synthesis of information about the effects of marijuana, with an explanation for the layman of the implications (or lack thereof) of animal experiments Examination of the legal alternatives to current policy regarding marijuana, how they would work in operation, and their implications An explanation of appropriate criteria for judging a treatment program (especially methadone), analyzing such factors as the expectation that many patients will continue to use drugs, and the importance of recognizing the value of different types and degrees of success A review of the experiences of secondary schools with handling drugs-including the use of confidentiality guarantees, the designation of one or a few teachers as confidential advisers, expulsion or suspension, liaison with community treatment programs, and relations with law-enforcement officials Analysis of the legitimate expectations of curtailing the supply of drugs through border surveillance, Turkish crop subsidies, and similar techniques An examination of the amount of federal resources (and those of a few major states) being spent on the drug problem and their allocation Research and Field Investigation Careful study of the reasons young people use drugs, what they want to get out of them, and how many have left drugs and are trying for the same effects in other ways A field study of peer pressure as a factor in youthful drug experimentation Categorization and review of the major characteristics of the drug-education programs in operation-how many have been evaluated, with what results, and how the children and teachers feel about them A study of the optimal role of the pharmaceutical industry in the prevention of abuse-including consideration of proper production quotas for particular drugs, diversion into illegal channels, needed research on abuse potential, and legitimate advertising to the public and to doctors A state-of-the-art conference on current research on the nature of heroin addiction-including the meaning of animal and human research, hypotheses being worked on, important issues, and productive lines of inquiry A study of the effects of heroin on users, in conjunction with a treatment experiment, to learn such basic facts as immediate effects on users, how to stabilize on heroin, the feasibility of simultaneous use of methadone and heroin, and whether a heroin user can function normally Analysis of the substitution of different drugs with different effects for the original drug of choice Treatment A synthesis of what is and is not known about the treatment of juvenile users of the various drugs-including hypotheses on how to treat this key group and the treatment resources a community should have for experimenters and chronic users, for hard and soft drugs, and for older and younger juveniles A paper on the state of treatment generally, pulling together the record of methadone, antagonists, therapeutic communities, and community mental-health centers, with evaluations where they exist, and consideration of such issues as public or private facilities, professional or indigenous staff, outpatient or inpatient, and voluntary or compulsory treatment A study of the employment of ex-addicts in treatment-the kinds of jobs available, the legal and community barriers, what job-training programs work for this group, and whether persons on heroin or methadone can do everything normal people can Assemble management consultants and material for dataprocessing systems for fledgling treatment programs. Law Enforcement Monitor how the new 1970 federal drug-abuse law works in a few major jurisdictions-how it is enforced, against whom, the penalties given out, and what happens to the classification sections Compare the experience in states with high (e.g., Missouri) and low (e.g., Nebraska) marijuana penalties to see the effect, if any, over a period of time on drug use, attitudes toward drugs, and drug education An analysis of the difficulties facing law-enforcement officials in the enforcement of drug laws against wholesale and retail traffickers It is not possible to lay down a step-by-step program forchanging the present climate surrounding drug abuse in thecountry. How to get the country to focus on the real evils ofdrug abuse and to attack them rationally without contributing tothe creation of even greater ones is a monumental task.Hopefully, the Council will not be alone in working toward suchan end and will be able to enlist the support of state and citygovernments, such branches of the federal government as NIMH, andother private and professional organizations. Hopefully, too,much of its work will affect the related problem of alcoholismand will help to end the fragmented approach toward differentkinds of drug-taking. The pace of the work and the prioritiesmust obviously be decided by the Council board and staff itself,guided by a realistic notion of the magnitude of the tasks facingthem and the opportunity to do something constructive about them. CONCLUSION It is of fundamental importance that man has and. willinevitably continue to have potentially dangerous drugs at hisdisposal, which he may either use properly or abuse, and thatneither the availability of these drugs nor the temptation toabuse them can be eliminated. Therefore, the fundamentalobjective of a modern drug-abuse program must be to help thepublic learn to understand these drugs and how to cope with theiruse in the context of everyday life. An approach emphasizingsuppression of all drugs or repression of all drug users willonly contribute to national problems. There is an urgent need for effective nongovernmentalleadership toward a more reasoned approach to drug abuse in thiscountry. A void exists that we believe can be filled by thecreation of a new Drug Abuse Council. In our best judgment, theCouncil could successfully exert this leadership and could have asubstantial and beneficial impact on drug abuse in this country. NOTES 1. Evidence obtained during 1971 indicates that the number ofactive heroin addicts as of December, 1971, was probably between250,000 and 300,000. 2. The Comprehensive Drug Abuse Preventionand Control Act of 1970 reduced these penalties to imprisonmentfor up to one year for a first offense and two years for eachsubsequent offense. 3. The 1970 Act established a Commission on Marijuana and DrugAbuse to review existing laws and policy and recommend necessarylegislation and administrative action. 4. See Staff Paper 5 for the most recent figures. 5. This information has become available and is presented inStaff Paper 5. 6. In 1971 this organization changed its name to the NationalCoordinating Council on Drug Use Education. 7. By December, 1971, there were over 300 methadone projectsand a large number of persons receiving methadone by prescriptionoutside of these projects. An estimated 50,000 patients are nowusing this drug for maintenance. See Staff Paper 3. 8. In November, 1971, the Food and Drug Administrationannounced it intention to propose broader approval of methadoneunder a closely con trolled distribution system. 9. These estimates are based on an addict population of about100,000 During 1971, official estimates of the number of addictswere raised. It i now estimated that 100,000 to 120,000 pounds ofopium are needed annually to supply the U.S. market. 10. In June, 1971, the President proposed a Special ActionOffice for Drug Abuse Prevention to coordinate federal drug-abuseefforts in treatment, education, and research. Regulation and lawenforcement, and military and veterans' problems are notincluded. CliffSchaffer's Home Page Contents | Feedback | Search DRCNet Library | Schaffer Library | Major Studies | DealingWith Drug Abuse